

THE
WAR
ON
THE
WORKERS
L. J. VILLIERS.


f
THE WAR ON THE WORKERS.


Authorised
by
The Australian
Tramway 'Employees
Association
and
The Victorian Railways Union.


7W
THE WAR ON THE
WORKERS
f
By L. J. VILLIERS
Published by
THE WORKERS’ PRESS
MELBOURNE


“ Love linked with Labor,
The Hope of the World !”
L.J.V.


CONTENTS.
Page.
The War on the Workers .. .. .. 9
An Octopus ... .. .. .. ..It
Overloading .... .. .. .. .. 18
The Working-Class .. .. .. ..20
Deeds of Valor .. .. .. .. .. 22
The Labor Movement .. .. .. .. 26
God in the Mire (from) .. .. .. 30
The Unionist as a Citizen .. .. .. 31
The March of Labor .. .. .. 33
A Song of the People (from) . . .. .. 35
Labor and Loyalty .. .. .. . . 36
Loyalty .. .. .. .. .. 38
God Save the King .. .. .. 40
Songs of Labor and of Love .. . . .. 40
The Labor Government and the Labor Press .. 42
The Church and the Workers . . .. .. 44
Capital and Labor .. .. .. .. 46
How Far Can Production be Strained? .. .. 43
Cherry Ripe .. .. .. .. 52
Season’s Rhapsodies (from) . . . . .. 55
The Living Wage .. .. .. .. 56
History of the Eight Hours’ Day . . .. 60
As It Was 62
Down at the Bank .. .. .. 63
Trades Hall .. .. .. .. ..65
The Coal Strike and the I.W.W. Trial .. . . 66
Australia’s National Song .. ~ .. 68


Page.
The Mightiest Might . . .. .. .. 70
Closing Stanzas of “The Wattle Queen” .. 71
Beryl Lee .. .. .. • ■ 72
“ Ode to the Magpie ” (from) .. .. 73
The Immigrant .. .. .. .. 75
The Cattle Years (from).. .. .. ..76
Come to Me Now .. .. . • .. 7S
The Song of the Shearing .. .. 79
Taking Her Home .. .. .. .. 81
The Worker’s Writer (from) .. .. .. 82
My Creed (from) .. .. .. ..85
“ The Agitator ” (from) .. .. .. 86
An In Memoriam (from).. .. .. ..87
Will Militarism End Soon? .. . . .. 83
The United States of Europe .. .. .. 91
Paying .. .. .. .. .. .. 94
A Look Ahead .. .. .. .. .. 96
The Dead Dove (from) . . .. . . 99
A Fight for Freedom .. ~ .. .. 100
Bill’s Logic .. .. .. .. ..102
Innocuous Matter .. .. .. .. 106
Rules for Passengers . . .. .. .. 109
Fragments .. .. .. .. .. HO
Contents —(Continued)


PREFACE.
If by the way, when with a prize in grasp,
A leader’s stricken from the workers* war.
The chill upon the hand we parting clasp
Stays not our hearts but stirs them to the core.
So wrote Leon Joseph Villiers, a few years before his
own death at the age of 44, in April, 1918. The lines
were from a poem to the memory of two Labor leaders,
Arthur and Jolley, and in a note the poet says, “In each
case death was mainly attributable to strenuous fighting
for the cause he represented.” It is only with the same
words that we can describe the life of L. J. Villiers and
its close.
The cause he represented was Labor, but he was not
content to take Labor in its narrower sense. He was
concerned not only with the immediate world of Labor,
but with the Fair Country that is the dream of all who
work for the emancipation of Labor. He did his day’s
work, as other men did. He was in the tramways, and
stayed there for 18 years. In addition to that, he was
a leader, an organiser, a writer who expressed the workers’
point of view, week-in, week-out. Still more, he was a
poet, and his thoughts when they were set free rose to
other planes of experience. He was a man who lived
the lives of three men, and none of the lives was wasted.
In this volume he appears chiefly as the man of affairs;
for it is something worth while, the record of a man’s
ceaseless activity in analysing the vicissitudes of the
workers’ war around him. When we remember that the
articles printed here were written not in leisure but at
great speed, after a day’s work, followed, perhaps, by
propaganda meetings, and that they were written as
journalism and not as essays, it is amazing to find what
a number of important Labor conceptions they outline.
They are the work of a man whose mind moved habitually
and easily amid the first principles of his philosophy.


Nothing that he jotted down, whether sober detail or
whimsical satire, or human-kindly description, was really
at variance with the thought underlying his most
transcendental utterance in serious verse.
As for his verse, the most finished and what one may
call the most normal of his productions have already been
published by some of his friends in book form. That
volume, “The Changing Year,” containing sonnets and
lyrics, is only a few months old. In the present book,
the verse is for the most part fragmentary. It seems that
in verse he had not yet been able to decide on his own
inevitable method of expression. He was still feeling
about for a method, but he had his matter ready, he
had titles inspiring in themselves, he had lyrical hints
and broken melodies. One of his most arresting titles
is that of an uncompleted work, “A Song Ship in the
Ranges.” His subject matter was, as he named one poem,
“Songs of Labor and of Love.” From that theme he
never really departed. He wrote of it sometimes openly,
in casual rhymes that he could not wait to make into
the brief compact lyrics which he obviously intended.
Again he wrote of, his theme obscurely, in long poems
elaborate as some ritual dance, but with words like these
throbbing through the rubric:
Unwrought as sea-foam
Is her scintillant wonder.
It is a poem to celebrate Australia, Pads Regina, the
Wattle Queen, who personifies freedom and the healing
of nations. These two lines in their beauty might have
been written by some aesthetic poet who shunned propa-
ganda as he shunned sin, yet they are in tune with all
Villiers’ ideals of moral harmony.
Here, then, is a book about Villiers and his ideals,
written almost entirely by himself. In one sense it is a
casual autobiography, a book of the reflections and
recollections of no ordinary man. In another sense it is
a Labor manifesto. In either case it is a book for the
Democracy of Australia.
CHRISTIAN JOLLIE SMITH.
NETTIE PALMER.


The War on the Workers.
Australians resident in Victoria feel something of the
war that is being waged on the worker here. While we
are shocked to such a pitch of emotion by the convulsive
adumbrations of a world-war, that sensation can hardly
be made to go further; and while the workers are bearing
a superhuman part in the efforts of that war, that is
almost beyond credibility here, side by side with the
sacrifice of the lower-placed citizen and the stress entailed
on the general community dependent on wage-earners or
wage-earning, there is a sinister policy of opposition to
the workers going on in the press and reflected in the
sycophantic hosts of privilege, whose gospel is in the
morning diatribes.
It is competent for us to look at this anomalous position.
Why is it that now there should be special spleen vented
on the worker? Why should there not be something of
friendship—a truce to the clamor and claquer of distortion
that is the familiar weapon employed to keep the worker
back, as far as may be, in his march towards his ever-
widening portal of enlightenment and its concomitant of
the wealth he produces?
We may take it that the clash of fiction, the cry of
injustice against the modern worker in his organisation,
is not one confined to Australia. But elsewhere in the
lands of war there is continual disapproval manifested
by the great conscience of the community against the
pursuit of the worker at this juncture, and concession and
amelioration is the order of the day. Here, then, is one
text that leads the organs of public opinion: “Down with
the worker! ” No matter in what guise emergency compels
change of employing conditions to the men and women
who are engaged in keeping the wheels of industry con-
stantly delivering to the needs of the day-—and the change
of circumstances in present conditions represents a decline
of about one-third of the employees’ benefits—there is a
virulent outcry evoked to the four corners of the land


against a granting of anything to the changed position.
All sacrifice is the workers’; all profit the right of privilege.
Whether it is that flour-handlers notify cormorant-shielding
authorities that there is urgent need of a lowered price
scale, pending which they will not handle flour for the
relegation of cheap food purchasers in other countries;
whether it is that men determine, after years of agitation
and procrastination, that compatible day work is to be
adopted for their craft; whether it is that storemen are
shut out in thousands, by means of a boycott on the part
of a coterie of callous price-raising merchants; or what-
ever may be the object in which the workers’ claim is
brought into public prominence, all is distorted by bias.
The goads of malice are thrust into the flesh of enduring
workers; the poison of part-truth is sedulously used to
embitter the great bulk of the people, who are necessarily
dependent on the general press for a summary of the
doings of the day.
Why all this most ill-timed local rancor? The reason
is fear. Here in Victoria there is a final mustering of the
forces of retrogression to stay the advance of the people.
Privilege crowds to his last post of defence. Now that
stronghold after stronghold has fallen from the hereditary
keepers of government, not an opportunity must be lost
by the remnant armies of reaction to regain some advan-
tage wherever it may show.
Just now normal influences are out of plumb. Emotion
and racial disposition have been inflamed by earthquake
horrors, whose seismic terrors have arisen not from sub-
terranean fires, but from the more dreadful flames of
human strife. Change is over the earth. Conditions and
control of placid years are subject to the unrehearsed
revolution of martial needs. Here is the opportunity
for the enemy of the worker. Here is the chance for the
trembling upholders of privilege to make a stand against
the iconoclastic workers, whose feet have marched over
citadels of conservatism in frequent victory. And there is
no mistake being made.
All the means at the disposal of lucre are made available
for the fight. Daily distortion, so obvious and unashamed
that in sane moments it would meet with general derision,
is now allowed to circulate until it spreads far beyond the


light of refutation. Platitudinous orators, of what in sober
hours was openly scorned as ludicrous class cant and
treated as the garbage of decaying promulgations of
Torydom, now. flaunt figures of error and standards of
wrong in open and unchecked brazenness. Now we have
babbles from the most unstable Brookes lauded and
columned to make the worker of this land appear a
mendacious robber. Sir Alexander Peacock is lined up
to keep a post, and, if possible, make a charge worthy
of his scintillant compeer. Sir W. H. Irvine, so that coercion
may be installed in this land while so many of its sons
are fighting for more solid security of freedom abroad!
Henchman Hagelthorn, huckstering for his rural coveys of
blacklegs, with railway and other perquisites, is trained to
protrude his not too retiring cheeks, with a glib tongue,
on such topics as the alleged inefficiency of the local
workers, and made to appear a public oracle superior to
Mill or Saleeby in the cheap applause of a sycophant
circle. And, as a climax, that junta of exploitation, known
as the Employers’ Federation, is magnified and glorified
in diurnal headlines and prosy columns until its voices,
that hitherto spoke to emptiness or scorn, are paraded as
economic exhalations of great pith and moment. It is
all so weak—so pitiably palpable.
And the pity of it lies not in its possibility of momentary
success, but in the fact that such puniness could be fos-
tered in our land at all. Has our declension gone so far
that the doddering platitudes of half a century agone can
be marshalled as powers against us? Are we become so
destitute of manhood’s virility that retrogression appears
as something of vitality, and the scorned jeremiads of
forgotten years can be resurrected as convincing factors
.for our hurt? Here we have our home living conditions
bodily attacked. Mercenary hordes brazenly defy us.
When we reply by stepping forward to meet the mer-
cenaries, we are called by all the unsavory epithets that
a figuring Brookes or a stuttering Hagelthorn can bring
from the armory of vindictiveness against workers. The
extremity of the times is the retrograde’s opportunity.
Already our living standard has deeply depreciated.
How far it will fall is not to be seen, but the long-borne
efforts of countless men and women in the ranks of Labor


are being hurled backward under cover of the world-war.
Labor is not decadent. It is full of vigor —as full of
militancy as when the maritime strike ushered the first
declared forces of toil into the halls of governmental
authority. Never let us delude ourselves that the backward
tendency of to-day is because we are growing enfeebled
in our cause, or lacking spirit in our counsel.
The patent fact to-day is that the unabated Tory has
an opportunity to hold us. Something so far from all
anticipation has given him an advantage. And here in
Victoria, when the fear of the onmarching worker had sent
its enemies into a corner, affrighted lest that last Bastille
should be taken—here is the bold stand being made to
recover from Labor something of its conquest.
Here may shelter the price-manipulator, serene in the
aid of its press mentors and employers’ federations. Here
arise the spectres of coercion ready to rattle bones of
gone reputations at the bidding of the people’s ghouls.
Now stalk forth the unabating figures of dead years,
clothed with the rustling nurse-sheets that, to some extent,
once were their shrouds.
It is war on the workers. War and the workers is a
general term of to-day, and undeniably the war is being
prosecuted by the million-handed sons and daughters of
toil. Problems of great concern are thrust on the world.
Amongst the general fears of old-time privilege is that
of the workers’ wider admission to right. Lest the reign
of capitalism may be curtailed, already the hands of
decadence put forth bony clutches upon what is already
granted as the right of the worker—a living wage.
Standards raised so steadily are being lowered continually
now, and the protests of Labor are placarded as evidence
that workers here are against their country—foes of all
decency and morality, and utterly unfit to breathe the
free air that extends the nostrils of ostentatious but not
sacrificing patriots. It is war on the worker already. Nay,
it is more; it is a token of the war’s effect; the sure
indication of what war means to workers in the loss of
well-being and reduction of present attainment. The
worker must pay. Waste and cost are sure burdens. Pay-
ment will be forced by those who batten on secured
necessity.


And what is to prevent this war on the worker from
treading down workers utterly? There is one hope. Out
of the implacable hostility that is being shown by a unified
host—howbeit, a doddering one—there is a hope that
workers will rally themselves into finer force. It is too
late at this day to think that there can be unity between
Tory hosts and toil’s legions. Toil was, and is, prepared
to work with all for the ending of the common martial
war. But Toryism has seen, in this amenable attitude of
the worker, something of a chance to wage a war within
a war. So that the workers be not routed by the foes
within their camps, it is imperative that they further
strengthen themselves. There must be a stronger and
more cohesive power. Organisation is more than ever the
passport to fresh advantage, just as small and often dis-
united unions lead to weakness. Organise our organisa-
tions themselves. Get stronger unity, so that workers shall
not be cleft, but will cohere and resist the forces that
indubitably are now bearing down the outposts that Labor
won in the past.
June 29. 1916.
THE AGITATOR.
And now we met: I on the outer fringe
Of moving life of which he was the hinge.
As little leaf was I within the wood,
And he the wind to sway its every mood,
To stir the stagnant atmosphere to wealth
And vigored richness of full-blooded health.
Some ear commands in every field of yellow.
Some songbird sings more sweet than his songfellow,
Some plaintive notes forbid the mind’s forgetting
In arid hours of gain and loss and fretting:
And he, rough-nurtured as the millions are.
In crudest mould that shapes a life-long bar.
Won as he stood the yearning crowd among
A murmuring homage kings have seldom wrung.
With voice subjective to a power intense,
And mind a dictionary of teeming sense,
He cavilled at a stolid, dull content,
And told the gospel of enlightenment.


AN OCTOPUS.
Melbourne has seen the last of the M.T. and 0. Co.
It had a long harvest on the trams of the city, and it
never hesitated to make hay while the sun .shone. And
it forked so much together for such little effort that it
would be hard to find a parallel to its prosperity any-
where outside the biggest grabs in Yankeeland. If one
could be retrospective, and go back into the days when
the cable cars were established, noting the changes that
have come over the city during the company’s tenure, it
would need something of a kaleidoscope to portray the
movements of change. The great outcry at the time the
scheme for street tramways was before the Victorian public
was largely against mechanical vehicles being allowed on
public thoroughfares, especially to be driven at a fast
rate. At the time the furthest thought of speed was
measured by cabs, and at last a nervous public accepted
the tram project, assured that the trams would not travel
beyond the pace of a cab-horse—estimated at eight miles
an hour.
How fearful the people were of change and chance is
wofully exemplified in the fact that after building the lines
—on their own roadways—and equipping splendid steam
power houses with the finest machinery, financing all with
public money, the management and general benefit was
entrusted to a lumbersome company of ’bus proprietors,
of whom Melbourne had no special cause to hold a high
opinion.
However, this company, which was largely a certain
astute Yank, known as “Clapp,” fixed up a charter with
the Parliament of the day, and in 1888 started the first
tram. How kind and considerate the embryo Yankee
Grab Co. proved itself is writ very largely on its employees.
The terms of the charter made with the complaisant
company stipulated that eight hours should constitute a


day’s work for those engaged on the trains. This was
plain, and it was thought that the provision was secure.
But the company didn’t think so. It straightway pro-
ceeded to work its men 60 hours a week, and continued
doing so for over 20 years.
The first check it got was from the bluff old charlatan
Premier, Tom Bent. This was about 10 years ago.
The 60 hours week of the tram men had been well
before the public at the previous State election, and a
reduction was insisted on by the growing Labor Party.
Tommy Bent set himself to fix things. After a fiery
denunciation of the company by Frank Anstey, who came
into the House straight from the ship that brought him
from a trip to England, Parliament was made ashamed
utterly of the 60 hours. But there were too many scrip
holders in one or other of the Houses to seriously imperil
the company. So a tentative plan for 54 hours was
adopted as a compromise.
This worked until the Federal powers got a move on
the men to form a union—a thing that had hitherto been
out of their reach. Then came the long deferred eight
hours day, and a couple of years later the Arbitration
award, in whose hearing so much time and sensation
occurred. The right of unionists to display the badge of
their calling was one of the side issues on which great
interest was fixed. The finding definitely showed that the
wearing of the union badge is' the right of a member of
a union when at work. But though the case for the men
was won in union interests the fact is that even yet there
is one tramway system, that of Brisbane, on which a
Yankee company is operating, and where no unionist may
display a badge or give an indication of his intention of
joining a bona fide union. But that is another story.
Now that the company has gone out of the tram business,
there is an acute feeling that some consideration should
be given to those men who worked for many years at 60
hours a week, and whose service was awarded on a 48-
hour week basis.
There is no doubt that a very strong moral right is with
these men—those that remain of them —that they should
be paid the arrears that is represented in the sum between
the terms of 48 and 60. It would be a large sum


certainly. But that would not make the need of meeting
so just a claim any less. The tram union was hopeful
that a considerable increase of Labor members would be
elected to the last State Parliament so that the matter
could be thoroughly reviewed in the State House before
the end of the company’s lease. That hope was not
realised. So agitation in political circles is hardly possible
or promising when both Houses are comprised of men
whose prime interest is with the money side.
But the necessity for consideration compels action of
some sort. A large number of the employees on the cars
are men who have given long service, and who, in the
common course of nature, are rapidly approaching the
day when some physical factors will depreciate, and their
occupation be gone. The best of their lives has been
given to a money-making monopoly, which evaded a
Parliamentary charter by working them 12 hours a day
virtually for nothing in the way of wages, but a heritage
of debility in the way of physical result.
The company is out of the business of car-running
certainly. But it is not yet wound up. There are many
adjustments to be made, both with the Government and
with innumerable financial interests, before the actual
undertakings and responsibilities will be closed. Mean-
while the claims of the men who so long toiled without
due recompense are not being heard. Should it be so?
Should this shekel-raising cormorant company be allowed
to take the youth and vitality out of hundreds of men
and depart with the depredations untouched? What of
the near drawing day when the energy of so many of
those men, which was expended for the fortunes of this
company, will fail, and there be nothing for the worker
but the dole of the stricken?
To give some idea how great must be the sum of profits
that the company has been making, it is only necessary
to refer to the fact that £200,000 a year was recently
offered for the right to continue the lease of the cable
roads. Now, on the capital of £4Bo,ooo—the sum put
into the trams by the company—this represents a high
interest. To that, however, must be added another sum
before we can estimate how much the business was paying.
Suppose we assume that 10 per cent, was wanted for


profit. Ten per cent, on £480,000, with the sum before
mentioned, shows £240,000 a year. This on less than
£500,000. A nice profit for an undertaking registered under
the Public Companies Act, which only allows a profit of
10 per cent, on capital, with a bonus of not more than
2i per cent.
Surely out of this Eldorado store, the store that has
been accumulating until there is an unknown hoard of
dimensions we cannot speculate upon unless we risk the
ban of exaggeration, there is a measure of recompense to
be given to the men whose strength, whose youth and
manhood is there. It is not usual to look for sympathy
from a public company any more than it is logical to look
for bread from a stone, but there is an account to be
settled between this particular company and the Parliament
of Victoria—the two parties to the charter now drawn to
a close. In the final days of adjustment it is surely to
be expected that the remnant body of democrats that is
in the State Parliament will make itself heard about this
matter, so that where legality has failed, a form of special
taxation may be introduced to at least ensure the men of
the tram company that they are not to be cast aside as
outworn and useless. This could be done without a
scintilla of injustice to accrued financial rights. Unless
some fair compensation is given the time-cast servants of
the company, for the life-sapping years they worked,
virtually without pay, then the perpetration of an
undoubted injustice will be allowed.
July 6, 1916.


OVERLOADING.
Divine authority tells us that man cannot serve two
masters. Yet that is what our daily task as conveyors of
a travelling public frequently compels of us. We are
licensed by the master that controls the streets in which
we ply—the City Council—to carry up to a certain number
of passengers on the cars. We are paid by another
master —the car company’s manager—to get the fares of
all the people who may, and do, crowd on the cars. So
our duties conflict. We are to carry in safety, for the
profit of the latter master, all that come along, for which
service we obtain a set wage.
True, we are provided with a certain notice to enjoin
a most indifferent public that we are “Full. Take next
car! ” The said public gives us and our placard about
as much regard as a citizen of an ant-hill would pay to
a finger-post indicating the road to a water hole.
But the consequent profit is not ours. Ours is the
added responsibility, the heavier work, the increased nerve
rack, and more active pressure all round. We show no
gain: we are the losers by the deal.
When the cars, licensed to carry fifty-four passengers,
produce revenue from a much larger number, we do not
enhance our prospects by one penny piece. We damage
them, in fact. By accepting all who struggle on to a
foothold, we condone an inefficient service, and so tend
to keep our fellows from a livelihood. In this day when
“each for all and all for each” is becoming a practised
truth, we show ourselves lacking in principle when we
do anything that unfairly affects our fellows. On most
lines more cars are wanted. They are built. A con-
siderable proportion lie idle almost every day. There is
hardly more than one line where the maximum service is
attained at ordinary times. Even should there be one


line working its full complement of rolling stock and then
failing to cope effectively with the traffic requirements, the
management must be blamed.
Surely managerial capacity has not arrived at the dead
end of incompetency in any part of the tram system of
Melbourne.
To make us, the running staff, accept legal responsibility
for overloading while the accruing benefit goes into other
channels, is surely so unjust that a simple statement of
the position will compel a remedy. It is the present law
of both our masters. We neither invite nor encourage
excess. We repeat that we lose by it. And now the
sword of the law hangs suspended by a thread over our
heads every day. Our objection is not to the law—that,
no doubt, was framed in wisdom. Our protest is against
the threat under which we conduct our necessary vocation.
To maintain the law is the duty of every citizen, and we
desire to be law abiding. But there’s the trouble. Our
work is the manipulation of the street cars. They are so
devised that while they accommodate a certain number
of passengers a greater number frequently finds a lodgment
upon them in our despite. We did not design the cars.
We were not asked to approve of the regulations. But we
surely may claim to be protected in our work. Those
that prosper by our risk should ensure us from its cost.
That, then, is our single request. The employer being
solely advantaged should bear the full consequences. The
onus is unjustly put upon us. Our shoulders should not
rightly bear it, though it was placed there by our two
masters.
We ask that the first master whose license we carry
shall arrange that the second master, whose pecuniary
interest we forward, will take the full responsibility that
now attaches to us. We want to be free from fear that
the odium and costs of the law will not be over us in
the pursuit of our calling.


THE WORKING-CLASS.
To us who are accustomed to labor for Labor, the term
working-class is, perhaps, generally understood as “the
people.” To those who use it most it is.one of the most
unappreciated phrases of casual understanding. They of
open Conservatism look upon any form of progressive
reasoning as a further invasion of the iconoclastic working-
class—the rude, easily agitated, horny-handed and
unrefinable beings who can never be admitted to the inner
circles where the obsolete is worshipped and privilege is
glorified.
Samples of such crass thinking can be seen in every
club that caters to exclusiveness, in every adherent of the
“good-enough-for-my-father” dogma, in our very institution
of law. Our Australian Federal Constitution is a flaming
placard of such lack-faith pessimism, and this creed of
the byegone has its mentors, chief of whom is the press,
“the great dailies of the young Democracy,” as the world
is taught to regard the Australian general press.
As propagandists we cannot blame these various agencies
for their adhesion to the cult of retrogression. It is their
rightful attitude to espouse the do-naught policy, and to
rest content with such progress as obtains—won for the
most part in their despite. Our charge is that the
workers are themselves capitalists. It is a serious one,
because it is levelled at home. If we could believe that
the term “working-class” was no longer accepted by
workers as a derogatory appellation, but was held as a
proud and wholly ennobling description of right-living men
by those who are ostensibly of the workers, and who can
vote and organise with the workers as workers!
We cannot believe in our immediate advance or special
gain while our army, the great host, whose one dependence
is continual work, is not at heart imbued with this sole
aim of the workers. What general would win a great


conquest if his soldiers were only nominally with him?
Not all the guns of Woolwich, not all the ardor of a
Nelson, would avail if there was not behind the leader
and the arras the strong impulse of faith in the cause that
brought the action.
Labor as a creed is an avowed enemy of Capitalism.
Labor’s champions are quite convinced that the aspirations
they hold, the policy they adopt, can never be fully
realised while Capitalism endures.
But the highest hope of many working men is that the
day will come when they will live on other workers—
become Cpaitalists. The great value that accrues to a
people is the value that grows on the lands of the com-
munity. The finer the aspirations of the people and the
higher the development they attain, the greater is the
price that is put on the people’s land. Thus, when the
workers express themselves as anxious to live by acquiring
property, that the rents may make them superior to work,
or when they join in speculation that depends for prosperity
on the increment that the community brings, how can we
believe that the object of Labor is realisable? Before any
policy can be fully achieved it must be expressed in the
hearts of the people.
Oh, what is the light that is bringing to-day
The Hope of the World?
That gleams through the night all the darkness to sway,
The Hope of the World?
Oh men, it is Labor! Tis Labor and Love,
That glories the distance with beams from above,
The light that’s to clear all the shadows and prove
The Hope of the World!
The Hope of the World,
The Hope of the World,
Love linked with Labor,
The Hope of the World!
—From “ What is the Light.**


DEEDS OF VALOR.
Australia is proud of her heroes. She exults in the
distinction of her sons as mighty men of valor. But proud
as she is, she is not surprised. As a mother who keeps
a fond maternal eye on the growing youth of her up-
bringing, she knew that the lads of her family were strong-
sinewed for high achievement and indomitable for duty.
She knew that they were not kind to the trapperies and
superfluities of conventional get up in proportion as they
were determined to might by the living reality for action.
The goose step had no charm, but the strong stride to
hitherto unscalable heights was sure when the cry
“Advance” came insistent to their ears. Australia’s sons
had little of the training that shows itself in etiquette, but
the virility of freedom is a sure sponsor for the impulses
of strength in the time of real need.
Nature, the mother, knew her children. She had seen
them win their way against the distances of untrod plains.
She had watched and hardened them to service in their
fights with her in her days of drought. She had developed
their hearts of combat in her red moods of fire, when the
roar of grass flames or the blue haze of gum smoke tells
of the encroachment of a foe who so often destroys the
labor of bands of pioneers.
She had seen, too, how they carved their way in
another sphere and against an agency more stern than
Nature —men.
These sons of Australia had made way to social progress
against foes who have held and still hold all other nations
in check —foes of poverty, child labor, long hours, illiteracy
and degeneration. How far they have advanced in the
teeth of a set force of reaction, in the face of the legions


of capital—by the strike, even when starvation, imprison-
ment or boycott was the immediate result—every step of
social amelioration is standing testimony. And in the daily
tasks of common toil, how many times and oft have the
sons of Australia shown a degree of valor unknown to the
heroes of Homer? The records of the mines are gleaming
with tales of miners’ bravery. In the bush, how frequently
is there a story read of some great feat of valor in the
everyday doings of battle with giants of the forest?
We hear of deeds of valor and strength so often that
they have become almost commonplace; and the simple
course of routine life has so many episodes worthy of
high chronicling that are never written. When the monarch
of our Empire speaks acknowledgments of the deeds of
Australia’s sons, giving a cross here, a medallion or a
ribbon there, we know that it is but the publicity of a
tithe of the fine achievements of Australia’s men. That
they are physically capable of so much is due in great
part to the vigor of their lives, the salubrity of their land
and the social progress won that enabled them to live and
develop somewhat better than the herded workers of other
climes. We never wonder, we that are of Australia and
have helped to fight for the progress of the community
here, we never wonder at the distinctions our fellows gain
in the fields of war. We know how vimful our hearts
must be at all times to win any advance over the set
conditions of workers elsewhere. What we have got we
won, even in the face of those who now applaud the
continuance abroad of the valor that distinguished
Australians in their working advance here. And even as
the deeds of Australians abroad win plaudits, so are the
efforts of Australians at home maligned and contumaciously
reported.
Last week, for instance, a few Victorian wharfmen set
out to advantage the people of the State by refusing to
handle foodstuffs being consigned away from these shores
while the costs here were abnormally high. With the law
or prudence of the action we have nothing here to say.
The fact of a few men offering themselves as a sacrifice
for the good of the community is a Spartan example of
fortitude that even the most obsequious of conventionalists.


whose text of life is found in every morning’s “Argus,”
should acknowledge.
But last week also there was a crowning deed of
individual valor performed on a railway line in Tasmania.
The Launceston and Hobart express met with a fearful
accidenf. One of those catastrophes that seem to visit
the works of men with unexplained cause and inexplicable
severity.
Driver Goodchild was in charge of the engine. He
noticed that the accident had very seriously impaired the
boiler of his locomotive, so much so as to make a boiler
explosion imminent, and so turn an already fearful
accident into an inferno of death and devastation a
thousandfold worse.
Shaken and bruised as he had been in the accident.
Driver Goodchild made no delay. He knew that every
moment was precious. If the great force of steam were
not relieved from the strained plates that held it yet in
check, an explosion would ensue that would be greater
than the burst of the mines of marine war. Climbing to
the stranded engine, he turned on a valve to let a great
rush of steam escape. To do so he had to take a position
that brought the steam over himself.
But what of that? The explosion was prevented. He
was scalded to the last inch of skin upon his body, to
linger on for a few hours in excruciating agony. He need
not have touched that valve. Personally, he was safe. He
could have gone away to immunity. Being already hurt,
it was perfectly feasible for him to have done so. He
was not driven by the pangs of remorse to commit a
culminating deed of bravery that would condone a great
fault. So far as is known, he had not committed a fault.
The accident was not of his making. And his deed was
not one impulsed by the strong rush of blood that over-
powers the sense of men where comrades fall and a foe
is rushing on. It was no do-or-die deed that was done
by that valorous Tasmanian enginedriver. It was do and
die. Die after suffering voluntary torture of almost in-
credible pains. Is not that action, that deed of sacrifice
by a grime-stained worker, a supreme illustration of the


greatness of heart that actuates our men to duty—simple
duty, not conventional array? Truly, peace hath her
victories, and as truly she has her valors. Was not that
deed of valor worthy to stand as the climax of courage
and sacrifice? One man, acting in the quiet calmness of
full knowledge, and with complete sense of the awfulness
he was bringing upon himself, climbed unhesitatingly,
simply to do his duty.
However we applaud our medallioned brothers, the sons
and comrades of Australian workers, this deed of Driver
Goodchild’s stands as an example of unparalleled courage
even in the days when valor is a tribute cast
indiscriminately everywhere.
February 24, 1916.


THE LABOR MOVEMENT.
What Is Its Leader?
What is the Labor Movement? Is it something so adapt-
able to any individual that it may be contracted into the
diminutiveness of one man’s personality? Or is it the
nation-spread manifest of millions of workers—men and
women; a woven epitome of their political plans for the
betterment of living and realisation of humanity?
Of course it is the latter. The Labor Movement is too
great for any person to be more than a unit of it, even
though it may exalt some entity into such prominence that
he appears to be clear of the elements that uplifted him,
and to be sustained by the vigor of his own ego.
The Movement has taken great strides since the time
when the aspirations of its industrial founders appeared in
dim visions in the far mists of the unknown. It has
sprung into coherent might and has taken hold of the
highest offices so long held as the dearest preserves of
Privilege. Leaders have brought it where the mass directed.
State after State has been as fields of conquest for the on-
marching army of Labor; and the continent itself has
yielded control to the militant power of the peace-led ranks
of Toil.
Such conquests have known many men who were high in
authority. So great was the personality of some of these
chiefs that brought the Labor Movement along the road of
victory, that they were sometimes better known than the
Movement itself. Certainly this was so in circles outside
the ranks and councils of Labor. J. C. Watson was such
a one. His place as a Labor leader, the first Labor man to
scale to a Prime Ministership, was one that was often
painted as belonging to himself as a personality. He left
the leadership of the Movement abruptly—and what hap-
pened? It was as though he had not been. Andrew Fisher
was installed as political leader. He, too, was paraded
in turn as an indispensable personality on which Labor
utterly depended for political action, if not existence.


The day dawned when Fisher gave over his leadership.
So came William Morris Hughes, the present leader of
Labor, and as thus, Prime Minister of Australia. This
leader, no more than his predecessors, is the helm of Labor.
He is the man at the helm. But the vessel of the Move-
ment is manned by tried and trained experts in such a way
that no one helmsman is an indispensable factor to the
conduct and existence of the ship. No one knows this
better than those within the Movement. The element of
the person is subjugated in the Labor vessel to the well-
being of the whole.
And now myriad voices are calling “ Hughes ”! Voices
that never sound praises of the Labor Movement exult in
the singing of Hughes’s name. Hughes is great; Labor is
nought. This is a strange contradiction in terms. How can
the deputed helmsman of the vessel, doing his work as a
skilled entity of the party commissioned to carry the destiny
of Australia—how can such a man be all-worthy in his
office while the Movement of which he is an integral atom
is something to be condemned—if possible, wrecked?
There is only one way by which the leader of the Move-
ment could merit encomiums from those who are ever
hostile to the Movement. That way is one dear to the
hearts of anti-Labor. It is by the leader forgetting his
office, and serving those he was elected to oppose, turning
down the Movement itself. This is, no doubt, the desidera-
tum of anti-Labor, and it is very natural tactics that the
press clamorers of the day should endeavour to indicate
that the Labor leader is a proselyte. Very good tactics.
But so obvious that only those who are willing to be
deceived would be taken in.
It is evident that the purpose of those opposed to Labor
is to defeat Labor’s object. The workers are not to be
allowed to reap the full result of their toil, nor any greater
proportion than will suffice to sustain them, even though
they gain political prestige. It is also clear that the Labor
Movement cannot be long defeated by frontal attacks. The
plan of checking the Movement by inveigling its leaders
into renunciation of the ranks is one so natural that any
neophyte can follow it.
William Hughes is no neophyte. He has had little actual


experience as leader of the Movement; but as an astute,
quick-seeing man, one sensible of guile and quite able to
combat it, Mr. Hughes is well proven. He is a man on
whom it is vain to spread the net in his sight. But if
the tone of the anti-Labor press were a criterion, Mr.
Hughes is already netted. His personality has been so
paraded, so exulted over, that the four corners of the con-
tinent hear of him as of an inspired champion come to
the aid of our land in its dire crisis. The Labor Movement
is never belauded, its fortunate charge of the country is
never hailed in terms other than of fear or calumny, how-
ever loud be the syren song hailing the Movement’s man.
Indeed, Mr. Hughes is most commended when in some
fine frenzy he uses words that may be taken as aspersions
upon some members in the forward lines of Labor. Then
his words, promoted from their context, are paraded as the
deliverance of an oracle. The familiar description of
parasite used so often and aptly by Mr. Hughes against
those who batten on Labor, is applied to some at the
furthest end of the poles from capitalists. Who they are
the press does not say directly. Neither did Mr. Hughes.
But the application is placed by the former on all those
who are not ready to follow the pack now in full cry after
conscription.
It matters not that Mr. Hughes is Prime Minister merely
because he is Labor’s leader. Labor has emphasised that
conscription must not be in this country. Though
the general platform did not express the term, recent
declarations have been so clear, general, and emphatic, that
Labor, industrial and political, cannot possibly be misunder-
stood on this issue. Yet it is made to appear that Mr.
Hughes may adopt it. Labor leaders are Labor entities.
The Movement made them and the Movement guides them.
An act in direct opposition to the express voice of the
Movement would be such a treachery that its committal
would be the deed of Labor’s foe. Now, all manner of
devices are being used to beguile the Labor Prime Minister
that conscription is for him to adopt. A willing country
and a waiting Parliament will endorse it! Those syren
singers of Piute, Sir W. H. Irving and Mr. William Watt,
hail the returning Labor Prime Minister as a man after their
own heart. They will follow; let him lead!


There is little fear that Mr. Hughes needs inspiration or
assistance from these syrens of Torydom. If they sing, he
is no Ulysses. He is bound not to their grim mercies, but
to the sure safeguard of the Labor Movement. No matter
how the key of apostacy may be pitched, it is useless to ask
a safe man to throw over his allegiance to principle. Harp-
ing on the necessity of the Empire is fashionable where
there is a project to hurt the workers. Lip patriotism is a
familiar whip for the back of Toil. The relevancy of such
a note is doubtful at this juncture, in view of the fact
that the most vigorous anti-conscription unions are those
who have furnished and are still providing the greatest
number of recruits to aid the Empire.
Workers have built the Labor structure in order that
their working lives would be more equitably followed than
was possible under the regime of other political sections.
Having won to power, Labor was in command of the
industrial destiny of the whole population. Those who
fought Labor every inch of the way were repulsed
thoroughly. But they were not subdued. They have set
to work to destroy Labor by covert machinations. Con-
scription became the fetish of these vigilant anti-Labor
forces, and patriotism was stalked out to help to down
the real saviours of the country—the workers. To intro-
duce conscription here would indeed be a triumph for the
foes of the worker. Under it there would be a subjugation
of the toiler, such as the most retrogressive Tory never
hoped to encompass in this country in its furthest success.
So every voice of Capital is crying it: Conscription. From
the advertisement-bossed “ Bulletin ” to the ultra-classy
"Argus,” the press clamor is raised incessantly: Conscrip-
tion. Mr. Hughes has been away. He has delivered many
orations containing much perfervid wisdom. Some of these
utterances are said to have committed the Labor leader to
the introduction of conscription in Australia. What he has
not said it would be difficult to guess at. But he cannot
have given any assurance such as is the fond hope of
the forces of Capital—unless he has abandoned his profes-
sion of Labor and betrayed the workers, who comprise the
Labor Movement. If he did that he would not be a Labor
man.
August 10th, 1916.


GOD IN THE MIRE.
Men to raise broad and high
Walls ’twixt the earth and sky,
Deep from the surface line.
Deep from the sunny shine,
Dig in the soil;
Weary must days be done
Ere yet the founding stone
Stands for their toil.
Men who in vision wrought
Temples of crowning thought.
Deep in the soil would turn.
Dig, and in depths discern
God in the mire.
Soon then the walls uprise,
Growing to meet the skies,
Higher and higher.
Know from the stain of soil.
Know from the sweat of toil.
Know from the depths lowhid,
Dank in the dark amid.
There lieth strength;
Thence to the air we build
Shrines to sunlight filled.
Standing at length.
Tis by the serving roots
Flowers come and filling fruits;
Deep from the pleasance seen.
Fields glad with waving green,
Win all their life.
While in the dark we tread.
Near in the way ahead,
Beauty is rife.


THE UNIONIST AS A CITIZEN.
There is much talk nowadays about the principle of
Unionism being overdone. In our Parliament we hear of
members lauding some form of Unionism they may have in
their minds, but lamenting that Unionists of this day are
going too far, and sowing much harm, particularly in
respect to the cost of living. We suspect that those who
voice the Jeremiah wails about Unionists and profess ad-
miration for Unionism, to a certain extent are conscious
or unconscious advocates of that scabrous variety of worker
whose advent in a community is an excrescence, one with
whom contact is moral vaccination, before one can join
ordinary citizens.
Certainly such members have never been conspicuous to
aid the establishment of a bona-fide Union, nor have they
ever sided with a worker when a question of gaining im-
provement has been debated. Conservative papers are con-
tinually proving the present-time claims of Labor are not
conducive to public good. They say by raising the cost
of manufacture you simply pass the enhanced expenses on
to the consumer, who is mainly the worker, and so the
benefit is unreal.
Just how far the argument is sound is worth examination,
for the repetition, even of a flagrant falsehood, begets a
doubt of the truth. In the first place, there is now no
public speaker or organ that denies the value of Unionism;
the criticism is solely against some tendency of the Unions.
What a great conquest is there! When Conservatism admits
that the principle of Unionism is sound, it acknowledges
the falseness of itself. Every form of public progress has
been brought forth in spite of the ablest energy of Toryism.
It showed that shortening hours of labor meant crippling the
nation, for by giving the workers more leisure they would
spend more time in drunkenness and evils natural to idle-
ness.


Our free and compulsory education was combated for a
similar reason. The ordinary laborer’s child was not
adapted for learning, and to compel its attendance was a
waste of time and inducive to moral harm. Only those
children of the general worker who showed special pro-
clivity for learning should be catered for, and as the old
system did that to a certain degree, we were always assured
that it was best to “ leave things alone.”
The Factories Act, introduced in Victoria about 1900,
was condemned in the interests of the workers. To cover
wages and hours of work in accordance with Wages Board
principle; to restrict or regulate child-workers; to insist
upon a trade paying a living rate to its employes, were all
good-sounding things, but were sure to hurt the employe
because they hurt the employer. The two interests were
identical. If the employer suffers, his injury is repeated ten
or perhaps a thousandfold, in his employes, and the whole
community is the loser.
Well, all these things have been operating over wide
areas for a long time, and have the predictions of the
opposition been bom out? Not in a single case. The
shortened day of labor has been in vogue for over 60
years in Australia, and the Australian worker is the most
able, moral, temperate, and studious in the world. Edu-
cation has been free and compulsory for over 40 years,
and the cry to-day sounds on shore for more and more. Its
value to citizenship is now so well established that every
nation is striving to have its community the best educated
in the world.
So with Unionism. It is within the memory of some yet
amongst us when men were transported, or even hanged,
for daring to attempt to form a workers’ society for effect-
ing improvements in labor conditions. All along the line.
Unionism has fought Conservatism. Conservatism has
always declared that the law of supply and demand makes
it impossible for the principle of Unionism to conduce to
good in the community. Unionists have always stated that
theirs is a recognition of obligations that life imposes on
each, and fairness renders imperative to all men: To assist
one another. It puts into practice the precept of Paul, “Ye
are members one of another.” By so doing, the status of
the citizen is raised. He lives better, and thinks better,


and is better by the influence of fellowship. He cheapens
cost by inventing improvements; he increases trade by
accelerating needs: he widens knowledge by compelling
education, and establishes improvement in morality by
showing what is its remedy.
Now, Conservatism admits that Unionism is valuable,
and limits its opposition to certain phases which it declares
are not true to the principle.
Well, is not that a triumph? To make the-crass mind of
Torydom acknowledge that its past statements were wrong,
that its economics were falsely founded, is a feat worthy to
be called a conquest. To heed the jeremiads of such
futile reasoners, who, by their present attitude, acknowledge
their past weakness, is to be unworthy of the Unionism
that won through their despite.
THE MARCH OF LABOR.
Who can watch the march of the worker in the ranks of
his trade, behind his banner, beating a rhythm to the strong
voices of his band, and not feel exhilarated at the progress
of which the march is a vivid illustration? To see the
lines go by, minutes drawing to hours, and an unbroken
column still swelling along—a titanic army, marshalled for
emblem of true advance, and at war only with decadence—
is to be lifted into exaltation with the thought of what great
good and mighty power is in the hands of the people, to be
swayed into heights, according to their purpose and their
worth.
A mighty army, without dread: an army of life, not
death, is the Army of Labor.
The force that moves the world towards its never-
attained goal is there. Peaceful toil, ever militant, ever
revolutionary, and ever evolving the days to horizons that
extend into newer brightness, where the sun sets and the
stars arise, but the night is not a pit of dreadful black-
ness. Such an army makes itself manifest in that march,
coming from bench and mill, desk and counter, wheels and
furnace, emblazoned in true pride, and conscious strength


of deeds done, but a world yet to be gained. It is truly a
grand force, for, with the consciousness of its might, it
moves on in peace to win the world to ways beyond the
power of sabres and belching artillery. Its purpose is
enduring. Not to gain from loss and suffer loss again, ac-
cording to the way of martial conquest, but to gain con-
tinually, expanding to newer concepts of men’s value, and
going on further as barrier after barrier is lifted away.
It is no force to be dreaded. None should fear it who
have hearts that beat in accord with humanity. It might
indeed be said that the pulsing sound of the workers’ feet,
in their onward march, is the sound of the heartbeats of
humanity, invigorated to new life. Certain it is that the
tramp, tramp, expresses a clear resolution of earnest good-
will—peace on earth. True peace, not lethargy, not in-
difference, nor the cowed surrender of stricken weakness.
Peace that gives to every man the opportunity to develop
his manhood and takes from him the lurking crudities that
are flamed by war into devastating repulsiveness. Peace
that ensures the equality of citizenship and the fraternity
of interests that were the lodestones of this country’s
pioneer democrats and are the hope of every true heart
amongst mankind.
Not less, but more, is our fellow-faith wanted. Not less,
but more, are wanted the exertions that won such material
gains as are shown in the placed strength of our achieve-
ments. And not less, but more, must we endeavor, even
though many are weakened momentarily by disappoint-
ments at home and hurt by evils abroad. Labor is one
everywhere. Let its march of triumph in this outpost of
its gains be the stirring signal that none herein are faltering
in the high hopes that fruitified in its demonstrated
triumphs.


A SONG OF THE PEOPLE.
Wrought by the years and schooled by tutoring ages,
While fell the flourished rule so seeming strong,
Inspiring seers and life-perspective sages.
While passing voices yearned with freedom’s song,
Thro* weakness we are winning
To might of Right’s beginning,
When blood nor tears shall mark our action’s pages.
The lancet probe and Rontgen rays’ revealing
Give weighty conquest for regardful eyes;
No Beauty’s robe rare beauty is concealing,
And wine is woe, if HI may analyse.
Tho’ knowledge fair is golden,
To love we’re more beholden;
We’ll link the globe by faith and fellow-feeling.
Let knowledge grow—no wall should compass learning—
Make broad the way lit Reason has to tread;
It must be so to wide the world’s discerning.
Where steel-eyed Science scouts in depths ahead.
Tho’ Science serve with Reason
To rule the flood and season,
She cannot know high Hope’s exaltive yearning.
Let Knowledge serve; she is the elder daughter
Of Love, the lord of omniscient light;
Her pulses nerve —the mammal wooing sought her,
Then forth uprose to scale the Infinite 1
But tho’ with wonder laden,
She’s but the day’s handmaiden,
Whose knights deserve, and win o’er land and water.
No sword we bear, but Truth so long corroded
In jewell’d sheath by draped Convention worn.
Not kill, but spare! tho’ memory whipped and goaded
With spurn and suffering impotently borne.
Tho’ scotch of harm hath wrought us.
Not hate, but love is taught us;
So Labor's share is life with riches loaded.
Man is divine, e’en tho’ the primal creature,
Made simian-wise or wallowing in the mire
Of depths condign, grew one with primal Nature
Before the call that raised him high and higher.
He comes thro’ test and trial
Till past the world’s denial:
Man is divine—the God’s in every feature.


LABOR AND LOYALTY.
Many are the expedients used to frighten the people from
Labor. We have always the cry of impracticability with
us —and Labor in office does more business for the nation
than its Governments had even known before. We hear
of the depressing effect of shortened hours of toil on indus-
try—and Labor’s short day of toil so raises the standard
of work done by emancipated Australians till the result
of a day’s labor per unit in this country is infinitely beyond
the output of individuals in any other part of the world.
The bogie of moral and physical degeneration was long
paraded as a reason why the ideal of Labor should not be
pursued. To give men leisure would make them turn their
idle hours to drink and profligacy, and the second genera-
tion would be tainted with the evil of alcoholism; and so the
nation would degenerate!
The lurking poison of present-time Conservatives —
Liberals is the word in vogue, but it is too misused to suit
a pen working on the lines of truth—is to cast a doubt on
the loyalty of Labor. At this time there is more than
ordinary meaning in the word “ loyalty,” and a hint of dis-
loyalty is an easy means of damning any citizen or section.
So Labor is disloyal! It is declaimed so in ponderous para-
graphs; it is hinted so in news items; and suggestions
that certain incidents that occur from time to time are dis-
loyal are always made to infer a point against Labor.
Mr. Brennan’s free denunciation of what he saw wrong in
certain phases of public action was interpreted as a clear
case in point—and so insistently did the clamor sound
that Mr. Fisher so far forgot the saving prudence of his
nature and the requisite caution of scepticism in regard
to press accounts that he actually took action on the
press reports.
Mr. Blackburn has lately been censured for a certain
statement he made with regard to the condition of workers
from war. The censure was from the table of a property
coterie of Bumbles; but if its voice was small its echo was
resounded with clarion fierceness until what should have
been credit was made to appear as most murderous blame.


“ The disloyalty of Labor ” is a favorite stick with which
to beat the people into the ruts of retrogression. Even
though Labor plans a scheme of defence for its trust—
Australia—and that scheme is adopted and becomes unpre-
cedently popular, so that it is the admiration of nations all
over the world—still the old rod of Labor disloyalty is
applied! When it was proposed to train the growing lads
of Australia so that, if need be, the manhood of the nation
would know something of the rules of martial working, such
press organs as the “Argus ” declared that there was danger
in the proposal. To adopt it would be to put the arms of
the country into the hands of working-men, who would turn
them against Capital! It is a very few years since our
Melbourne contemporary made that assertion—indeed, it
is less than five years since its antipathy to the Labor-
created Defence Act was dropped.
The fact of connecting the word disloyal with a Labor
organisation in Australia, in the face of what is being done
by workers here at the call of country, should be sufficient
to show how far from reason, from right, from justice, a
press inured to Conservatism can really descend.
The descension is made daily. In order to quell the
people in their raving for local freedom, the brazen voices
of our retrogressive press blare it by insinuation and un-
ashamed statement every time its sheets are circulated.
The fact that Labor desires to let the people have the
right to fully rule themselves is interpreted as proof of
disloyalty, because, forsooth, there are extreme occasions
for thought in the conduct of war.
Laborites have shown that in general practice they are
like unto all other people—their country is their mother-
land; and, when a war is upon it, theirs is to do or die.
But while so vast a proportion of workers is in the hosts
that are doing and dying, the great forces that our Capital-
istic press organs speak for are waging ruthless war upon
those Australians who are yet held to the duty of home.
There is nothing disloyal in that! Nothing disloyal that
the indispensable food of elemental life should be held and
manipulated so that citizens of Australia who are the
kindred of her fighters should pay many millions to private
tax-gathers if they would live! The sacrifice of the workers
in the fight; the patience of those who are yet here is dis


loyalty. The rapacious seizing and withholding of the
staple foods of life here, unless tribute to an unheard-of
amount is paid, is loyalty!
1915.
Free men are bound to each.
And in the tie
There’s wide result not cramp and cult,
But faith fair as the sky.
LOYALTY.
A famous man once exclaimed: “ Liberty, vvbat crimes
are committed in thy name.” If he lived now he would
probably change the word “ liberty ” to “ loyalty.” Of all
the phrases cant loves to roll for his enjoyment, none is
exercised so frequently and efficiently. Men everywhere,
in companies and organisations, purposed to get all they
can for themselves let who will go to the wall, use it as a
text of special virtue.
Society has so habituated democracy to the word
“ loyalty,” that he who calls it to his help in public is apt
to be taken at a very low valuation by all hearers who can
estimate worth by its works.
“ Loyalty ” as a general term can now be regarded as a
cover for duplicity, under which communities are inveigled
to their hurt. It is a haven for every politician who would
go fast—if, like a crab, he would go backward. It is the
final resort of the renegade, who, deserting Progress, unctu-
ously fawns on Reaction. It may be true that the term is
often used and accepted in good faith. Is it not an axiom
that one fool makes many?
What is more depressing to those who are launched on
the ocean of high purpose—those who are earnestly striving
to raise the standard of life, that humanity may realise
something of the grandeur of itself than to view a seething
crowd, excited beyond the possibility of reason, waving flags
and bawling staves of a song that is framed as a prayer,
but thus used is more akin to a sacrilege? And next day
the press will report such a pandemonium as a meeting
of special loyal significance, and in columns of pabulum
make attempts to show its important effect.


In Victoria one of the most powerful political associa-
tions besides Labor has for its motto, “ For God and
Country.” That body invariably supports the monied
element. Every influence it casts is for the suppression of
Unionism. Since Labor is for the upraising of men, and
Unionism is the way, that which hurts these injures the race.
” The King ” is a term signifying the community—the
people. Though there is, of course, a personal monarch,
the King we speak of is not so much a single individual as
the corporate person—the community. So an institution
making its first plank allegiance to the Throne, as does
the political association spoken of, and known in all its
works as irreconcilably against the people, is such a para-
doxical curiosity that it cannot be seriously considered.
Were it not that the members are composed of women —
who have not long enjoyed the franchinse, and may perhaps
be excused knowledge on that account —the league would
be laughed out of court. Yet that organisation claims
special prominence because of its loyalty.
There is another form of loyalty of which many of us
have often been more than full. That is the loyalty between
employer and employe. How often have we been told that
Unionism was disloyal to our employer? For years we
heard it; and during those years we know that the loyalty
the employer owed the employe was not existing. Loyalty
—and a man was thrown on the streets without a minute’s
notice merely because he ventured to have some opinion
distasteful to the palate of his master. Loyalty—and for
years he was worked against the moral right of a charter
this employer had signed and made his fortune by.
“ Fear God and honor the King ” is a text of every
unionist’s faith. If he were not consciously or uncon-
sciously guided by such belief he would probably be outside
the pale of unionism. But with him the Deity is not an
emblem to be used for the parade of special self-judged
fitness for heaven, nor is the King a term to aid the grinding
of the people.
We have lately had a surfeit of lip-loyalty. A little
opportunity lately came along to injure those who try to
work unceasingly for the suppression of evil, and such a
great babel of sound arose that it was hard to distinguish
an atom of sense or pick a trace of sanity.


Many of us, too, have a keen recollection of the word
loyalty being misused in connection with unionism. We
have known it to be called loudly by those who were by
no means loyal to their fellows.
It has served sophists in our midst to make war upon our
principles, to violate our high trust and confidence while
keeping our best servers under the odium of suspicion. But
we have risen superior to the mockers of our faith, and if
we remember the occasion of distrust, it is only to be guided
against the deceit of fair-sounding terms.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
(Sonnet)
God save the King! Thou great supernal Guide,
Leading mankind from depth to eminence.
To thee we pray in holy reverence,
The sovereignty to guard, whate’er betide.
To save is Thy prerogative, allied
With toil that strives in consummated sense.
That, highest blessing crown each why and whence,
As strength and wisdom are for grace applied.
Make thou the foe his virulence to cease,
Guard Poverty till Lucre gives increase.
True worth that wilts speed on with holy wing;
Shield thou life’s monarch—who is every man
In toil that life perpetuate thy plan.
Earth-moulded, but divine; God save the King!
SONGS OF LABOR AND OF LOVE.
Sing the worth of every deed
Planned and toiled, till wholly
Life has gained a thing of need.
High or routine lowly.
Charged with weal and burgeoning wealth,
Mind and happiness and health, —
So shall power
Turn the hour
For an. age love-sceptred solely.


Sing in soothe of river song,
Where the wool-weighed barge is;
And the dreams that come along
Where the fey mirage is;
Of long vigils kept thro’ night.
Shared with solace stars of white.
While unstirred
Lies the herd
Folded where the shadow’s marge is.
Of the whirring sound of wheels.
Speeding quick and quicker,
As the Mail with firebreath reels,
Where the lone lights flicker.
Of dim stations wide between,
Brief illumining the scene,
Like a star
Falling far,
Dying where mist-dark grows thicker.
Sing the strength of men who band
For high purpose common,
To ensure thro’ every land,
Unto all that’s human.
Peace by pass of regnant ill;
Never wearying to instil
Fellow faith.
Till love hath
Made of each a strong and true man.
Love’s a coin that’s never spent
When with Labor blended,
Not a glittering ornament,
But for wealth intended.
It is never made of gold.
But is of an earthly mould;
It is free
All can be
Raised by it to creatures splendid!


THE LABOR GOVERNMENT AND THE LABOR PRESS.
The Sydney “ Worker ” has given the Federal Govern-
ment notice that it can’t follow it any further in its
course of anti-Labor. One can imagine how the slashing
editor of the “ Worker ” must have been driven by the
political “ heads ” of the A.W.U. to have followed the
Government so far. Time was when this strong organ of
democracy would have been vigorous to show how futile
was this Federal Labor Government to carry out the
purpose and platform of Labor. The pen of Boote would
have been a journalistic javelin, piercing into the oppor-
tunism and Toryism that now shows itself through the hides
of so many of the Labor Ministerialists.
After all is said and done, perhaps the fall from grace
of Labor in office, with notable exceptions—Queensland’s
State triers, for instance—is attributable to Labor having
the government of the people before the people are really
shaped for the advance that Labor means; and, while
there is no medium between the people and advance, some
of the leading spirits of the movement are ready as may
be for any stride the programme allows. Others—and these
are the millions whose vote brings Labor into office—
see very little difference in the candidates, and vote to-day
for Labor, to-morrow for anti-Labor. These are the votes
to be wooed. And, having placed Labor in office, the men
of fortuitous emoluments see to it that, as far as possible,
they will stay there.
To make a Labor Government conform to the standards
of Labor, it is necessary to have something more than mere
members in the House. You want a driving force behind
the members. Not merely a driving force, such as obtains
in the few leagues and militant trade’s councils. You must
have a power behind your Labor Government that will
bring the points of vantage of such Government always
before the people at their breakfast-tables. You don’t expect
that an ordinary citizen, suddenly invested with many hun-
year income, is going to turn himself into a sacrifice.
Principle? Pooh! He was elected by the majority, he tells


you, and he will serve the majority. If any persevering
militants bother him he will soon give them the information
that they are not the great body of the people.
See how he will distend his chest, and show how already
flatulence has marked him for its own. How can you
expect such a favored son of fortune to make a sacrifice
of himself? Parliaments are not altars; they are havens
of rest.
If you want a Government to be as good as its promises,
you must have a sleepless power always working by the
force of public opinion. Give us a Government made up
of members who are dependent on a public that is educated
in politics by a press wholly hostile, and sooner or later
that Government becomes meaningless.
If you want your energies reproduced by the elected
gentlemen now extending themselves in nothingness, you
must put forth more energy yourself to keep more of these
liege people energised for right action.
Why fulminate against the Government? You are beaten
very soon if you have no consistent and persistent voice
ever propaganding the claims of advance. The press is
the living fire of modern society. Public opinion is largely
press opinion phonographed. Even if the inner conscious-
ness of men tells them that certain courses are not as they
should be, the constant reiteration of the great newspapers
overcomes the fears and impulses that are true guides of
humanity.
The moral of all this is to start a new campaign for a
democratic daily press. The men we have elected would
do our will all right, if they dared. What stops them is the
fear that the public is working against their plans. So,
holus bolus, conversion comes. Expediency is the master
of many men.
Let us do our turn in conversion. Convert not ourselves,
but the great body of the people, who are actually in
sympathy with us, but who are turned so readily by the
insistent activity of the press of Capital. We have a
case for presentment every day. We have a cause that is
the people’s. Can we not give the people a presentment
of their case each day, and make our cause understood and
our case—and theirs—successful?
February I Oth, 1916.


THE CHURCH AND THE WORKERS.
This is one of the great questions of the day. Per-
haps it is because of the many lights centred upon it, the
question is yet obscured—dazed by brilliance.
Certainly there is an impression that the Church is not
with the workers. That cannot be the truth, though some
members—it may be leaders—of differing sects declare
themselves against the march of Labor, and step forward
with dubious force to oppose it.
Such declaration is a warrant that they are of the
Pharisees and money-changers— not the Church, whose
Founder we, as workers, take for guide and example, and
whose teachings we are endeavouring to incorporate into
everyday life.
One of the readiest forces wielded against the workers
in the fight to free life from the shackles of Capitalism is
internal jealousy. That is accomplished by playing the
sects or divisions of the Christian Church against each
other. It is the common rallying-cry of reaction, known
as Sectarianism.
In every country where Labor has risen to stride ahead
for humanity’s emancipation, it is opposed by this hydra-
headed monster. In Germany, where education has shown
the widest influence, expressed by the tremendous force of
the workers elected to Parliament, it is the constituted
Church party, known as the Centre, that has frequently
saved the Government from domination by the workers’
power. It is so, too, in Italy and France. In Russia, the
official Church is the political agent for almost all the
degeneracy of that mighty nation.
To leave nations afar off and view the happenings of our
own land, one is not inspired with high grace towards all
our clerical teachers and guides. It is granted that the
press aids the least occasion to disparage Labor. A press
paragraph is an excellent fan for the smouldering embers of
sectarianism. While splendid service is rendered the people
in their cause by numerous noble-hearted, self-sacrificing
and masterful clergy and laymen, the publicity given shallow
utterances of feeble pulpiteers serves to foster the divisions


that rankle in so many campaigns, retarding so many fights
where success is within view, so that the law of Christ may
be embodied to a greater extent in the works of the world.
As the voice of a considerable portion of workers, we
do not hesitate to speak on such a debatable question. Our
definite: We are with the Church, but it must be a Church
whose creed is expressed in the Lord’s Prayer. If that
prayer is not a mere string of pleasing sentences, then the
creed of Labor is the doctrine of God. How, then, can
sectarianism be logically used to our injury?
We care not in what form a man may worship—that
is largely a matter of inheritance. It is not the form, but
the substance, that concerns us. It is the faith we live, not
the forms we declare, that counts. So long as we are
animated by the impulse of fellowship—so long as our
actions prove that we are inspired by the gospel of fellow-
faith, earnestly to forward every energy for advance—so
long do we know that our creed is good, and care not
under what forms we may bow to the Creator of all good
—the common Father. That there will be a difference in
detail is not a great matter, so long as the essential is
not clouded.
The Church, if it be the Church of God, cannot be
against the worker. Wherever workers are striving for
general betterment, there is a living Church in action. If
the Church be the Church of Mammon, its attitude, natu-
rally, is opposed to all forms of common good, consequently
it is anti-Labor. “Ye cannot serve God and mammon.”
That text sometimes helps to keep the worker outside the
walls of a church; it sometimes serves, also, to prove to
the humble that those within it are not of his life.
We do not attack the need of Church teachers of high
ministering for best development. “Is not the life more
than meat and the body than raiment?”
We need continual help of finer minds in our battle for
the material progress of life. We are striving all the while
for the realisation of the utmost that man may know of
worth. To discountenance fine teachings that stir the inner
consciousness of our hearts to the unrevealed heights of
brightest thought is not our purpose. That would be boor-
ishness, only fit for a stock exchange. The annals of man
who, while laboring in humblest guise, has risen to the fairest
altitudes that humanity knows in every realm of advance,
are proof that we do value wisdom and understanding.


CAPITAL AND LABOR.
This is one of the commonest terms of the day. In what-
ever company you find yourself the phrase is sure to appear.
The most fossilised Conservative will excuse his opposition
to the need around him, and air his sympathy with those
he hurts by saying, “Yes; I believe in Labor getting a
fair share, but Capital must have a fair share also.” All
along the line, wherever thought expresses itself—in
churches, societies, newspapers, and on various platforms
—attempts are made to adjust the proper quantity that
Labor should take, and allot Capital its rightful portion.
The two are accepted as necessary factors for the main-
tenance of man: each worthy of his hire.
Capital is generally represented as the governing, Labor
as the servient body. “We must have Capital or there is
no Labor.” “If Labor demands too much, Capital grows
timid and will not operate, so Labor loses all.” These are
the platitudes of every Liberal, and the beliefs of many,
even of those who support Labor in its political sphere.
Yet the term is a fallacy. Its general acceptance goes to
prove that you have only to persevere with a statement and
make it broadcast to find it admitted, however far it is from
fact.
Capital and Labor are not two forces; they are one.
Labor is action that men put forth to aid Nature’s produc-
tive power: the outcome is Capital. We may say that
Capital must supply the means for development before
Labor can use its force. Not so again. The whole of all
development is—Work. The grandest ship, the noblest
building, the most involved machinery; every plate and
rivet, every girder and stone, every wheel and lever, has
been resolved from the crude forms of Nature, and been
made of value by living Labor.
If all the shares of all the brokers, all the traffickers in
paper bills, all the trucking and plotting that are the
itinerary of Capital, ceased, or never were. Labor, as a
creative force, would not be affected. All the high values
of property in any form are not made by Capital, but life.


Capital is an extraneous institution. It lives on, not for
or by. Labor. When Labor realises its position and power,
and goes without it, we will wonder why Capital was ever
allowed to be.
Of course, Capital is not necessarily money. Capital in
modern life is an assessment or estimate of value that may
be made by the effort of communities, to be enjoyed by
those who did not produce it. Every movement that Capital
helps could be better attended to by the community acting
together and taking the risks and rewards. If the venture
is unsuccessful, the community is the sufferer now, though
it has not commensurate benefit by prosperity.
If the community that makes the value decides to keep
it for its own good, there is an end to present-day Capi-
talism. Money is an excellent means of exchange, and
while it is used so it is not Capital. As a matter of common
knowledge, there are half-a-dozen families in America
reputed to be drawing incomes from a larger amount of
Capital than exists in actual money in the whole American
community of 90 millions of people. Yet all the millions
pay tribute to those few.
Capital is a recent invention. A very few centuries ago
it was unknown. There is not one amongst the world’s
greatest teachers commend the principles that make reward
without effort—usury.
Christ, Moses, Paul, Confucius, Plato, Mahomet—every
one of the mightiest of man’s teachers—condemn the
practices that are the life of Capital. Each teaches the
good of Labor and the value of effort, single and com-
munal.
Labor is the might that makes all the usages of our
existence. The planning, managing, and working of the
facilities of Nature are the means of all the added wealth
the world knows. Yet they who are not lilies—toil not,
neither do they spin—hold the wealth of the world.
The great function of our most advanced law is to weigh
the portion that Labor should receive and leave Capital
in possession of “ its own.’’ To suggest that Justice needs
no scales in this matter is to run the risk of being regarded
as a highly dangerous demagogue or harmless lunatic,
according to the notice such a doctrine may receive. Yet
it is a truth as sound as Truth itself.


HOW FAR CAN PRODUCTION BE STRAINED?
This is not a dissertation for conscription of wealth.
Our political leaders have apparently decided that wealth
is not to be conscribed, however equitable it may now be
in incidence or necessary to a fair adjustment of service.
It seems of little use to belabor the question in the face
of the stolid antipathy of those who alone can bring the
need into effect, as in many aspects of current thought
there is less inclination evinced in Australia’s Government
to touch the perquisites of wealth than in other countries,
where Labor is not even nominally ruling.
Perhaps this sacrosant attitude of Labor towards wealth
is the expression of the intruder into sacred domains, or it
may be an excess of politeness. Having obtruded into the
places of privilege, the truly gentlemanly newcomers are
fearful lest they appear offensive to former holders. This
super-courtesy may be very well received by the people who
were not responsible for the intrusion of Labor into such
exalted and exclusive circles. But it is not kindly taken by
those whose efforts were strained so that the change came
about. Strained courtesy fits worse than no courtesy.
To those outsiders it is hard to reconcile the mild and
urbane attitude of Labor in office to the energetic and
iconoclastic mind of Labor out of office. There seems to
be an ocean of difference between the two. And the differ-
ence is all the more remarkable on comparing the work of
this Labor Ministry to the performance of the former Labor
regime. It is clear that the present failure is not due to the
vain whims of impossible visionaries. However, that is for
another occasion. Criticism of general policy is easy, and
floods of it will inevitably be loosed on the heads of our
Labor Ministers in due time. No! Not a word is here to
conscribe wealth. We are like our elected leaders now,
far too polite to hint of such a harsh measure of equity on
the long-suffering rights of privilege. What we would
dutifully inquire is; Are our political masters quite sure


that the relation of wealth—production—is so founded?
So far we have stood the undue claims upon our worker*
very well. If production has not kept pace with demand
during the last two years, we are willing to ascribe much
of the shortage to other causes than war. But even such
excuse does not overtake the shortage.
There is already a vast amount of wealth, tangible or
material, over our needs. The flotation of bank notes is
now somewhere near fifty millions. When it was less than
a fifth of that sum such respectable economists—the adjec-
tive is used more in chivalry than respect—as the "Argus”
insisted that the danger zone was crossed, and that further
incursions into the field of paper flotation were only steps
into insolvency.
It is unpleasant to recall the criticism of such good
friends as the “Argus” circle is to the Government now,
but our memory is not so amenable as our manners—and,
besides, we are outsiders. But if we must be self-contained,
producing wealth in as great ratio as consumption or obli-
gations need, how can we expect that conscription is not
going to hurt us vitally? Our wealth producers are of
our own land. We are not an investing community, draw-
ing interest from the undertakings of other countries. We
have our primary industries, mines and general manufac-
tories only for our wealth. It is all local. Apart from
the commitments of war, Australia owes something like
£300,000,000 at various rates of interest that has to be
paid yearly. Of course, we never believed the economic
principles of our critic, the “Argus,” but we are not pre-
pared to give carte blanche to the flotation principle, and
at the same time cut deeply into our productive resources
by curtailing the supply of producers, as well as reducing
our exporting facilities for surplus lines. As things were
going in peace time, the Commonwealth Note Issue was a
very fine thing to take a part in, although some of the
ladies of the league, calling themselves National, dubbed
“ Fisher’s flimsies ” as something too valueless to pay
for the washing of their poodles.
The Labor press never did, and will not do so now.
Unless there is a policy of waste allied to a policy of non-
production, there is not much fear that the Government
paper money will greatly deteriorate in value, or that it*


solvency will be questioned. But war does hurt production;
and it does induce waste. No matter how economic prin-
ciples are applied, both of these disparities are inevitable
to war.
And assuredly some of the heavy cost of living essentials
in Australia are due to the operations of these factors of
waste and reduced productive power.
It has always been noted that war-organised countries
are poorer individually than those lands where production
is not seriously checked by martial exigence. Even in
such a land as France, where the people are diligent and
skilled in husbandry, and patient in toil beyond anything
we know of in Australia, and where the soil and climate
are both much better than England’s, the wealth per inhabi-
tant is far below that of Britain’s.
The three countries with a very high value of production
value per inhabitant are Great Britain, America, and
Australia.
How much of England’s power is due to the prepon-
derance of her wealth is not easily calculated. That her
naval supremacy is almost entirely attributable to that
economic advantage is generally allowed. And her power
of wealth is, and has been, a remarkable source of strength
to her Allies. Her freedom, the freedom of which we sing,
and, more effectively still just now, for which so many of
us are fighting, has been founded on a non-military nation-
hood. True, she has accepted a measure of national
service, but before doing so she financed herself and other
countries to the extent of billions of money.
England, however, has one material financial advantage
over Australia. While Australia is compelled to raise about
£15,000,000 a year interest money and send it away from
her shores, England is continually drawing fabulous
amounts from other lands for investments and securities
placed there.
To introduce a measure that would more seriously affect
Australia’s productive power is a matter that would have
consequences that may not have been contemplated by our
Federal authorities. We have not great faith in the guar-
dianship of the “Argus ” school in this crisis, or any other.
It is significant that, while such critics strained at a gnat


(luring the regime of the efficient Fisher Administration,
they are swallowing a camel now that a Hughes Ministry
is on the benches. Export was high during most of the
time of the Fisher Administration, and wealth production
was at its topmost rate. Now export is very much below
the normal condition, and local production is by no means
at a high standard. Does not all this need earnest consid-
eration? The voluntary system of enrolment is not of so
serious a nature, for, even if as many men offer for service,
there has usually been some form of arrangement made
with the interests they have been connected with, so that
there is not cessation of work or disruption of the value
of the production of which they were the instruments.
South Africa and Canada—the other two of the great
trinity of British Dominions —are governed by a political
section synchronising with our Liberal party. It is unneces-
sary to say that they are fully as patriotic as Australia, and
fully as well informed as to the Empire’s position in the
war.
Is it too late to emphasise that the complete duty of
the Australian Government is to review all the effects so
far as they may be seen by ordinary observers before the
wealth-reducing forces are applied to this land? Labor
does not regard itself as greater than the nation. Laborites
are ready, much as they love the movement, to abrogate all
present objects, so that no essential harm come over the
land. It is not unlikely that the Labor movement is so
greatly detested by those present friends of the Labor
Government. The hatred that Torydom has for the real
Labor cause is so implacable that many of the Fusionists
would even imperil the soundness of this country, if, by so
doing, they wrecked the movement of Labor.
August 31st, 1916.


CHERRY - RIPE.
Dark-red and round and luscious they are to-day in their
bounty. The street reveals them in tons —barrows (where
civic bumbledom permits) are ranked with their fulness;
windows show their piles, and myriad bags are rustled into
a circle for the gratification of a fruit-hungry pleasure.
Plenty and prime is the mark of the season —but not cheap-
ness. They are not cheap. Fruit this summer is abundant;
cherries are the first manifestation of the bounty: but there
is a mark on every show of the luscious splendor almost as
prohibitive to the stinted purse as when a drought had
stricken the year.
Supply and demand are the rules of infallible Nature in
business! Ay, ay, we hear that story, but we scarcely see
proof of it. When fruit is scarce it is dear—it was last
year; we all remember. It is plentiful this year—and still
it is dear. What has Supply and Demand done now? What
evil influence is greater than infallible Nature? It is surely
some factor of wondrous power that can at once thwart the
people in their longing for a feast where plenty is, and
falsify the savants of Conservatism who are so ready to
convince us at all times of the immutability of the natural
order to our supplies and prices.
Nature this year has eclipsed herself in prodigality.
As though she repented of her meanness of last summer,
now she loads the trees with fruit, and presses down the
cornstalks with the weight of ears. Last year the law
of Supply and Demand ran true—at least, prices rose
to a famine pitch when supplies were low. This year
Nature has made amends—and do we find a swing of
the market accordingly? Hardly. The price of fruit is
100 per cent, above normal this season, taking the average
price of the last 15 years, excepting last year. Cherries
are not readily exportable. There is a brief day for that
harvest, and a narrow compass for its distribution.
Cherries are like a compound of dew and sunlight made


luscious for a moment and plentiful only when sun and
moisture wed in right harmony. If they abound they
should be cheap. And here to-day in Victoria there is a
pageant of them—behind barriers. This year, as we see
everywhere in our cities, the harvest of the gardens is
most bountiful. Then why does not the “immutable” law
of Supply and Demand keep in step with the prosperous
step of production?
It is all very well to blame the war. A mighty scape-
goat the great war is, but it is not to the overwhelming
scourge of war that the present prohibitive fruit prices
can be attributed. Cherries, at least, are not largely used
for canning—jam and conserves are not open ways for
cherry gluts. If there is a marked surplus of that fruit,
then there should be a correspondingly depressed market,
for it does not lend itself to far-off distribution.
How we have regaled ourselves in fancy with the fruit
feasts of this season! How we were to compensate the
family for the dread abstinence of last year! And now
the fruit is here—the abundance is on view, but the feast
is only a vision. With a shilling we thought to fill a paper
bag so that a bulged parcel would be hailed by the
watchers at home, but the expectations of the family are
not fulfilled. When the purchase is unpocketed, it is very
small. A shilling bought so little that we still think of
last year’s drought. It is remarkable that so passing a
commodity as cherries—one so restricted to locality of
production for its consumption—should be hoisted up to
the edge of famine prices at this prolific season.
It certainly seems a flagrant act of exploitation some-
where. It is not by the workers, for the cost of labor
in regard to picking and marketing fruit this year is
certainly not abnormal. As one with long farming ex-
perience, the writer knows that a case of fruit can be
picked this year at a much lower cost than usual. The
fruit clusters so thickly on the boughs that a picker can
fill his vessel in quick time. Last year the reverse was
the case. The fruit was so scarce that most of the time
of the harvester was not spent in gathering the yield, but
in finding it. The cost of picking the sparse fruit of last
year, pound for pound, would be much greater than this.
Certainly Supply and Demand ought to operate there again


to the advantage of the buyer. Why don’t it? The
grower is not grudged a good price, but there is not
need that there should be extortion of the public in order
that reasonable prices be given the grower. We all know
that it is not the man who produces the fresh fruits that
takes the toll from the people who pay so high for the
privilege of using his wares. It is not the worker who
hoists up the market. There is another power—the non-
worker. There is the force of harm. Just who the con-
stituents of that force may be in Melbourne it is difficult
to say. But the very fact of high rates where there is
such a lavish production of local foodstuff is sufficient
testimony of that force.
We hear a good deal of our duty now. And, for the
most part, the people do not cavil at the call of duty.
But how bitter it is to feel the screw of harpy working
influence upon us right in the midst of our common cause
for service as citizens! And how sinister it is to feel the
impotence we suffer under to remedy the ill of price-
manipulation. What can we do? Simply suffer, it seems.
Suffer in scarcity; suffer in plenty; suffer and make rich
a few who are pulling the levers of price in scarcity and
abundance alike. What can we do? We pride ourselves
on our sense of liberty; we glory in our strength for a
fight for freedom. Yet here we submit to be kept from
the bounty of our production unless we pay heavy tribute
to some unseen and unproductive force that is battening
and growing more obese daily.
We submit. More. When a little effort is about to
be put forth to quell such unwonted elements as now dis-
tend themselves upon us, we passively cry: “Not now.”
Lest some of the band of rooks should be disturbed by
our appeal to make the people the arbiters of themselves,
we allow the representatives of the said rooks to beguile
us with croakings about improper time or some such tem-
porising platitudes. Then we go right on as before,
suffering and submitting helpless as the sheep in the
picture of “Anguish.”
What people are we to talk of freedom? Of what
advantage is the bounty of Nature to us?


SEASON’S RHAPSODIES.
The summer’s in power, far away is the night—
(Green peas and noo pitaters!)
And earth is agleam with beneficent light—
(E-ya-ah! rubob a penny!)
The creepers festooning each portal and casement
Lend foliage fair to the stucco effacement
And temper brick-red from the roof to the basement—
(Cabbidges and corliflowers!)
The world’s an arena for young zephyrs' play—
(Wile rabbey; wile rabbeys!)
The sky is obsessed with itself in the bay—
(Barrycouter! Barrycoutah!)
The bee robs the bud for his saccharine ration,
The fruit petals rain for the young fruits to fashion:
Arise, 0 my soul, ’tis the heyday of passion—
(Oysters, three dozen a bob!)
Ensconced now, al fresco, in Bush haven’s calm
(The ants are in my socks)
The breeze softly circles with life-breathing balm
(Oh, these infernal flies!)
How fine ’tis to ponder where grass like a mat is.
As sunbeams enthral through the branch-making lattice,
How dear is old Nature, how lovely and gratis—
(Some dogs have shook the lunch!)


THE LIVING WAGE.
Pushing a Stone Uphill.
Does the “living wage” mean continual advance in
cost of production? If it does, then the principle is a
false and unrealisable hope that Labor has held. It seems
so to-day, if one regards superficially the conditions arising
out of the efforts put forward by workers to obtain a
minimum wage in proportion to living needs. If the aspect
to-day is true, then it is time leaders of Labor gave over
their exertion to obtain for workers fixed standards of
wages according to evidence given in a tribunal of Justice,
for all that is now necessary to defeat the law is to change
the conditions on which allotments were based.
It is as well to say at the outset that a living wage
never was the ultimate end of industrial agitation. It
was put forward as a principle of humanity that those
who did the work of the world should get at least sufficient
to keep them as citizens while they were employed. The
goal of the worker is not merely a “living wage”; it is
the product of the work he does.
The living wage principle was a step towards the goal.
And as a principle it was so sound that it was accepted
almost unquestioned in this country.
Those that opposed it did so timorously, declaring that
some industries might not be able to stand the impost
that living costs would amount to. Even these objectors
were silenced by the general acceptance of the principle
that an industry that could not pay those who worked it
a fair wage was not worth a community’s retention.
Conditions, nowadays, have so changed by high living
costs that many industries are indeed stricken hard to keep
up a commensurate wage. The day has come, say the
opponents of Labor, that the living-wage principle is
breaking down. It was only a Sisyphus load. The
agitators who incited the workers to clamor for it may
not have known that they were only rolling a huge stone
up a steep hill, and with every step it would fall back
on them.


That is what has happened—and what anti-Labor
declared must happen.
And in this case anti-Labor was right—while the
guidance of our community is along anti-Labor roads.
There is the difficulty. The job of the living-wage
emancipationist is a job for a Hercules, while the Augean
loads of private monopoly and anti-social competition are
pouring on the people. The one way to cleanse the stable
of its ever-recurring accumulations is to turn a river through
it—the river of public control. Take the job as Hercules
took his, and cease crying about the inefficiency of our-
selves to rid ourselves of a long-heaped-up system of
injustice.
If we really intend that the people shall be able to fully
enjoy their work by living as clean and wholesome citizens
from the reward of their work, then we will have to see
to it that each penny or shilling we add to the wage allot-
ment is an addition in value. It is naturally the opposite
now. And it is natural that it should be—as society is
constructed to-day.
If we make the wage circulation greater by 10 per cent,
we at once raise the values of land, rent and stable charges
by that amount. If a hundred people spent £2OO a week
to procure living essentials ten years ago, and those same
hundred now spend £3OO a week in the same endeavor,
what do we invariably find? The places they traded in
have grown more palatial; the ground they tread over in
their rush for bargains has advanced many pounds a foot,
and everywhere the stone that they try to push up the
hill is falling backward upon them. There is a rush of
competition locally and unseen, but inexorable; there is
a crush of Monopoly at the head.
It is absurd to expect anything else while present prin-
ciples of society are adhered to. Just as absurd as to
expect that the law of gravity would cease to operate on
the Sisyphus stone when that burdened worker took his
fainting rest.
Is it only possible to make improvement by bringing
about a complete revolution? The answer is the epitaph
of George Reid. Yes; before we can fully realise the
aspirations of Labor a complete revolution from the ways
of waste and war in social living must come. No; workers


recognised that Labor rule must be the corollary of Labor
laws, and sent workers to govern the community, believing
that the process of change would go on so that step by
step further advances could be made.
What has happened is that Labor rule is much the same
as anti-Labor rule, and so both the purposes and expecta-
tions of the workers are thwarted. But it is not because
of the fundamental error of the principle of wage allot-
ment. Do not let yourself think that, however often it
may be heard, or however vividly you see the weakness of
effect in present high wages. The great ill that present
Labor maladministration can do is to shake the men and
women of the movement from the faith that guided them
to build it up. That faith must hold stronger for the
adversity besetting the cause. Every exertion that was
needed in the past to build up the Labor structure is the
more necessary now that the pillars we made to hold it
are showing quick marks of weakening. If there must
be alteration, it is surely more than ever necessary that
the builders be exertive.
The fact that the principle of the living wage was so
widely accepted is one of the great triumphs of Labor’s
builders. It is only in a very limited part of the world
where so much has been won. It proves that the great
heart of the people is beating in unison with our aspira-
tions. For us to be diverted because influences have kept
us from our hopes would be a puny end to the high spirit
that set us forward.
No; the great object now is not to be downcast at
apparent failure, but to weigh and examine the circum-
stances around us.
We will see that what has happened in the just con-
comitant of Conservatism set alive by Labor, we see
nowadays that even the whilom democratic press brazenly
discards its last plank of Australian democracy—White
Australia—-and arrogantly demands that a great portion
of Australia should be tilled by colored labor. We see
newspapers that helped to legalise the living-wage prin-
ciple scorn and scoff at it as an impossibility for good
on account of the tendency to make prices for all com-
modities rising in keeping with wages.


What does such paltering matter? Truth is mighty, and
will prevail.
When we see the living wage applied to mining, and
at once a printers’ inferno raised about the crushing
burden on the industry, and the impossibility of applying
the law to such without driving many of the mines into
bankruptcy or idleness, even then we are not to be de-
terred. As well say that a railway to a sparse district
was unable to pay fair wages as to declare that a number
of mines worked now on a small margin of returns should
not pay community-held rightful wages. Certainly one
railway may not, or one mine; but by the unity of the
people all the railways can, and by the same law so could
all mines that are worthy to be mines.
It is admitted that minerals, especially gold, are not
easily affected by general fluctuations of ordinary com-
merce. So, say the low-wage-for-miners’ advocates, here,
at any rate, the living-wage principle has run to a dead-
end.
But that is not so. Even with the standard price of
gold there is no reason to believe that the mining industry
in Australia need be hurt by the application of the human
principle of wages. The effect of barbarous competition
in some cases, monopoly in others, has put a fictitious
value on commodities. In a sense you cannot put a
fictitious value on gold. So on that logic the gold miner
becomes a victim by the present system of wage allotment.
His product is not raised in price; his essentials of living
are.
The way to overcome the injustice there is to restore
justice to the principle of costs everywhere. Let prices
be what actual production makes them. If the people,
by communal power, make values high, as in the wheat
operations, then, as a matter of sanity, THE PEOPLE must
get that value—not a little handful of the people.
So it is everywhere. The application of communal laws
and dealing makes community action in further fields im-
perative. It becomes an endless chain. But if only a
fraction of the people are allowed to profit by the working
of communal operations, then a chain is put about the
necks of the remainder.


HISTORY OF THE EIGHT HOURS’ DAY.
The first trade union to be established in Australia was
the “Operative Masons’ Society,” which came into being
in Melbourne in 1850.
The principal duty it set itself was to reduce the hours
worked, which were something similar to what prevailed
in England.
After a year or two the agitation took definite shape, and
a straight-out fight was made for an eight-hours’ day, which
had, however, been adopted in 1848, in Otago, N.Z. It
was a town association in Otago that pioneered the New
Zealand movement, and thus instituted the great reform
of industrialism which has been so widely followed by
forces of workers throughout Australia, and which is now
being extensively copied throughout America and else-
where.
In New South Wales the first eight hours’ day was won
in 1855, after a strike; but there was very little develop-
ment in the movement until 1871, in which year four
trade unions held the first Eight Hours’ demonstration in
Sydney.
In Victoria the first Eight Hours’ procession was held in
1856. Six unions—the masons’, bricklayers’, carpenters
and joiners’, plasterers’, painters’, and slaters’—taking
part. The next year saw three more unions in, and about
700 men marched in the procession. From that time the
Eight Hours’ principle has been recognised in Victoria, and
new unions made it a feature of their obligations.
Queensland was slower to get a start, and it was not
till 1866 that an Eight Hours’ demonstration was held in
Brisbane. It was the masons that pioneered the move-
ment in Queensland, as in Victoria.
South Australia came in later again. The building
trades combined there in the first demonstration in 1873.
Until the goldfields brought a rush of men to West
Australia, in 1896, unions and eight hours were little


known there. The great change came then, however, and
from being the slow, decadent spot in the South, West
Australia got going industrially, and has since been the
most forward of all Australian States.
Trades unions started in Tasmania in 1874. In that
year the shipwrights of Hobart pioneered the movement,
but they were not able to obtain the eight hours’ boon for
many a long day. It was not until several other callings
had formed unions, and a straight-out fight ensued in the
form of a strike, that the shorter day of labor was adopted
in the Apple Island. The first Tasmanian Eight Hours’
demonstration was held in 1890.
While the eight hours’ system is so popular, and its
working has proved so admirable, it is a fact that not
even to-day is there a State in Australia where the system
is universally in operation.
No State, not even New South Wales, has eight hours
on the Statute-book, although that form of legislation was
given 20 years ago in New Zealand, and works well, even
in farming pursuits.
Of course, the principle of eight hours is recognised
by law in Australia. Both the Wages Boards and the
Arbitration Court incorporates it in their findings, but no
State Government or leader has had the temerity to rise
to the democratic height of Seddon in New Zealand.
The consequence is that the system is by no means
general in the working of the various undertakings in
Australia. The industry of tram working has generally
adopted it, but the eight hours’ day came into the tram
calling only in very recent years. Even yet, the system
is not strictly in vogue, for in our charter with the
Arbitration Court some of the agreements only allow over-
time after nine hours have been worked.
There is a long way to go before the full value of
advance is secured by all, although we do rejoice in the
annual demonstration of our Eight Hours’ Movement, and
take part in it with a feeling of pride.


AS IT WAS.
They had been to a presentation night. A delegate
had received a recognition of his service from his
comrades, and old Bill and Harry were warmed up to
exchange reminiscences, after the manner of patriarchs,
since Adam told his sons of the wonders of his youth,
when everything in the garden was lovely.
“Ah, yes, these young fellers think they’re big shakes.”
Harry was slow and not strong on words until the right
influence was touched, but he was evidently, well keyed
to-night.
“I remember some goes we had in the old ’bus days,
before anybody thought of trams,” he went on.
“What about the one out at Brunswick?” queried Bill,
keen on the scent of a yarn.
“Brunswick. Yes. I ain’t goin’ to talk about Brunswick
now, though. Before that. There was a meetin’ we held
in the city, Lonsdale street, at the stables then—they’re
a motor place, garage they call it now. It was a go we
had to form a union.”
“Oh, I think I heard o’ that. It’s before my time,
though,” said crony Bill, ruminatingly encouraging Harry
to the tale. His history was a year or so less than Harry’s,
and that friend never lost a chance of airing his pride of
record.
“Yes; they all met in the city, an’ they had speechifying:
after they fixed up to have a proper union.” Harry was
enjoying the recollection, but he had to stop to gather
words. “Oh, yes, that’s the Lonsdale street meetin’.”
“I know, I know,” says Bill, interrupting; but apologeti-
cally added, “It’s before my time, though.”
“I should think it was before your time! Why, I can
just as much as remember it. That’s why I got to stop
to think,” says Harry. “Well, we fixed it up all right.
There was 18 men made what we call delegates now.
Each of ’em took up the work. It ’ud be a hard job to
find any of ’em now. John Stanley was one of ’em—the


last—and ’he’s gone off, too. Anyway, that was on
Sunday. In the next week out comes word that some
’buses has to be taken off. Just 18 men was to go.”
Old Bill lifted up his head for another interjection, but
Harry whipped on the pace to continue, “Yes; and them
18 was just them that had to do the union work.”
“Oh, you can bet on that,” responded Bill.
“Bet on it. O’ course you can,” said Harry. “But you
couldn’t bet how quick we all fixed up to strike, and none
of them was sacked after all—not that time, anyhow.”
“It was pretty strong they picked all the right ones out
always,” said his crony. “Did you ever hear how they
got wind of the names so pat?”
“Yes; old Prowl. He told it. He hid in a tree in the
yard at the meetin’. They made him a boss afterwards.
He’s about yet, but ain’t much better’n you an’ me, Bill,
if he did have a few more quid. I saw him a few months
ago, and he wasn’t game to talk to me.”
“Ay, ay,” said Bill. “We had some tough tries in our
days. These fellers, now, they rile me when they sit on
the old ’uns as if they was no sort with ’em. I suppose
they do the best they can in their days, but we did the
best we could in the old days, an’ did more than most
o’ them would.”
“It’s a good job things V gone as they are,” said Harry.
“Lots o’ them that are gone would be glad to see it, Bill.
Let’s have another to their memory, Bill.”
DOWN AT THE BANK.
There is little congenial to bright minds of visitors at
the Yarra Bank. The place is cast away from habitation
like the walk of a penitentiary. A blank grey wall of
corrugated iron holds the northern line, beyond which rise
serried buildings, gaunt brick adjuncts of the railway that
sends intermittent trains thundering and shrieking past
during the whole day. The ground is a waste of mire—
a few acres that has not yet fallen to the demand of
reclamation. The usage of half a million feet and


thousands of hands have made the natural field a dismal
place of sodden garbage. But it is yet open; and there
speech is given more freedom than is allowed to truth
seekers elsewhere. On the southern fringe a road takes
flying electric trams and multitudinous vehicles along the
river’s brink. Across the stream is another world; green-
flushed lawns, parterres of bloom, banks of shrubs, statues,
groves and grottoes, and every artifice of beauty have been
placed there as a setting to the high official home of vice-
royalty that crowns the prospect and waves the flag into
dim vistas of the southernmost heaven. Eastward again
the world is still another place; a place of gleaming dis-
tance that is only held by the confines of the Dandenong
ranges setting purple bounds to the misty vision of Ideal.
October 12th, 1916.
Where do Yarra waters flow
When the light is leaving,
Eager for the to-and-fro
Of the ocean’s heaving?
Passing swift with swirl and swellings.
Huddled lines of human dwellings,
Where the nation herds the masses
From preserves of other classes.
Where the babes—Love’s greatest guerdon—
Come as heavy labor’s burden,
And to-day is as to-morrow.
Each a fight with sordid sorrow;
Yet, withal, where happiness
Softens many an hour of stress. . . .
On thro’ banks reserved as forum
For the rebels of Decorum,
Where they stand to jeers and jostles.
Proud to serve as Light’s apostles ....
Flowing on until emerging
To the sea-waves, foaming, surging.
There to join the vain endeavor
Of the assailing tides forever.
—From " Where Yarra Waters Flow.”


TRADES HALL.
There is something of history in the council chamber
of the Trades Hall, the venue of the conference. The
ring of many a fiery debate, in which great good for the
workers was formulated, still echoes there. The chairman
of this concourse, keen, courteous and conspicuously fair,
might be the reincarnated figure of the first president of
the Trades Hall Council, C. B. Hall. That name heads
long lists that enscroll the men who have been most
prominent in the workers’ crusade since Labor organisation
was firmly established in Melbourne. And within the walls
so marked one may well fancy that the ring of energy, of
enthusiasm and of fraternity still sounds for inspiration.
From 1858 to 1916 is but a day in the history of some
lands. In this country what has it seen? It has marked
the era of the worker, bringing him from the chrysalis stage
of a chattel to the period of an equal-righted man with
any citizen. The names on those walls are chronicles of
that transition. It is no small honor to be in that chamber,
watched over by the records of the undying men whose
names are thereon set forth. And there are other influences
beside the long scrolls or the echoes that memory or mind
may conjure up. Some few figures have been singled out
to shine as golden lights for guidance and hope in times
of doubt, and to men who are in need of an inspiring
influence. Dave Wiley, the pioneer Labor legislator, is
there, looking on, a quiet spectator at the right hand of
the chairman. There are many men in the movement
who knew him. It is always in one key that they speak
of him—reverence. His young face is there enshrined in
the sphere for which his influence was so strenuously
exerted. Another, G. Higinbotham, looks on that con-
ference from the height of the wall. His epitaph is written
in the word that shows beneath his name on the picture,
“Democrat.” So common a word to-day, and so sacri-
legiously used! We see it battened upon by the press that
would keep the people from their development, making
their progress serve the god that that press must serve—
the dominant god, Capital. There is grandeur in that
word democrat that no sophistry can diminish, however
it brazen forth its false sounding note. But though


“democrat” may be applied to many here, its simple
application to that portrayed figure in the council chamber
of the Trades Hall gives it the serene splendor of a single
shining star. And there is another figure on those walls.
It is of one that needs no man to tell his name to the
workers of to-day. It is the lineaments of Laurie Cohen.
Looking with peering eyes from the veil that lately shut
him from the material presence of his comrades, he
endures in that chamber as a never setting sun.
THE COAL STRIKE AND THE I.W.W. TRIAL.
Two notable Australian events culminated last week:
the settlement of the coal strike and the sentencing of the
“1.W.W.” prisoners. The first-named event bids fair to be
writ in Australia’s history as the extreme farce of that
loud-voiced great one, Mr. W. M. Hughes. It showed the
Australian Prime Minister in a most unenviable light.
Where he had been paraded as “the” Empire statesman
he showed such utter ineptitude that his every effort to
settle a local disturbance could do no more than make bad
worse. The coal miners struck for the full recognition of
the eight hours’ day—which has long been a principle of
work in this country. Instead of taking prompt and
decisive action to keep the mines going, even if to do
so involved their temporary nationalisation, Mr. Hughes
called for conferences, at which he poured oil on flames
to such extent that the continent spread with burning. The
coal was deemed the paramount essential for the transport
of troops. Instead of nationalising the coal in the pits,
our vaunted statesman seized the stocks of trading citizens
and so peremptorily shut down the commerce of the land.
Then this leader of the day agreed upon one fact: That
the solution of the coal mining problem was too complex
for him. He decided that a State judge should arbitrate
upon the matter. This was done; and immediately the
whole complexity was simply solved. An obscure man did
in a few hours what the paraded great one had failed to
do in several weeks. History, no doubt, when it mentions
the name of W. M. Hughes, will illustrate his true worth
as a statesman by such telling proof of futility—except for
mischief.
But Australia’s history will have a black page of in


justice from the transactions of last week. The I.W.W.
charges were finally “dealt with” by a gentleman of the
New South Wales court of law, Mr. Justice Pring; with the
result that fifteen years’ penal servitude was allotted to
seven of the twelve men, and terms of ten and five years’
imprisonment were given the other five.
We have no word to say for the upholding of criminals.
Wanton men are a pest that society must keep under.
But the men who have been so crushingly sentenced in
Sydney were never treated so. If they really were
criminals, the evidence given in court did not prove it.
What had generally been taken as proof was the countless
witnesses of the great press, the anti-workers’ platform,
and even the preachers of religion.
It became the fashion to call these men criminals while
they awaited trial. During the Referendum campaign the
one cry for obloquy raised against the workers in their
plea against conscription was the empty watchword of the
privileged parties—“the 1.W.W.”
The coal strike showed that Mr. Hughes can make a
farce. The I.W.W. case proves that he can be associated
with a tragedy. If justice was to be satisfied in the I.W.W.
cases, why was not Mr. Hughes charged with contempt of
court when he assailed the men?
Is justice so frail in New South Wales that men who
are to be tried can be assailed as criminals until the very
land is assured of their guilt? Not so long ago a Mel-
bourne doctor was charged with being implicated in the
disappearance of a girl. Circumstantial evidence was
printed daily in the press to show the girl had died as a
consequence of an illegal operation, and the doctor in
question was indicted as the guilty person. But his case
was not decided until the newspapers casting suspicion
upon him were brought to book. If contempt of court
was committed in the Dr. Peacock case, how much was it
accentuated in the I.W.W. cases? The whole of the men
charged have been found guilty, and are now incarcerated
for the serving of almost life sentences of imprisonment.
We have no hesitation in saying the sentences were a
bitter tragedy. The one offence those men now so officially
impugned were shown to be guilty of is the present crime
of advocating unpopular working class opinions,
December 7th, 1916.


AUSTRALIA’S NATIONAL SONG.
Just at the moment Australia has a national song. Last
year she had another—but it’s a long way to last year, if
we look over the lists of ephemeral whoopings that serve
in the garish superficiality of present surroundings. Now,
at least, she is Australia, even if she embraces a brazen
medley in ecstatic outpourings on the way.
In a sense this song of the present day is our national
song. It expresses the reigning emotion of a transitory
populace, and it unconsciously voices the apparent empti-
ness that lies in the national need at this time. What
matter if the song of to-day is as shallow as “Yankee
Doodle,” is bare of the true sentiment of humanity as a
hymn written to the Stock Exchange? Its raucous, belli-
cose unoriginality, its complete absence of national traits
will make it well worthy to be sung and played in the
parades of the moment.
From time to time Australia has sought a song to
epitomise the breadth of the southern continent, some
sparkling harmony of sky and sun and soil to vocalise the
strength and beauty of each and suggest the latent
grandeur of the South. A song it might be of the rising
worker at the portal of Freedom, of virility, of plenty,
of independence—yet complete fellow-dependence—a song
of Youth crowned universal in the halls of Peace.
Such a song could not be heard now. It may be
that it has already been poured forth unheard in some
desolate suburb, or in the lone length of the plains to
the accompaniment of strains from the invisible hands of
Hope. To sing it in the city to-day would bring the
poet into Pentridge—and cast his melody to scorn that
is more insufferable than silence.
We are told that we learn in suffering what we teach
in song, and that from a nation’s stress her singers arise.
Australia has often heard that she has no literature—and
to prove it a rhyming jingle utterly void of national in-
spiration or beauty is advertised as the work of Australia’s
first poet. To-day Australia knows suffering. She has sent


her sons into a palpitating charnel house, and they have
eclipsed the legendary light of old Troy in deed and
daring. Nothing is lacking of their courage and enter-
prise. What any men may do Australians do, not in the
grim despair of driven strength, but in a spirit of ex-
hilaration, wild and admirable, even if it is so cruelly
far from the daily peace victory over plain and bush, in
mirage and drought.
Australia will have her song. It is yet to be sung, but
it will not be a Marseillaise. It will be no exhortation to
death; it will be the song of life won by liberty—of peace
established by peace—none other can endure except as
suffering. There will not be a stone cast at mankind in
other frontiers by the singing of Australia’s national song.
It will not be suffering that attunes the harp that will
vibrate the chords of the song of the South. It will be
no cry for peace like the Russian Anthem—a cry sung to
a heedless heaven to the ceaseless accompaniment of
blood gurgles from bayonets and knout wounds. It will
be a song like the song of Miriam when the slaves of
Egypt left their lords and came across the sea to labor-
won freedom. And it will have something of the joy of
humanity that impulsed Mary when she sang, “He hath
pul down the mighty from their seats and exalted them
of low degree. He hath filled the hungry with good things
and the rich He hath sent empty away.”
If Australia has no national song, it is because she
has not yet dawned to the day of her strength. She is
voiceless as the potential, not dumb as the brute. And
when she sings it will be a song made gorgeous without
the echo of battle cries in its staves. It will be joy that
articulates, not pain. It will be a conquest by example,
not force. What land has ever known so vast a promise?
Greece was bright, but her history is writ with blood.
Rome was a triumph, but it was not a triumph of the
mass; it was rather the might of the few made dominant
by the sacrifice of the many.
Not even “Hail, Columbia” is a song of wide and free
stainless joy. It has been the death wail of millions
fighting in fratricide. No country has been so nurtured
in supreme peace as Australia. No land has been lapped
by Time in favored security until it can take a full-grown


estate with the world unblemished by the old world’s trials,
unstained by its records and unhampered by its trammels.
Thus Australia’s literature must be new in theme. It will
not be set in caskets of war, nor sealed in traditions of
blood. It will tell of effort, privation, strength, triumph.
Its voice will be inspired by the might of work and the
conquest of Labor into new zones of humanity. War
has served to prove that the way of peace is not the
way of decadence.
The gains of Australia in Labor standards have all been
won to the cries of laggard lamenters. The good intent
of each step has been ridiculed, and certain injury to the
stamina of the people been foretold.
Nothing has come of Australia’s advance but vital
strength to her children. War has proved this—if proof
were needed. When war ceases and the land is let upon
its pristine course of peace, the note that will sound may
be long in forming. It will not be ephemeral nor false.
It will be a song of the soul of light inspired by the
unstained glory of the sunlit land. There is no need to
look for it now. If it were here it would be rejected and
reviled as is all forethought of advance. It will come.
When it is heard it will be known, for then it will be the
voice of the people—the people grown to the worthiness
of the land they live in.
THE MIGHTIEST MIGHT.
If fame should seek to call me to her throne.
And say, “Choose thou the means, I will bestow.
“Wouldst thou the might of Alexander own,
“Or Nelson, or the gentle Angelo?
“Wouldst thou have wit and wealth as Solomon,
“Or conquer seas like navigator Cook,
“Preach out like Paul when heavenly gifts came on,
“Or as Copernicus read heavenly book?
“Wouldst patriot be inspired as Washington,
“Or work a language as old Webster works,
“Labor the elements as Edison,
“Or gain explorer’s crown like hapless Burke’s?”
I’d answer, “Goddess, if thou wilt, grant then,
“Grant me the vantage of a master pen.”


CLOSING STANZAS OF “THE WATTLE QUEEN.”
No lines to be writ
In the rubric of vassals,
Nor chant for uplifting of sorrow,
But waved spontaneity chorussed
To welcome the day.
Yet song ne’er to flit
As the calling of throstles—
The song to endure thro’ the morrow.
While shrines of perennial forest
Re-echo the lay.
Grey pillars and green vibrate ’mid the sheen,
A canto each way.
That song we would call!
But a Thracian lover,
Whose rave thy transcendence embraces,
Whose music is thee, manifested.
Ecstatic, elate.
Sublimity’s all!
Whom pined Echo gives over.
Each cadence and chroma retraces,
Till Dulness has quickened and wrested
From Durance his fate,
Whose measures are ringing Love’s regnant upbringing,
His lyre we await.


BERYL LEE.
As sweethearts love the solitude.
And thrushes love the plum trees,
As flow’rs approve while breezes move,
And bees love blossom’d gum trees;
As thirsting grain loves fresh’ning rain
While soft from heaven it presses,
As loves the Spring her wealth to fling
When she the world caresses;
So I love thee, my Beryl Lee,
And more than these my love for thee,
In day and night my heart’s delight
Is Beryl Lee, is Beryl Lee.
As motherbird bestows the brood
Her hours and hours of duty,
So love has brought my every thought
To pleasure in thy beauty;
And birds that high in tree and sky
Their carol joys are making,
Have songs for me of thee, of thee,
In sleeping or in waking;
They sing to me of Beryl Lee,
No other maid so fair as she;
No wind may greet a flow’r as sweet
As Beryl Lee, as Beryl Lee.


FROM “ODE TO THE MAGPIE”
When primal man had joy of sovran powers
O’er all the Garden’s underthings,
Eve’s court was made of myriad birds and flowers,
To wend the while on airy wings,
The God ordained it so, and bright with pride
Of Fatherlove saw all was fair.
That every weal of Heaven be undenied
His full reflected Presence there.
He gracious toned the buds with dews.
And bade them ne’er their souls refuse
Unto their queen.
The birds he tuned.
With super chords aeolian angels crooned
Or choired in praise:
Impowering all by varied ways
High loveliness to minister along the emergent days.
And then, 0 Warbler! thy commission came!
Vestured in cherubic whiteness,
Leavened with sun morning lightness,
And exultant sway and brightness
Of meridian flame;
Vestal thou of lyric glory.
Charged with keys of golden story.
That in numbers amatory
Tell Elysian fame.
Was it anguish made thee still
As the serpent had his will?
Did inceptive wiles of Passion lull thee into listlessness?
Was thy fluty organ rifted
That thou ne’er one call uplifted,
Raised one sounding song to shield her, warn of consum-
mative stress?


So I have heard, as with imponderate sleep,
By hovering want from me distrained,
Recurring rounds of sodden toil 1 keep,
To law’s inconsonancy chained;
When every loaded leaf and rim of grass
Gives forth a scintillated shower
Of errant star-rays, eager as I pass
For silver stairs their lord will tower.
To mount the ambient sphere again.
And leave the grind of battling men
And sorriness:
So I have heard
Thy joy commune with kindred joys, sweet Bird,
In euphony.
And, hearing, vision comes to me
To banish thought of mundane mould with wing’d felicity.
I would ofttimes that I could learn thy song!
To be, as thou, the Day’s upbringer;
Of new-born light the lucid ringer,
And like thee. Bird, a votive singer,
Unvibrative of Wrong!
To give the waiting world thy spirit,
That men in every clime would hear it.
And lit with incandescent merit,
Leave dark, where warrings throng;
End their grieving
By perceiving
Love has come the way along!


THE IMMIGRANT.
A new chum’s came and settled at our kipsey.
He’s just completely made himself at home;
An’ since he’s been there’s some that think I’m tipsy,
Perhaps that’s why I try to make a pome.
He seems a star a nuzzlin’ in an’ guzzlin’,
Then sleepin’ off effects the most of day;
Or lyin’ still as tho’ his mind was puzzlin’
On wonders more than ever I can say.
He only found his way with lots of trouble,
God! Men dunno what women have to bear!
But now the missus says he’s Daddy’s double,
An’ gone is all the killin’ pain an’ care.
The neighbours coo as round him they foregather,
The ole maids, an’ the sweethearts an’ the wives,
So reckon all—“ How very like his father!”
Tho’ some has never seen me in their lives.
His eyes they lift me up above myself, sure,
When screwin’ me with understandin’ search,
They’re fairer far than pitchers on the delf, sure,
Or in the painted winders of a church;
They tell me more than any sermon teaches.
Among the Sunday saints an’ meetin’ folk,
That livin’s more than any feller preaches.
An’ much of mighty good is never spoke.
He doesn’t seem to worry what his luck is.
Nor how the chances stand for play an’ work,
He couldn’t tell what bootin’ in the ruck is.
Or from a goer spot a spieler’s lurk.
I tip he’s just the immigrant that’s wanted
To let the country have a bloomin’ show.
The more of him the less we need be haunted
By fret and fear our land should never know.


You wouldn’t think a kid ’ud much affect me,
I ain’t the sort you’d fancy for a dad.
But for the softie kind you’ll not suspect me
Although I buckle to the tiny lad.
He’ll be about as good a man as any—
What if I have no gilt to skile about,
I promise you he’ll go as fair as many
That make a shinin’ show when startin’ out.
THE CATTLE YEARS.
Away beyond back o’ sunset skies.
The cattle stations lie;
A mob is ready the road to take,
The chartless route that the drovers make
To suit the pasture or weather break
Of rain, or spells of dry.
Then oh, to ride when the rounding horse
Goes thro’ the nightwel grass:
As each star dies out like a risen spark
And day is striking the tent of dark.
Where the light inside showed wan and stark,
As the shadows fade and pass.
The mist of dawn is a wreath of smoke,
When camp is broad awake.
Old kooka’s laugh is a scale of fun
Proclaiming night is over and done,
As miles of glistening greet the sun
When morning’s track we take.
The mob comes slow thro’ the damp of morn,
And slow thro’ the dry of day.
No galloping hours do the cattle need.
The times that turns to the rush of speed
Is never the time that cattle heed
On their ruminating way.


It’s oh! to camp when the river’s full.
In a band where trefoil’s deep.
It’s oh! to dream as the hobbles clink,
And the camp-fire glows to the shadow’s brink.
Where the cattle merge as they silent sink
To the fold of caring sleep.
The Cross hangs low in a velvet haze.
And the Way its dust sheds round;
And low the watcher must bring his ear
To catch the cropping of grazers near —
The heart of the night throbs true and clear
To him that knows the sound.
But what for stages when creeks are dry
And thirst has gripped the herd!
The whips ring out and the dogs strive long
As leaders lag and the stragglers throng,
Till breathing scent of a billabong
The cattle fresh are stirred!
We keep our tally and keep them sound
Along the mulga miles,
We strain in saddles as over logs
We chase at lead of the minding dogs.
The rebels heading for swampy bogs
Where luring danger smiles.
The creak of saddles I hear it still.
The bridle rein I feel;
Old Rover’s lifting his pointy ears
In dreaming hours of the flighty steers
That filled his toil in the droving years
As his teeth touched many a heel.


COME TO ME NOW.
Mist o’er the hills
Is pierced with tree spires,
Dips are a-chord with antheming choirs.
Morning instils
Pure fragrance of light
Up from sweet depths and level and height;
Come to me now, ’mid sunburst and song,
Oh, I have waited long.
Shimmer of blue.
Like sky over cloud.
Softens the distance when noon reigns proud
In garish hue.
Light toned with haze
Soothes unto dreams the far-running ways:
Come to me now, with visions athrong.
Oh, I have waited long.
Deep burnished gold
O’er realms of gum-green
Uplifts the trees with aerial sheen,
Shadows enfold
With purple and grey
Valleys where even uprises from day:
Come to me now, heaven’s glory among,
Oh, I have waited long.


THE SONG OF THE SHEARING.
Sing oh, for the click of the shears,
The click-clicking-click o’ the shears.
Now we station-ward trend
For the wethers are penned;
The season of shearing appears.
We steady our nags in the clover,
’Tis there that they paddock the studs,
Then straight for the huts canter over
To fix up the doss an’ the duds;
To-morrow the shed is commencing,
Full-handed except for the pen,
For two of the team outback fencing—
They lean to the old season’s men.
Sing oh, for the whistle has sung.
Each man to his billet has sprung;
Clicking blades disappear,
And with pelt smooth and clear
The sheep to the race is outflung.
The fleece on the board lies a-shimm’ring
Like a layer of surf at the beach,
That soft in the sunlight is glimm’ring
Where rolls of the tide barely reach;
A twist o’ the wrist of a picker.
Away on the table ’tis thrown,
All spread like a web, hardly thicker
Than wattle bloom breezes have blown.
Sing oh, for the rouseabouts’ cook, —
May never his hatches go crook.
Who turns out the brownie
More sweet than a townie
Has tasted or read in a book.
The pannikins go to the bucket,
And tea by the ton is consumed,
I fill my old clay then, and suck it.
My mate’s pipe is lost —how he fumed.
The “Blow-up” again sets us going;
The air down the board’s getting thick;
This eight-tooth I’m at is hard-blowing—
The cobbler—my cobber’s too slick.


Sing oh, for the rustle of lace.
When Beauty comes into the place;
Each form is a treasure
Of bountiful pleasure.
Such presence sheds charm by its grace.
The classer puts on special swagger,
A cheeky tarboy gives a cheer—
He’s worse than a man on the lager.
Kids fancy they’re men when they’re here.
The drummer’s yarn makes sudden ending,
Twasn’t meant for the feminine folk.
An’ we shear as tho’ lives were depending
On the length and the strength of each stroke.
Sing oh, when we’ve finished the day.
And we see what the tally can say;
We’ve started with vigor
To run up a figure
With wet, the rain, and the wrinkleys away.
Our rep. yarns of old Barrawidgee,
The shearers’ cook tells of a fish
He caught in the cool Murrumbidgee,—
For the station ’twould be a day’s dish.
There’s lovers an’ homers at letters;
A picker shows musical powers;
And cardsmen an’ draughtsmen an’ “sweaters”
Are trying their luck till all hours.
Sing oh, for the shearing is done,
We’ve cut out the last wrinkley one
Of the big-bodied rams.
An’ we’re thro’ with the lambs.
And the rolling of swags has begun.
We saddle the nags and are ready
For toil far away from the shed;
The plains we take cantering steady,
There’s rises and ranges ahead.
Still keeping the track, never tripping.
The clearing—and there is the grain
Raddle red with the ripeness for stripping.
We’re home from the shearing again.


TAKING HER HOME.
Broke yer leg? Ur, stop yer guyver,
Git up on yer pins en see.
Kid yer racin’ fer a fiver,
All yer got ter beat is me.
Come on, mum, it’s time we’re gettln’!
’Ow erbout the ole man’s tea?
‘Ow erbout young Linda frettin’
On ole Mother Jones’s knee?
She’s alright ter leave ther kid wif.
But it’s gut ter ’ave its feed:
Linda she can lift yer lid wif
Bawlin’ strong when she’s in need.
Mother Jones is just ther glassy
W’en yer want ’er fer a turn:
Never kids herself she’s classy.
Though she ain’t got much ter learn.
She’s a monte ter be thinking
Thet yer gone upon the shick:
Don’ she alwuz tell yer drinkin’
Ain’t the way ter keep in nick?
Don’ she say it gits yer under.
Knocks yer down en keeps yer there.
But our life it makes ’er wonder
Thet there’s any on the square?
Here’s a John, mum, ain’t he screwin’!
’Ere, Vs cornin’. Yessir, mum
Isn’t drunk en ain’t been doin’
Nothun so’s fer you ter come.
We wuz goin’ ’ome together,
Me en mother, en she fell:
Trod upon some slippy leather,
En she’s hurt er foot like ’ell.


Yes, I go ter school, I’m nine, sir.
Father’s workin’ every day.
Think ’e’s in the bottle line, sir,
Don’t git on ther shickerin’ lay.
There, she’s right, we don’t live far, sir,
She don’t want no amberlunce.
Now she’s walkin’. There you are, sir,
Yer the sort thet takes ther bunce.
THE WORKER’S WRITER.
Mayhap my pen has ne’er increased
The fatness of a wallet.
Nor viands offered to a feast
For cloyed and spurning palate.
No mind have I for Bacchus’ crews
Or pandemonium laughter—
The ship that will her charts abuse
Must soon have seas abaft her.
I’ve never strummed for patron lord.
Or recked of ire, my masters;
Nor clanged a word of flaunting sword
And reign of blood disasters.
(I’d sing a love o’ country chaunt.
In patriot mood exulting,
But ne’er a preening power to vaunt,
Another pride insulting.)
I’ve looked not for the subtley phrase
Of dim, esthetic musing,
Nor ever willed to sound the lays
Of blare and loud abusing.
I’ve worn no veil of seers occult,
Nor far prophetic sages:
I seek a present-day result—
NOW is the best of ages.


I’ve lingered not in amorous dell
With mystic lays consorting.
Nor dreamed to briny surge and swell
Of ocean nymphs’ disporting.
I bring no dainty ballad for
Sweet Fancy sentimental,
Nor frenzied adulations, nor
Soft languors Oriental.
If there is scenty flower o’ blue,
’Tis of the field and forest;
If there is balm of falling dew,
It is for heart the sorest.
If there is charm of breeze and bird
In vale and woodland glories,
It is for ear that never heard
A Melba or Dolores.
If I with free, unstudied note.
Allow my burdened brothers
To see earth’s joy, I would devote
No line of care to others.
Tis not alone in plushy tiers,
And with bejewelled convention,
That Melody can rule our ears
And Beauty crown attention.
The common road is lined with bloom,
There’s song in every byway;
There’s music in the factory loom
And grace in every highway;
The sky in arched sublimity,
The grandeur of the mountains.
The glory of the gestic sea.
The plash and flash of fountains;
The gamut of the throstle’s throat,
The bell bird chords a’quiver,
The gurgle of the magpie note,
The glee of creek and river;


They all are free: and every tree.
And sprout of plebeian grasses
Is fashioned with a harmony,
Nor graced diploma passes.
And hallowed happiness still thrives
Thro’ round of duties homely,
At caring hands of cottage wives
With dimpled bairns and comely.
Why drag the day in hodden drab,
And brightness ever living?
And why be servitors of Grab,
When substance comes with giving?
And, oh, to key the mighty thought
Within the waking masses,
Where pain has full experience taught
The ill of clans and classes.
And ill it seems that only such
May be our days commanders,
As at the counters of How Much?
Become new Alexanders.
To wring the planet of its worth,
And keep in ways exclusive
Fair propagations of our earth—
And still find joy elusive!
For others hold yet never taste
What life may yield of treasure,
And where the many want have waste
In lassitude of pleasure.
I’d sing that love in life doth dwell.
And freed from saws didactic.
Proclaim love’s gospel must excel
The altared creeds dogmatic!
And so I would articulate
The sigh of Labor’s yearning,
Unkeyed by sordidness and hate
And sorrow and heartburning.


MY CREED.
I have no heart for faith
That gives me task
To seek thro’ doom of death
Hope’s crown to ask.
My faith is life; I know not other—
Its works are man—on earth my brother.
I have no prayer to raise
Thro’ voids of blue;
No rituals of praise
To grace endue.
That holds my course in sufferance deep
When reason’s flight would onward sweep.
I have no heaven to gain
That knows not earth;
No penalty of pain.
Nor joyous dearth.
To make me subject and by tears
Life circumscribe in rule of fears.
I have no cross that saves
For after-realm,
So surge of sorrow’s waves
May overwhelm
Each impulse of onstriving breath
Till strength is sunken low to death.
I have no God who stands
In awfulness.
And makes by high commands.
All pitiless,
The gain of strife and drought of woe
That bring our earth than hell below.


Of sin I have no count
From creed of love:
The heart has welling fount
Of worth to prove,
For height and depth, all undeflled,
When faith rules as the faith of child*
The creed I would out tell:
Love is its name;
Not law, but principle.
Its sons proclaim!
Sufficient realm and time on earth
Has man to noble prove its worth.
Stars yet may guide whose beams
Lead far our way.
Till distance comes from dreams.
And dark from day.
But in the present paths we tread
The sun suffices clear o’erhead.
FROM “THE AGITATOR.”
The day is dawning, men,
That we must be
Designers of the living mould
Of our own destiny.
The time is going fast
Where we are just
As things to moil around the soil
For covering and crust.
No more will we be driven
Unknown, unseen;
Nor ever from our strength stagnate
In puny ways and mean.
The past is of the past
Yet from it we
May gather bounties to prepare
For benisons to be.


We’ll quit the might-have-been
And dead despair,
And show our race that Love has place
In other realms than air.
5jC jfc
Some set as hath the God
Set to the Sea
Strong barriers to hold the land
From massed humanity.
So with a futile force
The tides of man
Surge in the swarming areas
Permitted them to span.
To myriads now are born
In form divine
To live a stunted life of loss
Ignoble as the swine.
Pawns in the game of blood
Food for their guns
Cheered by a flag deep hell to drag
Proclaimed as patriot sons!
Oh, God, that man should be
By man abused:
Oh, God, that earth where Eden was
As hell should e’er be used.
FROM AN IN MEMORIAM.
If by the way when with a prize in grasp
A leader’s stricken from the workers’ war.
The chilli upon the hand we parting clasp
Stays not our hearts but stirs them to the core.
Some labor long: early must others die;
The task they serve can scarce be ever through;
Living we strive impulsed with purpose high
By what is done, and what remains to do.


WILL MILITARISM END SOON?
The ending of militarism, what does it mean? All of
us cry the phrase as a panacea for present ill action. From
Viviani to Lloyd George, from Andrew Fisher to Gustave
Herve, the wide hope of the words is expressed with
reiteration daily—nightly. We of the ranks of Labor are
no less taken with the exalted worth that is thus ventured
to our hearts as a fitting reward for the sacrifice and untold
suffering now upon us. An end of militarism! Can it be ?
Is the present age to witness the Utopian lion feeding with
the lamb and vultures of bandit-men living in permanent
peace with all mankind?
If it is, the era of the present is the dawn of the wprld’s
vastest glory. Well may proud scions of the earth cry
The Day, if it is to be That Day. Well may armies be bled
and navies be burst into atomic fragments of pulsations,
if the reward of all their hurt is to be such a crowning of
humanity. What visions will be realised! What hopes
will be fulfilled! What immense reaches of worth will be
the common breath of general men if from the ashes of
this mammoth sorrow of war there spring the eternal laurels
that will keep the brows of peace perpetually wreathed!
Ah! the grand hope of it. In the depression that follows
the sickness of our being when we dwell upon the stern
atrocities that are now heralded as the sole virtues of might,
we would gladly taste the elixir, and, imbibing its potence,
gain strength to go into the chaotic shambles that are to be
its gateway, thence emerging with the long hope of the
world, installed and irrevocably throned. It is this high
hope that inspires many to believe that out of such dread
as they enter upon shall come proportionate good. It is
the same vision that lights the Teuton, the Slav, the Gaul,
the Briton; and, maybe even among the men of the Orient,
there are white flames of the great desire animating them
to the present work for the universal crown that is to be
the reward.


Is the darkness breaking? Surely all these aspirations
are not mere incantations of a service of sacrifice. Yet,
if the dawn is at hand, the Morning Star is clouded. What
splendid portents are there across the heavens while racial
hate is being promulgated? What augury of happiness
may we detect in the misery that our Christendom is letting
its people drop deeper and deeper below? In Australia,
this most advanced outpost of the workers’ progress, there
is an unmitigated orgy of preying on the workers, and the
little authority that might supervene is as impotent as it is
exalted. If the light that is to come is now working for a
burst of effulgence—if peace is to be enthroned and mili-
tarism for ever cast into the utterly rejected pale of bar-
barous antiquity, men may be ready, but are they proving
it?
Militarism is not a term for the moment. Just now it
is used as an imprecation on the lips of most men. Yet
those who most condemn it in others will fight hardest for
its retention for themselves and the privileges it brought
them. For military suasion is the old and familiar suasion
of brute force. Backed up by armies, it is repellent now;
backed up by the forces of wealth for wealth’s continual
“ peaceful ” aggression, it is a natural—the natural—law.
The concept of society is the same in most of the circles
wherein range the “ Argus ” or the “ Times,” or any of the
high-placed monitors whose daily thunder is that misguided
voice we call “ the Press.” That is the doctrine of
Bernhardi—
“ They may take that have the power,
They may hold who can.”
Yet our smug leaders, while holding Bernhardi up as a
calamitous vice, will shriek ever stronger for the virtue of
strife in all the general avenues of living. Finance is for
the strong man of monetary association—though the whole
wealth of the people, developed and potential, is the only
asset upon which the finances of the world may form or
endure! Trade is a sensitive agent, obeying the demands
of the public with infinite nicety, and waste and ill-supply
ere conditions so common that they are not worth comment!
Militarism is not merely a matter of belching artillery.
It may be fashionable to inveigh against war and to soothe


our conscience with loud declarations against the principle
that arms men for slaughter and makes a dread devastation
in any and every place. It may be self-consoling to charge
certain folk with the present crimes of humanity, but, in
the trial of time, how hardly will any side be cleansed from
the stigma of blood? Let him who is without the sin of
strife cast the first stone.
If the faith of men is against strife, now is the oppor-
tunity to prove it. The present conflagration will burn
itself out in due course, and from the ruins of myriad homes
a new principle might be established. Dare we hope that
it will? Dare we hope that a great fundamental change
will evolve while we yet see the Governments conniving
at the people’s injury even in the thick of the fray? If we
are to cease the barbarous hand-against-hand system of
society that finds its logical outcome in militarism, the time
to change it is NOW.
But we will not end militarism while we suffer strife.
The finance and lands of the people must become govern-
mental, else the internecine war of daily life will continue
with unabated ill. The concept of brotherhood must be
lived, not preached. While we are content with texts to
trade upon, we make a mockery of our faith. It is, indeed,
a new era that is to dawn, but the light of the day of
fraternity cannot break while every man deems it his duty
to strive against every man.
Do not think, 0 comrades, that this is the ebullition of
vainness. It is surely more consistent with Christian
creeds, with Labor ideals, with man’s intellectual progress,
with the world’s advance in production and the bond of
blood that is beating in the strength of all workers’ hearts, so
it is the more inconsistent and antithetical that the waste-
ful strife we so abhor should continue. Continue it must
while men are trained by the taskmaster of life to war
continually man against man, worker against worker, nation
against nation. But when the community is beguiled with
platitudes about the ending of militarism, while the terms
of living are being cemented in strife, then may we say.
Why do the people imagine a vain thing?


THE UNITED STATES OF EUROPE.
Is it yet permissible to tell of other things than destruc-
tion? Are discussions of peace still taboo unless that peace
comes only by request of a foe stricken to death and denied
any attribute of further national liberty?
It has appeared so. But there are indications that the
blood mania that has engulfed reason may be reducing in
force, so that a review of the plans as spoken by the Paris
Conference may be permitted.
We will not expect that anything less than a permanent
peace can be even discussed in any plan for a settlement
of the present war. What we want to be assured of is the
peace plan as was outlined by Mr. Hughes and his Paris
colleagues—the Trade plan it might be called—such that
a permanent peace might reasonably be expected to ensue
from its adoption.
It is not apparent from the publication of such details
as have been given that a satisfactory peace would be
produced from such a plan. Quite otherwise. No peace is
worth acceptance unless it gives a fair assurance of per-
manency. Does the plan that prohibits certain international
trade and commerce under all conditions to a country of
60 millions of industrially trained people conduce to the
hope of a continued peace?
The plan is not to be entertained. First of all, it is
impractical because national frontiers are so Indefinable in
the dealing transactions of commercial life. Bremen is
near Christiana or Copenhagen; Hamburg is within easy
freight touch of New York; and goods of Teuton origin
cannot well be banned, even through the edict of a Hughes,
when they bear the stamp of Norway or America or Den-
mark.
Then the present plans, as told us, are not practicable.
Assuming that they were, from a commercial standpoint,
would they still be likely to be successful in the stated
object of creating an era of enduring peace? They would
not.


May we look a moment at history? Turn, then, to
Scotland, who was forced to a pact with England that
denied her religious liberty; to Ireland, who was subverted
entirely by iron measures that did not take into account the
natural forces of freedom that are inherent in strong
people; to Poland, who was crushed by tremendous neigh-
bors into geographical nullity, but was never subdued to
more than negative stillness by invincible, unsleeping re-
straint. No; history tells how Scotland had her incessant
rebellions, culminating in Culloden; then gaining her reli-
gious liberty. How Ireland’s turmoil made for national
weakness, that constituted a danger not yet dead. How
Poland’s subjection was always of nominal quality, that
called for more coercive energy on the part of the captor
than the prize was worth.
History tells us that peace is not going to be made per-
manent unless it is founded on justice. We have shown
that the trade of Germany would not be stopped by inter-
dictions of the Allies. But such interdiction would be the
perversity of natural laws of liberty, and would create an
undying hatred against the people or nations who even
irapotently attempted to do that which was fundamentally
opposed to justice.
Those upon whom an injustice is perpetrated are
naturally compelled to resistance. They nourish hatred and
cherish ways of strife. We cannot expect that a trade em-
bargo with the Allies will be the means of preventing Ger-
many from building up the organisation of war as she did in
the years preceding the present Armageddon, when arrant
lords of dominance had their arbitrary will. The wealth of
trade would still come to her through sources not within
control of the Allies, and the generations succeeding this
would nurture continual plans for the removal of the im-
position-—that could only be effective in the development
of strife.
If the wit of the counsellors of the Allies cannot evolve
something of a firmer peace texture than the vaunted trade
proposal of Paris, then indeed this war is not by any
means the last great war of the Caucasian races.
But the people are wiser than their counsellors. Evi-
dence, even in this period of suppression, is on hand that
indicates that the people of all the European nations do not


want to enforce terms of peace that are opposed to justice,
and must, therefore, be shortlived. Their eyes are being
turned to the international control of force. The element
of strife must be made subservient to all the nations for the
upholding of great racial integrity. No nation shall be per-
mitted to break the bonds of peace without incurring the
quick chastisement of the combined peoples of all the other
nations. Just as communal laws will further develop society
among the nations for the advantage of their people, so
intercomraunal, or international, processes will operate to
deal with international duties.
If the forthcoming terms of peace allow present national
laws to obtain in regard to war, the burden of cost for
“preparation” would go on increasing in even greater ratio
than ever. With every advance in discovery in all the mul-
tifarious sections of science and industry, new projects
would be called forth in arms and armament. Each nation
would have to run a continually accelerated race with its
neighbours in the same fashion as hitherto. But science is
ever changing; material is ever rising in cost. These factors
alone would make the struggle for supremacy by competi-
tion so extravagantly costly that soon the wealth produc-
tion of the various nations would not be able to keep pace
with the necessities called for by the rapacious maw of
“preparation.”
Per contra, international control of force would allow
natural advance for the people along peaceful ways. Such
expenditure as force would require would not be excessive,
for the simple reason that invention would be the general
factor, and science would be an instrument of service to all,
instead of an unknown dread to every neighbor, against
which feverish competition must always keep laboratories
and arsenals working and wasting.
It is not expected that a world federation will ensue. At
least, the day of such unity is not in sight, except to the
vision of a Utopian seer. But a drawing together of the
peoples of the white races is inevitably near. It is the
corollary of the present conflagration. Demarcation between
Gallic, Saxon, Teuton, and Slav is really a very difficult line
to draw. There is so much affinity in the intermingled types
that the one is the other. There is no biological reason why
these great sections of the white family of the earth should


not be bound internationally, retaining such distinctions of
country as are of worth. The peoples of Europe have not
fixed international barriers to overcome. Such as grow up
are the creation of unnatural agencies, that make their
habitat in courts of diplomacy.
This terms of the permanent peace that we are told to
look for must allow of international control of international
subjects. Certainly there must not arise any plans that
harbor injustice. Else the war of to-day is only a passing
phase of recurrent wars, and a social advance, against
which wars war, is grown more chimerical by the mists of
this strife.
November 9th, 1916.
PAYING.
Who will pay for the war ? That question is not heard so
often now as in the days before the costs had accumulated
to such overwhelming heights. It looks as if no one dare
survey the terrific mountain of debt and plan paths whereby
it may be dealt with. But though workers the world o’er
have a greater interest in the war than the matter of money,
it behoves us to view this aspect. For once get the inevit-
able fact of the war’s colossal debt duly comprehended, it
is apparent that we cannot discover the way wealth win-
ners—the workers—can pay the commitments involved.
That fact may do more to turn capital from its present
darling than all other means of agitation.
Naturally, the wealth must be made if it is to be paid.
If in the winning of products of essential wealth sufficiently
to meet the interest of war debts a nation makes more than
it can consume or sell, then the products will not be wealth,
and the debt they are to pay cannot be paid thereby.
That is just the present position. Not with one nation;
that would merely invite the others to swoop down and
rend it—veritably vultures upon a stricken body.
How long it is since Germany passed the line of solvent
possibility we cannot say; but her loss of £900,000,000 of
export trade at the beginning of the war left her with a
load of impoverishment that is crushing, quite apart from
the burdens accumulated from the actual war. This ex


plains the feverish intensity the Teuton war lords have for
securing great avenues of trade, but so far as the general
payments of war are concerned such security would not
make the position better—that is for other nations; for it
is by excluding Germany from her markets that other
nations hope to gain fabulous amounts, requisite in their
turn.
As capital is international these national vistas make a
will o’ the wisp.
Get this obvious truth assimilated. Let it be spoken, so
that the realisation of its significance may be general. It is
patent, of course, that the impost of war must offer induce-
ments to capital or capital will not maintain its business of
essential finance. Let the salient figures of the war’s cost
be set alongside of the wealth of the world’s production and
it will not need much argument to lighten the darkness of
the most capitalistic mind as to the impasse created. Take
a glance, for instance, at the specific case of Great Britain.
Her war responsibilities now reach £6,000,000,000,000.
This means that a much greater sum than the normal
British revenue is required to pay the interest of war’s debt
—to leave nothing for all other requirements.
Financial experts early foresaw where the excess of costs
might lead the war. During the first and second year of
the war reference was occasionally made to the breaking
down of ordinary ways of financial ethics to meet the great-
ness of this war’s commitments. But now there is a silence.
Hope, perhaps, is buoyed up by the rotten props of conquest.
Each nation or group of nations tries to delude itself that
its requirements may come at the cost of the others. This
cannot be, from the very nature of the mutable interest of
the various nations in what is produced by all or each. It
is an axiom that when production becomes so abundant
that it teems, then it is a drug and not a great source of
wealth.
The question of repudiation has been touched upon.
Bolsheviki have definitely placed it upon their programme.
This is, of course, something unthinkable to the average
mind of a capitalistic community. The fact of the Russian
workers placing such a revolutionary departure on their
scheme of action no doubt serves to account for the hosti-
lity engendered in the capitalistic press everywhere against


the Russians. To many such a general outcome of the
war would be regarded as more dreadful than a complete
victory of the Huns. This explains why Lloyd George
so significantly turned down the peace striving Russians
in his latest and otherwise greatest statement of the
British war aims.
Who will pay for the war? The answer touches forbidden
ground. But we may traverse paths that lead to it, and if
we do we will find that the matter of war costs has a greater
prospect for social revolution than the most militarist-
minded scion of capital wots of in the continual clamor for
more and more commitments on war. Like the tower of
Babel, its height will be its downfall; and with its fall a
sounder form of society, risen from the chaos of over-
weening capital, will be built. Thus may we see a social
community growing from the basic soil, where to-day un-
social competition crushes down the finer instincts of life,
clouding ideal and treading on the face of humanity. That
peace will evolve this revolution is the great solace of the
day, inspiring the workers of humanity to press on however
hard is the road to their feet.
A LOOK AHEAD.
It is the purpose of the day to get the war over. When
its over and done with we may settle to our domestic affairs
and local considerations. This is’what we hear daily, and
whether we view the coming time of peace with complete
satisfaction or not, we are ready to accede that our first
duty is to get the war over. The big thought that obtrudes
in many minds is, “ What will the war result in?” Not what
territories or commerce it will bring, but what will be its
result to the condition of the people’s lives? Prognostica-
tion is busy daily, and the general view seems to be that
the harvest reaped by the people cannot be immediately
beneficial. And it cannot. Victory will be shallow, so far
as material gain. Loss is the immediate certainty of the
avalanche of waste that this war is. Whatever comes,
conquest cannot be glorious except we take pride from


the historical records that chronicle events from day to
day.
Already economists are employed in forecasting what is
to be. The day when workers will have what they produce
would seem to be further than ever from its dawn, if the old
principles of financial adjustment are to be followed. The
great change that is to follow on the re-establishment of
peace must depend on the readjustment of our financial
concepts. If the prevailing plans are to be followed, who
can see anything but a morass of slavery for the workers of
the world? Great as is the agony of war, its heritage of
debt would entail greater agony on the world if familiar
plans are not changed by those who must make the wealth
to pay the bills that war leaves on the counters of the
world.
A writer in “ The Round Table” sees this poigant feature,
and as a remedy, says that capital will have to submit to
new forms of taxation, and Labor resort to finer schemes
of power in production, so that enhanced wealth may be
forthcoming.
Such a plan must obviously be utterly futile. It would
not be noticed here only that it is the common cry of the
day. If Labor multiplies production manyfold, will not,
naturally, the corrollary of that added power under the
present system of business be to lessen the cost of the
matter produced? The article in “The Round Table” asks
that workers must make more of the commodities of usage,
so that so much more wealth may be added to capital, and
that capital will give that super-gain to pay the interest on
war commitments. Plainly, that plan could only be involved
m the brain of one so obsessed by the rights of capital
that it is not accessible to the rights of Labor.
If production, say of wool, increases threefold, must we
expect that two-thirds of the new gain be allotted to the
extinguishment of the war debt? If wheat is increased by
double, are the people that grow and mill and cut to pay as
much as now, so that 100 per cent, of the added wealth be
given the perpetrators of a vast calamity? So of iron; if
we develop our iron production so that the mineral is
much more common, are we not to have the advantage
of our increased resource?
Certainly such a plan—were it adaptable to the powers


of the world—would mean that one section of the world
would shoulder the payments of the war. That is the pre-
sent principle passed on in perpetuity.
It is not by such a plan that the war cost can be met. All
that the unfolding of this callous writer’s mind discloses is
that the worker is the producer of wealth. We did not need
to read “ The Round Table” to be convinced of that.
Another publication, a book by Edward Carpenter, called
“ The Healing of the Nations,” makes a much more worthy
attempt to assess the ways and means of the world when
the war crisis is past. This writer is not obsessed with
“class.” He says: “Commercial prosperity means only the
prosperity of a class. . . . Let us remember that wars for
world markets are made for the benefit of the merchant
class, and not for the benefit of the mass-people. . . .
There has been a pretence of the Governments all round—
a pretence of deep concern for humanity, and the welfare
of the mass-people committed to their charge; but the
real moving power beneath has been class interest—the
interest of the great commercial class in each nation, with
its acolyte and attendant, the military or aristocratic.”
Carpenter strikes the nail aright in this—will he drive it
home? He goes on with; “A terrible and serious crisis
awaits us, even when the war is over —a crisis probably
worse than that which we are passing through now. We
have to remember the debts that are being piled up. If the
nations are staggering along now under the enormous load
of idlers and parasites living on interest, how will it be then?
Unless we can organise Western societies on a real founda-
tion of actual life, of practical capacity, of honest and
square living, and of mutual help, instead of mutual
robbery, they will infallibly collapse or pass into strange
and alien hands.” This summarises the financial ques-
tions of the coming crisis. It is useless to speak of the
powers of augmentation of production. Not a new basis
of production, but of allocation, is the supreme demand
of change. If the true values of present means of
production were realised and held by the people, there
would not only be ample for the whole of civilised
nations to have comfort in, but the quantities of the
excess would allow of a sane pace. In the mad rush
to keep up with the wholly ridiculous waste of the present


system, over-production goes on, and under-supply is -the
common experience of the workers.
To quote further from the “ Healing of the Nations” :
"When these hundreds of thousands of men return home
after the war is over, do we expect them to go meekly back
to the idiotic slavery of dingy offices and dirty workshops?
. . . Now at last arises the opportunity of our outworn
civilisation to make a fresh start.”
There is the crux: “A fresh start.” But can we hope that
the immediate decade will make that start? It should. The
burdens of the war must inevitably be greater than the
world can bear. When we remember how the Atlas-loaded
people are already strained by the weight on their shoulders,
it needs no flight of imagination to perceive that the added
impositions of this super-weighting war are as far beyond
the capacity of men as is the hewing of a tunnel through a
mountain of granite to the powers of a single pick.
January 28th, 1916.
THE DEAD DOVE.
The flood raged high, and long the peaceful dove
Sought for her feet a branch of homing rest,
But sought in vain. High turbulence possessed
In dark dominion, all the space she strove
To find from weary longing room where love
Might settle for the haven of a nest —
The call insistent of her rounded breast—
But rage inundant ruled where’er she’d rove.
Still on she sought, till myrmidons of blood
Termed her a vulture and her purpose crime.
Love was their dread, full menace to the flood
That swept for crowning homicide of time.
And now rude tossed on carrion-bearing mud,
The dove is dead and mingled with the grime.


A FIGHT FOR FREEDOM.
It was a beautiful Sunday night. That holy calm so
beloved of beneficent city councillors held the streets. Not
a flicker of gas or a flare of electricity showed in the facades
of the picture palaces. Quiet, serenity, peace made the key
of last Sabbath. Imbued with its passive calm hundreds
sought a shrine wherein they might regale the sense of duty
that always hangs on the Sabbath—even though it may
drag much of the world into dreariness.
I went with the rest along a tiled hall at whose entrance
was a placard with the words “ Miss Pankhurst. Should
men enlist?” Up, up and around interminable stairs and
landings, then into the sound of an orchestra and the wide
light of a great assemblage. Already the service had begun.
It was to the gallery that I had been directed —the rest of
the auditorium was filled, and only a few tiers of seats
remained for the “gods.” These were soon crowded, for
the habitues of the heights were coming, coming to their
abode in a strong current from regions far beneath.
The music ceased, and a man spoke from the stage, then
there was more music. But it was not the stage that held
me —the people: there was the interest. What a full con-
gregation, and how easily they took their devotions. There
was scarcely a face that showed a trace of the pains of
sanctimoniousness. Hardly a pursed mouth or a compressed
brow, or a straight religious whisper. The sanctity around
was one more in keeping with ease: the plain expression
was that of keen expectation.
Not curiosity or ennui or fashion was showing in the
faces. Interest and ease were dominant, and the pose of
all was in harmony with each and with the music that
swelled from the cavern below.
This was early. Soon another note came into play.
While I had been scanning my neighbour “gods” a few
khaki-clad auditors came into the crush. These ranged
along the farthest wall, beyond the prospect of the stage.
One of the khaki divinities managed to reach a plane
beneath his comrades, then, by clapping his hands, a fresh
interlude was signalled in opposition to the music below.


and discordant with all around. It may not have been
melodic; it was emphatic. “Boys of the Bulldog Breed”:
“One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine—out.”
“Australia will be ther-er-er-ere,” and such unconnected
fragments were sent in a medly stream of raucity by the
new force of topmost divinities to clash with and quell
any notes that would dare ascend from the stage.
As yet there had been no defined address from below.
Women for the most part were there, a bevy of attendants
waiting to sing or otherwise entertain the spirits afar. Pre-
sently a lady was seen to be speaking. This gave new
impetus to the voices above. What was said there no one
know. “ You can’t build boys of the Bulldog Breed” got
fresh vigor around. The numerals were salvoed inter-
mittently. Australia was there more stridently than ever.
And presently the last “gods” of the heights swarmed into
the boxes, crushing others less concerned in unannounced
items, and as yet eager to take in what had attracted their
original interest.
Away went glass from windows, for your “gods” must be
appeased with crystal burstings when they are enraged.
Medley took charge in undefined riot. Women were hustled
by force stronger than sound; men were hurled hither and
thither by the high pressure of the offended supremities. A
small, young, white-clad, woman essayed to speak in the
spaces below. Her gestures told of her intention, but
nothing was audible except the chaotic fury of the elements
of wrath.
Order was gone. Those who could were flitting quickly
away down the lengthy fight they had ascended in Sabbath
expectation so lately.
This gave space for greater freedom, which flowed itself
into a stream that spread everywhere, enveloping even the
stage in its tumult. Here the white-robed, frail-figured
woman was jostled, threatened and pressed back—but she
was as one of the greater divinities among the lesser. Though
thrust into chaos, she still showed her light. And for a few
minutes she managed to exude a glimmer that partially held
the throng around her. But her light was soon submerged
in the multitudinous storm. The rush of furies that clashed
around showed how far was the soft divinity from holding
them.


How many blows were struck is not recorded. What are
facial abrasions, to non-combative mortals in such high
combat? How many mortals were thrown off the island of
the stage into the seas of chairs and such immobile ob-
stacles? It is only given to the vendor of linaments to tell.
Freedom was in charge, and pandemonium was rampant.
A word—a blow. No word—but still a blow. One color
alone was a passport in that descended fury. If you were
garbed in the style of war, then you were the son of free-
dom—if not, you took your chance as to the injury free-
dom’s fighters might do you.
December 23rd, 19!5.
BILL’S LOGIC.
Bill had finished his job, with his kit of tools on his back
he made for home, not sure where the next job might be,
but taking the chances with a philosopher’s sense of
optimism. “If one thing’s cut out, another’s sure to start.
If I must keep the tools idle for a day or two it’s the luck
of life. It’s rough, with so much depending on every day
being put in, but it’s all in life.”
So Bill made for his cottage. Just before he turned at
his corner a motor car stopped in the centre of the road,
and out stepped a lady.
This was unusual. Not alone for the condescension of
the passenger, but for the manner in which she came
straight over in his direction. She made no small impres-
sion on Bill. No wonder. What man is so devoid of
chivalry that he is not susceptible to the advances of
beauty? And this advancing stranger belonged to a class
of human right out of the range of Bill’s personal acquaint-
ance. Charming she certainly was —there was an emana-
tion of subtle charm in her manner—the same attractive-
ness that catches the breath of rough-used seers when a
conservatory glory is exposed to their view. No beauty
of the wayside or bush may ever have caught their atten-
tions, but an exotic display commands instant homage.
It was plain she felt she was conferring a favor, but
wished to delude herself that she gave no indication of that


feeling. With all the gracefulness of art she took the few
steps between the car and the now stationary Bill, and in
those moments he noticed the simple “effect” of elaborate
plainness—the dress not lavishly ornamented but telling of
care and costliness. The single feature of ostentation upon
his visitor was a long, white trailing plume on her hat.
Bill was no specialist in such things, but he had enough
knowledge of lesser feathers that had figured on his wife
at certain times of extravagance to let him believe that the
drooping plume he now saw would cost the matter of a
week’s wage to him.
This summary was, of course, a matter of moments, for
as soon as her quick steps brought her within easy audience
the lady inquired, “You have finished your job?”
Bill was taken aback for a moment, thinking that here,
unexpectedly, another billet was being thrown at him.
“Yes, ready for another,” he said.
“That’s right. There’s another waiting for you, you
know,” said the lady, with quick, low-toned accents.
“All right. Where?” replied Bill.
“At the front, you know. Everybody is wanted to do a
job for the country now to help. Aren’t you ready to do
your part?”
“Well I’ve thought of it; and since you speak so plain,
I’ll tell you I’m not ready to go yet.” Bill said this in hesi-
tating tones, at a little loss in refusing the direct request of
so fair a questioner.
“Not ready? You must get ready, and now,” said she.
“Everybody is called on to do an equal part for our honor
and the honor of the nation.”
The words came freely as platitudes will to the lips of
inefficiency or inexperience, and their sound braced her into
enthusiasm. They also had a challenging effect upon their
hearer, whose answer was a rumination of her last words,
“Equal part for our honor and the honor of the nation."
“Equal part, eh?”
“Yes, everybody, you know. There are no classes now.
We are all threatened by a dreadful foe, and we’ve all to
do what we can,” was the explanation.
“Equal part,” still repeated Bill. “Then you are doing
yours ?”


"Yes,” she answered, in certain self-satisfaction. I’m
trying to.”
“ ’Spose your husband or sons are at the fight?”
“No, my husband is over age—and I have no son.”
There was a moment’s silence, and he took up his theme.
“Well, if I fight at so much a day and lose my life or
become crippled—my all—what would you lose ? You must
let me speak on equal ground, you understand,” Bill ex-
plained. “I don’t mean you, as a lady, but as a person of
a country who is rich. lam to give my all—are those who
get wealth as well as a living giving their all at the call
of honor?”
“Of course you know,” she said sweetly, “we are giving
of our wealth?”
“Oh, that’s not it. You said ‘equal’ a while ago. Now,
if our honor requires us all to give equally, where do the
rich people—those who draw big incomes from investments;
land, shares, and those things—come in against us who
must give all its possible to give—our suspended wages—
our lives?"
“What do you mean ? We all give liberally, of course.”
“Yes, you make donations; but the wealth out of which
you draw the money to make the donations still stays with
you, and we must defend it for you.”
She said nothing, and he went on:
“You ask me to fight for the honor of the nation,” said
Bill, quite at home now with his unusual visitor. “After
the fight your wealth remains. Mine is gone, for I am
dead, and my family have nothing of me to aid them.
Where is the equality?”
“There’s honor, you know,” said the lady reprovingly.
“Honor. Where is the honor of those who have wealth
asking and taking sacrifices from the general people in
order to keep that wealth intact? That’s very unequal
honor.”
“But we can’t give everything. We give freely, you
know—that’s our duty,” said the fair, would-be recruiter.
“If you speak of duty, I’m with you, madam. But duty
is a sacred guide, and leads none of us to inequality. Say
that duty requires that all people able to fight or aid should
do so. If they don’t, the land will either be taken from
them altogether, or it will be so taxed down by levies that


the users of it won’t get the value it produces. The fight
is to retain this wealth. Now is it duty or honor that only
a few of the people—those who happen to hold deeds and
bonds and such, now—should get the benefit of defence
when all of us have been put up to retain the rights of the
nation? Shouldn’t what we retain for the nation belong to
the nation? We’re equal in the fight or in loss—why
shouldn’t we be equal in gain?”
She listened with interest that was palpably assumed—
the well-bred interest that endures rather than insults.
Plainly she thought her working-man auditor was presum-
ing on her condescension, and was in no way appreciative
of her attention.
"Can’t you see,” he went on, 100 absorbed in his subject
to notice personal points, “it’s not honor at all, but self-
interest, if the land is to be the prize of those who happen
to have a lien on its deeds? Of course I have rights here,
and I’ll fight for them. But I’m over age too, as things are.
I’ve two sons gone and more of us might be going, and
there’s my other four children to look after. My wife
mightn’t think you are quite right in talking about honor
, »»
to me.
She flushed at this—but he did not intend it to have the
significance it conveyed to her.
With a touch of reprimand she rejoined, “Your country
is your motherland. Every man would fight before he
argued if his mother were endangered.”
“Quite right. My children would fight for theirs. I
believe that. I know I’d fight for my old mother. But
honor comes in there again. After all her sons fought
splendidly and equally willing for their mother, do you
think she still ought to give one or two special favor, leav-
ing the others to get along at a great disadvantage?”
She had come to the end of her patience. Beckoning to
her car, it rolled to her, and in a moment she was whirred
away from the road, while Bill took up his tools, feeling all
the better for having spoken his thoughts to one who was
not often within sound of such arguments as his.


INNOCUOUS MATTER.
Candidly the gag department is too much for the “Call.”
Suppression is master now, and we are its bondsmen.
* * * *
Last week the weather was fair. That is, it was rainy
in some places and some times, and elsewhere and other-
whiles, it was quite fine. Altogether, the season is good.
Grass is green and lambs are young, and in many parts of
the country crops are growing. Wool is thick and fleecy
on various sheep, but it is a positive fact that the wool
market is high. Let it not be thought that this is any
reference to censorable matter. We know our place.
Mr. Hughes has returned. His hatter reports that there
is no enlargement wanted in his house caps, but the sweat
bands have been removed from his bowlers, and his
phonographs have been wound up.
Since the fowls have started laying there has been a
marked drop in eggs. It is expected that accumulated
stocks will soon be available for service against any person
who may be so foolish as to speak contrary to the wishes
of those who are echoes of privilege. This should ease the
metal market.
Women and others who have been misguided in their
views are expected to show a better sense of the fitting in
future. There are still vacancies in the jails.
The war is still on. A fearful engagement took place
to-day in our back yard between the office boy next door—
a fair-haired darling, with his mother’s curls—and our
printer’s devil. There were many witnesses, but no other
participants, which proves that the proverb from the Tal-
mud: “Those that go last to the war are first home,” has
believers amongst us. The devil won, as usual. The view
around our window is circumscribed. The right-o’-way at
the back is very narrow, and the lanes at the front and sides
are frowsy with dust-bins and dull echoes of the street.
Near-by there is a stately church, so that no scent of gar-
bage may profane our nostrils against the odors of sanctity
that pervade our atmosphere. Just at the corner there is
a pub—the indispensable pub. It is a modest shanty, and
unless you are careful you might miss it. It is thought that


certain censor officials, on their way to the “Call” office,
are detained there by pickets for a considerable time, which
accounted for their late arrival in the healthy pursuit of
their new profession. The pickets have never so offended
against us. There is something of the look of a printery
about that pub. Probably it has begun to feel the influence
of its patrons in the same way as a healthy old couple
assume identical appearance with each other. The wowser
wave threatens to sweep over that corner, so all those who
desire to quench something of their thirst for fame had
better get a move on. Be early—earlier than early closing.
Our friends, suppressive and supportive, are well posted in
the brands on tap, and there is now no fear that anyone
will get lost there.
Adam Lindsay Gordon has been holding receptions of
A.N.A. members at his grave—at least they went there as
pilgrims, barefooted and with ropes around their waists, and
long, unshaven faces. Strange things happen in graveyards.
The first of September passed off beautifully. Nymphs
patrolled the streets dressed in filmy white, and transparent
and transfixed blushes. Such sights were winning. It is
satisfactory to say that, as a result, charity has again had
a fair cheque handed in. The wattle is in bloom on every
hill, also on every flat. There is nothing of note to report
from Flemington, though Caulfield got going again last
Saturday. Prices generally ranged from much to little or
from little to much, according to fancy. Winners showed
no such disparity, being invariably amongst the little.
Which goes to prove that Fortune’s vagaries are not affected
by the suppression gear now in operation on the movement.
Fortune’s vagaries were not quoted in the betting ring.
There is going to be a (we daren’t mention what)
taken on October 28th. We would like to mention, if we
may, that those who are not on the rolls have only a few
more days to get there. Rolls are in request again. For-
tunately, the grass is dry, provided you don’t get up early.
But with early closing spoken of so much, there is a marked
tendency for people to go in for early rising. It is better
not to rise, then you will not be able to fall. This is no
reference to our betters. Meanwhile, rolls are available.
Enquire at the post offices, police stations (if you are safe)
and railway stations. The rolls you get at the pub. are
not the right rolls for this occasion. But if you are not
on, see to the job yourself. It’s your business, and no one


else will do it for you. All over twenty-one, male and
female (if living) are eligible. Don’t forget; rolls are
ready for your inspection and inclusion.
Senator Pearce’s eye has got new spears of fierceness
fitted on. The job of keeping down the bands of people
who would try to be heard, in spite of their betters, has
necessitated further armour on his breast and a more
pointed spear in his glance. He must not be obstructed in
the execution of his duty, even if that duty is a number of
persons of most innocent habits. Let the execution go on.
Dairying is now a busy pastime. Milk is flowing freely
wherever udders are full. There is a painful rumor that soon
milk will be cheap. It is not wished that the rumour should
get circulated in the country districts lest the farmers
organise their herds into striking. There is enough trouble
nowadays without having country cows on strike. Besides,
where would we get our cream from when the strawberries
come in? Pigs are in clover this season, the bacon market
is fair, and ham is steadier than it was on the ark. It is
said Shakespeare’s ghost is bringing an action for damages
against bacon on the ground of robbery after death. As
usual, the rumor has only frail support. The office boy
and the printer’s devil (who has washed the crimson from
his boko—to use his own expression) are waiting with a
truck to take this copy down to the master’s department, so,
although our subject is not fully dealt with, it is necessary
to call a halt to our treatment of it here.
September 7th, 1916.
Twilight and evening star.
And one clear call for me:
“Get out! Get out! We’ve got to close the bar!
Go home and swill cold tea! ”
AT THE TABLE.
The lodger, so devout,
Says: “For this butter
Thanks for Thy care.
My God.”
The landlady, so stout,
Is heard to mutter,
“Touch, if you dare—
By God!”


RULES FOR PASSENGERS.
Note.—ln order to heighten good feeling between pas-
sengers and the men working the cars, the following set of
rules have been formulated. If not adopted by the tram-
way’s managers, and posted in the cars, it will not be
because the rules are not necessary:
1. Never be in a hurry. You have plenty of time and no
one else counts.
2. Always make the tram stop specially for you, even
if to do so requires that you separate yourself from others
waiting. It makes you feel as if the tram belongs to you.
3. Enter a car by the furthest entrance by walking slowly
from one end to the other and round again to where you
started; you get exercise before rest.
4. Leave a car by furthest exit. In moving, go slowly,
as if you were departing from a good home.
5. If you so desire you need not complete your toilet
before catching your car. Conductors carry safety pins.
6. In giving children cakes or sweets, passengers are
invited to leave liberal samples on the seats. Don’t be
mean.
7. Young lady passengers who are being seen to the tram
should not delay for the kissing. Most of the staff are
guaranteed adept at osculatory exercises.
8. Umbrellas should be kept in such a way that they
cannot be missed. They are excellent trippers.
9. In travelling with a child you should always escape
paying half fare whilst the child is in short clothes. They
prove it is under three. Half-fare ceases when the children
begin courting.
10. In tendering fares, never state your journey or what
you require. Conductors must know what you want; they
are paid for being thought-readers.
11. When desiring to stop pull the conductor’s coat or
butt him with your umbrella. That’s what he’s there for.


FRAGMENTS.
Let no men and women think that the bubbling promises
of such a speaker as we examine mean anything but desper-
ation for the interests of property he so long has upheld. . .
“Save, 0 save f is the cry. Come forward, workers! Pro-
perty demands it. Whatever else is at stake, consider us!
We thwart you in your aspirations. We scorn you in
your ideals. We calumniate you when you prove your power
to raise the standard of humanity. We hire farmers to
break down your claims for better living. But now we are
not safe. The foe is at our gates. Hold him off. Pro-
perty itself is imperilled. Anything that we can promise
you is yours. We implore you, we trust in you, and we
are sure that your reward will be great. Trust us for that,
but oh, never think that the rights of property are not more
sacred than the rights of life.”
* ?jC S}? *
Mother love is without motive. It is inherent in its latent
stage. It bursts into power from pain unknown to men. It
is a continual sacrifice, and a never-ending pride. It is at
once the glory and abnegation of beauty, just as birth is
the object for which beauty is given.
* * * *
We are apt, metaphorically, to regard Australia as a
queen crowned by modern Progress. In the days when
children scramble in hordes for the privilege of programme
selling, we are inclined to think that our picture is some-
what of a delusion.
“Card or book? Lars one! Lucky lars!! Sixpence!”
so runs the medley. That little brown-eyed, galatea-garbed
blossom of six is having his baptism of the street. He is
decisively beaten for customers by the trained insistence of
his neighbour of seven, who has plied himself into adeptness
by the practice of many months.
Both of them have been whipped into the round of
chance by the same taskmaster. When poverty makes de-
mand the child must be availed of, so that the family may
keep going. Gone are the little Nubian boys that were
whipped to explore the chimney stacks, but is it progress
that has removed the child chimney sweep and substituted
a precocious army of street vendors?


Smithson Bros.. Printers,
Warburton Lane, Melbourne.
