

*. OTH€R
«
>& ml
./XV
B ii
« 1 7/
'>*
t-r'
n
A "V \J
vt\
V
i
*
' /
f\
i < r
i k 7


/>
v)
61'


THE CROOKED TREE
and other stories
RENEE WOODS
w */>
MELBOURNE


ID MY FATHER
WHO KNEW AND LOVED
THE BUSH FOLK
Registered in Australia for transmission through the post as a book.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Verona Press Pry. Ltd., for
the publishers, Arura Writers, Box 293 B, G.P.0., Melbourne, Vic,, Aust.


(182
STORIES
The Crooked Tree 4
Morning Glory and the Sun Prince 10
Mother Earth's Dream Children 15
Why the Pine-Tree Sighs 21
Bulrush Spearmen 28
The Rainbow's Treasure Chest 35
Sill
COLOUR PLATES
Mother Earth's Dream Children 17
They Began to Visit the Grumpy Old Fellow - 20
King Winter—A Very Old and Nasty Man - - 24
Morning Glory Loved Dancing for the Prince - 25
They Fell with a Splash into a Pond 29
The Moonbeam Came Dancing Across at Once 32


THE CROOKED THEE
NCE, not so very long ago—that is, not so very
long ago in the life of a Tree, but, really quite
a very long time ago in the years of very old grown-up
people—there grew in the Bush a Crooked Tree.
Now, a Crooked Tree is not as other Trees. It
really is quite the thing, and, at the same time, quite
the proper thing, to be a Straight Tree. All Grown-Up
Trees tell their Little Seeds that they must be strong,
and tall, and straight, and must not use Old Man Wind
as a leaning post.
One day, the Breeze was listening to the Mother of
all the Forest saying good-bye to her babies. While
she was speaking, she was cuddling them close in their
little brown jackets, and making sure they had their
hankies. The Little Breeze had to carry them gently
down to the Fairy Godmother of the World, the Earth.
This day, the Fairy Godmother had dressed her-
self in her second-best gown which was of the palest
green with tiny yellow dots here and there. Her very
best gown is green with all the colours of the rainbow
sprinkled on it. She keeps that to welcome the Princess
Spring to the World. When she is not wearing it she
puts it away, deep down in her heart. Only the God-
mother of the World can use her heart as a wardrobe.


%:/ £ '"A
/-/• , A- At
/ £ / A
z/"- u /.•/-A ■■>}-
■rb> , /-'&,+ „.
V *Ai> ?■
A I- i''
While all this was happen-
ing, there was one Little Seed
that really was not listening to
what his Mother was saying.
And that is why this story came
to be written, for if there had
not been a Crooked Tree there
to be written, for if there had //
not been a Crooked Tree there vj
would not have been any story. ||
After the Breeze had flown |
the Seeds down to Earth, the 1J |
1 • J 1 .
the Seeds down to Earth, the
Bush Nurserymaid came and
tucked them under the blanket
of leaves their kind Mother had
softly spread on them; and there they slept for such a
long while, not making any noise at all.
While they were sleeping, the Fairy Godmother
changed her dress, and, because the Princess Spring
was going to pay a visit, she put on her very best gown.
Yes, she unlocked it from her heart, deep down where
I told you she kept it. She looked so nice the Queen of
the Sky sent her a necklace of dew diamonds. These, I
must tell you, are very special diamonds, because the
Sun kisses them to give them added brilliance.
All the Folk of the Bush dressed in their very best,
and when the Princess Spring arrived all the Birds
sang as she danced her way to the sleeping Seeds.
She waved her wand and sang softly so as not to
frighten the Little Seeds. And she called to the


J
w"
m /
Sr'
_v7' •
XJ4Zjr .
m/
j
//>-
MS'
M
Queen of Sleep to cease her lullaby, for the time had
come for the Bush Babies to awaken.
The Little Seeds yawned and stretched, the God of
Thunder sent a gentle shower to soften their overcoats,
and the Sunbeams warmed them with their kisses.
All of a sudden, the little coats became too small
and split with a "pop." Then the Little Seeds uncurled
their lovely hands and started to grow.
But, not all. There was one Little Seed who had
not listened to his Mother. He was just too lazy to
put his little hands up straight. All he did was to
w igg' e — an d ** was n °t a very good wiggle at that.
After a while, the Princess Spring went away, and
the Godmother of the World put away her best gown.
Queen Summer came and went, and so did the other
visitors, Princess Autumn and King Winter—this last
, v , y one, a very old and nasty man.
/if/Now, these visitors never
// come together. They are much
/ to ° important for that. They
W/m. I'' one after the other, and
the Godmother of the World is
Wfm.
l /i~z3y//
P u t to an awful amount of
mf l/jl i trou f ) i e through having to wear
4/r« a different gown for each guest.
M ' ~"wd.
i 1 many times these guests
1 wAiv'• came and went, and the Little
* k Seeds grew and grew. That is,


'
all except the lazy little one. He
just grew a bit at a time, then
went to sleep.
The Moonbeams were al-
ways dancing up and down to
wake him up, and sometimes
the Sun sent an extra special
spark to give him a little bite to -
try to keep him awake. One
day, the Little Tree looked
around and saw his brothers
and sisters—quite lovely young
** C if y '
Qvf rev
things they were—playing with the Breeze, who was
now their comrade, and he felt very sad.
"I really must get a hurry on and grow," he said
to himself.
Well, he tried and tried, but, sad to say, he had been
so lazy he had a hump on his back through leaning
against the Wind just as his Mother told him not to.
The other Trees would not even speak to him, he
was such an ugly little thing. The South Wind came
along and felt very sorry for him and tried to blow him
the other way. It helped a little but, blow and blow as
much as she could, the Little Tree simply could not
stand up straight as the rest of his family did.
Father Sun still sent his children to bite the Little
Tree; and when the other Trees sang at night, this
Crooked One would sometimes join in. But he was


® ir. r-f
t / 1
A I /a
\X^''
y jl
LCro'V 0
always told to keep quiet, as the harsh rustle of his
scorched leaves upset the rhythm of the song.
If you have ever been in the Forest at night, you
will have heard the rhythm of the Trees' song, and
you will know that they simply could not put up with
the crackling of scorched leaves.
So the little Crooked Tree stood there apart from
the rest of his family, and thought the best thing he
could do would be to fall over and die.
His sorrow was seen by a Little Brown Bird who, up
to this time, had not taken much notice of the Little
Crooked Tree. This Little Brown Bird was the Goddess
of Understanding—a Most Important
Person. She flies into the hearts of all
Live Things and leaves the Pearl of
Hope before she flies away again.
Some pearls are bigger than others,
and these she gives to the very, very sad
hearts. .
When she saw just how very, very
sad was the Little Crooked Tree, she
hurried off to her treasure chest, packed
up most carefully a big pearl,
and flew back to the un-
happy little fellow.
Now, the Pearl of Hope
is Magic, and as soon as the
Little Crooked Tree received


it he thought, "Well, I may be
crooked, but I am very un-
usual!" i
% /
Then the Little Brown Bird
told the Sun to cease hurting
the Little Crooked Tree, and
a U /Ft
ii /
soon he was singing in rhythm
with all the Forest, and this J|
made him very happy. One -
j . 1t . Mt / '■ '■ 4 xf
day, an artist was walking 1/nK
through the Forest and saw the \ ; '} •• ,4;
Crooked Tree. "What a beauti-
ful tree," he thought. "I must paint it so that its beauty
will last for ever."
So he did, and the Princess of Spring mixed his
paints with the beauty of the Rainbow while the artist
was not looking, and the Goddess of Understanding
whispered softly in his ear.
After the painting was finished, people used to
come from far and near to see it, and they would all
say, "Oh, what a beautiful tree!"
Now, all this happened not so very long ago in
the life of a tree, but really quite a long time ago in the
life of very old grown-up people. You may not believe
me, but if you see, as one day you will see, a painting of
the little Crooked Tree, you will know that this story
is just as I have told it to you.


I - -
M
MORNING GLORY AND THE SUN PRINCE
OU have seen the Morning Glory dancing and
curtseying to the song of the Bees. But there
was a time when she was not nearly so gay and beauti-
ful, nor was she known by such a pretty name.
In those days she was so very timid that she would
not even look up at the sky, but clung to Mother Earth
so closely that only the Very Wee Ones could see her
face. The Folk passing by would tread on her and not
even feel sorry, because they thought she was only a
carpet, and they named her Con-vol-vu-lus.
Now, the Wee Ones were not so
cruel. They could play hide-and-
seek, and all sorts of games, under
her leaves because they were so
small. Sometimes thev used her
j
leaves as sunshades.
That funny old fellow, Daddy
Longlegs, was quite perplexed by
the fact that a person who could run
along the ground was not able to
climb.
"My dear," he would say, "if
you do not look up you will not get
anywhere. I may be a very funny
old chap, but I do have a lot of fun.


"I can weave the very finest lace with the best of
them. And I can spin a rope to swing me anywhere I
want to go.
"Why, even His Lordship, the Frost, that very cold
gentleman, spends quite a lot of his valuable time in
crusting my lace with his jewels.
"So, you see that even if some folk are unintelligent
enough to say I am queer, I must be quite out of the
ordinary for such a lordly gentleman to seek my favour.
"Now, just you run along, find a tree or a wall, and
start to climb! Who knows?—you may not be unat-
tractive if you learn to drape yourself in becoming
fashion. Anyway, it will give a few of these busybodies
something to talk about!"
True, she had little feet, lots and lots of them, but
she had only used them to creep along the earth.
Off went Daddy Longlegs, leaving poor little Con-
vol-vu-lus alone, quite forgetting that he had not told
her how to climb.
"I had better ask the Cricket who keeps house down-
stairs," Con-vol-vu-lus thought.
As you know, the Cricket is only too glad of an ex-
cuse to have a gossip and show just how very clever he
is, so upstairs he came, as chirpy as could be.
"That's easy," he said, when Con-vol-vu-lus told
him she wanted to learn to climb. "Just wiggle and
squiggle, creep and crawl, and hold on tight." And
away he went.


Con-vol-vu-lus knew how to creep and crawl—she
had been doing that for years —so she did not bother
about the wiggle and squiggle. Anyway, she was much
too much of a lady to do such an undignified thing. So,
after a lot of creeping she found an old stone wall.
The stone wall was very helpful. It had lots of
niches, and little pieces jutting out all over it. Very
soon, Con-vol-vu-lus found that climbing was not nearly
as hard as she thought it would be.
Then, one day, to everyone's surprise, she draped
herself over the wall, just as she had been told. There,
all around her were Roses and Lilies, blue Forget-me-
nots and Daisies, and many other flowers she had not
seen before because she would only look at the ground.
Roses and Lilies are very proud. They would only
sj nod to the newcomer, but the little
rjj ' Forget-me-nots and Daisies were
ft 1 *? very kind and told her that they
/V-
would get her a prettier dress than
the one she was wearing.
Afif A Early one morning, when Prin-
cess Dawn was waking the World.
/_Vv\<\ the Little Flowers asked her for a
piece of her train to make dresses for
f \ Con-vol-vu-lus.
\ -i /1 \b / ~ What excitement there was! The
'p ' \ A Fairies came and helped dressmake.
and there was such a hustle and


J
I
S&; 1% /
A OC-. s
> ~ i -
bustle to get them finished!
Then, one morning, the
World awoke to find Con-vol-
vu-lus dancing in the sunlight
in a beautiful gown. It was
a special gown, made of the
purple-blue of Princess
Dawn's train.
The Bees came along to \
" " w -V; < C 4-
see what the fuss was all Wv jKAfcSZ
\ I \
about, and very soon they
H, , «\ Ik '*
were making more noise with their humming and strum-
ming than all the Other Folk. What a merry crowd
they were! Con-vol-vu-lus was so happy she could only
dance, and twirl and whirl with joy.
At this moment, one of the young Sun Princes came
to rest on the old stone wall. Imagine his surprise to
find it taken by the Most Beautiful of Ballerinas who
was dancing to the music of the Bee Fiddlers.
As soon as he saw who the dancer was, he fell in
love with her and called her his Glory of the Morning,
because of her lovely blue dress.
The Sun Prince vowed he would never leave her.
This caused quite a stir, for it is not the thing for a Sun-
beam Prince, or, really, any other kind of Prince, to
refuse to go home at night.
The Folk had never heard of such a thing before.
Morning Glory, as she was now called, loved danc-


/ JjT~
ing for the Prince, and she would have danced for ever.
This was a terrible state of affairs, and it had Father
Sun quite worried. He sent one of his messengers to
the Princess Twilight to seek her aid in this serious affair.
Princess Twilight sent for the young Prince and
told him that under no circumstances could a Sunbeam
stay out at night. She also told him that if, before re-
turning to his Father at eventide, he folded Morning
Glory's gown and sealed it with his special seal, then
only he could unfold it.
The young Prince agreed to this. So now, when
the Sun calls his children home you will always find
Morning Glory's gown folded; and if on the following
day the Sun does not shine you will never, never find
the Blue Ballerina dancing in her beautiful clothes.


<§H
MOTHER EARTH'S RREAM
ERILRREIV
OTHER EARTH seems such a happy and
beautiful person that folk like you and I
never think that she has one very great sorrow. But,
sad to say, this is so. And, sadder still, she has one
very great enemy—the Desert. This wicked old man
hates everything that is beautiful and kind.
There was a time when this Ugly One was beauti-
ful. That was before he wanted all his own way. What-
ever Mother Earth gave him, he always wanted some-
thing different. And because he did not get all his own
way, he destroyed all the gifts he received.
This made the Lords of the World very, very angry,
and as a punishment they condemned him to live al-
ways alone.
Sometimes the Sun would paint the Desert's rocks
with bright blues, yellows and pinks; but the Ugly One
was never grateful, and said that the Sun was only do-
ing this to amuse himself, and not because he was try-
ing to be kind. And sometimes Mother Earth would
send some of her Folk to try to cheer up the Desert; but
he was so bad tempered that he would not allow them
to stay, and the poor things were starved out.
At heart the Ugly One was cruel, and he vowed
that one day he would do Mother Earth a great harm.


He used to try to do this by sending his henchmen,
the Sands, to destroy all they could find; but in this he
was not always successful as the Lords of the Winds
were always watching him, and they would blow the
evil Sands back to their master. Day after day, and
year after year, the Ugly One watched and waited for
the time when he could find Mother Earth asleep.
As you know, Mother Earth sometimes drowses,
and while she drowses she weaves for herself Dream
Children, just as you sometimes do. So as not to lose
these Dream Children, she locks them away in the
Cavern of Time, and there they are safe for ever.
Dreams cannot live, because they have no souls;
and if they were allowed to escape they would become
just reflections, and reflections fade into nothingness.
Once, and only once, did Mother Earth sleep very
heavily, and it was then that as she slept the Desert
seized the opportunity to steal some of her Dream
Children. You see, she had been so tired that she had
quite forgotten to hide them in the Cavern of Time.
When she discovered her loss she pleaded with the
Ugly One to give her Dream Children back to her, but
he only jeered and laughed at her sorrow.
These Dream Children were Trees and Water in
lovely form, but because they did not have any souls
they were not real. They looked like Trees and Water,
but when anyone went near them they faded away.
Grown-up folk call them Mirages.


i ' jif -
V ' r' i , >
. f I V' *. v -
\jjp
\" a; ; .
<- <{ '•-"' v X
{ST
V V'>.,v.S f v\ i f ''' <v :
M *■•> . Jv;i
II '<■ \ I hrr,'--" <
; i L,;v ; 7 ' '
\ i\'SViml iUJ?
MOTHER EARTH'S DREAM CHILDREN


The Ugly One had them com-
pletely in his power. He would let
them go, but they were to obey him,
and when he called they were to re-
turn immediately.
iA Mk \ turn immeaiaieiy.
f? Go!" he bade them. "Go and
y our sou^s ' Go and haunt
( Mother Earth with your endless
wanderings and searchings. Haunt
SrM' j /r » her with the nothingness of her
V &V dreams!"
s y )/ Off went the Mirages on their
endless wanderings. Many, many
times they were seen, and many times did Earth Folk
wonder at them and try to reach them. But always the
Desert was waiting to recall them, and at his call they
faded, only to appear somewhere else and fade again.
Still the Ugly One was not satisfied. He called the
Mirages back, and then he did a dreadful thing.
He would lie in wait for Thirsty Travellers, then
taunt them with the Mirages. And as soon as the Trav-
eller would walk towards the shady trees and cool water
they would disappear.
Sometimes the Forest Folk would get lost in the
great sandy wastes and the Ugly One would send the
Soulless Ones to tease them. And when he became
tired of this game, he would send them off on their
wanderings again in search of their souls.


But, search and search as they would, never could
Mother Earth's lost Dream Children find their souls.
At the end of each day, when darkness spread over the
World, he would call them back and hide them, for the
Ugly One knew that if Lady Night found them she
would take them back to Mother Earth.
Now, there is only way to catch a Mirage, and that
is to quickly throw a Cloud over it. Once a Mirage
fades into nothingness in a Cloud, that is the end of its
wanderings.
Of course, the Ugly One would not tell the
Mirages this, because he knew that a Dream Child
wrapped in a Cloud is a Memory, and that if the Mir-
ages become Memories nothing could hurt them.
Sometimes you will see the Mirages resting awhile
quite near the Big Cities; but always they fade away,
though they may come back to the same place time
after time.
Maybe, they are lonely, and, maybe, one day the
Ugly One will forget to call them back.
When that day comes, we will have to say good-bye
to the fleeting Mirages, for never, never more will they
have to wander in search of their souls.


K. R v >-* v 4 &L
f; r s iti X' s <t\
1 \ /f » F v f
*
V • .. 7 u 1"
., •*» • -- "'
THEY BEGAN TO VISIT THE GRUMPY OLD FELLOW


/■
\ ______
1
\c:Mm /:( i-i i |
* • —*- s<4\■ i | \
v>> p>> ,t ~v J —
WHY THE PINE-TREE SIGHS
iNCE, long ago, so long ago that even I can-
not remember the time, there grew high on
a mountainside a discontented Pine-tree.
Of course, there were many, many other Pine-
trees, but this one would just stand alone and sigh.
No-one knew why, and no-one had bothered to ask
him why. Really, the Forest Children were rather
afraid of him, he seemed such a very grumpy old man.
The Sun Children had offered to play with him,
and so had the Children of the Moon; but all he would
do was to fold his thick blanket of green around him-
self and start sighing worse than ever.
There seemed nothing at all the Forest Folk could
do about it, so they left him all
alone on the mountainside.
Some Birds had built their
nests in his branches; but when
the Mother Bird tried to teach
her babies to sing, all the poor
little things could do was sigh,
just as they had heard the
Pine-tree do.
Now, all the other Pine-
trees sang a lullaby and told all
the secrets of the world to who-


ever would listen to them, so there were no secrets left
in the world.
They grew so very tall that they had only to look
down on Mother Earth to see what was going on there,
and, of course, being so very tall, they had only to look
up to the sky to know just what was going on there.
The noisy, talkative Parrots carried all the tales to
them from places far and wide as well, and really,
there was not a scrap of peace for anyone.
Of course, some of their lullabys were lovely and
told of the warm sea, and the pink coral where the Sea
Folk played. Others told of their brothers who had
sailed the seas and had seen the land where the King of
Ice lives crowned with the light of a million stars.
And one very old Tree told the strange tale of
Princess Dawn who stayed so long folding the blanket
of night that she nearly lost a day.
Ever since then, the Mother of All Living Things
has awakened the Birds very early, so that if they see
Princess Dawn lingering too long, they sing very sweetly
and very loudly to let her know that Prince Daybreak
is waiting at the edge of the World.
All these songs are quite alright, but when the Pines
start singing, and telling all who will listen (and, of
course, that is everyone) the secret that Princess Dawn
had really stayed because she loved Prince Daybreak
and did not care if she had lost a day or not, well, that
is a different matter!


That was not the only secret they told. For in-
stance, they told of the trouble the Sun had with the
Sunflower. That really was a most upsetting thing.
It seemed that the Sunflower, a very vain fellow, had
looked at himself so long in the mirror of the sky that
in the end he considered himself superior to the Sun.
That was bad enough, but, to make matters worse,
he asked the God of Thunder to help him take the
throne from the Sun.
Of course, the God of Thunder thought this a great
idea as he really had no time for the Sun, and had been
trying for a long time to get rid of him and make him-
self the Father of the World.
The silly, vain Sunflower quite forgot that one very
bad storm would break his proud head.
Fortunately, this silly scheme was overheard by a
very busybody River, who babbled it all over the place,
and very shortly it came to the ears of the East Wind
who told the Sun.
So that was that.
While all the Trees were talking, the Pine-tree on
the mountainside did not say a thing. He just sighed,
and sighed, and kept to himself whatever he heard.
In time, the Forest Folk began to notice this, and, to
get away from the noise and scandal of the other trees
they began to visit the grumpy old fellow.
He was very pleased, and, of course, had tried to


KING WINTER—A VERY OLD AND NASTY MAN


rm —^
■ ij y t *
I )j ?»*? v*
Cl 4 i ... .
I a---.
I
MORNING GLORY LOVED DANCING FOR THE PRINCE


mend his ways after the sad affair of the little sighing
Birds that could not sing.
The Spiders who really did not mind his sighing,
and were always far too busy to take any notice of it in
any case, had spun their webs in his hair, and the Prince
of the Frost had decorated them which, naturally, made
Grumpy take notice of himself.
"I must be very firm with myself," he thought, "and
stop this sighing and crying." And if you see a Pine-
tree with tears of resin spilling down his limbs you will
know I am right.
Very soon, all the Forest Folk were talking about
the Tree who never spoke, and, thinking themselves
very clever, one by one they started to tell the old chap
their very important secrets.
He was so thrilled about all this that he grew taller
than the tallest Tree in the Forest, but for the life of
him he could not stop sighing.
By this time, however, the Forest Folk did not mind,
and in their heart of hearts they would have been very
sorry if he had spoken.
Soon the Birds were telling him of the world on the
other side of the horizon, and he felt more important
than ever.
The Snow Fairies told him of the meeting of
Princess Dawn and Prince Daybreak, and how the
World had been flooded with golden light, and how


very angry Day had been and had chased them both
behind the Rainbow.
I heard this from the Snow Fairies themselves, and
they should know.
Very soon there was a meeting of all the World's
children, and all the very important ones, and it was
decided to make the Sighing Pine the Keeper in Chief
of all the World's secrets.
Mother Earth was so pleased that everything had
ended so well that she called for the little Sighing Birds.
She gave them new feathers made of the down that
was left over from the Butterfly's wings.
The Queen of all the Bees took such an interest in
them that she gave the secret of the music of the Bees.
And so to this day they are known as Humming
Birds.
So, as there will always be a Keeper in Chief of
Secrets, the old Pine taught all his children to sigh.
If ever you have something that you do not want to
tell anyone else, you will be wise to give it to the Pine to
keep for ever for you.
He will be easily found, for even on the sunniest
day you will hear him sigh.
Sometimes in the Winter he is covered in a mantle
of snow and even then, if you listen very carefully, he
will be murmuring ever so softly.


BULRUSH SPEARMEN
HE other night there was such a " • '
mumbling and grumbling in
the old She-oak by the River. r - " ;
Old Grandfather Owl had been
upset again. This often happened when he had been
annoyed by his wife.
It seems there had been a difference of opinion over
a very fat and foolish Moth.
Now, if the fat and foolish Moth had been outside
Grandfather Owl's Wife and inside Grandfather Owl,
I may not have heard this strange tale.
Poor Grandfather Owl had left home in a very bad
temper and was looking for someone to tell all his
troubles to. The She-oak thought he was being very
difficult and, anyway, she was much too busy combing
her hair to pay attention to an old Owl.
Grandfather Owl and all
<\ <
K I\i his relations are the Watch-
N J
I I men of the Night. Long,
| if,long ago, Lady Night had
~-/W A: 1 asked them to watch over all
lis \ *° -,. * . 1 ' » I
the living things of the World
while Mother Earth was
drowsing.


r
C '" ' I
W . .. 'f
' Kch. <
,
/ "^L
y «
" . 1>
*' ■-- ■
THEY FELL WITH A SPLASH INTO A POND


Lady Night is so very busy that
someone has to be awake to see what is
going on, and then, of course, the Little
Folk have to be kept in order, or they
will get into all sorts of mischief. The
Owls, as you know, are very wise and
know everything. They also see every-
thing, but it is very rarely they ever tell anything.
And that is why I listened to his grumbling. After
a while, his temper improved and he told me this story:
"Now, one lovely moonlight night, the Stars were
polishing their lamps; that is, all but a few naughty
little ones who were chasing each other across the sky.
" 'Something will happen to them.' thought the
Moon, and something did.
"Down, down they fell, ever so far, past the Moon-
beams, through the Clouds, who did their best to hold
them. On and on they went until they fell with a
splash into a pond.
"The Little Stars were very frightened and
wept, and called to the Sky to come iQm
and get them, but the Spirit of the C
Pond would not let them go.
"For years and years she had
watched the Stars, and even though
they shone on her face she had never «-.
had a real one of her own to hold and
treasure. -


finite
Wf>
Mt
f- -V J t A
' I'
"Once, she tried to steal one
while the Sun and Moon were
not looking, but the Rain Bird
saw her just in time, and told of
the terrible punishment that
awaited anyone who stole a Star.
" Tf you are caught,' he told
her, f the Sun will take your pond
back with him to the Clouds, and
you will be turned out of the
World into the Great Nothing-
ness.'
When the Little Stars fell into her pond she
quickly hid them under the Ferns which grew so thickly
around her banks.
"She really was very unhappy when they cried, so
she sang to them the Song of the Raindrops. Of course
you know that the Raindrops are the Children of the
Clouds and are sent to the Earth for the Living Things,
and also for the great and little Seas, Rivers and Ponds.
"After a while, the Stars were happier, but the
Water Spirit was always frightened that the Lords of
the Sky would try to take them back.
"The Big Trees formed a circle around her banks,
but still she worried. All the while, she was being
pestered by the Forest Folk who wanted to see the
Little Strangers, and the Ferns were getting tired of


mmi i ii '
~
;Tv
v -' - v -»A
• V V ,
~;; 4 f v *
/\ /j \ v'
- V"~\ \ /
/% /^
- * N £T Jf
- ■ r < X Xyf
:W'X?4t v — 1
/ ;. ▼ < ; i#
i j i X" v / fl ' ' '
- - \l i
., ;. i 7 f fc * - '*
?& t* ■! Ar T V- 2
THE MOONBEAM CAME DANCING ACROSS AT ONCE


bowing their heads over the water. They wanted to
look up and see what was going on around them.
"One night, the Old Man of the River came to see
the Water Spirit. He was very curious about the little
hidden Stars. He had heard about them from a
wandering Thistledown Fairy who had seen them fall
into the pond.
"The Water Spirit was afraid that the Old Man of
the River would steal the Stars and give them to the
Great Sea with whom he was very friendly.
"But this was not so. When he was told of the
trouble it was to the Water Spirit to keep the Little Ones
hidden, he thought of a great plan. He called to the
Thistledown Fairy to bring his Spearmen to him.
"Now, you have seen the Spearmen of the Rivers
many times. They are dressed in green and carry
slender brown spears. They are really Bulrushes.
"They have been in the service of the Old Man of
the River for ever so long. There they stand along his
banks, keeping guard. Some of them have stood sen-
tinel for so long that they are too old to stand up
straight. They have been so faithful that, as a reward,
they were given brown velvet tips to their spears.
"Of course, you know that the Old Man of the
River is so kind that he would not let them hurt anyone,
so it does not matter if their spears are blunt.
"When the Spearmen arrived, he told them that


\ 4
t 1
they were to stay with the little fallen Stars and never
leave them. Being good Spearmen, they never would.
"Everyone thought this a good idea. The little
Ferns could dance in the breeze and gossip with the
Water Babies, and the Forest Folk could come and see
the Little Strangers. And best of all, the Little Stars
could play. Often, the Folk of the Sky would spare a
few minutes to bring them news of their old play-
grounds.
"Of course," said Old Grandfather Owl, "there are
still foolish Stars that will chase each other across the
Sky, though, mind you, they should know better."
Just then, a Star fell from the Sky. "There now,
what did I tell you? Ah well! More trouble for the
Bulrush Spearmen more
Ponds to guard. As though
they haven't enough to do as it
is! There must be hundreds
of foolish Stars in these little (
Ponds and Rivers. If you look
very carefully at night, you will
see them shining in the water —
troublesome young things, no
wisdom!"
And there I left him, sitting
in the She-oak by the River
where the Bulrush Spearmen
stand guard.


<SW
THE RAINBOW'S
TREASURE CHEST
* )
y_ .H3
v ll Vua, /( c3Atf^
HEN Time was very
young, long, long
ago, the Mother of All Living
Things—the Big Wide World
—was quite a different place
to what it is now. Her child-
ren were not bright and gay,
as they are today; and this grieved the Mother of All
Living Things sadly.
In time, her sorrow was seen by the Father of All
Things, the Sun, who, until then had been so concerned
with his own work that he had become forgetful of
others.
He had been having some trouble with HIS child-
ren, too. They just would not do as they were told. At
bedtime, there they were playing hide-and-seek with the
Moonbeams, and by the time the Sun sorted them out
he was just too tired to think of anything else.
One evening, he became so angry he turned them
all into Stars, and there they are today, all higgledy-
piggledy, just as the Sun caught them long ago.
After all this trouble had been dealt with, the Sun
had more time to see what had been going on in the
World, and that was how he came to see that the Mother


of All Living Things was griev-
ing so sadly over HER children.
"Dear, dear me! This will
never do!" he thought. "Some-
thing will have to be done!"
lxixxx- VYXXX xxcxvv. " W/ >\
He called his favourite T
daughter, Twilight, and sent
•'/ y \
IMT s§P' ■ i
l.vlv
her to the First Lady of the
Night, Lady Moon, asking if
she could help to dress the
Children of the World.
The Moon, being a Lady,
could understand the troubles
of the Mother of All Living Things far better than
could the Sun, so she sent a gift of lovely Moonbeams,
wrapped in blue and purple she had found in the Sky.
The Sun had collected all the colours from his
children, and sent them with the gold and the pinks and
the greens of the Dawn to the Earth Children.
And while he was not looking, little Twilight tucked
some of her own beautiful garments in the parcel.
When the Mother of All Living Things received
this wonderful gift, she just could not start making new
dresses for her little ones quickly enough.
She hurried here, and hurried there, until very soon
all the living things were dressed.
The Rain washed the World, and the Sun warmed
and dried it. The Snow spread a blanket of white in


j "f> Mil
the winter. The Lady Sky lent her blue to the Sea and
the Lakes and the Rivers.
The Moonbeam and Sunbeams spilt their glory,
and the Sky caught it and made the Rainbow.
Then the Mother of the World kissed the Birds and
the Animals and the Insects, and clothed them in a
glory of colour.
All this was very wonderful, but in the hurry and
the bustle some of her children she had kept hidden
ever so far under the ground were forgotten.
They were very plain children—in fact, they were
Stones. Some were little and
some big. x
Now, they had heard the -4, fs-v
Earth talking and had also / f 1 .
Earth talking and had also
heard the hustle and bustle that *
had been going on, and the
Earth's watchdogs, the noisy x
Frogs, had told them what was V \ / ! / |\
happening. A-W
"That's what you get for be- /vA\
\W \ t
f V \v
' *■ \\\
ing out of sight," said the TwffSi
Stones. "We shall call a meet- ffS V 1 V
1 9 ' '
ing and see what's to be done."
But, call and call as they would, they just could not
make themselves heard.
One night, a friendly and inquisitive Glow-worm
heard them talking and thought he would listen to what


they were saying. He was very surprised, and wiggled
off as fast as he could to find a stray Moonbeam who
would listen to the latest gossip.
He found the Moonbeam dancing on a water-lily
pond, and called to her that he had something very im-
portant to tell her.
Being a polite little Beam, she came dancing over at
once to hear what the little Glow-worm had to say.
She was very upset when she heard the Stones had
been overlooked, and straightway went to find Will-o'-
the-Wisp, who knew most things. Will-o'-the-Wisp is
a very cheery fellow who never looks on the dark side
of things.
He always plays jokes on people, but is never un-
kind.
He took himself off to the Rainbow. Now, he knew
that the Rainbow was looking for a hiding
place for her Jewels, and what better place
could she find than with the big and little
forgotten Stones that were hidden ever so
far under the ground?
The Rainbow was delighted
/V\r X 7y N fh. with the idea and off she set to call
\ on lonely Stones. She spread
\ i herself across the Sky, then bent
r 1 )Y\ ! ;j! A her lovelv head to the Earth.
vt. Av: IM \
y. By this time, the inquisitive
v Wnrni harl fnnnrl nut what wac crn-
By this time, the inquisitive
Worm had found out what was go-


*\ * V
' V 4 - | \
wis
J\~X;
ing on, and there he was to meet the Rainbow.
He wiggled down to the big and little Stones and
told them they had a visitor. They were so excited that
they pushed their way up to speak to her.
When she heard their sad story, she cradled the
Lonely Ones in her beautiful arch and, placing her
beautiful colours on them, set them back in Mother
Earth.
Just as this was happening, a bright red ray from
the Sun ran down from the Sky to see what it was all
about. That playful fellow, the Will-o'-the-Wisp, caught
it and gave it to the Stones to hold for ever. And they
do, with all the colours of the Rainbow, to this day.
If you dig deep enough, as others have dug before
you, you will find the lovely Opal which, as you know,
is the Treasure Chest of the Rainbow.


ARURA WRITERS
Arura Writers is a publishing organisation founded for
the express purpose of forwarding Australian culture
by publishing works by Australian writers, past and
present. On the Arura Publications List are works of
particular interest and appeal for all lovers of the
Australian. The romance of Australian history, the
rich store of native legends and folk tales, the cream
of Australia's poets —these and others are among the
books shortly to appear. The aim of Arura Writers
is to bring reader and writer into closer contact than has
been possible for many years. Arura Publications may
be obtained through all leading booksellers throughout
the Commonwealth.




"
,
- -
