

THE THOORGA LANGUAGE.
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
Mertib. Assoc. Etranger Soc. d'Anthrop. de Paris.




THE THOORGA LANGUAGE.
By R. H. Mathews, L.S., Memb. Assoc. Etranger Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.
Prefatory.
In the following pages an attempt will be made to supply the out-
lines of the structure of the Thoor'ga, or Thur'-ga, language, which is
spoken by the aborigines scattered along the coast of New South Wales
from Bermagui northerly to Jervis Bay.
To the north and north-west of the Thoorga are the Thur'rawal,
Dhar'rook, Gun'dunguPra and Ngoonawal tribes. Adjoining the Thoor-
ga on the south are the Jirringan, Thawa, and other communities. The
speech of all the tribes mentioned is similar in grammatical structure,
although differing more or less 'widely in vocabulary, and constitute
a language which differs in several important respects from that of
the natives of other portions of New South Wales.
The above aggregate of tribes covers the territory between the
Hawkesbury River and Cape Howe, extending inland till met by the
great Wiraijuri nation, whose speech belongs to the Yookumbill order,
which I have briefly outlined in the Appendix hereto. It is hoped that
the two types of Australian languages described in this paper may be
found useful to philologists.
The different parts of speech will be first dealt with, showing
the declensions of nouns and adjectives, the modifications of pro-
nouns, and the conjugation of verbs. A few songs used at the initia-
tion ceremonies come next, after which there is a vocabulary containing
about four hundred and sixty carefully-selected words from the Thoorga
tongue.
Every word in this paper has been taken down by myself from
the lips of several old men and women of the Thoorga tribe on different
ccasions, according as opportunities offered to make special journeys
among them. The student of ethnology will readily understand all
the difficulties and patient work appertaining to a first attempt to
reduce to writing the language of a savage people possessing no litera-
ture of any kind, where all the particulars have to be gathered orally
from the native speakers. I therefore crave the indulgence of the
reader for the incomplete form of this article, as well as for any
errors which are necessarily incident to the first edition of a work of
this character. On a future occasion I hope to complete the task
upon which a commencement has now been made.
* Read before the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, 28th
November, 1901.
Reprinted from the Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland, Vol. XVII.


Orthography.
The vowels used in the Thoorga language are a, e, i, o, u; and the
consonants, b, c, d, g, h, j, k, 1, m, n, p, r, t, w, y. In this treatise
every word is spelt phonetically, the letters having the same value
as in English, with the undermentioned qualifications:
Vowels have the usual short sound, unless marked, as follows:
aas in late I ias in kite eas in bear
a ~ ~ far | 6,, ~ vote
It is hard to distinguish between the short, or unmarked, sound
of a and that of u, a difficulty also met with in several other languages.
Combinations of vowels are pronounced thus :
ee, as in meet; 00, as in moon; ou, as in loud.
In order to get the native pronunciation as accurately as possible,,
it has been found necessary to make certain combinations of conso-
nants when spelling some of the words.
Ng at the beginning of a syllable, as nga, has a peculiar nasal
sound, which can be got almost exactly by assuming oo to be placed
before it, as 00-nga, and then pronouncing the two syllables as one.
At the end of a syllable, it has the sound of ng in sing, but more nasal.
The sound of the Spanish nis frequent. At the commencement of
a word or Syllable I have represented it by ny, as nyir, which is
articulated as one syllable. At the termination of a syllable, n is
adopted, as yoo-in.
Y, followed by a vowel, is attached to several consonants, as dya,
lvee, byoo, tya, and so on, which are pronounced as one syllable, sound-
ing all the letters. Y sometimes follows a consonant at the end of a
word, as in gur-ra-gaty, meaning slow. In such cases it must form part
of the preceding syllable; thus, gaty should be pronounced all in one.
Dli, whether at the beginning or end of a word, is pronounced
nearly as th in that, with a slight sound of d preceding it; thus, dhoo-
gan, a camp, and kan-nargo-badh, a porcupine. Frequently th is used
instead cf dh, when an initial t sound is substituted for that of the d.
Nh at the commencement of a syllable, as nhoor, is pronounced as-
the th in that, with the sound of n before it. At the end of a word, it
resembles nth in tenth, omitting the final hissing sound.
The final h is guttural, closely resembling the ch in the German
word joch.
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k.
R has a rough trilled sound as in the exclamation hur rah ! no
matter what its position in the word may be.
The sound of j at the beginning of a syllable is often given by the-
natives as ty or dy, thus, tya has substantially the sound of ja.
Ch, which seldom occurs, is pronounced as in church.
The accent is shown thus, Kuhla, and when two syllables are?
accented, both are marked in the same way.


When there is a reduplication of a, consonant, as in boorra, each
letter is distinctly enunciated.
To Mr. H. E. Hockey, manager of Wallaga Lake Aboriginal
Station, I wish to express my thanks for his courtesy in allowing me
to have free access to the natives under his charge, and for other acts
of kindness during my visits to that portion of the district while
engaged in my ethnological investigations.
Articles.
There are no articles, such as the equivalents of “ a” and “ the,” in
the language.
The usual arrangement of words in a sentence is to place the nomi-
native first, then the adjective, and lastly the verb, as Koongarangga
jiroura thunnan, the opossum leaves eats (is eating). An adjective
qualifying either the nominative or objective, follows its noun. Space
will not admit of examples at present.
Nouns.
Nouns are subject to variation on account of number, gender, and
case—the inflexion being effected by means of suffixes or postpositions.
Number. —There are three numbers, the singular, dual, and plural.
The singular number denotes one ; the dual number two, or a pair; the
'plural number more than two. Generally, the dual is formed by*
adding the termination, burra to the word; the plural is formed by
suffixing burraga; as in the following examples:—•
(1) One opossum, Koong'ara,
A pair of opossums, Koong'arambur'ra
Several opossums, Koong'arambu^raga
(2) One kangaroo, Boo'roo
A pair of kangaroos, Boo'roowur'ra
Several kangaroos, Boo'roowur'raga
(3) One boomerang, Warang'an
A pair of boomerangs, Warang / anbur / ra
Several boomerangs, Warang'anbur'raga
In t-lA first example the name of the animal ends with a vowel,,
and the syllable is closed by the annexure of the letter m, which is then
followed by the suffixes burra and burraga respectively. The letters m
and b are closely related to each other in sound; in the articulation of
the former the air escapes through the nose—in the latter through the
mouth. Therefore, the introduction of the m before tha b makes the
whole word flow more easily than if the m were not there.
In the second example the creature’s name concludes with 00, which
is closely allied to w in sound, therefore the b is dropped* from the
beginning of the next syllable, and a w substituted for it, making the
whole word read boo'-roo-wur-ra —the two syllables roo-wur melting
into each other.


In the third example, the name of the object terminates with n,
and the suffix is added without modification. It appears, therefore,
that the suffixes are liable to variations which are apparently designed
for the sake of a pleasing, easy pronunciation.
Gender. —There are two modes of indicating difference of gender
in nouns : —(1) By using different words for the male and female ; and
(2) By affixing some word indicative of sex.
Yoo'in is a man, wang'gan a woman. Kum'mera means an old
man ; karn'ga an old woman. Gub'bogoobal, a boy; yan'dabal, a girl.
The gender of animals is usually expressed by forming a compound
with another word, as Wuddhung'ur beano, a male dog; wuddhung / ur
wang'ganmano, a female dog, wang'ganmano being derived from wang'-
gan, the name of the human female.
For a few of the animals a specific word represents the male, with-
out naming the animal, but in the case of the female the animal name
must be stated, followed by a distinguishing word. For example, the
male of the koong'ara, opossum, is called kumburroo'ga, whilst the
female is spoken of as koongara-kooroo'roo. G-umbawur, native bear,
has the single word bur'runda for the male, but the female is repre-
sented by giving the name of the animal, followed by kooroo'roo,
thus—gumbawur-koorooroo. A female kangaroo is called immer, as
booroo-immer.
When the name of any animal or inanimate object is mentioned,
without some word specifying the sex, the masculine gender is
invariably understood.
Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, nominative-agent,
possessive, accusative, dative and ablative.
The nominative is expressed in two ways, the first being called the
nominative—the second the nominative-agent. The noun is unaltered
if we merely name the object under consideration, as, wuddungur tham-
bamoolaga, a dog I saw. But if we speak of the object as performing
any act, a suffix is required, as wuddungurra koongara buddhal, the
dog an opossum bit. Koongarangga jiroura thunnan, an opossum
leaves is eating. The form of the suffix varies slightly with the termi-
nation of the noun to which it is annexed, as in the last two examples.
Frequently the agent-suffix is omitted altogether.
The possessive (genitive) is formed by adding the suffix noo, or its
variants, to the name of the object possessed, and dha, or a euphonic
modification, to the name of the possessor, as follows:
Wanggan, a woman—wurran, a child ; but wanggandha wurranyoo
is a woman’s child.
Yooin, a man—bimbia, a shield, and yooindya bimbianoo, a man’s
shield.


Wurran, a child—thoogan, a camp; but wurranya thooganoo is a
child’s camp.
The possessive case of a large number of nouns is effected by a
suffix corresponding to the person and number required, thus forming
one word, which can be inflected as under;
(Ist person My camp Thoogandhooga
Singular '2nd ~ Thy camp Thooganoong
(3rd ~ His camp Thooganoo
11 of J Our camp (inch) Thoogangul
| P iOur ~ (excl.) Thoogangullung
12nd ~ Your camp Thooganbool
(3rd ~ Their camp Thooganumbool
Dual
M , , (Our camp (inch) Thooganyin
I s person ( Q ur (excl.) Thooganyinnunga
" 2nd ~ Your camp Thoogandhoor
(3rd ~ Their camp Thoogangadhan
Plukal
The native words in the above table read thus: —Camp my, camp
thy, camp his, and so on.
In the accusative there is generally no change in the noun, as,
Wanggandha wurranyoo garay thunnan—the woman’s child a snake
is eating.
The sense of the ablative case is often obtained by means of the
objective: Wuddungurra koongara buddhal —the dog the opossum,
bit; that is, the opossum was bitten by the dog.
The dative case is sometimes obtained in a similar way: Eedhun-
gooroo murrawarnoo mirreejigga ngoomal —the mother her daughter
a bandicoot gave, or, the mother gave a bandicoot to her daughter.
Usually the ablative and dative cases are shown by suffixes to the
noun, and in a few instances they are indicated by modifications of
the verb.
Adjectives.
Adjectives have three numbers, and are placed after the nouns
they qualify. When an adjective qualifies a noun in the dual or plural,
the requisite suffix is attached to both :
Yooin garneena, a man bad
Yooinburra garneenamburra, a pair of men bad
Yooinburraga garneenamburraga, several men bad
The suffix is often omitted from one of the words, leaving the noun
only, or the adjective, to indicate the dual and plural.
Adjectives also take the same possessive, dative, and ablative
suffixes as the nouns with which they are used.
The comparison of adjectives does not follow the same rules as in
European languages, but there are several ways of comparing one
quality or quantity with another. One method is to use a stronger form


of the same word, thus, birraga, large; birragambora, above the
average size; birragangoodhoo, very large.
Referring to a couple of boomerangs, which are equally good, a
native would say, Warrangan neen jummagadha—warranganwal
jinginda jummagadha, Boomerang this good—boomerang other that
good; that is, This boomerang is good, that other boomerang is good.
If abetter weapon were produced, he might say, Warrangan jummagan-
goodhoo, boomerang very good.
Where one of the objects compared is smaller or inferior in any way
to the other, the speaker will use words to imply, small this, large that,
or as the case may require.
Comparison may be effected by using different words, as,
goorougoora, fast; joambadhoo, resembling the speed of a falling star.
We have seen that when used qualitatively, adjectives are inflected
for number and case; when they are used as predicates, they are
inflected for person and number, and are placed foremost in the
sentence:
list person lam good (good I) Jummagambaga
►Singular J 2nd ~ Thou art good (good thou) Jummagambee
(3rd ~ He is good (good he) Jummagaman
(i,t f" e are good mol.)
Du ._ ! ISt perSOn 'We „ „ (excl.)
i",2nd ~ You are good
(3rd ~ They are good
list nersnn jWe are good (inch)
Ist person (Well
Plural , v ” ” \ txcL )
2nd ~ You are good
13rd ~ They are good
J u mmagam b u ng
Jummagambungulla
Jummagamboo
Ju m m again b u r r a
Ju nun again bun
Jummagambunga
Jummagamban
J m n m again b u rraga
Any adjective which is used in this way, as, I am strong, hungry,
glad, and so on, can be inflected as in the above example. They also
admit of inflection for past and future time, like intransitive verbs.
One example in the singular of each tense will be sufficient:
( Ist person I was good
Singular -j 2nd ~ Thou wast good
(3rd ~ He was good
And so on for the dual and plural.
Jummagamboolaga
Jummagamboolee
Jummagambool
1 1st person I will be good Jummagambobooga
Singular -I 2nd ~ Thou wilt be good Jummagamboboonee
(3rd ~ He will be good Jummagamboboon
It appears, therefore, that any adjective which describ s a quality
or attribute, which can be connected with a personal pronoun, as “I
am good,” “he is merry,” “we are sick,” can be conjugate:! in the
same manner as an intransitive verb. The primary use of these words
as adjectives is exemplified in such expressions as “ A good woman,”


u ‘ a merry boy,” “a sick man,” and they are then declined for number
and case only. Many adjectives, as bright, 3weet, frosty, thick, and so
on, cannot be used as verbs.
It would be better, perhaps, to include the predicative adjectives
among the verbs, but I have thought it as well to illustrate them under
the present heading, for the purpose of keeping all the adjectives
together.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have the singular, dual, and plural numbers, and are
without gender. The nominative and possessive pronouns are as
under:
(Ist person I Ngiaga Mine Ngiagangool
i 2nd ~ Thou Indeega Thine Indeegangool
(3rd ~ He Jeenjulla ' His Jellanudda
Singular
| |We (incl.) Ngiawung Ours (inch) Ngiawunga-
1 1st person, exc j jNgiawungulla Ours (excl.) Ngiawungal-
-1 angool
2nd ~ You Indeewoo Yours Indeewool
Dual
3rd ~ They Jeenjullowurra Theirs Jellanowurra
I IWe (incl.) Ngiawan Ours (inch) Ngiawunyun-
J Ist person j^y e exc j.) Ngiawanga Ours (excl.) Ngiawunga-
Ptttrat ' ! 1 gool
12nd ~ You Indeewan Yours Indeewun-
thungool
3rd ~ They Jeenjullowur-Theirs' Jellanowur-
raga raga
These pronouns are not much used as separate words, except in
answer to a question, or assertively. If some one ask, “ Who is going
hunting?” a man may answer, “ Ngiaga,” I am, or “ Ngiawungulla,”
we (dual exclusive) are.- If an inquiry be made, “ Whose food is this?”
some one may reply, “ Indeegangool,” thine; or “ Ngiawunyungool,”
ours (plural inclusive), and so on.
There are other forms of the above pronouns, meaning “ for me,”
“ with me,” “ from me,” etc., which extend through the three numbers
and persons. And the number of a noun can be expressed by means
of the pronoun, thus, a native could say, in reference to a couple of
anything, “Ngiagangoolowurra,” mine both; if referring to several
articles, he might say, “ Ng'iagangoolowurraga,” mine all, and so> on.
Pronominal suffixes, in abbreviated forms, are used in great num
ber and variety in the declension of nouns, adjectives, verbs, pi'eposi-
tions, and adverbs, examples of which are given under these parts of
speech in the present article.
The equivalents of the demonstrative pronouns, “this” and “that,”
declinable for dual and plural number, and also have modifications


to express possession. In these demonstratives—and also in the per-
sonal pronouns—there are two forms of the nominative case, one being
the simple nominative, and the other the nominative agent, as already
explained in dealing with the nouns in an earlier page.
The interrogatives “who” and “what” have numerous inflections
for number, person, and case, a few of which are as under :
Who art thou, wunnunggawee
Who are you (two), wunnunggawoo
Who are you (several), wunnunggawun
Who is there, wannungga nyoon
What is the matter (with thee), minyamanee
What is the matter (with them, several), minyamanha
Who is this for, wannungalool nyeen.
Other forms of these interrogatives represent, belonging to whom
and what, from whom and what, etc.
If there be any relative pronouns, they have up to the present
escaped notice.
Verbs.
Verbs have three numbers—the singular, dual, and plural. There
are three principal moods—the indicative, imperative, and subjunctive,
or conditional, with indications of an infinitive, which I have not yet
succeeded in establishing.
There are three persons and three primary tenses—present, past,,
and future—and possibly a perfect is occasionally used. Conjugation
is effected by numerous postpositions, among which there is consider-
able regularity. What are called participles in English become part of
the inflexion of the verb l in the native tongue.
The stem of the verb and the pronominal suffix with which it is
used, together form one word, as, Booroo thambamaolaga, a kangaroo
saw I; Booroo thambamoolee, a kangaroo sawest tliou, and so on.
This permits of the verb, and its corresponding particle, being inflected
together throughout all the tenses. When a pronoun is postfixed to a
verb in this way, the former is very much contracted. The following
is the conjugation of the verb Jama, “ to talk or tell.”
Active Voice —Indicative Mood.
PRESENT TENSE.
1 1st Person I talk Jamaga
Singular - 2nd ~ Thou talkest Jamanee
(3rd ~ He talks Jaman
Jaman
list J We talk ( incL ) Jamoong
| ist lerson | We talk excL) Jamoongalla
j2nd ~ You talk Jamooroo
(3rd ~ They talk Jamandawurra
Dual
list Pprcnn l We talk ( incl -) Jamooifi
jist ieison j We taJk (excl> j Jamooinga
12nd ~ You talk Jamooroon
(yrd ~ They talk Jamana
Plural


PAST TENSE
j Ist Person I talked Japioolaga
-'2nd ~ Thou talkedst Jamoolee
(3rd ~ He talked Jamool
Singular
fist Person I We fcalke d (inch) Jamoolung
! ‘ (We talked (excl.) Jamoolungulla
i2nd ~ You talked Jamooloo
(3rd ~ They talked Jamoolawurra
Dual
•Jamoolawurra
(Ist Person I We talked ( incl< ) Jamoolun
j ierson (We talked (excl.) Jamoolunga
2nd ~ You talked Jamooloon
(3rd ~ They talked Jamoola
Plural
FUTURE TENSE
(Ist Person I will talk Jamooga
Singular J 2nd ~ Thou wilt talk Jamoonee
(3rd ~ He will talk Jamooan
Ist Person I We will talk ( incL ) Jamooung
IWe will talk (excl.) Jamemoongulla
2nd ~ You will talk Jameemboola
Dual
3rd ~ They will talk Jamoonawurra
(i ,p . fWe will talk (incl.) Jameembun
p j 8 ei f SOn j\y e w iH talk (excl.) Jameeminga
lural... j 2nd ~ You will talk Jamoonan
3rd ~ They will talk Jamooana
Imperative Mood—present tense.
Singular 2nd Person Talk (thou) Jamoor
Dual ... 2nd ~ Talk (you two) Jamooroo
Plural 2nd ~ Talk (you all) Jamooran
future tense,
Singular 3rd Person Let him talk .Tamooya
Dual ... 3rd ~ Let them talk Jamooyawurra
Plural 3rd ~ Let them talk Jamooyawa
Conditional Mood—present tense.
[lst Person I may talk Jamooga-wanda
Singular - 2nd ~ Thou mayest talk Jamoonee-wanda
(3rd ~ He may talk Jamoon-wanda
PAST TENSE.
) Ist Person I may have talked Jamoolaga-wanda
Singular j-2nd ~ Thou mayest have talked Jamoolee-wanda
J 3rd ~ He may have talked Jamool- wanda
Passive Voice.
There is no special form fox the passive voice. The phrase, “An
opossum was bitten by a dog,” is expressed in Thoorga by saying, “A
dog bit an opossum.


Middle Voice—lndicative Mood.
PRESENT TENSE.
Singular 1 1st Person I talk to myself Jamunjaleega
Dual ... J lst ~ We (inch) talk to ourselves Jamunjaleeng
Plural. .. 1 1st ~ We (excl.) talk to ourselves Jamunjaleean
PAST TENSE.
Singular Ist Person I talked to myself Jamunjaleeoolaga
future tense.
Singular Ist Person I will talk to myself Jamunjalooga
Each of the three tenses in the last examples contain all the persons
and numbers, but I have only shown sufficient to illustrate their
structure.
There is a reciprocal inflection of the verb in the dual and plural,
as under:
We (dual inch) talk to each other Jamunjaleeang
We (plural incl.) talk to each other Jamunjaleean
The negative form of the verb consists of in-fixing the syallable
ngamba between the stem of the verb and the termination, as in the
following example in each tense:
Present I talk not Jamangambaga
Past ... I talked not Jamoolngambaga
Future I will not talk Jamoongambaga
And so on through all the persons of the singular, dual, and plural.
Various modifications of the verb are made, to convey different
shades of meaning, of which the following are a few examples, which
extend to all the persons and numbers:
I talk to thee
Jatnagoon
I talk for thee
Jamoonamagoon
Do not talk to me ...
J amoongambeengga
I gave to him
Ngamalaga
He gave to me
Ngamaleengga
I took from him
Moondardillaga
He took from you two
Moondardilool
I took from you all...
Moondardillagoondhoor
A man caught a wallaby ...
Yooindyoo jarrooga dhubbagal
A man caught a wallaby for himself
Yooindyoo jarrooga dhubbagamil-
leel
A man caught a wallaby for me ...
Yooindyoo jarrooga dlmbbagamoo-
leengga
A man caught a couple of wallabies
Yooindyoo jarroogamburra dhub-
bagalool
A man caught several wallabies ...
Yooindyoo jarroogamburraga
dhubbagalin (that is, a man
several wallabies caught)


It will be observed that the dative, ablative, and possessive cases
are often included in the verb, as “ to,” “ from,” “ for,” etc. The
number of the verb in some expressions agrees with the subject, and in
others with the object, noun.
The T’hoorga natives employ a verb meaning “ to become,” or “ to
intend,” in future time, which can be used with an adjective or another
verb, and in such cases the adjective or verb need not be declined.
In the following example the
adjective bulwul, strong, will be
taken :
(I will become, or intend
c be, strong
1 INGULAIi 'Thou wilt become strong
(He will become strong
Bulwul anyerreeooga
anyerreeoonee
anyerreeoon
(We (inch) will become strong Bulwul anyerreeoong
Dual ' ( »* » » » anyerreeoongulla
■“ I You ~ ~ , ~ anyerroonthoo
(They ~ ~ ~ ~ anyerroonawurra
(We (inch) will become strong Bulwul anyerrooin
Plural ] We ( excl o -> ». » » anyerrooinga
You ~ ~ ~ ~ anyerrooan
(They ~ ~ ~ ~ anyerroonawi
anyerroonawurraga
Prepositions.
Post-positions, or the equivalent of what are called prepositions in
English, are of two kinds, one of which compr.ses separate words, as
booroongoona, between. The other kind consists of various particles
suffixed to verbs, nouns, and adjectives, which ,give them a preposi-
tional meaning. Thus, instead of using a separate word for “ through,”
there is a verb, “ irreetboolaga,” meaning “ through-went-I,” which
can, of course, be conjugated for number, person, and tense.
The following are a few words exhibiting a prepositional sig-
nificance :
Booroongoona boonbalwurra, between two trees.
Bunnerwawalan boonbala, the other side of the tree.
Burreetboolaga, across came I (as across a river).
Nyirroowaga, down go I (as down hill).
Dhulleeboaga, up go I (as up hill).
Gooroomboaga, around go I (as around a camp)
Like nouns, some prepositions can be conjugated by suffixing an
abridged form of the requisite pronoun :
(1 st Person Behind me Burgidha
Singular j 2nd ~ Behind thee Burgiioong
(3rd ~ Behind him Burgieen
.p (Behind us (inch) Burg'iangul
Ist kelson j ßehind us (excl.) Burg'iangulling
2nd ~ Behind you Burgiyool
3rd ~ Behind them Burgianumbool
Dual


(Ist Person (® eh i us ( incl -) Burgagianyin
Plural J (Behind us (excl.) Burgagianyinnunga
i 2nd ~ Behind you Burgagiandhoor
13rd ~ Behind them Burgagieedhan
“ In front of me,” “ on my left,” etc., can be conjugated similarly.
Adverbs.
Adverbs may be either primitive words, or they may be derived
from adjectives, from which they differ so little that the use of the
word determines what part of speech it belongs to. The numerous
inflexions of the verbs lessen the necessity for the employment of
adverbs, and hence diminishes their number in the language.
The following are a few examples of phrases containing adverbs, or
having an adverbial meaning :
Wuddha wuddungur, where is the dog?
Mullee wabboolee, whv didst thou go?
Werndoong wabboolee, when didst thou go?
Jummagamanyeen willian, well he runs.
Yooka nannomanyee, how dost thou know?
For some other examples, see the end of the Vocabulary.
Some adverbs can be inflected for number and person, like nouns
and prepositions:
list Person Where am I Waddunggabaga
Singular j 2nd ~ Where art thou Waddungabanee
(3rd ~ Where is he Waddungaban
p pl ,„ nn j Where are we (inch) Waddungabung
£j ual j (Where are we (excl.) Waddungabungulla
1 2nd ~ Where are you Waddungabanoo
(3rd ~ Where are they Waddungaburra
Ppfcnn 1 Where are we (inch) Waddungaban
Plural ' ( Where are we (excl.) Waddungabanga
12nd ~ Where are you Waddungabanhoor
(3rd ~ Where are they Waddungaburraga
The meaning of the word “instead” is obtained by the following
expression:—Yannoon—miooga, goes he, stop I; that is, he goes
instead of me.
Conjunctions.
The number of conjunctions in the Thoorga dialect is very limited.
Their general absence is attributable to the numerous modifications of
the verbs and pronouns, by which means sentences are brought together
without the help of connecting words.
Exclamations.
Yi, calling attention. Wuddhou, hillo ! Yuggadya, surprise. Moolo
mooloonga, vexation. Most of these interjections have a dual and
plural form.


Numerals.
The cardinal numbers, which are indeclinable, are as follows:
One—mir'dindhal; Two—jirree'ba; Three—toor'oongad'ya; Four—
jirree'bawal jirree'bawal; Five—mur'nawal, or a hand; Ten—Thou'a,
the two hands ; Many—thou'a-mullan.
Once, mirdindhalee. Twice, mungundhawurra. Thrice, dooreen-
gawurraga. First, murrool. Last, walleengal.
The ideas of the natives in regard to numbers, quantity, and size,
are very limited.
Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremonies.
In an article contributed to the Anthropological Society, of Wash-
ington, in 1896, I described the Bunan 1 ceremony of initiation in force
among the native tribes occupying the south-east coast of New South
Wales from the Victorian boundary to Bulli, and extending inland
from eighty to a hundred miles. Since then I have also described a
preparatory inaugural rite, called the Kudsha 2 , which is practised by
the same people. This tract of territory includes the hunting grounds
of all the tribes referred to in the present treatise.
In the papers referred to, I have given the words of certain sacred
songs used in the celebration of the ceremonies, but am now in a
position to incorporate the music of some of them in this article. The
words of one of the songs chanted by the old men in the presence of
the boys are :
Dharamooloon, Dhurramooloon
Bingilbee moondanunna
Gfummerawarawa •
These words are droned monotonously ad libitum to the following
music :
v Z)/iu)-rcin-L-00-k<rn -- * /)/ius'- rarrh-JU, 2 ~ _3 • 710 - 4<L - Jy&p
)p ' n
j V>' T 1 % *1 1
, 7nor,i-*ia-iuin.'-ci, aler,,. _ W r- - / WCL
*/ TCI,.. IV Ct, . • • " - * - *
Another song has the following words and music :
Dharramooloonga gale wirrabroo ganga
Ngoorungga wirraleema.
« -lawn, JO- jet, - ft, t, 'z- - 4-yu -6at> a. 7t pt-v-r-u~ny -Jet
1 American Anthropologist, vol. ix., pp. 327-334.
2 Journ. Roy Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxiv., pp. 276-281.


The words and music of another song are :
Ngalalba waloolba jilleejilleen.
TYV o^iC'v^O
Jil'barara murTagadyah'
Yam/ungad'yenah /
This is sung to the following music :
One of the songs used by the women in the morning during the
time their sons are away with the chief men undergoing initiation is:
fpp
v ?«ur-w J~/C -6a - ra,-ra in/tt'- ra-ycut t j%. Tara. rnu/. m ,V*r^-
'IJ j j r.| |j j j j-. |i/T jjjf,
During the same period the mothers of the boys chant songs in the
evening, of which the following is a specimen :
Ngul'leejee gawinjee mullinda
Gunilyee mong'gajee
Millingalee kubberinya, millingalee kubberinya
Bingandabee pambeeloonya
Mirreewala pambeeloonya
The music runs thus, repeated as long as required
Another song sung by the boys’ mothers, with the accompanying
music, is as follows:


&/ rv bee Pam-bee Ire, ,i/.i OJ.rrec..u 4*. Ft .nA bsrrt -Ifti.
These are the first songs of the aborigines of this part of New
South Wales which have ever been set to music. It may be mentioned
that the words of these chants possess no meaning to the present
natives, having been handed down from one generation to another.
They were probably in the language of conquering tribes in the past. 1
They are considered sacred, and are never used except at the initiation
ceremonies, of which they constitute an important essential.
APPENDIX.
The Yookumbill Language.
In order to add to the value of this article it is proposed to furnish
an abstract of the grammatical structure of the Yoo-kum'-bill, or
U-kum'-bil, language, spoken by the natives of the Upper Macintyre,
the principal source of the Barwon River, New South Wales.
This language is representative, in its fundamental principles, of the
speech of tbe aborigines of mere than three-quarters of the geographic
area of New South Wales, being one of the most widely spread of Aus-
tralian tongues. This type extends southerly from the Macintyre and
Barwon rivers to the Murray, and stretches easterly to include the
north-east coast of New South Wales from the Hawkesbury River
northwards. It also covers a great part of Queensland.
Nouns.
Number. —Nouns have the singular, dual and plural numbers, as
follows :
Singular A kangaroo Bun'dar
Dual ... A couple of kargaroos Bun'darbu'ta
Plural Several kangaroos Bun'darmundim'ba
Gender. —In the human family different words are used to distin-
guish the sex, as—gib'beer, a man; uk'keether, a woman; woo'nar, a
young boy; mee'kai, a young girl; gir'ri, a child of either sex.
The gender of animals is shown by adding words signifying “male'’
and “female” respectively, as, goo'pee an opossum male;
goo/pee goc'nee, an opossum female. These distinguishing words are
different when speaking of birds, thus, boidhoorba is a cock and
gooneedhar a hen.
iR. H. Mathews. —“The Origin, &c., Australian Aborigines,” Proc. Amer. Philos.
Soc., Phila., U.S.A., vol. xxxix, pp. 556-578,


Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, nominative-agent,
possessive, accusative, dative, and ablative.
Nominative. —Gibbeer, a man; ing-gal, a child.
Nominative-agent. —Gib'beeroo ing'gal, u'mea, a man a child beat.
Possessive.—Gibbeergoo bur'gan, a man’s boomerang; ukkeether-
goo koo'nee, a woman’s yamstick; bun'dargoo dhoon, a kangaroo’s tail.
In the Thoorga language the object possessed also takes a suffix.
Accusative. —In the example given above for the nominative
agent, it is seen that the word inggal, a child, does not change. When,
however, an instrument is the direct object of the verb, it takes a
similar suffix to the nominative-agent, as, uttha burgandoo dhoowanee,
I am boomerang threw.
Dative.—Ngoo'ra is a camp; ngoo'raga munnayettee, to the camp
come.
Ablative.—Ngoo/randee munnal wandeebia, from the camp go
away.
Adjectives.
Adjectives are declined for number and case, and are placed after
the nouns they qualify.
Bundar muggan, a kangaroo, large.
Bundar mugganbuta, a couple of kangaroos, large.
Bundar mugganmundimba, several kangaroos, large.
The inflexions for case are :
Nominative-agent.—Gibberoo muggandoo inggal umea, a man big
the child beat.
Possessive.—Bundargoo muggangoo dhoon, a large kangaroo’s tail;
gibbeergoo muggangoo burgan, a big man’s boomerang.
Dative.—Gibbeera mugganda yetteemunna, the man big come to
(come to the big man).
Ablative. —Gibbeeree muggandee munnal, the man large go from.
Comparison is effected in a manner similar to that employed in the
Thoorga; and certain adjectives, when used as predicates, can be con-
jugated like intransitive verbs, the same as in that language.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have the nominative, possessive and objective cases, but
are without gender. The following are the nominative :
(Ist Person I
2nd ~ Thou
3rd ~ He
Uttha
Inda
Numbo
list Person { M),
- 2nd „ You eX °^*
(3rd „ They
Uttee
Utteenumbo
Utoota
Numbotuta


(1st Pers
i We (inch)
on ( We (excl.)
Nguninda
Plural
Ngunner
1 2nd
You
Indaner
13rd ,,
They
Utooldiner
The
possessive
and objective
forms of these
pronouns are as
under: —
(My
Ngea
Me
Utoo
Singular
Thy
Innoo
Thee
Innunnoo
(His
Numbego
Him
Utuluttoo
Ours (incl.) Uttininnoo Us (incl.) Uttinna
Ours (excl.) Uttinungo Us (excl.) Uttinunna
Yours Innoobootangoo You Inunnabuta
, Tlieirs Ngulbootangoo Them Utoomeea
Dual
(Ours (inch) Ngananinnoo Us (inch) Nyunnunda
Ours (excl.) Ngananner Us (excl.) Nyunnuna
Yours Inanoo You Iniinea
Theirs Nguldeenoo Them Utooldeena
It will be observed that these pronouns have two forms in the first
person of the dual and plural, one of which includes the person
addressed, and the other excludes him.
Interrogatives.—Ngana woonee, who is there? Nganda bundar
umea, who struck the kangaroo? Nganoona burgan, whose boomerang?
Nganbi, who from? Ngandoona, who did that? Minya nha, what is
that? Minyanginda, what for? Minyungi, how many? Wundha,
which or how? Wundha beepoonda, which is the best? Wundha
inda immemeea, how didst thou do it?
Demonstratives.—These are veiy numerous and are inflected for
number and case, and usually follow the word qualified. Space forbids
examples.
Verbs.
There is a difference in the termination of the verb for each of the
tenses, as umunge, beats now; umea, did beat; umul, will beat.
Th6re are, moreover, variations in the past and future tenses, to
express slight differences in past and future time, thus, umulganiba,
did beat this morning, etc.; umulngii, will beat to-morrow, etc. (See
conjugation hereunder.) These variations are the same in all the
persons and numbers of the tense to which they respectively apply.
Any required number and person in each tense can be shown by
using the necessary pronoun, as, uttha uinunge, I beat; uttee umunge,
we (dual) beat; nguninda umunge, we (plural) beat. It is apparent,
therefore, that each tense form remains constant throughout all its
persons and numbers.
In these respects the Yookumbill verb differs materially from the
Thoorga and kindred tongues, in which there is a distinct verbal ter-
mination for every person and number in each tense.


Some of the numerous modifications of the verb will be understood
from the following conjugation of the verb “to beat." The present
tense is given in full, but in the past and future the first person only
of the singular is taken.
Active Voice—Indicative Mood.
PRESENT tense.
( 1st
Person
I beat Umunge
uttlia
.Singular
' 2nd
Thou beatest ,,
inda
( 3rd
».
He beats ,,
numbo
Dual ...
| 1st
Person
We (incl.) beat
We (excl.) beat ,,
uttee
utteenumbo
| 2nd
9 9
You beat „
utoota
3rd
9 9
They beat ,,
numbotoota
| 1st
Person
We (inch) beat ,,
nguninda
Plural...
We (excl.) beat ,,
ngunner
1 2nd
9 •
You beat ,,
indaner
3rd
99
They beat ,,
utooldiner
PAST TENSE.
Singular / I beat just now Umea uttha
Ist | I beat this morning Umulganiba uttha
Person ( I beat some days ago Umul-byane uttha
These forms of the verb are repeated through all the persons of
the singular, dual and pl.ural. Thus, for the second person singular
we have—umea inda, umulganiba inda, umulbyane inda. For the
third person singular we use—umea numbo, umulganiba numbo,
umulbyane numbo. They can also be applied to all the persons of the
dual, and to all the persons of the plural, in the same manner, by using
the proper pronouns, which are tabulated in a previous page.
future tense.
(Singular /I will beat presently Umul uttha
Ist -< I will beat to-morrow ) TT , ,
Person \or some future time j mu n^tl u ia
And so on through all the persons and numbers.
Imperative Mood
Beat tliou Uma inda
The negative form is-
Beat tliou not Yooka uma inda
Conditional Mood.
I may beat Umulleea uttha
Middle Voice—indicative mood.
PRESENT TENSE.
I am beating myself Umungngge ufctha


PAST TENSE.
I did beat myself
Umungingiange uttha
future tense.
I will beat myself
Umunga uttha
Imperative Mood.
Beat thou thvself Umungilleea inda
There is a reciprocal form of the verb, which is necessarily restricted
to the dual and plural:
We are beating each other, Umullella uttee.
This reciprocal has also a past and a future tense.
Many other variations of verbs could be given, but this is precluded
by exigencies of space.
Adverbs.
Yo, yes; yooka, no; yooumbange, no one; nha, here; unna, there;
nunggoa, yonder; numboo, that; dhouakal, a little; moorgeer,
-quickly; boothoo, slowly; peepoon mea, well done; ngardha mea,
badly done; wanda ngea ngoora, where is my camp? wandabungga
inda munnal, where goest thou away ?
Interjections.
Ya! calling attention. Thuttea! stop! Wirro wirro! equivalent
to Oh, dear!
Numerals.
Dharrar, one; boota, two; bootagarar, three; dharara, onee;
bootagoo, twice; dhararmunnia, first; guttunnee, last; moolan moo-
lan, middle.
Prepositions have their place in the language, but conjunctions are
few and unimportant.
THOORGA VOCABULARY.
Man (collectively), Yoo'-in-
bur'- Old woman, Karn'-ga
ra-ga
Wife, Dhun'-na-ma
A man, Yoo'-in
Girl, Yan'-da^bal
Old man, Kum'-mer-a
Father, Bang
Clever man, Moo'-yoo-loo
Mother, Meeng'-a
Young man, Nhur'-ma
Elder brother, Dha'-dha-dha
Youth, Kab'-bo-goo'-bal
Younger brother, Mi-a'-ga
Small Bov, Wur'-ran
Elder Sister, Ma'-ma-dha
Woman, W'ang'-gan
Younger Sister, Mur'-nung-gan
The
Human Body.
Head, Kab'-ban
Eyebrow, Men-mir'-koon
Forehead, Goon'-doo
Eye lid. Meed-pum'-bo
Hair of head, Jou'-oor
Nose, No'-goor
Hair of beard, Yar'-rari
Nostril, Ngoor-doo-ngcor-doo
Eye, Mab'-o-ra
Jaw, Mun'-tha


Back of neck, Nung'-goor
Throat, Kam-mee
Ear, KooF-ree
Mouth, Tha'-ga
Lips, WeeP-leen
Tongue, NguFnan
Teeth, Ee'-ra
Chin, WaF-100
Chest, Bing'-al
Navel, KoF-ree
Navel string, NcoF-reech
Stomach, Bin'-dhee
Abdomen, Moo'-roo
Rump, Mun'-jee
Anus, Goon/-nee
Flank, Kung'-gul
Back, BarP-ka
Penis, Burn'-da
Erection, YooF-doo-ba-ga
Testicles, MooF-ra
Vulva, Kul'-la
Clitoris, Mee'-gurn
Hair on privates, Moo'-roo-goo-
Semen, BooF-ra
Copulation, Kon'-de-ja-lin-ba
Sexual desire, MuF-loo’-goo-dha-ga
Sun, Nou'-a, or, Bag'gorari
Moon, Thou'-a/ra
Stars generally, Jing'-gee
Sirius, Goon-je-ran
Alpha Ononis, Goomung'-a-ma
Orion's Belt, Yoo'-ih-dya
Pleiades, Wang-gaF-tee
Canopus, MiF-ree-jig-ga
Milky-way, Kur-ray'-wa
West wind,
Cold ditto, Koo-nanP-ma
East wind, Jir-rin'-jee-ring
Cold ditto, Bee^wa'-wa
South wind, Mii'-reeng'-a-ma
North wind, PaP-ya
The Pluman Body— Continued
Urine, JiP-100-ow'-ga
Venereal, Bum'-bo-ra
Excrement, Goon/-nee
Arm, KP-kan
Elbow, Dhui'Meeng
Hand, Murn'-a
Finger, WaF-doo
Finger-nail, Yoo'-100
Knee, N gooPmo
Shin, Boo'-yoo
Foot, DhurP-na
Blood Jei'-ra/-lee
Fat, By ok/-wan
Natural Surroundings.
Picture, 80-an'-yoo
Clouds, Mong'-ada.
Sky, Mir-ree 7 -war
Thunder, MeF-ree-bee
Dew, Jing'-ee-a
Mist, MooF-yan
Fog, GuF-ral
Snow, Goon'-umma
Frost, Dliug'-gatch
Hail, Dhun'-dul-la
Water, Ngad'-yoo
Sea, near, KaF-thoo
Masturbation, Kud'-da-gud'-da-ba-
Woman’s breasts, Ngab'-boo-na
Woman’s milk, Ngam'-min-ya
Shoulder, Ko'-ko
Thumb, Koddoong'-oodoo
Calf of leg, Jab'-boor
Thigh, Boorn-daF-ya
Big-toe, BiF-rargaz-yoodoo'-dh*.
Little-toe, Koo'-hee-ji-ang'-a
Pleel, T'ung-gul
Sole of foot, Dhun 7 -na-dha
Bowels, Goor-goon
Skin, Wa-dhoon-gan'-yan
Lightning, Goo-i-ang'-00-ran
Rain, Bun'-na
Sea, distant, Ngur-rou'-an.


Sparkle of Waves, Mil'-lum-ba-wa
The Ground, Koo-rat'
Mud, Nhoo-roo'-ba-ba
Stones, Boor'-ran
Sand, Ja'-jo-an
Light, Bin'-nin-gul-la
Darkness, Gil'-wa
Heat, Ngoo'-boo-lin
Coldness, Dhug'-gar
Fire, Kun'-bee
Smoke, Tur-ro'-wa
Day, Ngoo^roong'-a-roo
Night, Dhub'-boo-ra
Moming, 800-moo'-la-ga
Evening, Ee-r&bee'nee
Sunrise, Bug'-ga-ran kar-rick-
bung'-adeen
Sunset, Bug'-ga-ran ee'-rik-boo'-
yal
Food, T'hung'-a
Kangaroo, Boor'-roo
Porcupine, Kan'-na-go-badh'
Native Bear, Koor'-a-ban
Wild dog, War'-re-gal
Opossum, Koong'-ar-a
Flying-fox, Kar-a-mon'-da
Kangaroo-rat Wang-ga'-lee
Wombat, Bung-ga/-ta
Emu, Mur'-re-a
Eaglehawk, Mun'-yung-ga
Crow, Wa'-goora
Black duck, Wom-ba'-ra
Teal duck, Gooon'-bur-ra-ga
Wood duck, Koon-ar'-rook
Pelican, Kar'-oong-goo/-ba
Laughing Jackass, Koo'-goon-yS.
Native Companion, Koor'-ardhoo
White Cockatoo, Ngow'-al
Black Cockatoo, Wy'-adert
Soar gull, Ma-ran
Natural Surroundings— Continued.
Honey, GoD-ang'-gal
Hill, Bun'-gur-ree
Creek, Bud'-da
Camp, Thoo'-gan
Home, Mung'-gur-ra
Hole, G-a'-goor
Path, Bur'-doo
Mammals.
Birds.
Fish hawk, Nyir'-ra
Grass, general, Wad'-dhan
Tree, general, Boon'-bal
Bark of trees, Boon'-boon
Leaves of trees, Jir-rou'-a-ra
Wood, Gou-go'-al
Lump, Boo'-bun-dha-ga
Egg, Gou'-a-na
Shadow of a man, Moo'-ran-jan-
Shadow of a tree, Kum'-bo-ree
Echo, Bur'-re-wur'-re-gan'-yon
A sore, Kun'-ja
Flying-Squirrel, Pong'-goo
Bandicoot (short nose), Koor'-a-
goor ‘
Bandicoot (long nose), Mir'-ree-
jug-ga
Ring-tail opossum,
Native Cat, Mid'dha-goon'-ee
Wallaby, Bud-dhaMee-ma
Swan, Koon'-yoo
Pheasant, Ja'-goo-la
Bird (general), Boo'-jan
Common Magpie, Koo-rim'-ba-ga
Slate Crane, Koor-ar-ay'-ga
Plover, BinZ-ja-ring'-arring
Curlew, Kwee'-ir-wur'-wur
Quail, Boor'-boor-an
Brown hawk, Bib-bur-noong'-ga
Shag, Bir-ro'-a-ra
Cormorant, Bin-ya/-roo


Fish (general), Ma-'ra
Whale, Moo'-ree-ir-ra
Killer, Mar'-nun-na
Star-fish, Tyoong'-ga-
Guard-fish, Woor-am'-been
Guard-fish, small, Koo'-bee
Shark, Wablim-boor-a.
Great Shark, Dar'-lou-an
True Valley, Ba-ja
Porpoise, Dha'-wur-ree
Jew-fish, Ir-rim-ba'-goon
Schnapper, Bar-ra'-ran
Squire, Nar-ra'-wan
Iguana (tree), Bur-na/-ga
Iguana (water), Jer'-ra-burt
Jew Lizard, Jar-ra'-gar
Snake, general, Ka'-ree
Bee, Moor'-roorn
Locust, Kur'-lan
Centipede, Dha/-jar
Louse, Moob-a
Mountain Ash, Ngan-dhou'-ur
Lillypilly, Kul-lung'-ur-ra
Myrtle, You'-ee-a
Tree-fern, Jer-rung'-a-ra
Kurrajong, Koor-a'-man
Boo'-ar-la
Ironbark, Goorn-dae'-ra
Stringy bark, Ko'-ba
White box, Koor'-a-bar
Wattle, Bid'-dhoo-dhoo
Grasstree, Meeng'-go
Peppermint, Bur'-rum-bur-ra
Swamp Yam, Boong-üb-la
Land Yam, Goor-am'-an
Ferns, Mung'-ga
Bullrush.es, Nyoor'-goon
Fishes.
Whiting, War'-ra-boo-gan
Toad-fish, Jir-neeb-boon
Bream, Boor'-oomy-el
Black Bream, Wa'-gal
Silver Bream, Gam/-ban
Flat-head, Dhug'-gul-la
Mullet, War'-re-gul-la
Small mullet, Dyee'-bur-ra
Flat-tailed mullet, Gar'-ree-ba
Salmon, Bur-re-go-an
Eel, Bur'-ra
Stingaree, Gwee'-a-la
Reptiles.
Turtle, Bib-le-ma
Big Frog, Koor'-gaty
Insects.
Common fly, Na'-ka
Spider, Mur'-rar
M osqu ito, Nay '-1 00-goo
Bull-dog Ant, Kur'-roor
Trees.
Red gum, Ya'-la
River oak, Oom'-bul-wur-ra
Forest oak, Bib-la
Cherry tree, Ma-ma/-ja
Jeebung, Bub-bud'-dhal
Cabbage tree, Dhur-rou'-a
Blood wood, Goor'-gool
Spotted gum, Dhur-ra'-nee
Honeysuckle, Ba'-birr
A squeaking-tree, Mou'-a-rutch
Plants.
Cutting grass, Nyee'-reen
Reeds, Kum-bae'-ra
Burrawang, Bung-gnu'
Nut of burrawang, Ib'-bur
Death-adder, Boo'-boo-goor'-ning
Sleeping Lizard, Bir'-reen
Swamp Mahogany, Mud-dhou'


Spear, hunting, Bir-ree'-wa
Spear, plain, Jar'-ram-ba-dhee
Spear, jagged, Kam'-ma
Fish Spear, Garrou'-at
Shield for Boomerangs.Mil'-le-dhoo
Shield for Spears, Bim-by'-a
Club, Boon'-dhee
Spear thrower, Wom'-ur
Boomerang, War-rang'-an
Tomahawk, Moon'-doo-ba
Fighting hook, Bud'-dharwul
Stick to throw, Ja-jur'-na
Alive, Mur'-ro-wan
Dead, Warral
Large, Biiraga
Small, Koo-bid'-ya
Long, Yar'-ung-am
Short, Bar'-la
Good, Jum'-ug'ga
Bad, Gar-neen'-a
Hungry, Ee^thal-a-ma'-ga
Thirsty, Ka-boot-ban-dhan'-ing-a
Distant, War'-ree-gam-ban
Near, Nyoo'-neel
Red, Mun'-ya-mun'-ya
Grey, Wur'ree
White, Wur'-ra-wur'-ra
Black, Bur-ou'-ra.
Full, Thood'-bun-dhool
Empty, Kar'-ra-gul-lum-bee'-wan
Quick, Goo-rou'-goo-ra
Slow, Gur'-rargaty
Blind, Med'-bo-ah
Jealous, Ngoon'-a-roong-oor'-a-ga
Flat, Bil'-wur
Round, Boo'-bun-dhan
Sick, Gun'-ja-ma'-ga
Lame, Nun'nung-gar'-a-ga
Deaf, Warrag'-a--dhan
Strong, Bul'-wul
Weak, Gul-la'-bo-an
Heavy, Moon/-door
Weapons, Etc
Koolamin, Bun'-gul-lee
Fishing-line, Wa-rou'-ur-ra
Fish hook, Thoo'-la
Net bag, Mud'-boo
Yamstick, Ga'-ga
Canoe, Kur'-ree-ja
Lining of Canoe, In'-nul
Paddle, Wa'-ree
ang'-ah
Adjectives.
Light, Bir-ree'bir-ra
Afraid, Goo'-roo-ba-ga
Sweet, Jeen-ga
Angry, Ja-joo-la'-ran
Right, Yag-goon'-a-dha
Wrong, Gur'-na-mun'-ya
Straight, Ngoo'-rum-ban
Crooked, Gang'-gool-wur'-ra
Tired, Eed-bool'-arga
Greedy, Ka'-roo-dhan
Silent, Jan-bub'-boor
Stupid, Wa rn'-boor
Ripe, Wa'-nhal
Blunt, Mqor'-doo-boo-ra
Sharp (edge), Jar'-ra-ran
Sharp (point), Nya'-garn
Fat man, Byoo'-wan-gee
Lean man, Yab'-bin-gee
Hot, Now'-an-ma-ka
Cold, Koo'-yoo-doo
Dirty (as water), Burl'-gun
Glad, Ir'-ring-ga-ga
Sorry, Goor'-ngam-ba-ga
Deep, Ka'-goor
Shallow, Dhoon-bun'-yil
Ribs of Canoe, Kur-bung'-a-ma
C'hild’s play canoe, Dha'-le-gir
Stone or Shell Knife, Kur'-rang-
Courageous, Goo'-roo-ba-ngam-ba-
ga
Clear (sparkling),
dha


Live, Mur'-rooa-ga
Die, Moo'-boo-ral
Eat, Thun'-na-ma-ga
Drink, Ngoon'-dhoo-loong-a
Sleep, Dhur'-ree-ga
Sir, My'-ee-ga
Go, Wab-boo~boo-ee
Tell, Ja'-ma-ga
Speak, You'-a-ga
Walk, Yan'-na-ga
Run, Wal'-le-a-ga
Bring, Mur'-ran-di-ga
Take, Wab'-bun-di-ga
Lift, Kur'-reebbar
Carry, E-lee-mao-'-dhan-yal-lun
Make, Yab'-bunrja-ga
Break, Gam-bool'-arjal-la-ga
Strike, By'-eel-la-gug'-ga
Fight, Kam/-barja.l-la-ga
Fall, Goong'-o-ba-leen
Observe, Thoom-ba'-ma-la-ga
Hear, Ngar'-ra^lug-ga
Know, Nan'-noo-ma-ga
T'liink, Boon'-jel-a-ga
Grow, Dhoo'-re-ga
Give, Ngoo-ma'-la-ga
Like (love), Ngoom'-boo-dha-ga
Sing, Yang'-gal-la-ga
Weep, Nyoong-go-a'-ga
Cook (as food), Kan'-na-moo-ga
M arry, Yoo'-n i n-j ad oong'-ul-l a
Sneeze, Jir-ngam'-ba-ga
Cough, Gud'-da-ba-ga
Steal, Kar-rang'-a-lee
Bum, Gun'-na-moor
Ask, Kun-ny'-armoo-ga
Barter, Ngoo'-man-ja-long
Bind, Na'-ra-ga
Bite, Bud'-dhoon-e>-ga
Blow, hit, By'-eeJug-ga
810w 1 , with the mouth, Boom*ba / -
larga.
Build, Jin'-ya-moo^ga
Verbs.
Catch, Nun'-ba-ja-ga
Climb, KuF-la-wal-ga
Cover, Bur'-ree-moor
Cry, Nyoong'-go-an
Cut, Thur'-gan-jar
Die, Moo'-booral
Drop (from the hand), Ngar'-ram-
bil-lil
Drop (as rain), Ngurl'-wan
Fear, Goo'-roo-goon-dha-ga
Feed, Dhun'-na-ma-ga
Fly, Yar'-rat-ba-ga
Hang up, Dhang'-gar-moor
Hear, Ngar'-ra-ga
Hold, Gar-gang'-ar
Jump, War'-da-ga-ga
Keep, Yoo'-na-ga
Kick, Boor'-doo-100-ga
Kiss, Noom'-boo-lug-ga
Laugh, Ngad'-jee-lee-ga
Learn, Kan'-nan-dhimZ-mee-100-ga
Leave off, Wun'-nar-ran
Scratch, Wam'-an-jal'-le-ga
Let go, War'-nud-dha
Loss, Dhoon-boong'-a-lug-ga
Perspire, Bug'-ga-ra-ma'-ning-ga
Pinch, Nyeen-mooP-la-ga
Plunder, Kar-rang'-al-larga
Praise, Jum'-ma-gang'-oor
Be quiet," Jar-room'-boor
Rejoice, YeP-la-ga-ga
Remember, Boon'ja'-ga
Forget, Wi'-an-dha-ga
Rend, Kar'-deer-a-ga
Return, Wal'-lim-by'-a-w an
Rise, Been'-dar-ga
See, Nyul'-lag-ga
Search for, War-dal'-100-wul'-ga
Send, Yoo'-ree-al'-00-gco
Shake, Boor-un-gal-la-ga
Shine, MilMum-bub-ban'
Fri ghten, Go o'-ra-bu n-ya-rae '-moo
ga


V erbs — Continued.
Spread, Yar-ra-ran-jart
Stand, Dhar'-ree-ga
Sm k, Ngoon-dhoob-leen
Swim, Yang'-an
Talk, Ya'-woo-ga
Taste, Garb-un-dhoo-ga
Touch,
Turn away, Ga-rang'-a-lir
Twist, Koo-ii Y-moor
Wash, 800/-100-moo-ga
Rub, Wab-bun-jab-la-ga
Spit, Joo ; -joo-ba-ga
Smell, Mir-ra gou' a-ga
Throw, Bin'gou'-00-ga
Pretend, Bur'-nang
Hunt, Kur 7 rum-bad oo'-ga
Paint (one's self), Mib-ling'ba-100
Adverbs.
Yes, Nga'way
No, Thug-guy'-il
Here, Ny-eeh
There, close by, Nyun'na-dha
There, a little way, Jeen'-a-boora-a
There, farther away, Jeen-ab-ee
bur-ra
Yonder, Jin'-na-dha
Distant, War 7 -reego on-da
Near, Mub'-boom-bah, and nyun'-
il
Where? Wud'-dha
Why? Mub-lee
Late, Ka'-reen
To-day, Nhou'-i
Yesterday Boo'-gee-a
Tomorrow, 800 ra'-ja
Day after that, Yar'-ra-der-ou'-al
Day after to-morrow, Boora'-ja-
wab-lin
Once only, Mir'-dhan-dhaZ-ga
How? Yook'-a
When? Werib-doong
Now, Jab-100
By-and-bye, Bub-la-boo
Hereafter, Bub-la-bo-goo'-dha
Long ago', Yer'-ra-der-o-al
Front, Bin'-dyee-oorb-ya
Behind, Bur-gi-dha
Outside, Dhb-a-nud-dha
Middle, Doo/-la-yin
Right hand side, Dhoor-gb-an-dhee
Left hand side, Wad'-bur-ray'-an
Enough, G-oon-ja
Over, across, Burd-Wga
OUTRIDGE PRINTING Co., Brisbane.


*
.




