

(foni|rcgatioi|iil Union §5 jftbsion of Oidoi;ia +
THE BATTLE OF FAITH
IN THE
IlineteentJj ©eutmnj.
THE INAUGURAL ADDRESS
Of the Congregational Union and Mission of \ ictoria,
Delivered in the Collins Street Independent Church,
on Tuesday Evening, October qth, 1888,




Congregational Union anb HUssion of Victoria.
CHAIRMAN’S ADDRESS.
Honoured Fathers and Brethren,
You will allow me at the outset of my Address to express
the deep sense which I entertain of the honour you have placed
upon me in calling me to occupy this chair upon an occasion which
is so memorable in the history of our Churches. lam deeply
conscious of the fact, that I represent to-day much more than
the merely personal relation which leads to the election of your
annual chairman. One so recently come amongst you might
well expect to wait longer before he was summoned by the
suffrages of a free assembly to the position of its president.
And when, as this year, so much of historic interest gathers
about our meetings, ought we not to have chosen a chairman
from among those brethren who have served you in the ministry
of the Church, for many years 1 But you have placed me in
this office as pastor of the mother church of the colony, and I
therefore lay the honour which you have given me at the feet
of that community in which God has made me minister and
bishop—a church which, established almost at the beginning of
the life of this State, has grown with its growth, and. after
some years of union with yourselves as a body of churches, is
now second to none in loyalty to our Union and devotion to
the best interests of our fellowship. I greet you, therefore, not
only with the respect which I owe to my brethren, but also with
the Christian welcome which this Church extends to you as you
are now assembled in this its place of worship.
But the interest of the occasion which brings us together is
heightened by circumstances belonging especially to this year.
It is a notable year in the historj" of our nation. We had
scarcely ceased to listen to the echoes of the loyal acclamation
with which we greeted the Jubilee of our Queen, when we
again lifted our voices at the Centennial of the settlement of
the English people upon this continent. A hundred years ago
the British flag was flung out over the first occupation of
Australia in the name of Great Britain. And while, as was
fitting, the public celebration of this event was held in the
oldest colony, in that fair city which sits enthroned above the
beautiful waters of her harbour, it has been left to this younger
city—Queen of the Southern World—to mark the completion
of our first century, by assembling the skill and industry of the


nations in our Exhibition. Not many months have passed
since there went down our streets a noble procession of the
representatives of the world, and there was gathered in our
Exhibition Building such a display of rank and wealth, learning
and civilisation, and honoured toil, as might have graced the
mightiest capital of the old world.
Into the midst of these significant circumstances the cele-
bration of the J übilee of Victorian Congregationalism enters
with a particularity of interest to us which not even the
wider occasions of the time can equal. For half a century
the worship of God, according to our faith and order, has been
maintained with unbroken course, and ever-widening power.
It was a happy thought which suggested that the best mode of
celebrating the Jubilee would be the removal of all the debts
of the Churches, and the successful issue of that endeavour,
which will be reported to you in the course of the meetings,
will be indeed a crown of rejoicing for all who have shared in
the labours of the last few years.
To join with us in our thanksgiving to God for the blessing
which He has poured out upon Victorian Congregationalism,
there have come to this place not only the members of our
Union, but representatives of our sister Churches throughout
the world. We greet you all ! Brethren who have laboured
among the heathen, and have seen the power of Christ to
change and save, to civilize and sanctify the idolator and the
savage, we welcome you! All these southern colonies have sent
us their delegates. From the mother state, of which once our
own was a part, and which now with the honour of her greater
age, and perhaps more staid and sober dignity, yet allows our
younger nation to be a friendly rival—an affectionate sister—to
be ever drawn nearer to her by ties of commerce and custom,
literature and religion, you have come to unite with us in praise
and conference. Brethren, we welcome you ! From that sunny
land of South Australia, with her beautiful capital lying so fair
and broad between the ocean and the hill, you have come to
our assembly. Brethren, we welcome you! From Queensland,
rich in promise, gathering the treasures of all climes, oniy
waiting for the growing energies of the people to develop the
resources of its broad territory into the wealth of a mighty
empire, you have journeyed far to share in our rejoicings.
Brethren, we welcome you ! From Western Australia, whose
slender population, with large acreage and expectant hope,
surveys the vast reaches of a land which seems to await the
tides of emigration that must some day flow to the making of
a mighty stale, you have come to us. Brethren, we welcome


you! We welcome you who are here from that New Britain
of the southern world—that land of beauty and of wonder,
lifting its Alpine heights into the clear azure of the heaven, and
gathering the waters of the ocean into its fiords of awful
majesty—the Switzerland and Norway of these Austral climes ;
and you who bring the quiet beauty and the sober gentleness
of that green island which hangs from our continent like some
pendant jewel on the bosom of the sea. If not in person, in
spirit they also are with us, and in their words of greeting,
who have kept unbroken the faith and liberty which were
planted upon Plymouth Rock, and with blood of the Pilgrim
Fathers in their veins, have taught the doctrine of the Pilgrim
Fathers to a new world, and there have builded by the brain
and heart and hand of New England’s children, the mighty
Republic of the West. And what shall be our words to you,
brethren, from the dearest land of all—land of all lands—that
sea girt isle, mother of kings, of statesmen, of poets whose
speech so strong, so tender, is the master speech of man ;
mother of common men and women greater than kings or
statesmen or poets, who have filled the earth with labour and
with life, with law and liberty ; that land which has taught
men how they may rule themselves; whose people great in war,
are greater still in peace ; that mother of nations still herself
greatest of all her daughters ; that England, that Britain—
HOME —still Home for all who speak the English speech, and
Home for us. Brethren, you bring us the old memories, the
scenes of childhood, the august treasures of the past gathered
in castle, abbey, college, church ; you bring us the roar of
London’s life, the press of industry of the mighty North, the
scent of summer hedgerow, the grip of winter’s frost; and better
still, the life, the thought, the truth, which to gain and keep,
our fathers toiled, fought, and died. We salute in you the
glory of our England’s past, the faith, the hope which still
illume a world. Yes, brethren all, we welcome you !
And will any man dare to mock at our conviction that eyes
which have opened on the splendours of the unseen world are
looking upon our gathering, and hearts which have been raised
to the pulsations of Heaven, fill with affections which immor-
tality only exalts and purifies, and the brethren who have entered
into rest are with us in spirit to-day ? It has been assigned
to another to tell the story of our Victorian Churches, or I
might recall a noble array of names of men, who both in the
ministry and in lay service, did great things for Christ.
This pulpit has been occupied by a succession of godly men,
each of whom in his own fashion, and not one of them feebly,


served his generation, and fell on sleep. Waterlield anil
Morison, and Fraser, Henderson and Jones, Hebditch and
Hamer make an apostolic succession of unbroken character
and ceaseless witness, of which, upheld as they were by many
a godly man, to whose memory with theirs, we pay this tribute
of our esteem, any Church might be justly proud. With what
interest and earnestness did not the last two look forward to this
day of rejoicing. To my honoured predecessor, our Jubilee move-
ment owed much of its first suggestion and inspiration, and think
you that they are now indifferent to the crowning glory of this
hour? We celebrate to-day our Jubilee so joyously because
those men of God laboured so well, and they with us rejoice,
and find that Heaven’s duties exclude not the more perfect
understanding of the histories of earth. We invoke not the
saints, but we hold communion with the saints, while they
and we alike are in the presence of the Lord of Heaven and
Master of His Church. So, in the silence of our loving hearts,
we greet the immortal ones. They, too, are with us.
But let no man suppose that Congregational Churches; when
they assemble thus, have no eye, no heart, no hand for the
sister churches of Catholic Christendom. Congregationalism
stands four-square and open to all the winds of heaven. We
have distinctive principles, but we are not Congregationalists
first, but Christians ; and in ‘that spirit we look forth to-day
upon all the Churches of the Lord. Those who, in a freedom
not altogether unlike our own, have wrought the Master’s
work, and kept with us a fellowship, which is declared by
preacher’s place and the Lord’s Table open in occasional inter-
change of service and communion, and whose labours have
joined our own in the building up of the moral and spiritual
life of the new seats of British Empire, and the extension of
the rule of Christ. We greet these sister churches, and wish
them God speed as they work side by side with us. We have
no rivalries of sect and pride and narrow exclusiveness. We
only claim the spiritual freedom of our Churches, and at times
may learn a lesson from the closer phalanx—the more serried
ranks of our brethren's order—while perhaps we are not
unwilling to see that they are gathering something of our free-
dom and democratic spirit into the life of their more organised
systems. We look also with Christian fraternity towards those
more historic and hierarchic Churches, who, perhaps, mav
condemn our liberty, and even refuse to regard the validitv of
our Church claims. But they are Christians; so are we. It
is not ours, it is not theirs to pronounce the final verdict upon
the Church. That is the Master’s, and we await His sentence,


and meanwhile assert our liberty, but also our recognition of
theirs, and even go beyond to see the Christian brotherhood
in him who may deny it to ourselves. We are mindful of
what those Churches have given us of life, and service, of
martyrdom and witness, of holy hymn and noble thoughts in
noble speech. We draw to-day from founts of sentiment and
spiritual inspiration which lie within their pale, but whose
streams, thank God, can flow far beyond the bounds with
which they would enclose them, and refresh the open land of
liberty wherein we rejoice. We greet then, Christendom, and
with head uncovered, and the bended knee before the God
and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, we offer the hand of
fellowship to whomsoever will take it and return the brother’s
greeting.
Great and significant is the celebration which we keep. For
it happens that not only does the period nearly coincide with
the Jubilee of the Monarch, and the Centennial of Australia,
but other dates of signal meaning are called up to our memory
when we speak of 1888. Three hundred years ago a mighty
fleet set out from Spain. Its destination was the English
shore. Spain was the imperial power of that age. She had
chosen as her role the defence of temporal and spiritual
tyranny. England was her strongest foe upon the sea. Whether
consciously of intention, or whether by Divinest Providence,
our nation chose the path that led to freedom. If then the
might of Emperor and of Pope were to be assured, England
must be vanquished ; and to this end the Spanish admiral sailed
out of Lisbon with the fleet invincible. Lord Howard of
Effingham was Lord High Admiral, and Drake and Hawkins
and Frobisher were under him—the greatest sailors of their
time. Every English lad knows the story—the long-continued
fighting up the channel, the final rout of the Spanish fleet, its
disastrous flight by the North Sea, and the shameful return of
its broken armament—a remnant of its pride and glory, to the
Spanish port. But England and Protestantism, Europe and
liberty, were saved ; and we are the children of the men who
fought for that great saving, and we still carry that flag
unstained.
Two hundred years ago, James 11. departed from England,
and thus virtually closed for that country the great controversy
of liberty. What the nation had sought to gain by the long
struggle with the Stuarts, was at last attained, and the
determination reached that, for Britain at least, no king could
be a tyrant, but must reign the constitutional monarch of a
free people. The memory of the revolution of 1688, may


easily l>e narrowed to the purposes of sectarian bitterness and
party hate, but we to-day cannot forget the deeper significance
of that event which was little more than the inevitable conse-
quence and the close of that earlier assertion of a nation’s
liberty, by those who were our fathers, and whose principles
we inherit and maintain.
One hundred years ago, a company of Englishmen landed
upon this continent and set up the beginning of the British
rule, an event rendered portentous by the remarkable advance
of the communities settled here, so full of the power and
promise of the nation that is to be, and because of the con-
ditions and circumstances of life and thought at that period,
all tliQ more fateful for the character of this nation’s history.
It would be affectation for us to ignore the mighty events
which about a century ago convulsed the world, and made
absolute the rule and progress of freedom among mankind.
The French Revolution startled and shocked men by the
excesses to which a frenzied people could be driven by centuries
of injustice and wrong, but we may be sure that the liberty
which was secured when the Armada was broken, and when
the Second James fled from his country a dishonoured and
discrowned monarch, was only made still more certain for
universal man, and it was not without its significance that this
land found its beginning though with the clank of fetters yet
into the age of human liberty. Many great epochs are
celebrated this year, all of them stages in the march of
humanity. It is becoming that we too, who among the
spiritual communities have always claimed our right to
freedom, should celebrate our Jubilee in the midst of these
memorials of liberty.
Buf great and important as are all the considerations which
these thoughts suggest, they are hardly the topics upon
which the Chairman of the Union of Churches desires
particularly to dwell. For there are certain characteristics
of the period through which we have passed which more
specially compel the attention of the thoughtful Christian.
The last fifty years have been very notably a time of conflict.
The quickening of the human intellect, and the wider range of
study presented to inquiry, with the peculiar spirit produced
by the enormous advances of physical science, have all tended to
bring every subject of human interest under the most careful
observation, the most relentless criticism. A new method, or
at least a new tone of inquiry, a historical criticism which
knew no reverence for age or vested rights of traditionary
belief, a democratic sense of equality which subjected all claims


to investigation and to the judgment of the individual—have
fallen upon Christian doctrine and practice, the creeds and
Churches with a peculiar vehemence, and we have lived through
a period of most emphatic contention. The material and bodily
conflicts of earlier ages have been more severe, more bitter ; but
it is doubtful whether the Battle of Faith has ever been harder,
demanding more courage, more alertness, more watchfulness,
than in our own half-century. Perhaps at the present time
there are signs of a temporary cessation. Men are inclined to
pause awhile. There scarcely seems so keen a passion for the
fray ; notable concessions have been made on all sides, and it
seems, therefore, a suitable opportunity for considering our
position; for asking the question, what has been the fortune ot
of the war 1 Can we number our slain 1 Can we bury our
dead 1 Perhaps even, can we re-adjust our boundaries, and for
a while at least, live in peace—armed it may be, yet peace.
In a word, are we any longer Christians 1 to repeat the question
of the great critic. If we are Christians at all, what sort ot
Christians are we 1 What is the Christianity which we still
can claim 1 Indeed, have we a religion at all ? Can an
intelligent and reasonable man have any object of faith ? Does
the controversy leave anything to reason, or must faith find
refuge either in authority which tramples down all reason, or
in superstition which ignores it ?
One important branch of the modern controversy has been
that which we may designate the philosophical. We might
entitle it the theological, but that term may properly cover
the whole inquiry. We mean by the philosophy involved in
the discussion, that transcendent question as to the sufficiency
of the purely material conclusions of physical science to explain
not only the condition of the universe, but its origin and
control.
I need hardly enter the caution against supposing that I
charge science with being necessarily matei'ialistic ; or that
there is an essential and eternal separation between the
conclusions of the physical inquirer and his spirit, and the
convictions of the worshipper of God—the religious temper
which marks him. No one will doubt the reverent character
of many of the leaders of the modern scientific world ; and it
seems to me that their devotedness, their love of truth, their
awe in the presence of the mysteries and the revelations of
their pursuit, oftentimes set an example to men of professedly
religious character, even for the exercises of their faith. But it
cannot be denied that the tendency of what we may call the
metaphysics of modern science, especially as exhibited in


some of its votaries, is not harmonious with the belief in a
personal God, and with even the more general doctrines of
Christianity. To affirm for example that in matter and
motion are to be found the explanation of all the phenomena
of the universe, that the facts of consciousness and the strivings
of the will are wholly included within the things that can be
measured and weighed, that God is the evolution of man’s
thought, and duty the custom of hereditary ages, and thought
the result of the play of the atoms of organised matter—these
statements, if they be true, must settle all religion, all morals
for ever. In such a universe, there cannot be a God. Revela-
tion is an impossibility, and Christianity a mere story of
human credulity and mistake.
In the first place, then, has the controversy of the past
generation resulted in the acceptance of a
materialism, as the complete expression of the facts of the
universe. That the researches of science have established
the reign of law, I presume we shall all readily concede.
That the investigations of the phenomena, alike of the vaster
spheres of activity and the microscopic world, have determined
the universal presence of similar elements whose laws of com-
bination have been most clearly demonstrated, everyone will
allow. But that any of these observations, or the speculations
founded upon them have made it certain that there is nothing
ixa the world but atoms and their motion, is one of those
tremendous assumptions which can only be accepted by the
mind that is impressed by reiterated and strong affirmation.
The bridge which is to cross the gulf between matter and
mind is not nearer building by a single stone than in the first
speculations of nascent Greek philosophy, than in the finest
wire-drawing of mediaeval scholasticism. The atom has been
a very protean object of thought in the mind of the scientific
transcendentalist, and the force with which he so skilfully
conjures has borrowed many an assumption from the region of
the mental phenomena which he so strenuously denies. Hence
the confessions of the leading speculative writers who have
seemed to argue upon the materialistic side. They acknowledge
the boundary of the unknown which they may not pass—that
is, may not pass if they have no power of advance other than
those which the material atom and the physical force will give
them. The ablest thinkers acknowledge that it is impossible to
express in terms of matter and motion the simplest product of
mental activity. There can be no equation of the symbols of
chemical or physiological change which exhibit the operation
of the brain substance, and the symbols of subjective and ideal


action, which express the mental movements. The involuntary
employment of language which invests matter with all the
powers of mind, is nowhere more copiously illustrated than in
the language of modern material science. “Law,” and “potency,”
and “tendency,” “selection,” “adaptation,” “in order that,” and
“ plan, are all phrases borrowed from the dictionary of thought
and will. “ The promise and potency of all terrestrial life ”is
trange eloquence on the lips of him who would find everything
in the material atom and its motion. It is not to be wondered
at, therefore, if, as the result of much expenditure of words alike
in breath and ink, there has emerged more clearly than ever
the conviction that law, as revealed by the universe, is the
manifestation of mind ; and that power, wherever it can be
felt, is the ceaseless energy of will. Whatever may be the
issue of the world-enduring controversy of mind and matter,
the original facts of consciousness, which are thought and
will in the being who observes them, have not suffered
hitherto in the strife.
The discussion as it bears upon the nature of man himself,
forms part of the more general controversy which I have thus
briefly reviewed. Mental philosophy has of late years largely
concerned itself with the phenomena of physiology as they are
to be discovered in the brain and nervous system. The
researches of psychologists in England, France, and Germany,
combined with the labours of physiologists, have furnished us
with abundant knowledge of the structure and operations of
man’s nervotxs system ; but it is yet to be shown that the most
intricate investigation of the merely physical forms and
functions have thrown a single gleam of light upon the nature
of consciousness or the law of mind. That brain can be injured,
and that man’s mental states are affected thereby, or more
accurately, the manifestation of those states by bodily expres-
sion, has been the commonplace of human experience long-
before the science of physiology dawned. Speculations and
experiments as to the duration of nerve-currents and the time
taken for sensation to be recorded, and the various other
interesting and curious results of modern phychology have
undoubtedly furnished most pleasing exhibitions to the scien-
tific observer or to his wondering audience. But the supreme
utterance of man when he declares his existence, and his
consciousness of it, and the relation of this consciousness to his
bodily structure, has not come a step nearer solution than when
first men looked inward and obeyed the command of the oracle
to know themselves. Pascal’s words—“ Man is to himself the
mightiest product of nature, for he is unable to conceive what


is body, still less wliat is mind ; but least of all is he able to
conceive how a body can be united to a mind, yet this is his
proper being • ” are only re-echoed by Professor Huxley, “if
anyone says that consciousness cannot exist except in the
relation of cause and effect, with certain organic molecules, I
must ask how he knows that; and if he says that it can, I must
put the same question.” We are no nearer the solution than
we were. But of this, at least, we may say the modern
controversy has made us certain—whatever we are, we are
more than brain, however subtle and complex may be the
organisation, and when the physiologist has said his last word,
the psychologist only begins his work, and the moralist must
pursue his study of human conduct and character in respect
of a being who stands in a sphere separate and beyond that
where play the forces of matter, and act and re-act the infinite
atoms of which that matter is composed.
Upon no part of human belief has the controversy beaten
with greater force than the faith in a personal God; and we
may well inquire whether the result of modern speculation can
be fairly and justly held to make it an irrational thing to still
affirm, with the first member of the Apostle’s Creed, that “I
believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and
earth,”
The speculations of the elder Darwin, Lamarck, and Cuvier
had not greatly affected the belief in the presence and power of
a Supreme Being, Creator and Upholder of all things, both seen
and unseen, and natural theology, as it was called, flourished
in a sort of gentle unobtrusive way, proving a pleasant mode of
union between the definitely religious persons on the one hand,
and the inclined on the other. Paley was an
authority. The Bridgewater Treatises were recognised as
valuable contributions to both religion and science. Geology
was held to confirm Genesis, and the marks of design, with
special ends, were pointed out with much satisfaction, now by
the religious teacher, and again by the scientific lecturer. But
in the fifth decade of the century appeared that anonymous
work, The Vestiges of Creation. It re-asserted in popular
language the doctrine of Lamarck concerning the changes in
species which were to be observed in nature, and referred them
to physical causes, rejecting the aid of specific creative acts in
their production It endeavoured to maintain the unity of
method in the organic and the inorganic worlds. It made the
reader familiar with the doctrine of transmutation, and
undoubtedly prepared the way for the reception of the great
and scientific work of Mr. Darwin.


Fifteen years after the appearance of the Vestiges, Darwin
published his Origin of Species. And the labours of that great
writer, together with those of Mr. Spencer, Professor Huxley,
Professor Tyndale, and the vast majority of scientific investi-
gators, both in our own language and in foreign tongues, are so
familiar that I need not refer to any of them in detail, except
to call attention to the fact that what had been hitherto almost
a discredited theory, occasionally referred to by a few writers,
came to be the common doctrine of universal science. The
creed of Catholic Philosophy was Development; and the entire
relation of human thought to the facts of the Universe may be
said to have been wholly inter-penetrated by the law, as it has
now been almost universally declared to be, of the progress and
history of the world. Whether Evolution, under whatever
formula it may be affirmed, is to be considered as the last word
of science in respect of the progress of the universe, I am not
now concerned to discuss. We can accept it as if it were a
proved law, for the peculiar merits of the theory itself does not
affect the point of view from which we regard it.
The relation of this theory to the belief in a personal God,
was very soon held by some of its supporters to be destructive,
an opinion in which religious people also for the most part
agreed. The few cautious and patient voices which counselled
moderation on both sides, were drowned in the uproar of the
controversy. Men ill taught on all topics, naturally, on either
side, shouted their crude opinions with a vehemence inversely
commensurate to their knowledge, while those who may have
been expert in their oavii spheres, rushed into the subject Avith
Avhich they were little familiar, and dealt in methods of thought
and reasoning for which they were wholly unprepared. But, as
we have said, there is some pause in the conflict. The dust is a
little subsiding, and the smoke clears away. Let us look round
us and see what has been the destruction, Avhat the issue.
When Evolution was first of all advanced, it was greeted as
if it were in itself a power or agency. It Avas Avritten with a
capital letter. It took the figure of personification, and Avas
conducted round the sphere of being with the reverence due to
such a mighty and all-compelling power. But Avhat is evolution,
or development, or selection, or adaptation, or any other of the
terms which have groAvn familiar as household words 1 They
are in the first place, names—brief signs which represent
statements, records of facts, or series of events, or observations,
and beyond this, no man by any force of reason or cunning
sleight of word can even drive them —they are conceptions of
the human mind. They have no existence as things or agents


or powers per se. Immediately that we interrogate them, they
fly to the recesses of human thought and hide beneath a
jungle of philosophical speculation, a wild tangle of the growth
of speech. When a man says that a species is produced by
development, or by the law of natural selection, that the entire
order of the world is the result of the process (that is the going
forward) of development or the changing homogeneity of simpler
combinations into the heterogeneity of more complex organisa-
tions, he is simply describing his conception of what has taken
place in the universe. He does not answer the question whence >
or 7vhu, but only the question how; and this at least has become
more or less clear, that the grand postulate of a Creative Being,
a Will which is the fundamental, or central, or all insphering
element of the universe is not so much as touched by the
controversy which Robert Chambers opened by the Vestiges oj
Creation, and Darwin made most pronounced by his great and
monumental labours.
It is hardly necessary to remind you of the position which
Darwin himself took upon this question. Whether he believed
that his theory was an adequate account of all variation
or not, it is certain that he did not set it forth as explaining
the origins of life. Here he was compelled to stop, or if he
suggested an explanation, it was that upon which thoughtful
minds of all ages have fallen back as the only adequate
explanation of the universe—God. There must have been
some power to start the first primordial germs upon their
wonderful way, The breath of life must have been breathed
into them, and the famous passage, brief though it is, lies
for e\er upon the page of his book a rebuke to his fanatic
followers, and the ever abiding acknowledgment that if his
theory be indeed the law of the world, it is that only as
that point at which the intelligence and will of man find their
equivalents, their reflection, surely their necessary origin in
the intelligence and will of Him who created all things and
filled them with His power.
That the doctrine of development has had a tremendous
influence even over the specifically Christian thought of the
time, every one must allow. Its application to history, to
criticism, to the progress of the Church, to the growth of
doctrine, to the onward march even of the individual believer
himself, may be seen in every book published, and heard in
every sermon preached. The fact is, development is not a
new theory by any means ; but its statement and illustration
were so apposite and far reaching in the hands of its great
modern expounder, that it seemed to furnish a key which


fitted into the complicated wards of human thought and
speculation in all directions. It certainly proved a powerful
agent in philosophic classification and unification. It enabled
the mind to grasp in one formula, the many differing spheres
of natural science, history, morals, politics, and theology, and
has assuredly not lessened, but probably, greatly increased the
interest felt by all quickened and inquiring minds in the great
questions which are involved in the relation of God to man.
The age may be sceptical, but it is not the scepticism of the
eighteenth century. It asks Pilate’s question, but not in
Pilate’s tone. Even if human culture be not won over to the
creed of the Church, it has at least been penetrated by a
spirit which makes it far more sympathetic with those ideas
with which the Church is familiar ; and even though symbolic
Christianity may have to acknowledge some losses, the gain in
the more reverent, the more religious spirit of the age, has
been sufficient to far overpay that loss.
The unity which philosophy ever seeks has been remarkably
illustrated by the investigations of modern science. That law
of evolution which presents a single conception of the many
processes of life has been accompanied by similar generalisations
in the different branches of natural science, all tending to the
unity which is the ultimate goal of philosophy. The “corre-
lation of the physical forces,” is one of the familiar phrases of
the day. The conceptions of the varied forces as being merely
manifestations of one original force is now a scientific
common-place. Laws of chemical affinity and equivalence suggest
the reduction of the elements to one universal element, the
different arithmetical relations of whose atoms form the
substances which as yet have resisted all analysis. But that
which the fire and the test tube cannot effect, the imagination
may feign, and the final conception of the world as matter plus
force is a generalisation to which the patient investigator of
science has brought the human mind.
But when we consider this speculation as it is related to the
transcendental metaphysics of religion, we cannot but recognise
that the movement towards the unity of the universe is only a
movement towards God. We may not be satisfied with the
creed of the scientist; but what is that reverence which comes
over him as he approaches the confines of his world of sight
and measure, space and time. He speaks with hushed voice,
and walks with foot unsandaled. Why should there be the
sense of awe, if there do not lie beyond these limits of the
visible the manifestations of that Being who is at least greater,
more worthy, in those attributes to which the qualities of our


own nature bear witness. We do not bow to bigness, we
acknowledge only the greater worthiness of the higher. It is
intelligent will, it is moral duty which compel our allegiance ;
and if the universe as it seems to unlock its secret, and yet at
that very moment seals it from our expectant all-eager gaze, fills
us, at the same time, with the reverence which we feel only
for the things of highest worth, is it strange that many and
these not the least masters of physical science itself, have
believed that the One and Universal Power to Whose presence
the world bears witness, and the signs of Whose presence all
things are proved to be, is that intelligent moral Will whom we
call God, and whom we acknowledge The Eternal Father of All.
For this is the gain of the controversy. Let us grant that
many a cosmological and cosmogonical theory of the past,
which has been clothed around with all the sanctity of
traditional faith, and made even very dear to the hearts of
men by reason of its relation to all that has been most valuable
to themselves and useful to the generations which preceded
them, has been blown to the winds by the new doctrines of
modern science. Let us have leave if we please to laugh the
old notion of the Infinite Watchmaker out of court, and even to
modify greatly our conceptions of design, and special ends, and
intended adaptations ; if you like, for the moment, we will grant
that our idea of miracle must be given up, or at least so
modified as to almost re-construct it; is it no real advance, for
the general subject of religion, to have brought the Supreme
Intelligence and Will back from the remote recesses of a
temporal creation, or the infinite distances of an overruling
God, to be the indwelling and immanent Force, the Life and
Spirit of all the universe, its past, and still its present filled
with God. The universe is not a made machine, it is an
inspired life. lam not sure that the best thought of modern
times does not tend to reverse the principle, that life is the
product of organisation, and would rather affirm that it is life
which is the original, and organisation the result. Some of
the supposed settled controversies may have to be re-opened,
but at least they will be renewed with the advantage on the
side of those who believe in the presence of the Eternal, who
worship not merely a far off Creator with the cold acknowledg-
ments of the Deist, but hold communion with a Father of
Spirits, Who is near to every one, in Whom we live and move
and have our being, the very breath of our life, the life blood
of our heart, the essence of our thought, Supreme and Super-
eminent indeed, but also the Immanence of nature and of
man.


1 am not sui'e that the modem controversy has so strenuously
concerned itself with ethical questions, except in their application
to the practical needs of Society, as with the relation of
physical speculations to the principles of philosophy and theology.
Asa general rule, the ethical theories of the school of Bentham
have been accepted as a good working hypothesis in respect of
human duty and conduct. Religious writers themselves have
not been altogether averse to the doctrine that utilitarianism
might be taken as the guide and test of human duty, while the
foundation of it was to be found in the Divine Will. Indeed,
one of the strange features of the earlier conditions of the
controversy was the lack of antagonism manifested, even by
theologians, to the school represented by Locke, and Hartley,
and the Mills, whose fundamental principles seem subversive
of all possibility of faith and worship. Probably the
association of some schools of theology with these writers, in
respect of questions of practical liberty and philanthropy,
rendered them somewhat less severe in their criticism upon
their philosophic position.
But the reseai’ches of physical sciexxce have certainly
not avoided the regioxx of ethics. Up to evexx the time
of the younger Mill, discussions on the moral theory were
by most authors held to be limited to the psychological sphere.
Man’s coxxsciousness axxd xnan’s conduct were the fields of
ixxvestigation and debate. But physical science has changed
the venue. The doctrixxe of development has beexx applied to
the moral sense. Heredity, with its numberless illustrations, so
picturesque and vivid, has givexx a new impulse to the discussion
as it moves along the lixxes of the generations which precede
us. Morality is xxow custom. The doctrixxe of the useful
is merged ixx the doctrixxe of social force. The coxxvictioxxs or
sentiments of the xxxoral xxature are the survival of anciexxt
habits, the hereditary grooves ixx which life has been ruxx for
ages by our forefathers, a doctrixxe which seems to tend to the
overthrow of all duty, of the sense of obligation, axxd to xxxake
virtue the xnere coxxxpliaxxce with the stronger power of the
other persons by whoxxx we are surrounded.
There are two points which have come out with some
clearness ixx this controversy. First, that assumixxg the truth of
the scientific explanatioxx of the origin of the xxxoral sense, this
does not affect its xxature. We often confuse the history of an
object with the analysis of it. It is true, the story of its birth
axxd growth will help us to know its xxatux'e. But evexx
granting that the materialist is correct ixx his accouxxt of the
origin of the sentixxxent, that does xxot explain the special


and differentiating character which belongs to it. The moral
imperative is not less strong because we can show whence the
imperative has been derived, and the professor of hereditary
descent can no more refuse to listen to the superior questions
of conscience, than can the moralist who asserts that it is an
original faculty of man, implanted, underived. For even if it
l>e a descent, there must have been some cause for the special
and peculiar quality of moral obligation. It is not egoism, it
is not the force of public opinion, it is not the perception of
greater good, but it is itself. It speaks with the voice of duty
and re-echoes the word “ I ought.” You may thrust the
question further back, and make it more perplexed, because of
the dimness and uncertainty of that precedent age in which you
track its origin and progress ; but even there you must meet
the question of the moral attribute, and solve the essential and
necessary specialness of the moral sense.
. te sec oud point which the modern conflict has brought
into great distinctness, is the necessity in ethics for some
assurance that there shall be a preponderance of affection over
egoism, that the merely selfish interests will not outweigh
the social. To secure this by making it depend upon the
compulsion of external force brought to bear upon the
individual by the action of Society, may be a refuge for an
imperfect theory, but would be no ideal of a moral state.
Morality involves self-government. Ethics do not make their most
important officers to be policemen, and the elevated character
ot many of the teachers of these doctrines of a mere equilibrium
of physical powers, is the best answer to the peculiar philosophy
which they promulgate. The positive and utilitarian schools
rely upon the force of public opinion as the moral power, and
yet it is remarkable, that out of the influences of the teaching
of these very schools, has emerged the doctrine of altruism,
which if it means anything, must be the regard which the
individual entertains for others than himself, not because of
their compulsion, but because of the free spontaneous outo-oin"
of his nature in sentiments of affection, and deeds of love.° &
But Avhere is the need of public opinion to modify and
correct the generated habits of ancestors. Animals do not
force back these developed tendencies in individuals of their
species. If the circumstances are favourable to their action,
they are quickened and enlarged ; each inherent force seeking
the path of least resistance, with no concerted action on the
part of all other members to guide or control. Why should
there be in man I Why needs the individual to pay heed to
this social compulsion ? What is that voice within him which


unites with the voice without, even against the longings, and
passions, and instincts of his nature ? Is it not clear that there
is something unique and special in the moral sentiment —its own
force, its own prerogative ?
And why should we be altruistic 1 It is no answer to say
we must, for the must of social compelling is not the must of
personal conviction. Besides, Society can have no ideal of its
own preservation, for ultimate objects and special ends have
no place in a science whose chief heresy is teleology, and whose
prime disobedience is the quest of intent.
But after all, is not this new fangled altruism only a very
old law ? Have we not heard its echoes—“ looking every man
upon the things of others,” and “ loving one another, and
“ bearing one another’s burdens,” and “ doing unto others what
we would that others should do to us.” Can there be more
instructive examples than the establishment of the religion of
humanity by the Great Master of Positivism ; than the virtual
idolatry of a woman by the son of the man who, consciously
and with eyes open, emptied his whole nature of any sense
of God. What a lesson to the world is that brief and modest
preface by perhaps the greatest ethical teacher of our age, who,
in a few lines, gives us the history of the progress of his own
mind from conditions in which it was likely that he would
have ever served the merely material philosophy of the science
to which he was early called, into those where he has proved
himself the foremost champion of the transcendental freedom of
man, alike in the movements of his own will, and the strivings
of his spirit towards the Eternal Father of Life.
In this philosophical discussion then, we may I think
be assured, that these fundamental ideas of God, and Duty, and
Immortality, have come more clearly into vision, and that he
who believes that there is within him that which is more than
matter, which though conditioned for its activity by material
laws, can yet act within these conditions according to the
royalties of his own choice ; that yet for that choice there is a
law which owes its sanction to no condition of time or place,
which has a dignity reflecting the majesty of the heavens,
while for him who will contemplate it wisely it shall even
transcend in its magnificent and imperial might the splendours
of those very skies j and that above this immortal principle,
independent of space and time, above this wide-sweeping law
which is the highest law which man can know, there is an
Infinite and Eternal Spirit, filling all things, the voice of all that
speaks, the light of all that sees, embracing our own being and
even infusing it with His own, while beyond all the matter


and fore® that we may know or imagine, He transcends, until
the things that are, become the mere shadow of His Beinc* or
the effulgence of His face. Is this a reasonable faith we ask ?
And we think we may answer in the light of the controversy
of half a century, it is. Much has been lost, perhaps, which
the devout heart treasured. But it has only been lost that we
nnght gain the more. Was God removed back from Creation
by a new Genesis ? Creation may have been antedated, but
God has been seen in His Creation as He was never recognised
before Has man been reduced to the level of the creatures
around him, with whom and from whom perchance he may
have sprung? Nature has been certainly made more a unitv,
but in that unity man has only come to a deeper and a fuller
communion with all life and action. Lessened that he might
grow greater ; here indeed by his cross passing to his crown
Has our immortality been threatened by the analysis of
the particles into which we have seemed to dissolve 1 But
the essential immortality which lies in the absolute immateriality
ot our nature, has been made more distinct. God and Duty and
Immortal Being—these stars of human hope and thought and
endeavour grow more clear ; and the grand tone, I ought, still
ro is in echoes which eternity cannot bring to silence, as we
enter with that word of worship the temple of the Eternal
which is His universe filled and sanctified by His life and light.
11. We turn in the next place to consider the effect of the
controversy upon the narrower questions concerning historic
hristianity, for if the battle has raged about the more general
p nlosophic speculations involved in all religions, it has not
been less severe in regard to the specific doctrines of the Gospel.
Ihq claim of the Roman Church is to an authority residing in
the Church itself, and speaking through her recognised head,
to which, on all questions of faith, man must submit!
1 rotestants flung over this authority of the Church, and it
became necessary that some other ground should be discovered
upon which men might rationally base their faith, and this was
found in the Bible, which was declared to be the infallible
authority—a series of inspired documents each of which in
respect to the subjects with which it dealt to be accepted
as the ultimate ground of appeal. But the spirit which had
questioned the claims of the Church was not long likely
to refuse to subject the Book to a rigorous search. If the
Bible is the Word of God, how do we know it ? Truthfulness
must be a mark of that which comes from God. Is the Bible
truthful ? Is it what it says it is ? Is it what men slyit is ?
Did events occur according to these records ? Are they


documents to which we can give credence 1 These and similar
questions were speedily asked by the reformed Churches—by
the ever advancing intelligence of mankind.
The earlier reformers exercised very freely the right of
private judgment in respect to the canon of Scripture. They
determinedly separated the Apocrypha from the Old Testament
and some of them did not hesitate to make marked distinctions
between portions of the New Testament. The demand
however for a stable standard became pressing, and as the
Reformation proceeded, and the creeds of the Reformed Church
were settled, the infallibility of the sacred Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament was distinctly affirmed, although even
in some of the language of the symbols we may detect a certain
liberty of view which could not altogether be suppressed.
But criticism was inevitable. It commenced with Richard
Simon, a Catholic, and Spinoza, and was followed up by the
ever increasing band of Biblical scholars and critics, whose
labours, especially in Germany, bring us at length to the
writings of Baur, the founder of the Tubingen school which,
during this century, has exercised so large an influence upon
Christian theology, in the first place, by its effect on the study
of the scholar, and secondarily and more widely, through its
indirect effect upon the views of those writers who have dealt
more especially with the life of Our Lord.
Three questions, more particularly, have been affected by
historic criticism. In the first place, there is the personal
character and history of Jesus Christ; in the second place, the
authenticity of the accounts of miracles which have been
received in the Church, and which have seemed essential
to the Christian faith ; and in the third place, there is the
growth of doctrine in the Church, and its relations to the
historic facts of Scripture, viewed either as traditionary develop-
ment issuing in legend and myth, or a trustworthy witness of
indubitable facts containing a revelation from God to man. A
brief reference to the history of the critical discussion will
furnish us with a proper introduction to a fair survey of the
present relation of thought to these important topics.
The best known name in destructive criticism is that of
Strauss. His life of Jesus in its original, and in its later form,
created a profound sensation. It was hailed by the opponents
of Christianity as furnishing the last and the most certain
conclusions concerning the falsity of the history upon which
our religion was based. It was the work of a scholarly man,
who stuck at no violence which might be done to the most
sacred objects of Christian veneration ; who, indeed, finally


closed his career by answering the question, are we any longer
Christians, by a virtual negative, relegating historical Chris-
tianity to the limbo of exploded fictions. Strauss denied the
historical character of the Gospels. They are, in his estimate,
legends concocted at a period long subsequent to the events.
In some way or other there arose a society of persons who had
come to believe that Jesus was the Messiah. They had
collected around their conception of Jesus the prejudgements
which they formed concerning the Messiah. Thus grew up a
series of myths which in time were formulated in tradition, and
at length took the form of the Gospels, which we now possess.
Upon this principle he proceeded to narrate the life of Jesus,
and to explain away the supernatural elements which belong
to it. &
The importance of the work of Strauss lay not so much in
what it accomplished, as in the fact that it marked an era in
the history of the controversy. It closed the epoch of
indecision. It was the starting point of radical philosophical
rationalism. It gave form to the so-called scientific spirit
which has lent so much force to the critical attack upon
historical Christianity.
The Life of Jesus, by M, Renan, was another example of the
method of dealing with the Christian history by the destructive
criticism, while the flood mark of the tide among English
writers is to be found in the Supernatural Religion, an
anonymous work, which created no small stir at the time of its
publication, and received a special and powerful reply from
Bishop Lightfoot.
The real inspiration, however, and leadership of this
destructive criticism was found in Baur, who endeavoured to
furnish the answer to the natural question—if the Gospels be
thus untrustworthy, what is the explanation of their origin?
According to him, they are not collections of vague and
unintentional legends, but they are the result of a definite
purpose. They are the product of a “tendency” in the early
Church. Baur has a theory of the condition of affairs among
the primitive Christians which, slender as a thread, he seems
to consider is that first string which skilful engineers get boys
to throw across a river by the flying of a kite, to which can
then be attached a series of ever stronger and stronger cords
and chains, by which at last a bridge can be hung over the
stream. So does he build up the history of the Church’s
doctrine, on which finally the whole superstructure of
Christian faith and life may rest. Renan founds the Gospel on
the startled cry of a fantastic woman. Baur makes his


foundation the supposed differences between St. Peter and
St. Paul. The anti-Pauline spirit of a small section of the
Church on one side, and the Pauline affection of the sect of the
Marcionites on the other, are in the third century the survivals
of the original state of the earliest Christians. Ebionitism is
original Christianity. All the rest is development and myth.
It is interesting to observe how a theory not altogether unlike
that which prevails in scientific speculation has pervaded the
historical criticism of our age. It will be impossible within
the limits of this address for me to do more than mark its
existence, and in a few words endeavour to describe the
position which a reasonable faith may hold in view of a
controversy so severe.
Among the incidental advantages arising from the conflict
has been the careful re-consideration of all the spheres from
which any light can be gathered. What an array of learning
has been marshalled for example in respect of the text of the
New Testament. The uninstructed Christian hears sometimes
with dismay that a verse of Scripture is not authentic ; that
some passage of the Bible is uncertain. He looks perhaps
with alarm at a volume bristling with the notes of various
readings, and he is almost tempted to feel that the whole of
his cherished New Testament is riddled like a sieve, and full of
leaks. But how stand the sacred writings in comparison with
other works of antiquity 'I No man doubts that we have
virtually the words written by Caesar or Cicero, Plato or
Tacitus. But remember, that of these the critical authorities
are to be numbered by units, while of the New Testament
there are hundreds of sources of the ancient text. In
comparison with other writings the certainty of the genuine-
ness of every verse of the New Testament far exceeds that of anv
other book of antiquity ; while to surround and illustrate the
text there are the various resources of history, unbroken links
of organised life, the customs, the laws, topographical and geo-
graphical research, all of which, with many other's, have been
called into requisition for the purposes of this controversy.
And what remains? We take only that which the most
exacting must grant. In the fii'st place, there is the testi-
mony of St. Paul. The severest critic is bound to acknowledge
that four at least of the writings said to be St. Paul’s are
genuine. No man doubts the existence of that great preacher.
All agree that his life and work closed before the end of the
seventh decade of the first century, little more than thirty
year’s after the death of Jesus. Now, here is a fact, solid,
certain as the last record made in the laboratory or at the


observatory. What is there in the entire Gospel as accepted
by the Church which might not be elicited from the words of
St. Paul 1 Here is a man of learning, by all the history of his
previous life, by all the possibilities of the futui’e which were
opening to this favourite of the schools, this trusted one of his
party, his Church, his nation, to be regarded as the least likely
to accept the claims of the Nazarene, and to adopt the story of
His life and death and resurrection. And yet, let all the
Gospels perish, and every other writing of the New Testament
disappear, and all other witness dissolve like the dream of
the night when one awakes, even then it would be possible to
reconstruct the main facts upon which Christian faith depends
from the testimony of St. Paul alone.
The question of miracles has furnished much occasion of
debate in the Christian controversy, and I have no doubt that
many will agree with me in feeling that at the present time,
and in the modern temper produced by the influences of
scientific teaching, miracles are not a very great help to the
promulgation of the Gospels; neither are they a practical
necessity of the Christian life. I cannot here enter into the
discussion of the miraculous, and am prepared to acknowledge
that the Christian teacher must modify considerably the
definition of the miraculous, which has been often accepted ;
still two points must be noted, which, for the historic faith, are
certainly an issue of victory.
The opponents of Christianity have always started, at least
in the more modern discussion, with the assertion that miracles
are impossible. The first page of the critic’s book is always
devoted to the affirmation of that so-called axiom. It has
been therefore a startling and significant fact that one of the
ablest expounders of science, by no means accepting, indeed
explicitly denying, the occurrence of miracle, has laid it down
as his opinion that so far as material science is concerned, there
is no inherent impossibility in conceiving that what has been
called a miracle should occur. This statement, brief as it may
be, must not be forgotten. It relegates the whole discussion
to the region of testimony. The question is not what can
occur, but what has occurred, and the ground taken by many
an apologist is thus virtually ceded by one of the highest living
authorities in scientific speculation. With what a different
spirit will the records be investigated if the pre-judgement of
the impossibility of the miraculous be not present. A docu-
ment which records a miracle, if miracle cannot happen, is
necessarily rejected. A witness who says he has seen one, if
what he says occurred cannot occur, is necessarily mistaken or


a liai\ But now the document must be weighed ; now the
witness must be examined. Christian faith has conquered
“the impossible!” Now, it only has to deal with historic
credibility.
The other point which calls for attention is the relation of
the Resurrection of our Lord to reasonable faith. It has been
clearly seen that here lies the real centre of the conflict. If
Christ rose from the dead, then the supernatural history of the
Gospels needs little discussion. If Christ did not rise, then
criticism has to face the tremendous problem of the Christian
Church, with its doctrine and life, with all its attendant
documentary evidence and traditionary belief, with its initial
establishment, its progress, its character, without the fact of
its risen Lord. The questions which are now forced upon our
destructive criticism are those which centre especially round
the person of Jesus. What became of Him if He did not die?
What became of Him if He did die ? What started the faith
that. He rose from the dead ? When did that doctrine, that
more than doctrine, that sense of the re-animated Saviour’s
presence with His people, at times even manifesting Himself
to them, enter into the Church ? If miracle is the
occurrence of an event for which there are not sufficient causes
discoverable in the natural precedents and concomitants of the
event, then the faith of the Church in the Resurrection is the
most difficult miracle with which the critic has to deal. The
hour has come when Christian defence has ceased, and critical
defence must begin. The supernatural in Christianity is no
longer the shrine in the centre of the fortress which the
Church must guard. It is the standard which she must bear
at the head of the army in her assault of the foe.
The fact is, the most important effect of the modern
historical discussion, is the emergence of the figure of our Lord
Jesus Christ as the real basis of Christian faith. He is the
perpetual support and life and law of His Church. The
critic has recalled the Christian apologist from the evidences of
prophecy and miracle, the former often needing a large measure
of adaptation to discover its application, even in the most
general form, and the latter as we have said, often increasing
the difficulty of the discussion. He has centred the thought
of the Church upon Jesus Christ, and it has been the life of
Jesus, which if most vigorously assailed, has by the very
assault, won a new attention from the world.
A theological conception of Christ must always result from
the operations of human thought concerning Him, and the
significance of His appearance and work. But this is not the


most powerful side of the presentation of our Lord. It follows
the acceptance of His rule, the conscious allegiance of the soul
to Him in loyal faithfulness. But the modern discussion has
helped greatly in clearing the minds of men from the difficulties
which prevented them from this acceptance of Christ; while
some things perhaps must be abandoned under the influence
of the modern spirit, much more has been gained than lost,
and the claim of Jesus Christ upon men was never so powerful
as it is to-day.
The modern critic has drawn away the thoughts of men
from the discussion of the symbols which have now become
almost antiquarian curiosities, rather than living tests and
canons of the faith. They have perceived that Jesus Christ
is the light of the truth ; that it is by relation to Him that
men shall stand or fall; that even the Church itself is but
a secondary object of interest and attachment, and that
historical Christianity depends upon the Lord and Master.
On Him it was founded, from Him it springs. Higher than
its fount, the Christian stream can never rise. Except upon
this foundation, the Christian temple can have no stability.
So it comes to pass that in these days of storm and stress, the
figure of Jesus Christ, more clear, more distinct, more tender
than ever, rises before men’s gaze, and wins even from those
who would deny His historical reality, the loving homage that
must be paid to goodness so excellent, to the image of a
Divine power suffused with a love that is more than man’s,
and a pity which is its only measure. When it was the
authority of a Church which reason had to sustain, the issue
was foregone ; when it was the claim of a creed, the battle was
hopeless ; when it was even the infallibility of a book, the
victory was doubtful; but when it became plain that out of
all the lines of witness we could gain the clear conception of
the Person—then reason and faith found their meeting place,
and the light of God shone in the face of Jesus Christ.
The third and last subject which I propose to touch upon
in respect of the great movement of thought in our age, and
where there has been a vast power of critical solution, combined
with a large re-action of gain, to more than compensate for the
loss, is the social discussion as to an ever-enduring spiritual
organisation. Ever since the Reformation, the matter of the
organised life of Christianity has pressed home upon the serious
attention of religious men. Having broken with Rome, was
there any other visible fellowship which the Reformers could
join or set up 1 Part of them claimed to be still of the historic
Church, others declared the right of Christian people to free


action in the formation of assemblies, in whom would be found
all the qualities, the privileges and authority of the Church ;
and Christendom has been not a little disturbed, and Christianity
weakened and dishonoured, by the unholy strife into which
the entire Church has been thrown. In one place the Church
became the mere engine of the State—almost the tool of the
reigning dynasty, until one scarcely knew which most to
deplore, the absolute worldliness of the community, or the
cynical ease with which men regarded the spectacle. Elsewhere,
there was the narrowest sectarian bigotry. Men could only
recognise the Christian brotherhood of those who could speak
their shibboleth, and re-echo their formulas. The energies of
the Church were dissipated by the struggles within herself, and
the world-wide work left by the Master for the Church to
accomplish, was undone.
But this age of discussion has seen a mighty revival of the
power of the conception of the enduring organisation of Christs
Church. The law of development, applied to the spiritual
corporation, which consists of the entire company of the faithful
throughout the world, enabled men to see that the changes from
primitive simplicity were only in accordance with that vast law
which gathers all things, all beings, all forces within its capacious
grasp ; while the growing unity of Christ’s Church, not founded
upon external authority or likeness, but upon the indwelling
and ever present life of Christ, was in harmony with those laws
of universal effect which were at work upon the physical sides
of man’s condition and history.
Men perceive now that there is a place for development,' for
growth and adaptation. The simplicity of the Apostolic age
could not content the later mind. The particular and
exclusive claims, therefore, of individual Churches have been
blown to the winds by the breath of modern life ; but in their
place, there is the recognition of the one unseen and living
organism of Christian men and women, which subsists in all
the ages and in every clime. Men are beginning, again, to
win the thought of that Catholic Church, which was the life
and authority of the primitive ages, until it was destroyed by
the claijns of Catholicity and supremacy set up by the particular
community. But it has revived as the result of the historical
criticism of the age—not as an external, visible, limited com-
munity, but as the communion and fellowship of the Christian
life of all men in their union with Jesus Christ, the living Lord
and Saviour.
Hence comes a stronger desire for the set and compacted
body of believers. Some dreamers would have this realised in


particular communities; but while the very longing for unity
may harden and make more pronounced the differences of
the Churches, and in some cases render denominationalism
more rampant and pronounced, yet on the whole, the spirit
which recognises the unceasing presence in the world of a
spiritual order, to whom and through whom God reveals
Himself, will work towards the bringing of all Christian
communities into a harmonious federation, wherein liberty shall
be ever conserved, and yet the never-ceasing unity of Christ’s
Church be more recognised and accepted.
This is the explanation of the movement everywhere
apparent in the direction of compacting and organising the
life of the Church. Every Christian community feels the
influence of this movement. Co-operation, Church order, and
union are found among all parts of Christendom. Men
recognise each other’s brotherhood, and we ever tend towards
that one Church of the living God, which subsists through all
the ages, and which has accompanied as its organ the perpetual,
ever-renewed revelation of God to man.
The freedom of our own Church life has admitted this spirit.
Unions and Fellowships, undreamed of by our fathers, have
become common things with their children. The superficial
observer condemns the spirit of the Church now as indiffer-
entism, lack of moral conviction, a facile and careless faith, a
good tempered and easy permission of all and every form and
opinion. But a deeper analysis discovers the working of the
spirit of unity. Many a dream of co-operation and union is
indulged in, and the old rancour and jealousy, and spiritual
pride and schism are fast dying out under the influence of the
spirit of the age. This is no worldly carelessness; it is the
perception and the illustration of that deep mystery which has
run through all the ages—the living Church, to whom God has
spoken, and by whom He works among mankind. A new
meaning is perceived in that profound maxim of the ancient
preacher, and before some ardent minds there arises a vision of
that Catholic Church which shall some day gather all the
faithful and be co-extensive with the race.
We therefore greet in no ungrudging spirit the signs of a
more catholic temper lately apparent in ecclesiastical regions,
where too seldom the large interpretations of the Christian
life and fellowship are to be found. They may indeed be but
the first faint streaks of the brighter day that dawns; but we
hail them. It is always better to turn the face toward the
light that cometh, than to shroud it in the darkness which must
be at last dispelled.


Xt lias been well said, that the epoch of a thorough going
destructive criticism has been coincident with that "of a
Christian faith more courageous to meet the attack and to
assert itself by its devotion and its labour in the name of the
Lord. Action and reaction are ever equal in the world of
mechanical forces; and the same is true in the spiritual
sphere.
If the controversy of the nineteenth century has been severe,
and the issues of that controversy have been the loss of some
things to rational faith, compensated by the gain of greater and
more effective aids and arguments for religion, it must also be
confessed that in the region of active Christianity there has never
been an age which can exhibit such triumphs as our own. If
we turn to the external signs of practical piety, what an array
of service of generous gift and effort is spread before our eyes.
We may not erect the grand Cathedrals of the middle ages,
though it would be found that even in that respect the
nineteenth century has not been behind any previous time, but
in the covering Christian and un-Christian lands with churches,
colleges, and schools, how busy have been the hands, how large
have been the labours of the Church. Sympathetic service for
man in the relief of need, the rescue of the lost, the provision
of the destitute, the efforts of the philanthropist, the creation
of new ideals of virtue, self-restraint, human brotherhood
and helpfulness, lie broad and fair o’er all the earth. When
was the Church more aggressive ? Not even the percep-
tion of the Divine Providence in the progress of alien
religions, and the recognition of the unity of faith even
outside the Christian pale, have lessened the endeavours
of the Church to extend the Kingdom of the Lord, and
to obey His last injunction. Compare the piety of
our age, not in the mere expression of creed, or the ready
eloquence of a religious diction, but in the virtues and graces
which are the fruit of the Spirit, with previous epochs, and the
contrast is noteworthy. A larger liberty, a wider conception
of the meaning and worthiness of life may have seemed to
render the Church more worldly ; but test the condition of our
times by the interpenetration of the world with a Christian
conscience, and by the actual ethical standard and attainment
of Christian life, and who shall not rejoice ? From the
stateliest and most ordered of Christian communities to the
wildest and most grotesque of modern exhibitions of Christian
life and work, we may find everywhere a deeper realisation of
the presence and power of the living Lord. There is a burning
zeal to save men, not from some future catastrophe of doom,


but from the present dominion of vice and crime. The Church
in our age, by her practical activities, as well as by the
Christian thought and life, has entered into the speculation and
habits of a wider range of human character and condition than
in any other period of history. The topics of most interested
discussions among the people of culture are those which gather
around historic Christianity. The most vital and progressive
of the nations ai’e those most stirred by the teaching and truth
of Jesus Christ. The lowest, the most abandoned, the most
vile—the denizen of the stews, and the occupant of the prison,
are the objects of Christian solicitude and endeavour.
It is then with feelings far different from those which have
had some prominence of late that we review the intellectual
standing of Christianity, and the spiritual condition of the
Church. Charges have been made of unfaithfulness and
treason to the Lord and Master. We repel them ! We deny
them with scorn and indignation. We refuse to how before
the human creeds stiff with age—engines often of ecclesiastical
and political tyranny, forged by men who have no claim to
infallibility, and cast in forms of language which are foreign to
our usage, and under conditions from which we have escaped
into a larger and a diviner life. We recognise no human
authority who can pronounce for us what shall be the view we
take even of the Lord Himself, and the truth which He brought
into the world. If we are to submit our reason to these
external authorities, we will choose at least those which are of
largest induction, and can claim an extent of acceptance before
which our modern popes dwindle almost to the unseen. But
we affirm our undiminished trust, our unshaken allegiance to
that divine Lord, who is the life of His Church to day, as
He has been for ever her strength and life. If men will cast
their thoughts concerning Him and His work into systems of
concatenated and reasoned words, we have no quarrel with
them. They must reason; so must we. But as we refuse to
make our method the test of their piety, so we must hold
ourselves free to judge and dismiss, if so we see it, what they
affirm to be their doctrine of the Lord. We do not deny their
loyalty to Him. Let them bring no charge of treason against
us.
But these, brethren, are but tremulous ripples caused by the
winds of time as they blow across the fair surface of the
thought and the life of the Church. The deep waters of her
piety are fed from the fountains fresh and living that leap from
the heart of God. This is the closing message of my address,
already so far prolonged beyond the proper measure of your


kindly patience. Christianity is the living witness of the
living God, who is present in all His universe by His word,
and the witness of Whose presence is ever borne to the hearts
of His faithful ones by the grace of His Spirit. What higher
truth can reason teach us than the immanence of the Eternal
Father; and this is the agreement of our faith which binds us
to Him who revealed this truth, as He must have revealed it, in
the highest form we could conceive—the incarnation of His
Word. Christianity is Christ, not creed or ritual, not ethic or
church, but a life manifested in man and perpetuated for ever
as the bond between our spirits and the Eternal. It is a life,
then, to be lived. It may be lowly, like the flower which,
though it blossom unseen in some obscure nook, exhales its
fragrance, and puts forth its beauty, because it gathers into
itself the mighty energies of nature—energies no other than
those which hold the earth in its strong bonds, and keep the
stars as they swing in their mighty cycles of immeasurable
space. It may be lofty, spent on the high places of the world,
visible to the race, a monument of power and effective action
which all history shall record. No other force shall sustain it
than the same life and love which made the humblest true, and
beautiful, and good. It is yours, my brother, given freely to
you, to all. Does Christ fill the palace of God with His power ?
The gates are open and you may enter into His presence, and
touch the extended sceptre, and receive the largesses of His
grace. Nay, He Himself will come to you, has come to you,
and bowing beneath the portal of your home, He will dwell
with you ever as a friend, walk with you through all the ways
of life, and hold your hand and guide your steps, and fill your
heart with joy, and bring you when the pilgrimage is done, to
the eternal vision of His glory ; for you He loved, for you He
died, for you He lives.
I cannot close without a word to you my brethren, who like
myself, are preachers of this Gospel of Jesus Christ. To be a
preacher of Christ is the highest honour, the dearest joy of
earth. And that is what you must be —preachers of Christ.
Choose your own fashion of preaching. Each man must speak
as it is given him, and first of all and last of all, he must be
himself. Preach as it pleases you, with reasoning, or illustra-
tion, or eloquence, or poetry, or passion, or pathos. With any
or all of these, it matters not, so long as you preach Christ,
and believe me, there never was a time when Christ could be
preached with so much power, with such victorious certainty, as
in this age. Men never listened to the story of His life, never
enquired concerning its meaning, never so longed to be able to


make Him their own, and to be His, as in our time. And your
preaching shall be irresistible if you make men feel that they
are indeed in the presence of that wondrous Person, who fills
your life and fills your speech with His all commanding
power. Man is personal, and it is personality alone that can
gather all the elements of human life. Hence to preach
Christ, and to love Him is to add to reason faith, and to faith
duty, and to duty love, and to love aspiration, and to aspiration
the content of the perfected nature. Before these gathered
and assembled forces of our ministry, all opposition must give
way. It is will to will, and heart to heart, and love to cold-
ness, and virtue to unworth, and Jesus Christ to man. Whom
has He not vanquished 1 What age, what character, what
condition has He not overcome ? And still the music of His
name is sweet, and the magic of His love is mighty, and men
need Him; never did they need Him more than now, when
all that nature gives, and art can furnish, and science bestow,
will still leave the heart empty and the soul discontent. But
He lives, and still He gives His life for the world. It is yours,
it is mine, to preach this Christ.
STILLWELL AND CO. IT,INTERS, 78 COLLINS ST. EAST, MELBOURNE.


■


