

THE
KANAKA LABOUR QUESTION:
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO
MISSIONARY EFFORTS
IN THE
PLANTATIONS OF QUEENSLAND.
By the REV. ALEX. C. SMITH,
Convener of the Queensland Presbyterian Foreign Mission Committee.
irislumti, (Humistnnd :
Alexr. Muir 1 & Morcom, Printers, Bookbinders, &a, H‘Al Queen Street.
1895.


THE
KANAKA LABOUR QUESTION:
WITH SPECIAL REVERENCE TO
MISSIONARY EFFORTS
IN THE
PLANTATIONS OF QUEENSLAND.
By the REV. ALEX. C. SMITH,
Convener of the Queensland Presbyterian Foreign Mission Committee,
Irtelmmi, ffincensland ;
Alexr. Muir & Morcom, Printers, Bookbinders, & 0., 221 Queen Street.
1892.


PREFACE.
This pamphlet I have written and published by the authority, and
under the auspices, of the Queensland Presbyterian Foreign Mission
Committee, of which lam Convener; and it is hoped that it may
accomplish the end aimed at in it. It is simply a brief digest of all that
has been urged, or may be urged, from reliable authority or personal
experience, in the way of defending the re-introduction of Polynesian
Labour into Queensland. I trust that the general public nay thus get
a condensed but correct view of the question, as a ivhole, from first to last.
ALEX. C. SMITH .
Mowlraytown, Brisbane, Queensland,
December, IS9S,


Presbyterian of Church of Queensland.
FOREIGN MISSION COMMITTEE.
It having been resolved a short time ago by this Committee that
the Convener, the Rev. A. 0. Smith, should write for publication a brief
but condensed pamphlet on the Kanaka Labour Question, with special
reference to missionary effort put forth on the plantations of Queensland,
a draft of said pamphlet, on being completed, was submitted to them for
their approval and revision. After a few emendations it was ordered
to be printed by their authority, that it might be distributed as widely
as possible in the colonies and in the home countries.
In name and on behalf of the Committee,
ALEX. C. SMITH,
Convener.
Brisbane, Queensland,
December, 1898,


THE
KANAKA LABOUR QUESTION.
SmS WISH to state, in the outset, the motives that have weighed
alls me in writing the following pages on the Kanaka
Labour Question, and the re-introduction of that labour
into Queensland.
if k It is not because I look at the question in a commercial
Taspect. I might indeed comment on this to any extent, and
® show the great monetary value to Queensland of the sugar
industry, as carried on in connection with the employment of Kanaka
labour. In the Maokay district alone, where more than 2,800 Polynesians
are in regular employment over fourteen plantations, I learn from
trustworthy authority that, in ten years, the direct benefit of the industry
there to the colony as a whole, apart from the individual gain of the plant-
ers, amounted to £2,561,498, being on an average more than a quarter
of a million annually. I might shew also the great amount of monetary
profit it has brought to the white population of the colony, seeing that,
in the same Maokay district, in ten years, £775,460 were paid in wages
and rations to white labourers, about £77,000 yearly. I might shew
further that if the Kanaka labour were to cease, the great sugar
industry would be seriously imperilled, if not wholly destroyed, White
employees could not supply the place of ln cooler regions,
as in New South Wales, where sugar growing is carried on to a
smaller extent, white employees may he found able to work in the oane-
fielda • but in the hot regions of Central and Northern Queensland, they
could not. The heavy dews that fall in the mornings on the sugar canes,
and the stilling nature of the work in cane cutting, are such that white men
could not, in most cases, continue at it persistently, so as to retain their
health. Even if they could, they would not, at the same rate of wages
paid to the black labourers ; and should higher wages be demanded, such
as they have been accustomed to, the industry would not pay, _or
compete in the markets with the sugar products of other countries.
I might comment to any extent on all these points, and easily show
that if Polynesian labour in Queensland ceased, it would mean that
from 20,000 to 30,000 white labourers would be thrown out of employ-
ment, large rich districts of Queensland, eminently adapted for sugar-
growing, be allowed to run to waste, and “ a great industry, amounting
to about £5,000,000 ruined,” 1
1. The London Morning Post, 17th May, 1892.


However, these have not been the considerations that weighed with
me in writing the following pages. What has induced me to do so is
the hasty and most unjust aspersions that have been flung on the church
to which I belong, the Presbyterian church of Queensland, because she
did not protest against the re-introduction of Kanaka labour this last
year into our colony, but rather approved of it. Our church —and I
suppose other churches, that have as a whole, come to a similar decision—
has been held up to obloquy before the Christian world as “ conniving
at” a “ most infamous traffic,” which is “ undisguised slavery of the worst
description,” either because through mercenary considerations we are
afraid to speak out our real convictions, or because “ through familiarity
with the traffic the best feelings of our nature ” in common with those of
the Queensland public “have been blunted if not destroyed.”i Kay, it
has been suggested that “ all the other Australian churches should refuse
to federate with any church, such as ours, that takes up such a position,”
and shews herself so “ lost to all sense of right and wrong.” 2 Many
similar attacks have been made on us on public platforms and in colonial
and home newspapers, and my object in writing these pages is to give a
condensed summary of all that has been urged from the first, or that
may be urged, either from reliable testimony or from my own personal
experience, in reply to the objections advanced against the re-introduction
of this labour, and consequently against the attitude of our church id
respect to it. By doing so, sufficient light on the question may penetrate
into quarters where the different aspects or points connected with it have
only been looked at piece-meal, and I may be able, at least, to justify my
own church in her action in the matter. I shall not say a single harsh
word against the parties making these charges. Several of them are men
of the highest Christian character, who have done noble work for Christ
in their day, while in writing and speaking as they did, they, no doubt,
did what they believed was their duty. lam willing even to go further,
and say that, on account of the many abuses connected with the impor-
tation of this labour several years back, I am not surprised that many
excellent people should, through lack of consideration as to the present
state of the question and of knowledge as to the nature and surroundings
of the labour on the Queensland plantations, have come to the hasty
conclusion that such abuses are inseparable from its employment in
Queensland, and its continuance down to the present day. What,
however, I do complain of ia, that many are guilty of such lack of
consideration, and so persistently shut their eyes to that knowledge which
might so easily be obtained, They raise a man of straw, and, with the
most pronounced determination, proceed to knock him down. The
famous l)on Quixote, armed cap-a-pie, set out once to demolish certain
monstrous giants, and lo 1 they were only wind-mills after all.
While on this point, I shall say one word more as to my motive in
writing this pamphlet at the present juncture. I replied at length
in the Brisbane Courier of 26th March last to the Eev. Dr. Baton’s
a • Ti ie ,?r V ‘ ? r %^ aton ’ a “latest against Renewal of the Polynesian traffic ”in the Brisbane
Courier , 2fird March, 1892. '
2. Ditto in ditto.


“ Protest against the renewal of the traffic ’’ in, the Brisbane Courier of
23rd March ; but I have found that, while his “Frotest” was largely
circulated at home and through all the colonies, my reply, while
circulated at home and throughout Queensland, was not so throughout
the other colonies. Further, on visiting the Federal Assembly of the
Presbyterian church of Australia at Adelaide in September last, while I
brought the matter at some length before it with special reference to our
mission at Maokay among-t the Kanakas, not only did the Adelaide press
not report my speech, but I found there was considerable ignorance on tho
whole question, and especially on the particular aspect in which I referred
to it, in the southern colonies. Taking all this into consideration,
together with the fact that suggestions were made to me by several
brethren in the south that I should put what I said, and anything else
on the question I thought fit, in a somewhat fuller form, into public shape,
I now, with the sanction and under the authority of the Queensland
Presbyterian Foreign Mission Committee (of which I am convener),
proceed to state as succinctly as I can what I have to say on tho whole
matter.
Before proceeding to consider the objections against the re-introduc-
tion of this labour into Queensland, I shall speak for a little about the
missionary efforts that have been put forth, especially by our own church,
in connection with it.
Going by the Government Statistics l I find there were 9362
Polynesians registered as employed in the labour at the beginning of 1891
—2816 in the Maoitay district, 2846 in the Bundaberg district, 471 in
the Maryborough district (now about 700), while the rest are
scattered over Queensland. For several years back, a con-
siderable amount of missionary effort has been carried on in these
three important districts, and I shall refer to each of them, though confining
myself chiefly to the Maokay district, as I can speak of it from personal
experience, having spent a whole month in September 1891, in visiting
all its plantations.
At Bundaberg there has been for some years a Kanaka mission
conducted on undenominational lines, to which two resident missionaries
devote their whole time, the Revs. Mr. Johnson and Mr. Eustace, who
.have been established there, and greatly helped by the well-known zeal of
the Youngs of Fairymead, the Gibsons of Bingera, and others, who all
most liberally give to its support. The two missionaries hold separately
week-night classes and other services, the attendance reported
by the one
127 are baptised annually, and from 20 to 80 “ boys ” help the missionaries
in the work, as native teachers, in every plantation where classes are
established. 2 This is quite in accordance with the annual printed reports.
There is also a mission conducted by a Church of England clergyman
the Rev. J. Clayton, who can report “ 336 Sunday attendances, and 216
week-night attendances, and about 80 baptisms annually ”. 3 All these
1. Annual report of Department of Paolflo Island Immigration, Brisbane, 24th Feb., 1891,
2. Letter from Rev. 0. F. Johnson, Bundaberg, Bbh November, 1892.
8. Letter from Rev. J. B. Clayton, Bundaberg, 6th November, 1892,


hold regular visitations over ten plantations, and testify abundantly as to
the good done, not merely by furnishing the statistics just given, but by
testifying to the diligence, desire to learn, sobriety, and good behaviour of
the “ boys ” as personally witnessed by themselves, and confirmed by the
testimony of the police of the district, and the employers.
At Maryborough “ a missionary has week night classes
in the town and visits the plantations, besides preaching on Sabbath,
The church of England also has a class for boys, and the church of
England missionary at Bundaberg comes over to hold a service every
fortnight. Almost every evening, a large house, that has been given to
them, is filled by the boys, who meet for a religious service—all pro-
fessedly Christain boys, and ever shewing themselves most eager and
attentive. Besides this, on two of the largest plantations, classes are
conducted by ladies resident there. All the planters speak highly of
the good that is being done, and say that the boys who attend the classes
do not fight, as they formerly did, do not drink, do their work better,
and are more easily managed.” 1
At Mackay, or rather at Walkerston, about 9 miles distant, up the
Pioneer River, the Presbyterian church of Queensland started a mission
nearly 4I- years back. The Rev. J. M‘L. Mackintyre, who resides at
Walkerston, is a most devoted man, and has had his work crowned
with ever increasing and most remarkable success. All the 14 plantations
over the district he visits regularly in succession every year, holding one
service every Sabbath at two of the plantations, and one at Walkerston )
whilst for four evenings each week he conducts a night school, in which
the islanders are taught reading, writing, and arithmetic, intermixed
with singing and religious instruction. Up to the close of last year, 224
“boys” and 8 Marys attended the week-night schools ; many coming from
several miles distance. Every Sabbath, the service is attended
by large numbers. In the first three years 90 were baptised,
and during the last twelve months 162 additional, making in
all about 250 in rather more than four years. Twelve months
hack there were 1836 pledged total abstainers, and their
number is now increased to about 1900, which is more than two-
thirds of the whole Polynesian population hr the district. Mr,
Mackintyre, who sends a monthly report to our Foreign Mission Com-
mittee, assures us that “ there has been a great and growing appearance
for good amongst the boys morally and spiritually,” that “ they assemble
of their own accord at various plantations on Sabbath mornings for
prayer, and to hear addresses by their own countrymen, one of whom
travelled 40 miles for this purpose,” that “in his absence they always
keep up and conduct the Sabbath meeting amongst themselves,” that in
“ nearly all the plantation he has native teachers, who conduct services
every Sabbath,” that “ they are remarkable for order and good conduct
during school hours and also on the Sabbath,” that “ there is no mis-
behaviour through drink, or in any other way, known to or heard of by
him in his visitations,” and that “many young men among them
1. Letter from Rev. J. I. Kiiipe, 8.A., Maryborough, 7th November, 3892


are able and willing to take part in Christian work.” Of certain outrages
that are reported as having recently occurred amongst them, I shall
speak afterwards, 1 only saying at present that, instead of detracting from
the good apparently done, they only shew how great that good has been.
Then in addittion to these efforts of our missionary, J. Donaldson,
Esq., on the Sandiford plantation, about a year back erected
a large hall, and he and his wife have for a long time for four
nights every week, instructed and held services amongst about 150’boys
and that with great devotedness and success. Of the entire number
already mentioned as baptised, 66 belong to the “ boys ” there, and
many have given of their own accord large contributions to the Kanaka
Mission Fund. I cannot speak too highly of the work done by Mrs.
Donaldson, and those who wish to know it would do well to read a
letter signed “ Lizzie Donaldson,” that appeared in “ The Australian
Christian World ” some weeks back. 3
As I have already said I visited Maokny in September 1891, and
spent an entire month in the district. I visited all the plantations, held
frequent intercourse with the “boys,” went inside several of their houses,
Saw their food, visited their sick, attended frequently at their
night classes, and preached on the Sabbath. I went also to
the offices of the local police magistrate, the district registrar, and
Polynesian inspector, and satisfied myself as to every point on which they
could give me information. Almost all the planters wore at home, and,
without exception, not only received me most courteously, but afforded me
every facility for seeing the boys and the plantations, and answered most
readily every enquiry I made. And now the result of the whole is—
my deep-seated conviction that a very good deal of good is being done to
these Polynesians by their importation into Queensland, that they are
improved'physically, morally, and spiritually, and that, apart from the
monetary benefit accruing to the colony through their employment in
the sugar industry, Sir. S. W. Griffith did a wise thing (on their own
account), in re-introducing them for a term of years.
I shall attempt now to deal seriatim with the charges brought
against this labour, and consequently against our church, for not
protesting against its re-introduotion into Queensland,
It has been said that “in the recruiting, these South Sea islanders
are often violently kidnapped, and terrible atrocities committed, such as are
to be seen under the worst forms of slavery.”
This charge has been adduced sometimes in a milder form. We are
told that “ the labour cannot be carried on with justice to the natives,
nor with honour to the British nation,” and again that “recruiting without
abuse is an impossibility,” 8
Sometimes it is urged in far stronger terms. “ Slavery,” “ slavery
without measure,” “ slavery worse than American,” are expressions that
1. Seo page 28.
2. Australian Christian World, 3rd Movombur, 1802.
3. " Protest against Renewal o( Polynesian trafflo 1b Queensland " by Uew Hebrides Mission
Synod, June, 1802.


have been repeated over and over again. The Rev, Dr. Paton has, in the
most prononneed way, asserted that “ the whole system is steeped in
deception and murder,” that “ recruits are kidnapped by false pretences,
or against their will, and taken forcibly on board,” that “ atrocious
crimes and murders are committed calling to heaven,” that “it is the
worst form of slavery, scarcely under a cloak to any now,” nay, that
“ they are worse off than real slaves.” 1 Marion Disney (who “ Marion
Disney” is Ido not know, 1 suppose it is a nom-de-phwie) paints a
most melodramatic picture of “ newly recruited Polynesians just arrived
at the scene of their labours.”. She (or ho) describes them as “ naked,
emaciated from sea-sickness or disease, their bodies covered witli soars or
festering ulcers, abject terror in their faces, looking wildly around as if
seeking escape, forced or decoyed by the labour agents to work on the
plantations.” 2 Several others have used language, if not so terrific, yet
tending in the same direction.
Now, in reply to all this, it is admitted with sorrow and shame, that
such a state of things did, to soma extent, prevail prior to the year 1885,
th’ongh the reports of it have no doubt been exaggerated. The Royal
Commission, who sat that year to examine into the state of matters,
examined only 6 out of 16 labour vessels; while Mr. Archibald Forbes,
the well-known war correspondent, in The New Review for June, describes
a visit he paid to the sugar plantations of Queensland in 1883, and in it
he refutes “ the atrocity charges” point blank. Be that as it may, how
stands the matter 7 In 1880 an “ Act ” was passed by the Queensland
Parliament for regulating the Polynesian labour traffic, with a further
“Amendment Act” in 1884, containing very stringent regu-
lations connected with it. Unfortunately, notwithstanding this,
what may be called terrible abuses, really occurred. A Royal
Commission (as already stated) sat in 1886, and after rigorous investi-
gation as to the conduct of “the Hopeful ” and five other labour vessels
declared that the traffic was “characterised by deceit, cruel treachery,
deliberate kidnapping, and cold blooded murders.” The results we all
know. A very emphatic sentence was pronounced on “ the Hopeful ”
prisoners; and, in addition to this, a further “ Amendment Act ” was
passed by the Queensland Legislature, enforcing the same regulations,
hut decreeing that “ after the 81st December, 1890, no fresh license to
introduce islanders shall be granted”—in short, that after 1890 the
introduction of South Sea island labour into Queensland should cease.
All this is admitted on every hand, and Sir S. W. Griffith, who after-
wards moved tor the re-introduction of the labour in 1892, got that “Act”
of 1885 passed. Lord Knulsford, who refused to interfere
with the re-introduction of that labour, declared that “ prior to 1884, the
abuses were very considerable.” Many other prominent men, now
advocating the renewal ot the labour, admit the same.
In 1885, however, the sitting of the Royal Commission, the sentence
passed on “the Hopeful ’’prisoners, and, “the Amendment Act”
1. Ilev, Dr. Patou's “ Protest" in Brisbane Courier 2Brcl March; also his letter to the London
Times, 29th August, 1892.
2, London Daily flews, 16th August, 1892.


abolishing the labour after 1890, worked wonders. They told favorably
on recruiting vessels, ship-captains, and Government agents, checking
and restraining abuses. Sir S. W. Griffith has more than once publicly
declared during last year that “ no serious complaints of kidnapping have
been made since then,” and that “ the abases of former days have long
since come to an end ”. 1 Lord Knutsford, the late Colonial Secretary
set Lord Charles Scott and Captain Davies of H.M.S. Royalist, to watch
the importation of Kanakas, and as tlie result declared that “no fault
was to be found with the recruiting system since 1885,” and that “he
could not, after careful investigation, condemn it.” 2 Mr. Caulfield, the
Polynesian inspector at Bundaborg, declared some months back, “I have
been inspector for 5 years and have examined 3000 islanders. They
know my office, and they could bring any serious complaints to me, and
yet none such wore brought. I have seen tears shed by more than one
recruit on being told he could nob, because of bodily defects, land in
Queensland, but 1. have never come across an unwilling recruit. They
like to talk of going to Queensland, and boast of their having been there
two fellow time, and they are looked on ns an oracle by un-travelled ones
at home. The difficulty is to keep them back, not to make them go.” 8
Mr. Lyndt, P.R.G.S., who sojournad for a time in the Now Hebrides, has
written “ Kidnapping has broken down since 1885. The Polynesian
labour office has a black list of names kept of persons not allowed tp
engage in the traffic against whose character anything is known, down
to the humblest servants on board. Those engaged don’t want to go to
New Caledonia, and they hate the Preach, because, they say, they decoy
them on board, and carry them away against their own will. The difference
in this respect between the British and French vessels is talked over at
the camp-tires.” 4 Sir James Garrick, Agent General for Queensland,
has stated “ All ships containing these islanders must be licensed, and
the officers of the ship, and agents of the intending employer approved by
the Government., The master of the vessel has to enter into a bond of
£SOO for the return of the islanders to their native villages in their
respective islands. . An agent, appointed or paid by the Government is
on board to see that the regulations are properly carried out. The result
is, that, since the appointment of the Royal Commission in 1885, now
more than seven years ago, I know of no. serious abuses.” 6 Dr. Selwyn
the Bishop of Melanesia, says “ it seems to me an abuse of’ words to call
such a system slavery, or inhuman,” 8 Similar declarations I might
quote, made, by such men as Bishop Saumaroz Smith of Sydney,
and Mr. Playford, late Premier of South Australia. Bishop
Montgomery, of Tasmania, who has lately been visiting all the
stations in the South Seas under the control of the Melanesian mission,
says that “he has seen more good than evil in the labour trade, as now
1. Reply to London Missionary Society, 17th August, 1802; and elsewhere,
2. Brisbane OquHct, August, 1892.
3. Brisbane Courier, Bth April, 1892.
4. Brisbane Courier, 20bh March, 1892.
6. London Tinier 10th M*y, 1802.
6, Tho Guardian, 4th May, 1893.


carried on by British licensed vessels.” 1 I shall add only three
testimonies more. The London Times, after speaking of the old
horrors of the labour traffic, says “ of these there is no prospect now and
no possibility, the old outrages cannot be repeated.” 2 Dr. John Harden,
principal of the Sydney Presbyterian Ladies’ College, and who was recently
gent out by the N.S.W. church to visit the Now Hebrides, made, on his
return, an elaborate report. While saving that he would like to see the
recruiting abolished, he adds “it is very far from slavery. The missionaries-
of the New Hebrides are agreed that the mode of traffic on the part of
the British is fairly clean. It is idle to talk of outrage and
bloodshed, such statements are untrue to' fact. It is universally
acknowledged on the islands that the boys, in all cases, recruit willingly.”
And he closes by saying “ I could hear of no murders or outrages. The
natives could tell of none. Instances of kidnapping I heard of, hut not
in connection with the Queensland traffic. We may safely conclude that
the recruiting by British subjects is carried out in accordance with the
laws, and abuses of a violent nature are rare or-nnknown.” 8 The Rev. A.
H. Macdonald, one of the missionaries on the New Hebrides, recently at
the General Assembly of the Presbyterian church of Victoria, admitted
that “ there could be no complaint on the score of the manner in winch
the Kanakas are recruited.” 4 Surely all these testimonies, so abundant
and coming from such reliable quarters, ought to be enough to scatter to
the winds all the alleged charges as to “kidnapping” and “atrocious
cruelty in recruiting the islanders” during the last seven years. I may
add that, so far as I personally am concerned', all these testimonies are
quite in accordance with my own knowledge acquired in interviewing the
islanders at the Mackay plantations. To every question I put they always
replied, “ me, black fellow, go if me like to Queensland —me stay at home
if me like.” Several " boys ”in Brisbane also gave a similar testimony
to the Eev. W. Whale.
And yet—strange to ,say—notwithstanding all this, it has been
asserted by the Eev. Dr. Paton and others, that kidnapping of the worst
form is still practised, and has been practised within a very recent period,
Ko such charges, however, have been seriously proved. Take, for instance
only one case, adduced some time ago in very strong language by the Rev.
Mr. Landels, the missionary at Halo, as having occurred some 18 months-
previously—the case of “ a woman with a child, kidnapped against her
husband's will.” 5 This, anyone could see at a glance, was impossible by the
regulations, which do not allow of “ taking a child,” or “ separating a
woman from her husband,” However, Sir S. W. Griffith took the matter
up,® and, although “the labour agent” referred to was dead, he found from
the testimony of the captain of the ship and the mate and recruiter that
"one of the recruits taken the previous day falsely represented himself as
the woman’s husband,” and that “ the woman had gone willingly on board,
1. London Observer, quoted in the Brisbane Courier 28th November, 1802.
2. Loudon Times, 16th May, 1802.
8, Melbourne Arhus, quoted in the Brisbane Courier , 25th October, 1892.
4. Brisbane Courier, 11th November, 3892.
5. Sydney Presbyterian, 21st May, 1802.
6. Official letter to the Rev. Mr. Lnndels, 80th May, 1892.


because .of a little elopement planned between them (I)” 1 So much for the
one alleged case of “ kidnapping.” But that is not all that has been
urged. It has been said more than once that “ the islanders are cruelly
used on the voyage,”'and that gross “immorality is practised on the
■women on board.” I might ask, why, i£ these things are really true,
are they not reported to the Polynesian inspectors on landing? The
assertion of Marion Disney, to whom I have already referred, that “ the
■childish simplicity and native ignorance of the Islanders render them
•quite incapable of availing themselves of the laws made for their
protection,” 2 is, to use the words of a planter, who has had to do with the
Polynesians for years, simply “ ridiculous.” Again, it is very easy to
make general charges—why do these conservators of public humanity and
morality, as another planter of high character says, “ not produce
particular instances 7 Why do they, like Marion Disney, remain
undisooverable and unproduceable, in the making of charges, which, if they
■were worth powder and shot, might subject them to prosecution ?” Charges
.go made, may, we think, be dismissed with the contempt they deserve.
All these points havirig been satisfactorily established, the Queens-
land Government recently re-introduced the Kanaka labour into Queens-
land. It was very generally felt that the old abuses of kidnapping,
prevalent several years back, were not “ inseparable from the traffic.
Acting on the conviction of this, as well as on other grounds, Sir. S. W*
■Griffith, who had moved and carried the abolition of the traffic in 1885,
■recently moved and carried its re-introduotion for a limited hurobei of
years. This new “Act,” renewing the traffic, is just the old “Act.” with all
its stringent clauses made still more stringent by new clauses, 16 in all.
The sum of these amounts to this, viz “In recruiting, the Government
a trent is to have complete control. It is not to be carried on in hid
absence. He must, by personal enquiry, see that every recruit understands
the nature of his employment, None are to be recruited under 16 years
■of age. No recruit, changing his mind, and wishing to leave the ship, is
■to be prevented. When they arrive in Queensland, they are inspected by
district and medical officers. No married women are to be taken apart
from their husbands. When these embark they have separate apartments,
without access other than from the deck. No man is to be allowed into
■their apartments, unless accompanied by the Government agent. The
food they get on board is to be such as the islanders are accustomed to, »
I may remark that the most important item here is that “ the Government
agent is to have entire control." If the engagement and transport of the
Kanakas is exclusively in the hands of the Government agents, then, as
Mr. Archibald Forbes, late war-correspondent, admits, “ the recruiting
machinery will be adequate and unimpeachable, should there be a further
proviso that a central depot shall be established somewhere in the Pacific.
I think I need to add nothing more to all I have said in respect to
this first charge against the re-introduction of Polynesian labour into
Queensland. Enough has been adduced to shew that to call the system
1, Brisbane Courier 18tli, July, 1892.
2, London Daily News, 16bb August, 18J2. v n ,™r o »ni*lahaiip Mav 18DS.
3, ••Imperial and Colonial Acts lor Bomutmg Polynesian Labourers, Brisbane, May, IWJ.


of recruiting as it is now, “ slavery in its worst form,” is unjust and untrue.
Of course, no system of legislation can absolutely prevent every abuse,
but I am satisfied, along with many others, that the system will henceforth
he conducted without any serious infringement of the ■ law of the laud,,
and without “ injustice to the natives, or dishonour to the British name.” 1
11,
_ It has been alleged that the “ deportation of young and able-bodied
natives tends to depopulation, mars industry in the colonies, and checks
civilisation and Christianity.”
On this I need not dwell at any great length.
As to its “ tending to depopulation,” let me quote the wise words
of Sir. S. W. Griffith. 2 “ This seems at first sight a strong objection
to the traffic. I have, however, after much consideration, come to
the conclusion that it is not practicable to shut the islanders up in their
own homes, or prevent them ■ from fulfilling their desire to see civilized
countries. Many of the most eminent ministers of the Christian church
who are personally acquainted with the subject, have publicly expressed
the opinion that to do such would be futile, and that, even if successful,
it would be undesirable.” Again, in another public way. Sir. S. W.
Griffith declared that “ a charge of this nature would apply equally
to every form of emigration from England to America, or Australia.
As the education and contact with the white races increases on the
islands, the spirit of enterprise will be roused. The young Kanaka
begins to long to better himself by recruiting, just as young Scotchmen
or Englishmen, with this difference, that the Kanaka has a situation
found for him, and his return, if he wishes to return, is secured at the
end of three years.”
Again, the charge of its “ marring industry,” I cannot understand ;
neither can I understand the charge made more than once by the Rev. Mr.
Landels of Male, that “every Kanaka goes home poorer than he came.” »
Those who emigrate, are for the most part young unmarried men beginning
the world, and I am assured from various quarters that, on their own
islands, through their productiveness or other causes, the islanders are
usually content with such very moderate industry as enables them just
to live. When they come to Queensland, however, new habits of industry
get stirred up. They are not satisfied with a bare living, they long to
lay past. The “ boys ” in a great many oases are laying up money in
Savings Banks. 1 I found endless pigeon-holes in the Polynesian
inspectors office at Mackay, filled with their savings in various
sums up as high as £6O. Someone told me somewhere that a
“ hoy ’ who had been several years in Queensland, had in the bank about
HVHh *’ Mad in the Jew HobrWes Synod Protest against the renewal of the
JrVu , ot flange. aH *pr. Marclon, In the report of his visit to the Now Hebrides,
SUSifV"j ~w 10 ? the , missionaries (ag a body) emphatically condemn the Queensland and Mi
meffnr mnrn “"if “ wortl i * boHt . iutor-ialand trade, which Is the worst ol the two,
™‘,Ln r moro ox t6uslvo In its operations than the Queensland traffic,” especially aa, when the
anaworod ‘wi* 16 S .l n °v ' w j“i her the Qaeanslimaara wore the Hrst offenders ?" they
offenders? On ‘W 1 ** i . b l folfe thQ a 8 if wo were the worst, yea, the onl
Oireuaois_f Con snolia one-sided protest carry much weight with lb ?
2. Reply to London Missionary Society, 17th August, 1802.
,8. Sydney Presbyterian* •


£350 ; but I cannot vouch for the truth of this. However it has been
officially stated that “to the credit of 3400 Kanakas £20,000
are lying in the Government Savings Bank.” 1 Whether they will
go back to their own islands to spend all this we cannot say, but that
industry ” is quickened rather than “ marred ” by their visit to Queens-
land is beyond doubt.
, Again, the charge that their “emigration to Queensland checks
civilization and Christianity ”is equally incomprehensible, I shall have to'
deal with this point more fully afterwards, when speaking of the good
done hy our mission in Queensland, but, meanwhile, let me adduce a few
testimonies by way of answer. Sir H. W. Norman, K.0.M.G., the
Governor of Queensland, says, “ I consider that large numbers of the
Kanakas, who have come to the colony, have largely benefited by the
civilizing and Christianizing influence to which they have been subject.” 3
Che Bishop of Brisbane speaks in the same strain. 3 The Rev. Mr,
Knipe, of Maryborough, who from long residence and experience there,
is well qualified to judge, writes: “ From a long and intimate acquaintance
with the Kanakas and their treatment, 1 am convinced that by coming
here they are improved physically and spiritually. They learn also the
nature of work, and something is being done to remove tribal enmities.” 4
Professor Henry Drummond, the distinguished author of “ Natural Law
in the Spiritual World," and who looks very coldly on the Kanaka
importation, admitted, when interviewed on the 16 th of May last year,
that “ in several oases Kanakas wore improved by residence in Queens-
land.” 5 The Rev. Mr. Johnson, the eminently successful missionary at
writes, “ After seven years experience amongst them; I can
say that it is better for the boys to be hero than in their own islands.
They are more teachable, more tractable, more trustworthy in many ways.
I have been in correspondence with several missionaries, and they all say
it is harder to get them to come to school in their own islands than
here.” 0 Two remarkable testimonies, bearing in this direction, I cannot
forbear adding. The Rev. J. E. Clayton, Church of England missionary
Minister at Bundaberg, writes : “ I visit regularly over ten plantations.
taken the trouble to find out the average number of islanders, who
did not attend school or roneive any religious instruction before they
arrived in Queensland, and, out of 255 whom I personally interviewed, I
found only 68 had been taught anything about religion, an average of
26 per cent.” 7 Now, if we add the statistics furnished by his letter to'
those furnished by the Rev. Mr. Johnson’s letter, we gather that the
number of the boys coming in contact with religions instruction in Queens-
land amounts to close on 75per cent. Again,Mrs. Donaldson, of Sandiford
plantation, whom I have already referred to, writes, “ Glorious mission
1. Queensland Hansard, Ist April, 1892. The “ Boport of Sugar Tuduatry ”in the Brisbane-
Connor , 3rd September, 1802, states that at Bundaberg 708 bovs bad sums lying to feholv credit In-
the bank amounting to £8668,
2. Despatch to Lord Knutaford, 33rd May, 1803.
3. Address to Synod of Diocese, Brisbane, May, 1802.
4. Letter, 7th November, 1893.
5. London Pali Mall Gazette, IBtli May, 1892,
6. Letter, Bth November, 1893.
7. Letter, sth November, 1803.


•work is being done in Queensland. Oat of my * boys ’ 66 have been
baptised in 13 months. My labour of love has been a very encouraging
.and pleasant one." She goes on to say, “ I believe that the boys are
•easier to win, and that mission work is consequently more successful
here than in their own islands, and for this reason, that they are away
from their heathenish prejudices and superstitions.” She adds one
curious and striking fact bearing in the same dirretion. “ With regard
to sickness among them, many come from their islands to be doctored.
I had one boy under my care, a mere walking ske eton. I asked him
why he left home when he was not strong, and he replied ‘ Some boy
been in Queensland, he tell me very good, you go, yon get medicine,
doctor look out you, and soon yon be all right.’ And so it was. In
•six mouths’ time you would not have known him. He often used to
•say, ‘You very good to me, Missus, suppose me stop along island me
dead a long time.’” 1 Oan any sensible man compare Mrs. Donaldson’s
testimony with Marion Disney’s melodramatic testimony about the
horrible condition of the Kanakas in Queensland, and the gradually
destructive work that is being carried on there towards them, and
hesitate for a moment which of the two he is to believe 1
111
It has been alleged that “ the South Sea islanders don’t know our
' language, and so, on being recruited, don’t know properly what they are
doing, or understand the nature of their employment, the length of it,
and the wages offered.”
The changes have been rung on this charge to a moat voluminous
•extent, is not one that requires a very lengthened reply. Even if
it could, with any shew of truth, have been urged some years back, it can
not he urged now. Apart fiom the fact ot its being an express Govern-
ment regulation that “no islander shall be recruited even through an
interpreter at his island, unless there is also a competent interpreter at
the colony on his arrival,” they all know note perfectly well, on being
recruited, what they are doing, the nature of their employment, the length
of it, and the wages offered. What does Mr. Caulfield, inspector at
Bundaborg say ? “Though some may have been enticed at one time by
false pretences, deception now is impossible. The labour-ship’s occupation
is known to all, and its badge is carried on the forotop. After three
years, 50 per cent, return home. Through many coming and going,
•the islands are now so much in touch with Queensland that all,
going there as recruits, know perfectly the kind of work and wages.
All this has been fully made known to them, and talked over by those who
have gone formerly and returned. Those who return to Queensland are
•envied and made big men of, and boast of their residence in it.” 3 Sir
S. W. Griffith says—“lt is a fact well-known to most who have actual
■experience in this matter, that, in the islands to which permission to
recruit is limited, almost all, if not all, are fully acquainted from the
reports of their fellow-islanders who have already been engaged for service
1. Australian Christian World , 3rd November. 1802.
2. Mr. Caulfield's letter, already quoted.


in Queensland, with the conditions of the service.” 1
Now, I ask, would all this be so if they had formerly been deceived
in the matter,! If they had been cajoled before, why could the Rev.
Mr. Johnson of Bundaborg write—“ I find the boys themselves like to
comeback to Queensland, I have had boys going and coming to and
from the islands several times, and when I asked them why they came
back again, they said they liked Queensland better”? 2 IE they had been
so hoodwinked before, why would they be, as I could prove from the’
testimony of many employers of their labour, so very anxious,
to return, and oven beg to be taken back to to their old plantations 1
Or, why does it happen that very many have, of their own free will,,
been engaged over and over again,, so that in not a few oases, 12 and
even 15 years have passed since they first came to Queensland ?
One word as to their knowledge of time, and of the length of the term
oi their engagement, and when it expires. It is plain that they must
know this thoroughly, not only from the reports of those who have gone-
before, but from another little fact. They count the lapse of time, and
measure the length of their service, by notches cut on a stick. They put
a knotoh every month—only their months are not calendar , but lunar
months, marked by the revolutions of the moon, And the result is that,
when the exact time of their agreement ends, they are always slightly
defective in their calculations (though they have come now to know about
this), but only to the extent of the small difference that exists between
solar and lunar calculations.
IV.
It has been alleged that the Polynesians are “cruelly treated on the
Queensland plantations,” so as to “equal, and even outstrip,” in
inhumanity “ the worst forms of American slavery.”
As this is a most serious charge, and one on which I can
write from the moat careful personal experience, I wish to look at it, and
deal with it, at some length. 'Dr. Marden—to whom I have already
referred, as recently sent by the Sydney Presbyterian Ladies’ College to-
visit the New Hebrides islands and investigate the question fully—a
gentleman, who went there with a bad impression of the' traffic—
nevertheless, after strict investigation, decided in favour of its
continuance, though he would like to see recruiting on the whole abolished
and the islands annexed by Great Britain. 3 Dr. Marden acknowledges there
is only one thing of which he knows nothing personally, and that is, the
treatment of the Kanakas on the Queensland plantations, as he has never
been near a Northern sugar plantation, and knows not one of the large
owners. This “ missing link,” however, in his argument in favour of the
continuance of this traffic, I can supply, and give the result of my own
personal experience, when I was sent for a month to the Mackay district
in September 1891, to go over all the plantations, and examine the
condition of the Kanakas carefully for myself. I must own that, when I
Started on this mission, I did so with considerable misgivings. I had
1. Reply to London Missionary Society, 17th August, 1892.
2. Letter, Bth November, 1892.
3. Melbourne Argus, quoted in the Brisbane Cowier S6th October, 1802.


heard indirectly many terrible charges made against the planters, and,
like Dr. Marclsn when he went to the N.H. islands, I went to the
Queensland plantations, “ having no special opinion ” on the matter “ save
a general impression that things mast be very bad since so much had been
written against them." I first spent three days at Bnndaberg, and saw
over the three principal plantations ; then I went to Maokay and spent
fully a month in going over all the plantations, as I described at length
on my return, 1 and also in my reply 2 to Dr. Paton’s famous “ Protest"
against the renewal of the labour. I did not confine myself to the reports
of the planters. I associated chiefly with the boys, saw them at their work,
visited them in their houses, as well as attended their night-class
meetings, and I interviewed and cross-examined them, as often as I oonld
get an opportunity. Evidently therefore, out of about 9000 registered
Polynesians in Queensland, I may say I saw the existing con-
ditions of nearly 6000—about two-thirds of the whole. I have the most
reliable testimony that the same conditions prevail in the Maryborough dis-
trict, leaving only about one-fifth of the Kanaka population scattered over
Queensland, which X have not personally visited, and of which I can give
no very definite information. The result of the whole was, that I was
most happily undeceived. I found the islanders on the plantations
everywhere treated in a most humane and Christian way. As to slavery
there was not a vestige of it, rather the opposite. If the planters erred
at all, they erred in making too much of their black employees. At all
events, I was forced by sheer conviction to the conclusion, that it would
be a good thing for all the white labourers in the colony if they were as
well off, and as well cared for, as these poor blacks.
Let me look at the alleged charge of “slavery” and “inhuman
treatment on the plantations.” The Rev. Dr. Paton indulges in a
number of very strong statements, which have been repeated in still
more exaggerated terms by Marion Disney and others. To the chief of
these statements, as urged by Dr. Patou, let me reply seriatim.
Before doing this, however, let me say in the outset, that those who
make these charges commit the grave error of quoting experiences
belonging to several years back, and now quite out of date, and of adducing
what occurred then as descriptive of what occurs now. Dr, Paton, in
his “ Protest," 3 refers almost entirely to what he admits occurred prior to
1885. So again, in recently re-asserting the charge of slavery, lie, by
way of proof, refers to “ what was proved by the Royal Commission in
1885.”* In like manner, the Rev. J, Copeland, attempting to reply to
the letter of Mrs. Donaldson of Sandiford describing the state
of the boys on her plantation, 8 says, " Mrs. Donaldson speaks from an
■experience of 12 years, but the experience of many others is much greater,
.and mine is for 30 years.” o He thinks further he has made a
1. My letter in the Brisbane Courier, 2ml December, 1801.
2. Reply to Dr. Patou’s “ Protest" la tlio Brisbane Courier, 20th March, 1892,
8. Brisbane Courier, 23rd March, 1803.
4. London Times, 20th August, 1893.
6. Australian Christian World, Hrrt November, 1892.
6. do. do. lUth November, 1802.


great point in quoting a pamphlet by Robert Sharp, a Queenslander,
written in 1870, in which the Kanaka labour traffic is styled “ the Slave
Trade in the Pacific": and ha goes on to quote the report of the Royal
Commission in 1885 about “kidnapping, deception, and murder.” But
I would ask, what is the value of all such assertions 1 They imply an
entire overlooking of the real question at. issue. The question is not, as
I have already hinted, “ what occurred, or what abuses existed 22 years,
or 12 years, or oven 7 years back ? ” but “what has existed since 1885 ?
what exists now ? have these abuses, as is indisputable, ceased
since then, thus showing that they are not inseparable from the traffic 1 ’
That is the real question, and it. is again and again wilfully overlooked,
and a rechauffe of the old Imrped-on abuses served up to us, steeped in
the fullest horrors, As I showed .in my reply to tließev. Mr. Landels,
of Male, all this is a flaring instance of “ begging the question.
That there is slavery now is a thing taken for granted without proof, and
then, the conclusion is drawn that “ these abuses are inseparable from
the traffic,” and lastly, “ that it is and must be slavery (!) We talk_ of
setting up a man of straw and then knocking him down—this is setting
up a man of straw as a living man , and because we have dune so, drawing
from it a proof (hat ho must be a living man (1).
Let us, however, look at the charges themselves.
Dr. Pal on says that “ owing to long hours of labour, hard work,
changed circumstances of food, clothing and houses, there is unexampled
mortality amongst the Kanakas, in some cases amounting to 26 per cent.}
and when they die they are buried like dogs.” 2
First of all, as to “the mortality” on the plantations. Dr Patou
says it is “ unexampled” sometimes “amounting to 26 per cent ’ I
repeat what X said in my reply to Dr. Paton’s Protest, 3 that there must
be some strange mistake, When in Mackey about 13 months lack, j
made the fullest enquiries at the offices of the police magistrate, the
Polynesian inspector, the registrar m Mnckny, and I learned that the
death-rate, considerable at first, had been steadily diminishing for the
lastS years, year by year. I examined the “ Annual Report of the
Pacific Island Immigration Department,” issued at the beginning of 1891,
and found that, in the Mackav district, during 1890, there were resident
3816 Kanakas, of whom 98 died, (the registrar at M’nckay states that
during the last,nine months, the number has been 82, only a very slight
increase). If however. Dr. Patou’s statistics are to be taken as i correct
estimate of the usual mortality, the number that died should have been
nearer 700 than 98. As to Bundaberg, the same Animal Report
for the same year puts down the deaths at 156, out of 2846 Kanakas
there—-if the above rate is correct, there should have been about 700.
1. Sydney Presbyterian, dth Juno, 1892.
2. “ Protest” in Brisbane Courier. 28rd March, 1802.
8. Brisbane Courier, 20th March. 1892. . , .. .
Dr Patou complains that “numbers never return, after three years service, to then own
islands,” andthat “thousands wlio went to Queensland are unaccounted for j” and ho implies it is
because they have died off, and only “ the fittest survived ” (see the Christian lierala f Lonuon,
28rd June. 1802). But why do they not return? Not because they have died olt, butbecause, feeling
bettor off In Queensland, they don't want to return. Many of the “ boys iu Queensland now
have been there from 3 to 15 years.


It is true indeed that the mortality amongst the Polynesians-
in Queensland is higher than that amongst the white population, but
it does not follow that this is owing to their deportation to Queensland.
To judge the matter properly, we would need to know the death-rate in
their own islands, and compare it with the death-rate in this colony,
is it not true that the dark races throughout Australia and
Polynesia are gradually dying out, whether in their own native
settlements, or elsewhere ?
Then as to the “ long hours of labour ” —Dr. Paton calls them “ very
hurtful ” —and Marion Disney says “ the men work in the fields with
short intervals for meals, from dawn tn dark, or from 5 a.m., to 7 pmi.” l
But how stands the matter ? At Maryborough the work is about 9 hours-
a day. At Bundabarg I believe it is about the same. At Mackay I am,
told it is 10 hours in summer and 8 in winter.
As to “the hard work’’ and implied cruel treatment on the
plantations—Marion Disney speaks heart-rendingly. “ The cane is-
planted in rows, and as it attains a height of eight to ten feet, the absence
of air, together with the humid exhalations of the ground, renders the
atmosphere almost unendurable. . . . At the first streak of
daylight the plantation bell summons all hands to the labours of the day.
The Kanakas, shivering in the cold, white fog, are told oft in gangs,
each gang being under the charge of an overseer, or Kanaka drivers, the
latter usually white men of the labouring class, whose business it is to
exact the utmost possible amount of work from each ‘ boy,’ and sea that
there is no malingering. . . . In the fields, the overseers on horse-
back superintend the work, while the drivers on foot move about among
the Kanakas, encouraging them both with blows and profanity to exert
themselves to the utmost of their power. Downcast and dejected, from
12 to 14 hours a day, these natives of the Coral Isles labour beneath the
eyes, and not unfrcquently the fists, of their white masters.” 2 But how
stands the matter ? If the work is so hard, why are no complaints ever
made to the inspector, or to the planter ? They have overseers set over
them, usually white men—say 1 to every 40. These tell them what to do,
shew them how to do it, and see that they do it properly. One planter, B '
who has several plantations, and employs a large number of “boys,” has
as|ured me that “ there is no such thing as ill-treatment on the part of
the overseers. The‘boys’are numerically far stronger than the overseer, and
quite know their rights, and would at once apply to the inspector,
Sometimes, amongst n large number of boys, there will be a sulky
and bad-tempered one, and a great deni of tact is required in their
management. If anyone wilfully disobeys orders, he is brought up before
the police-magistrate, and, in the case of one who is incorrigible, the
agreement is generally by consent cancelled in the presence of the
inspector, and the boy is sent back to his island.”
Next, as to their ‘‘ wages”— how stands the matter 1 I was told on
reliable authority that new boys get not less than £6, and often £8 and
1. London Daily News, 16th August, 1892.
2, ft
8. J. E. Davidson, Esq,, ofßrniisoombe, .to., Itnokay.


even £lO per annum. The amount due to them every six months is paid
to them in gold in the presence of the inspector, and no deductions of any
kind whatever are allowed. Rations, clothes, medical attendance,
tobacco, soap, etc., are also found by the employer in addition to the
wages. “ Overtime ” boys get from £l4 to £lB per annum, with rations
and medical attendance, though they have to provide themselves with
clothes, etc. When their agreement of three years is up, they engage at
these new rates generally for a year only, as they like changes about to
various places. They are entitled to a free passage to their islands on
the termination of any agreement.
As to their “ Food." which is complained of, I examined it and
found it good and plentiful I be'ieve it is quite as good, in fact, as that
which the planters eat. At Bundaborg—according to “The Report of the
Sugar Industry,” 1 “ the Kanakas have fresh-baked bread every day, a
bullock is killed tor them as often, and they meet with treatment such
as millions of outcast England would absolutely ravel in.” Perhaps then’
food may not at first quite agree with them, but I am told they soon get
used to it.
As to their “ clothing ” I could sec that it was decent and not too
burdensome. One planter who employs a good many boys, says, “ they
are well clothed, many with starched shirt and collar,” 8
As to their “houses,” I visited several of them, and found they
were in many cas.'s built by the islanders themselves according to their
own taste, and they often prefer these to those offered by their employers.
"When any of them are sick, there is to be found on the plantations, a
house or kind of hospital, set apart for the sick, where they are kindly,
and if necessary, daily attended to by proper medical officers, and proper
diet given. This is in addition to the Government hospitals.
As to,their treatment at death, they are not, as Dr. Paton says,
“ buried like dogs.” They are decently buried like white men, and the
resident missionary performs the ceremony at the grave.
Looking at the Kanakas on the plantations as a vhole, and as L
saw them, I found amongst them a general air of contentment, and olten
of placid happiness. Mrs. Donaldson specially speaks of “hearty laugh-
ter and singing in their huts at night, when their work of the clay is
over.” 3 I myself was present at a tea-meeting, the first ot the kina
given to them, when about 300 Kanakas put in an appearance. Row
clean they were ! how polite (o each other ! how proud the dark stewards
and helpers were of their office ! what an abundance of the best ot
eatables were givm, and how they ate and drank I Then, how the blacks
sang hymns, and how the whites recited poems, sang songs to them, ana
entertained them for hours, made it to me outstrip in enjoyment any tea-
meeting I was ever present at in my life.
A few words as to what occurs to them when their term of agree-
ment expires. As I have already said, they know the term by the notches
on their sticks, besides, I believe the inspector takes care to inform them
X. Brisbane Courier, 3rd October, ISOS. ■ ■ .
2. J. Bolton, Esn., of Pntlolgh,ln Brisbane Evening Observer, UtU November.
3. Letter in Australian Christian tVcrtd, 3rd November, 1832.


of it. If they wish to go home, they are at once paid off and discharged
and go to the immigration depot, and get sent back by the first vessel.
Many indeed prefer to 1 walk about ’ for a time, doing no work, and
.amusing themaelyes making purchases with their earnings before they
return to their islands ; while some after a holiday, will re-engage, either
friends »i tatl ° nS haVB 3 ' llSt left ’ ° r 0,1 somo ' other . where they have
I must say a few words also as to what becomes of them when the
p antationa are sold, or change owners. The Rev. Dr. Pa ton has asserted
a the Kanakas are bought from chiefs and Friends and relatives,
ihe inspector causes them to walk back and forward like horses before the
employer, who bargains for them at so much per head, then they are
driven off like a mob of horses for a three year’s
this, he quotes the findings of the Royal Commission in 1885,
seven years back (!) He also quotes “an advertisement ho saw about a
Maryborough plantation” (I presume also 7 years back), “in which
Kanakas, horses drays, and all sugar-making plant, etc, were to be
n S ° d ’ i !Uld i i" 3 aC C evid(?ntl - y im Plving is so to the present day,
nHensl l ™°' v they are so sold with every plantation, which
chants owners. • I would ask, do all in Queensland know this ? I
9 ni M '' I) 2f ,d ® 0 "' of Btanaoombe, on this point, and he
lej. bed to the following effect. 'To describe the islanders in this way, when
a plantation is sold, is utterly and absolutely untrue. What takes place
willlnn. i£ he .incoming purohaeer is willing, and if the Kanakas are
..Milling, not otherwise, the agreements made with the vendor of the
plantation are transferred, in the presence of the Polynesian inspector,
to the pm chaser, but there must be mutual consent amongst albeoncemed.
The cost ot importation is ascertained, and the proportion of their cost
for the miexpired portion of their time is repaid to the first importer,
i here is no sunk thng as an app raisement of value. One employer’s name
is substituted for another, and he steps into the shoes!
accepting the same responsibilities, and furnishing proper securities. A
Kanaka is at perfect liberty to decline being transferred j but, as it does
not affect their wages or position in any way, in very few instances— ’
in none known to me-do they object, Sales of estates in full working
order are few and far between.” * 8
One other thing I may add, ere leaving this point. If such
terrible things were true, why do the Kanakas (as I have already said)
not only m many cases not wish to go home,'and even beg to bo
re-engaged by their old masters, but why, when they do go home, do they
m so many cases praise “big-fellow master,” and .the women have so
many kind things to say of “ missis?” OF this, if necessary I cou Id
give many testimonies Perhaps Dr. Paton and Marion Disney may be
able to answer this—l cannot. J *
I must now dwell for a ,little on the missionary efforts, put forth on
1. Letter from J. H. Daviilaon, Esq., 7th November, 1802.
2, The London Times, SOth August, 1802.
•I. Lottor, 7fch November, 1802. M


the Kanakas in the plantations, and how these are seconded, and in every
way encouraged by the planters.
What these missionary efforts are at Maryborough, Bundaberg, and
Mackay I have already described; though from personal experience I
know moat about those at Mackey, where our missionary has been
established and supported by the Presbyterian Church of Queensland for
more than four years back. The Rev. Mr, J. M.‘L. Mackintyre, the
missionary there, is a most hardworking, zealous man, and has frequently
knocked himself up by overwork, His wife is equally zealous and devoted,
conducting the week-night classes when her husband is absent. These
efforts are abundantly seconded by the planters. At first nearly all were
lukewarm to the mission, but now all are enthusiastic about it, and
subscribe to its support. They give every facility to the boys to attend
the Sabbath services and the weeknight classes. These gentlemen are
few in number, not more than ten in all, but during the last twelve
months they have subscribed double as much as on any former, year, and
I have been informed, not long since, from a very reliable source, that
an effort is to be made amongst them to subscribe at a still
higher rate. But this is not all. Mrs Bolton, of Farleigh, (one of the
planters’ wives), gives up every Sunday afternoon to instructing the boys
on her plantation. Mrs. Donaldson, of Sandiford, I have previously
frequently referred to. I have already mentioned her efforts, conjoined
with those of her husband, in instructing four nights a week 150 boys,
for whom her husband built a hall, aud several of whom for a long time
she had instructed in her own house. Her letter recently written to the
“Australian Christian World,” 1 and to which T have frequently referred,
recording as it does her Christian philanthropy and great
success is an admirable one, and should carry conviction to every
unprejudiced mind. Modestly docs she speak of the 66 of her boys
baptised in 13 months, while she says nothing of the generosity of these
same poor boys, who have subscribed nearly £2O to the Kanaka Mission
Fund, besides paying local expenses.
As to the results generally of our mission at Mackay, I have already
given some statistics, and they furnish facts that speak for themselves.
If I had time, I could dwell on the deep impression my actual contact
with these results in my visit to Mackay made on my own mind, and how
they stirred me up spiritually, as I have not been for many years, I felt
like Barnabas, when he came to Antioch, and saw the groat and gracious
Divine work going on there. Like him, I could only look on in amazement
and deep thankfulness, and “ exhort them all with purpose of heart to
cleave unto the Lord” (Acts xi. 23). Looking at these poor “ boys”
as a race, I could see that they wore not very brilliant, intellectually, but
they were evidently a docile and even affectionate race, orderly in their
behaviour, anxious to learn at school, exceedingly pleased when you visit
them, and most courteous, and even polite to each other, attending the
week night classes in relays to accommodate one another. As to the
moral results of the mission, they were simply astonishing. Drink and
3rd November, 1892.


fighting used to be only too common amongst them, and one planter l
assured me that “as many as 25 would be carried into bis plantation on
Sunday afternoons, bleeding and wounded, but that all that is now
entirely at an end.” Planters, doctors, inspectors, police-magistrates,
and policemen, all unite in testifying to the completeness of the reformation
in this respect. As formerly stated, out of 2800 Kanakas there, 1917
are now pledged total abstainers, and thoroughly sober men. The
spiritual results of the mission are even more remarkable. The “ boys ”
and “ Marys ” turn out in large numbers to the Sabbath day services, at
the head quarters of the mission at Walkerston, some occasionally coming
from a distance of 15 miles. When they cannot, from distance, or other
causes attend, there is a morning service on each plantation, either conducted
by the missionary, or held by the boys, presided over by a native teacher,
amongst themselves, There has been, year by year, an ever deepening
seriousness amongst them, They prove themselves most susceptible to
Christian influences, and are increasingly anxious to listen to the gospel.
Many seecn to have been savingly converted, and daring the four years or
so of the mission, 252 have been baptised, and several more are awaiting
baptism. I know it has been hinted in some quarters that they are
“baptised too readily.” If this has been so in any other part of the colony,
I know it has not been so in connection with the mission at Mackay.
There they are carefully trained beforehand—seriously examined by the
missionary, local ministers, _ and elders—and then baptised in churches
packed to overflowing by mingled blacks and whites, sometimes more being
outside than within. A more solemn sight I never witnessed than when
I baptised 19 catechumen in my visit in September last year—while their
prayers and simple addresses 1 heard, at some of their meetings, often
brought the tears into my eyes. Let me add that from a letter recently
received by me from Mr. Mackintyre, I learn they have made a new
departure, and held' two great “camp meetings,” which were largely
attended, and at which a number of “ boys ” prayed and gave addresses,
60 as to melt the heart of every white person privileged to hear them
V.
One other charge I shall briefly refer to, viz that no real
Christian good is done by missionary effort in Queensland,” and that
“ what seems so at the time has no permanent lasting results, when the
boys return home,”
The Rev. A. H. Macdonald of Santo said recently at the Victorian
General Assembly that “ ho did not think that the visit of the Kanakas
to Queensland did them any permanent g00d,”2 The Rev. Mr. Landels of
Malo, speaks in a still more emphatic way. He says that “ the greatest
proportion of those apparently religiously impressed never came near the
mission station on their return home. . . Some I have seen who had
been instructed and even baptised in Queensland, who on owning home,
returned to nudity and gross heathenism,” —he even goes on to say that
4 whatever good may have been done in Queensland, however sincere the
Kanakas were at the time when environed by Christian influences, it was
1. W, Stoedman, Esq., of Pleystmve (Haoltn-y).
S. Brisbane Courier, llth November, 1592.


impossible to expect them to continue such when they return home.” 1
Why, Mr. Landels ? If Queensland were so bad a place in every sense
lor the poor boys, and if it were far better for them in every sense to
remain on their own islands, why is the little good they got in Queensland
rubbed off when they get hone ? According to this reasoning, you say,
it is better for the boys to remain at home, for, while they may get some
apparent good when they come to Queensland, they can’t keep it for a
-day at home. (!)
However, Mr. Landels goes further even than this. He says—
■“ Those who‘ may have been looked on as exemplary in Queensland, turn
out to be perfect devils on reaching home.” 2 I deny this out and out,
1. What right has Mr. Landels or any man to say that the poor
•boys in Queensland, converted and baptized, are not converted 7
Have they ever visited Queensland, or the plantations, or the
professedly converted boys, or do they do what it is so easy to do,
make groundless charges through heresay 7 Sure lam that had Mr.
Landels, or Mr. Macdonald, come to Queensland and seen what I have
soon, they would have spoken very differently and gone homo, if not
“ sadder,” yet “ wiser ” men. But perhaps such say that the proofs we
have adduced of real “conversion,” and a “saving change’’ are not
■sufficient to convince them, though they may convince everybody else.
What I Absolute heathens coming to attend school and church with a
regularity and earnestness that would put most white people to shame-
professing, in spite of all opposition from men of their own race around,
and even persecution, to bo converted and undergoing baptism—exchang-
ing a life of waste for one of thrift, and a life of degrading drunkenness
for persevering sobriety, and a life of frivolity for a life that gives every
spare hour to helping the missionary and earnestly pleading with others
about their souls ! 3 IE these are no proofs of a real spiritual change,
luhai are ?
2. These gentlemen may say : “ All this good, however apparently
great in Queensland, utterly disappears on their return home.”
Why, Mr. Landels, be in such haste to judge these poor
boys ? This is a point, only to be settled by time, It requires time for
the fruits of a tree to follow its inception of life. But how stands the
fact 7 Some, no doubt, who have come to Queensland and not come in
-contact with missionary effort, may have donned “ civilization’’ here, and
thrown it off when they went home. Some even, who have come to
■Queeensland and come under missionary influence, and professed to have
become Christians, may possibly go baolc to heathenism on their return
home.' What of that 7 Was there not one Judas among the twelve 7
Bub while this may have been true of “ civilization,” I question if it is
true of “ Christianity.” Let these gentlemen not make general state-
ments, but produce actual oases. I know this at least in respect to the
1. Sydney Presbyterian, Slat May, 1302.
2. Sydney Presbyterian, 21st May, 1802.
8. Besides, the “ boys ” over the Mackay district have contributed about -CSS to the support
of the Kanaka Mission during the period of 12 months, and this independently of what the planters
give. X wish wo had a few such “devils’ 1 amongst our white population.


mission at Mnckay. Since our mission began there, years ago, only
two hoys ot those professedly benefited by the mission have returned to
the islands, and in respect to one of them at least, a boy named Kissaway,
and baptized by the name of Peter, the missionary of his island when he
returned home, wrote to Mr, Maokintyre and said “ ho was doing good
work there.” Mrs, Donaldson, to whom I hare several times referred,
writes—“ I hod a letter from a missionary quite lately and he spoke of
the good behaviour of some boys returned from Queensland.” 1 In con-
nection with the mission at Bundaberg, which has been longer in
existence than the one at Maokay, still more explicit testimonials come.
" Philip Kalu, on reaching his island, went to Mr, Fraser, 1 lie
missionary, ami arranged with him as to becoming an assistant teacher;
he got the missionary soon after to write to Bundaberg and say he held
a very good class of his own people, whom he was telling about the
Saviour.” “ Another boy, Jimmy Mia, left his wife on the island and
occasionally returned to take her money, hast time lie left us the
inspector handed him £l9B, a sum he had saved during the 19 years he
had been in Queensland. BCe held a class every night on board during the
voyage. He became a teacher on one of the islands and was the means of
his wife’s conversion, which caused him great joy, and it was her wish to
bring up their little boy to know Jesus too, that they might all be
followers of the same Saviour. In writing to me the missionary says :
' We have abundant cause for praise that God has allowed us to see such
manifestations of His work in the heart of boys.’ ” 2 I could give other
testimonies to the same effect, but I forbear. A tew such are worth a
thousand vague general assertions on the other side. At all events they
show us that no one has any right to say that all the good we do the
Kanakas is merely superficial , and that when they go home the veneer
comes off, and they prove “ perfect devils.”
Before I close I must advent to one other point. Some sad outrages
were perpetrated amongst the boys at Maokoy on one another, and several
people said, “ 0 ! look at them 1 they are a quarrelsome race, full of all
sorts of tribal hostility to each other, and to bring them to Queensland is
only to bring into it elements of lawlessness and disorder! ” However
the Rev. Mr. Maokintyre, the missionary at Maokay, recently wrote to
me and gave me a true version of the matter. After referring to one
outrage at “ Homebush ” and another at “Hill-End,” he goes on to
1. Letter in Australian Christian World , 3rd November, 1802.
2. Sixth annual report of Bundaborg Kanaka Mission, 1801-02. Lot mo confirm that testimony
by a passage in No. S of the articles recently written by “ a reporter in a recruiting schooner ” in
tho Melbourne Argus, and abridged in the Brisbane Courier of 10th December last. The writer
speaking of the sojourn for a short time of tho labour schooner Helena in Danae Bay, Huron
Island, says that tho “crew of tho Emproza” (another labour vessel then visiting tho same snot)
“came with boat-loads of tho island passengers to visit friends in tho Helena. The men in tho
Holona returned their visits and I had an opportunity of boarding the Empreza, The majority
of ‘tho Solomon boys’were having a ‘sing song’ on deck. Tho hold seemed deserted hub on
descending I found in a secluded corner between 30 and 40 natives of the New Hebrides and
Solomons holding a religious service. Though the barbaric dance was in full swing overhead, the
worshippers below were very attentive and reverential. .... At tho prayers the boys knelt
with one accord, and with subdued but musical voices joined In the ‘ Amen? I was informed that
all the ‘ Solomon boys ’ who took part in the service had been Ohriatianiy.ad through the aaenev of
vlimon schools in Queensland," The italics are mine, bub the testimony thereby given deserves
to be emphasized.


speak o! the outrage at Mackay. He says that “ the boy who was mur-
dered, was one of his native teachers, an inoffensive boy, to whom another
islander gave the highest character, saying, 1 lie good alUhe time ’—and
who having been at the night school, and pleading with another boy
about his soul—was treacherously struck by a fierce Mahratta boy with
a nulla nulla, and died in a few minutes. It was not a tribal aggression,
a reprisal, but a-cold-blooded, wanton murder, perpretrated out "of hatred
to the boy and his earnest, active Christianity, Four hundred boys,
amongst them many Mahrattas, attended his funeral ; and out of ins
death, fruit has already sprung to the Saviour of souls.” As the Brisbane
Courier very pertinently remarked after printing my letter conveying this
intelligence—“ This outrage instead of shewing, as was too hastily assumed
in certain quarters, that unchangeable elements of disorder and lawless-
ness are introduced with the Kanaka, is rather a proof that, on his return
to the Pacific, he will cany with him elements of order that will act on
his kindred in a way eminently helpful to the South Sea missionaries.” 1
It may not be out of place here, to insert a letter lately received from one
of the “ boys ” at Mackay who witnessed the outrage, and who had
recently gone there from Bundaborg. It will shew the nature of the
thing, as well as give a proof of the good really done amongst the poor
“ boys.” This letter was written to the Rev. Mr. Johnson of Bundaberg,
and forwarded to me. 2 “Mackay, October 34th, 1892, Me lead cm
boys all time. Me gat cm 24 boys baptized. Temptation along Mackay
plenty strong. Me like em altogether. Christian boys pray for me.
You remember Charlie Api, he work close along Bundaberg before. • He
boy belong a you. Poor Charlie, he murdered on Saturday night when
lie came from school. Charlie been lending plenty boys to Jesus. We
plenty sorry ho died. We try to get Mahratta boys "come along school,
but they will not come. One day we had class. A Mahratta boy come
with tomahawk, smash door to pieces. He throw bottles at us. We no
angry with him, We pray for him. When ho smashed door we kept
singing. We ask God make him good. Ho go away. He no more
stop. We plenty glad. God hears our prayers.” Do these poor “boys”
get no good indeed ? how can anyone utter a calumny so gross—so
untrue ?
I now'bring my pamphlet to a close. In doing so, lot me say a few,
words.
First of all, I believe I have made good my point to all unprejudiced
readers, and shown that our Queensland Presbyterian church was
justified in not protesting against the re-introduction of Polynesian
labour into Queensland —nay, I believe I am justified in saying that to speak
of “ slavery of the worst description existing on these sugar plantations of
Queensland” is utterly untrue ; while as to the charge of “ atrocious
kidnapping ’’ in importing the boys, the asaerters of it are beginning to
keep quiet, because the charge, only provokes in most minds, “ inex-
tinguishable laughter,” which Homer speaks of in old times as coming
1. Brisbane Courtei\ 18th. November, 1892.
3. Letter, Bth November, 1802.


from the sight of, or hearing, something supremely ridiculous. As to the
whole matter, I consider I am justified in saying, as I said at the outset,
that *• the Kanakas are benefited physically, morally and spiritually by
their visit to, and residence in Queensland j” and also that our Governor,
Sir H. W. Norman, was justified in saying that “large numbers of
Kanakas, who have come to the colony, have greatly benefited by the
civilizing and Christianizing influence to which they have been subject.” 1
Secondly, I would say how deeply grieved I am that such attacks
have been made on the church to which I belong, and the colony in
which I live. It is a great pity they have been made, and they have
worked no little mischief. They have wounded to the core the hearts of
multitudes of Christian men and women, as implying that there are no
right-thinking, right-feeling Christians left amongst churches, planters,
or people. They have flung a wrong impression of onr whole colony
broadcast over the entire civilized earth. They have done what they could
to damage missionary effort amongst the Queensland people, as implying
the utter uselessness of all such effort. Why cannot those objectors leave
us alone, and cease heaping on us unmerited abuse ? Why cannot they
let us prosecute our work amongst the poor blacks as we best may, with
God’s help, in striving to benefit for time and eternity, one of the most
interesting of the dark-skinned races on the earth ? It may take years of
■elaborate skilful work to raise a building, and yet a few hours’ rash
assault may pull the whole down. In the words of the greatest
philosophical poet of modern time, changing only one word,
The way is smooth
For power that travels with the human tongue.
Ye holy men, so earnest in your care,
Of your own mighty instruments beware.
jVI
&I6LIO
'rnnary O
fvs 7
iKlcfH
Finis.
1, Despatch to Lord Knutstorfl, 33rd May, 1892,
