







VIEWS AROUND MITTAGONG.


MOSES JONES,
Veterinary Livery Stables,
Late Mr. John Gray s
BURRADOO STREET,
A^BOWRAL
—<* —
Cabs , Horses and Vehicles for Hire.
Victoria Carriage for Invalids.
PARTIES DRIVEN TO
THE WOMBEYAN CAVES
ALSO TO
The Charming Sights of the lllawarra District.
Private board & lodgings.
Trains Met. Telegrams Promptly Attended to.


ISSUED BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF MINES & AGRICULTURE
FOK THE
Management & Protection of the Wombeyan Caves
No person will be allowed to enter any Cave unless accom-
panied by the Caretaker, or an authorised Guide.
The Caretaker may exclude from the Caves any person who
is guilty of improper conduct.
Visitors are conducted through the Caves by the Caretaker
or a Guide, for which service no charge is made, but the Care-
taker is authorised to charge for the use of magnesium ribbon
and candles, as per printed scale of charges.
* Any person found breaking, defacing by WHITING, or
marking, or otherwise injuring or removing any rock, stalactite,
stalagmite, or any part of the Caves will be PROSECUTED
WITH THE UTMOST RIGOUR OF THE LAW.
All specimens of whatever description derived from the
interior of the Caves are the property of the Government.
The shooting or trapping of any wild animal or bird, or
the removal of the eggs of any w,M bird within any part of the
Reserve for the Caves is not allowed.
The Caretaker is instructed to request visitors to insert their
names and addresses in the books provided for the purpose, and
to read the published Regulations relating to the management of
the Caves which are posted in conspicuous places on the reserve.
The Caretaker is instructed to immediately report to the
Under Secretary for Mines and Agriculture the name and address
of any employee, visitor, or person infringing any Regulation
published for the information of the public, or any Regulation or
Instruction issued for the guidance of employees.
* Particular attention is invited to this regulation, and the
Public, for whose recreation the Caves reserve was created, are
requested to assist in its observance by giving information to the
Under Secretary for Mines and Agriculture, Sydney, which may
lead to the conviction of any person found injuring any Cave.
JOSEPH COOK,
Secretary for Mines and Agriculture
Department of Mines and Agriculture, 1899.


if-S' 77
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.]
[ILLUSTRATED.
WOJTBEYAN CAVES
AND THE
BOWRAL, MITTAGONG & HOSS VALE
TOURIST DISTRICTS
1899.
Publishers s
HSS f ST/3>
The Argus Printing Works, Parramatta, N.S.W. ,AV




PREFACE.
ffHEEE are limestone caves explored and unexplored
in all parts of the world. Some of the explored
ones are in the beaten track of the tourist, and
others are beyond his reach. Of caves frequented by
tourists the world is continually hearing from one
source and another, but of the partially explored caves,
and of those off the paths of civilisation, the busy
world knows nothing; except, perhaps, vague uncer-
tain rumours.
The Wombeyan (which, by the way, is the
raison d'etre for this guide) has for years past belonged
to the latter category. It has lived in neglect, owing
to its former isolated position, and not until the
commencement of the excellent roa 1 now connecting
it with the tourist districts of Bowral, Mittagong
and Moss Yale, was Wombeyan and its attractions
known beyond a very limited sphere. Moreover the
accounts that were in circulation in districts im-
mediately surrounding the caves were of a dim and
shadowy order, and smacked of that piquant flavour-
ing which legends acquire when handed down from
generation to generation. The data, however, now
at hand (due to the fact that the caves are in
closer touch) is authenticated, and the object of this
guide is to give greater publicity to such data, to


reach a larger audience, and, by giving particulars
which tourists need, tempt the thousands who have
not done so to pay visits of inspection to the sub-
terranean wonders of Wombeyan.
Up to the present, nothing has been at-
tempted in the form of a guide-book for these caves.
The eyes of the sight-seeing world have been directed
towards, Jenolan, where, in the last ten or twenty
years, many thousands of pounds have been expended
by Government in making a more direct road, facili-
tating the means of transit, and in providing luxurious
accommodation for tourists. Jenolan in consequence
has received a large share of attention at the hands
of journalists and makers of books. Its glories
have been loudly extolledthe caves have been pub-
lished from the housetops by means of voice and
pen, and, where the lecturer has failed to reach,
the indispensable guide-book has been sent out upon
its silent mission. More than one Jenolan guide-
book has been published for the edification of the
public, but Wombeyan—beyond an occasional article
in a journal and an official report or two—has
hitherto received no journalistic favours. This guide-
book, therefore, is the first of its kind. It, how-
ever, makes no pretentious claims, and asks for no
consideration beyond what is usually allowed to any
book written for the popular mind with the object
of conveying information instructive—or at least
useful —in directing the movements of tourists prompted
to visit the place or places described.


INTRODUCTION.
fIHE early history of the Wombeyan Caves is lost
in the mists that have gathered in the distance.
No one can tell definitely the circumstances
under which the caves were discovered. True one or
two claim to have heard from ‘ old hands ’ the story
of discovery, but those who (by virtue of fifty
years residence and close association with the caves)
ought to know, profess ignorance on the point. Prob-
ably the caves were used by bushrangers as a place of
safety and retreat after daring exploits which might have
excited the anger and resentment of settlers, and
which might have at least needed, for a time, the
total effacement of the gang in order to calm in-
dignation and elude the police. Mr, Chas Chalker
(the late caretaker), who was first shown the caves
by his father half a century ago, is disposed to
accept this theory, but beyond the argument from
probability there is nothing to support it. At the
time referred to gangs of freebooters—desperate, mur-
derous fellows —were “ killravaging the country,” and
the caves, which are just a mighty maze without


a plan, would offer a security that no other spot
could 'possibly afford.
Mr. Chalker, senior, father of the present
guide, was a brother of ‘old Ned’ Chalker, at one
time heavy-weight champion pugilist of the world,
and of ‘old Dan ’ Chalker, the light-weight champion
or sixty years ago. The writer knew ‘old
Ned’ in his declining years—‘he died when about
85 years of age)—and it would be like putting
violent hands to the memory of the dear old man
if he omitted to state that the hero of the ‘ring,’
whose misshapen hands gave evidence of the fierce
conflicts he had engaged in, deeply deplored his early
life, and, seeing his errors in the light of maturer
years, earnestly exhorted men to avoid his mistakes.
Furthermore, the name Chalker is associated with the
capture of Lynch, the perpetrator of a series of
atrocious murders committed on the main Southern
Road, between Berrima and Picton, some sixty years
ago, for which the murderer was hung in the Ber-
rima gaol. As a matter of fact the name Chalker
is of more interest historically than the fictions which
imaginative minds would fain weave round the word
Wombeyan, which, after all, is not surrounded with
the halo of any romance.
Since the caves have been visited by sight-
seers a rude record has been kept. This record
consists chiefly in names and dates, and a few
strange hieroglyphics which might pass muster in an
Egyptian tomb. The earliest record the writer (whose
attempts at exploration have been rewarded with a


degree of success) could find in the old caves is: —
OXLEY
HASSALL
1862
But a resident of the district who has visited the
caves for thirty years, affirms that a much earlier
record than this may be found, although, of late
years, he has been unable to discover its where-
abouts. It reads, thusly :
WILD—IB42
The cave itself is the jealous custodian of
its own records, which are inscribed with charcoal
upon the marble tablets in
vast illumined halls,
Silent and bright, where nothing but the falls
Of fragrant waters, gushing with cool sound
From many a jasper font, is heard around.
All respecting the Wombeyan beyond this
impromptu record commenced by scribblers is pre-
historic, and is sealed in the limbo of forgotten
things. The record did not begin at the beginning,
and it will not end at the end because every stately
column within reach of those wishing to hand their
names down to posperity threatened to become as
badly disfigured with hieroglyphics as Cleopatra’s needle
itself, and the practice has, therefore, been suppressed
by law under heavy pains and penalties.


THE ROAD TO THE CAVES.
The meeting cliffs each deep-sunk glen divides,
The woods, wild-scattered, clothe their ample sides ;
The lawns, wood-fringed, in Nature’s native taste;
the hillocks dropt in Nature’s careless haste;
The arches, striding o’er the new-born stream ;
The village glittering in the noontide beam.— Burns.
|IF one has any capacity at all to admire Nature
'JR in her wildest grace he is bound to feel, when
travelling by the new route to the Wombeyan
Caves, as Bobby Burns doubtless felt when he penned
the lines quoted above, or, perhaps, as Goldsmith
felt when (in his lonely wanderings through the
Continent) he sat on the summit of some rocky-
crested height and surveyed the surrounding land-
scape which expanded to the skies. ’Tis a feeling
that only the utterly soulless have failed to ex-
perience ; —a feeling of spiritual exultation, of mental
intoxication and delight. The spirit of grand majes-
tic scenery finding a ready response from within,
enters one’s breast and casts his thoughts in a diviner
mould, for it must ever be remembered that country
has a profound influence upon human character.


&, *
...
s *mw w nwmw- ' x^,^p
BOWRAL LANDSCAPE, SHOWING THE GIB.




Probably there are a few tourists upon whom the
most enchanting views pall. Fortunately, however,
these are few. The majority are lovers of nature,
and find satisfaction in viewing the awe-inspiring, as
well as in calmly musing in the umbrageous walks
and solitary seats of some slyvan scene.
Tourists sometimes become very blase : numbers
suffer from surfeit. Their quest is variety, and to
them
Variety’s the spice of life
Which gives it all its flavour.
Long drives are at times tedious because of the
absence of variety, which, when present, relieves the
tedium of the journey. Now the first stage of the
journey from Bowral, Mittagong and Moss Vale is
through uninteresting country. It is, indeed, ex-
cellent driving ; but not before the eighteenth or
twentieth mile is reached do the features change
from grave to gay. The transition is rapid. From
the sameness of undulating country, a leap is made
into the wild and romantic, and in this class of
country there is abounding variety.
When the tableland ends crags and peaks and
gaping glens appear in sight. Glimpses of blue sky
are got through the stalwart trees, and one becomes
conscious of the proximity of a deep gorge. A
chasm opens at his feet and reaches far away. The
road passes by the escarpment, which affords an un-
interrupted view of a broad fertile valley beneath.
In the dim and hazy distance are the Blue Moun-
tains —“a sweeping theatre of hanging woods.” Daubed


here and there, on a dark forest background, are
grey dull blotches marking spots where ‘ring-barking’
has helped the settler to reclaim the soil. Trees,
bleeched with the heat of insatiable summer, people
these lonely spots, and, with wild, weird arms raised
on high, these seem like “ witches waving curses
in the air.” Checkered with grassy paddocks and
cultivated fields the whole landscape wears the ap-
pearance of a gigantic chessboard opened for the
use of players belonging to some mythical giant
race. Here and there, also, are seen faint and
glimmering traces of hearth and home-a white-
washed wall, a curling smoke wreath, or other token
of life. Frowning upon this picturesque valley is a
rugged wall of rock, which mark the western ex-
tremity of the tableland. This wall is but the
tattered and torn edge of a plateau which Nature
has cleft in twain, forming the valley beneath, which
is called Upper Burragorang.
A few miles beyond the point from which this
view is obtained is Bullio, a sheep station. Bullio
looks on the Wollondilly. The region through which
this river passes, both above and below this point,
is rugged and romantic. Bristling peaks—sombre,
silent stand like sentinels along its winding course.
A lonely grandeur—a kind of gloom—invests them,
and their feet are laved by the gurgling waters of the
Wollondilly. The Wollondilly is a river of moods.
In wet wild seasons it is a turbulent torrent, and at
such times, in the valley, one hears “ the incessant
roar of headlong tumbling floods.” Among the


heathery hills and ragged woods one can admire
Nature in her wildest grace, as—
Still through the gap the struggling river toils.
And, still below, the seething cauldron boils.
At Bullio the new road, skirting the mountains,
commences to descend. The grade is so easy—the
descent so gradual—one almost forgets he is drop-
ping into one of the deepest gorges in Australia.
Engineering skill, applied to road making, has
smoothed the difficulties away, and the tourist may
accomplish an Alpine feat without the labour and
fatigue thereof.
Across the Wollondilly is Jock’s Creek. In
these parts “Jock’s Creek” is a synonym for wild
inaccessible country. On Jock’s Creek side of the
Wollondilly, as on the other, the crags and peaks
are of granite. The road winds its way upward—
patiently, painstakingly, on the southern side of the
gorge. One of the characteristics of this rugged
region, which has added enormously to the cost of
roadmaking, is the prevalence of isolated peaks.
The mountains stand apart, alone, and the sides of
the larger peaks are deeply scored with gullies filled
with rock. When the summit of the range is
reached and Jock's Creek is left five miles to the
rear, the W'ombeyan Valley comes in view. It rests
peacefully beneath one’s feet. A run of two or
three miles carries the tourist to the Caves House,
which nestles in a grassy glen. Passing through
the centre of the glen is the Wombeyan Creek—a
meandering stream which winds through a long


avenue of oak trees that sigh so sadly in the
breeze. The Wombeyan, like all Australian streams,
is subject to periodical ebb and flow, and its
limpid, talking waters dwindle to nothingness in
times of protracted drought.
The rock formation changes before Wombeyan
is reached. Limestone supplants granite. The change
is inevitable—limestone is a sine qua non where caves
are concerned. The area of limestone country at
Wombeyan is extensive, and cropping out of the
hills about the caves are large masses of calcareous
rock more or less waterworn.
In the face of a wall of limestone, furrowed
deeply at some remote period by the action of water,
is the entrance to the ‘ old ’ caves, at a stone’s
throw from the Caves House. The opening, re-
sembling the mouth of a railway tunnel of vast
proportion, leads to those rock-hewn chambers first
explored and discovered in these parts by white men.




LOT S WIFE AND THE COCKATOO, WOLLONDILLY CAVE


THE CAVES.
Vast illumined halls,
Silent and bright, where nothing but the falls
Of fragrant waters, gushing with cool sound
From many a jasper font is heard around. —Moore.
tiHE word ‘ Caves ’ is a comprehensive term. In
I regard to Wombeyan it embraces, not one
series of subterranean passages, but three dis-
tinct series of systems. In the first place there is the
‘ Old ’ ; in the second the ‘ Wollondilly’ ; and in the
third place the ‘ New ’ Caves. These systems are
separate and distinct, and appear.(as far as explored)
to have no connection whatever. Of course, further
exploration may reveal connecting links, which at
present do not seem to exist. In limestone country
the rocks are invariably honey-combed scored
deeply by the eroding power of water. Traces of
the handiwork of this powerful agent are found on
every rock ; —its influence has extended throughout
Wombeyan.
Here and there it has simply smoothed the
outer surface of the rock ; in other parts it has
cut deep fissures and intricated underground passages,


which have extensive ramifications. These passages,
sometimes too difficult to explore, at other times
not interesting enough, exist in large members. The
writer has, in the course of a few years,
examined dozens of these openings, but as the
passages are narrow, difficult, and devoid of splendour,
no attempt has been made to open them up. Until
a complete system, practicable to the tourist, is
discovered, it is not likely that anything will be
done in this direction.
Attempts at exploration are made from time to
time by enthusiasts. The efforts, however, are
spasmodic, and appear to be made as the spirit
moves. Mr. M. Chalker, the caretaker, is himself
an explorer of note, and an enthusiast in these
matters. His recent discoveries are important, and
of great promise, but have not as yet been brought
to a successful issue. Of the extensive passages,
spacious halls and lofty chambers, embraced in the
recent discoveries, there was not much more than
a vague suspicion twelve months ago, and although
the passages are in juxtaposition to the ‘ Old ’
Caves, all efforts to establish communication have
so far failed.
THE OLD CAVES.
As the name implies this Cave is the oldest—
that is, historically. Owing to its exposed position
it must have been observed by the first white
man who passed through the valley. The other


eaves, hidden from view and guarded jealously, were
once sealed with the secrets of the silent hills, but
inquisitive man, seeking a sign among the huddled
masses of rock, found the clues which led to their
discovery.
The entrance to the ‘ Old ’ Caves has already
been compared to a railway tunnel. On each side
of this rude, rugged opening, which passes right
through the hill, is a labyrinth of passages above
and beneath. The vast opening itself is called the
Womheyan ‘ Church.’ A hundred feet or more above
is the ceiling, studded with great stalactites, which
look like drippings from candles magnified a million
times. The walls are formed of irregular masses of
rock, and the general appearance of the interior is
that of chaos. High above the floor are ledges of
rock adorned with strange forms —a crude kind of
statuary. One figure in particular resembles an
angel. Looking down upon the ‘ nave ’ of the
‘ Church ’ is a kind of dias, in front of which is a
low parapet. In this the imaginative mind has
seen some resemblance to a pulpit, and it has
been named accordingly. The Wombeyan creek
flows through the ‘ Church ’ and disappears in the
great fissures in the walls supporting the arch. In
these dark, mysterious passages are marble basins,
worn with the incessant eddying of the stream,
which might vie with the famous baths of Titus,
and Dioclotian, in Rome. Beyond a certain point
the course of the stream cannot be traced. It
passes into a world of eternal shades and seems


itself to become the river of Styx, but there is no
boatman to ferry one across.
The gurgling sound of eddying waters becomes
a dull and hollow roar, —a sort of confusion of
tongues that strikes one with awe, and sounds like
the bitter wail of—
Tortured souls
Waiting in some fierce Inferno.
There are fluted columns, rugged archways,
passages, marble fonts, and glistening spires. The
objects that grace these subterranean passages are
white and transparent, like alabaster, or are clothed
in tiny facets that flash like the felspar crystals in
a block of porphyry. Slabs of carbonate of lime,
delicately tinted with apricot color, terra-cotta and
gold, waved and corrugated, hang from the ceilings
like beautiful fabrics, folded and draped. When
struck these vibrate and sound like plates of
tempered steel.
THE WOLLONDILLY.
In point of beauty, this cave is the best. It is also
the latest addition to the group. The ‘ Old ’ caves
are handsome ; these are 'pretty. Every chamber is
crowded with objects of exquisite beauty. The
‘ Old ’ Caves are rambling, and some of the chambers
show great blank spaces ; but there is a delicacy
of formation in the “ Wollondilly” which is un-
equalled in the others. Instead of a great natural
archway, the opening is like a mine ‘ shaft,’ and
leads to the crystal passages beneath. It is protected


THE OBELISK, WOLLONDILLY CAVE.




by an iron grating, and is on the slope of a hill,
near the ‘ Old ’ caves. The ‘ Wollondilly ’ was dis-
covered ten years ago in a rather remarkable
way : —Two residents of the Mittagong district had
ridden out to the caves. One went out in quest
for ‘ copy,’ the other went as his companion. The
former was commissioned by a local editor to ex-
amine the country between his district and the
caves, and to report as to the possibility of making
a road. And this circumstance was really the
initiation of the movement which led (after many
disappointments) to the construction of the present
tourist road. As these men wished to try their
’prentice hands at exploration, Messrs. Chas. and
Mick Chalker—the former and the present guides
—took them to a cave which had, at some time,
been partly explored, but forgotten and placed in
the category of caves not meriting attention. Ex-
ploration had previously stopped short at a deep
pit,—a yawning chasm filled with the blackness of
darkness. In order, therefore, to complete explora-
tion, a rope was necessary. It was obtained, and
by its means the base of the chasm was reached.
This chamber, sixty or seventy feet deep, proved
to be the portal of a complete system of caves.
The work of exploration had been commenced on
the distinct understanding that if the two were
more than three hours in the caves, Chalker was
to regard them as lost, and to go to their relief.
About midnight they emerged, and sat down to
discuss the events of the evening. Presently they
heard sounds of men walking hurriedly and talking


excitedly. It proved to be Mr. M. Chalker, and
two men he had called out of their sleep to assist
in recovering the entombed men, whom, he sup-
posed, had fallen into some hole, as he estimated
that their supply of candles must be exhausted.
Chalker fully expected to find their mangled re-
mains. Judge then of his surprise when he found
the corpses he sought sitting at the mouth of the
cave, enjoying a rest and laughing at the discom-
fiture of himself and his friends. Of course, there
were mutual congratulations, and after explanations
on both sides, the party dispersed.
On the occasion alluded to, the now famous
‘ Pine Forests ’ were discovered. After leaving the
deep hole a veritable chaos the explorers found
an outlet leading into a long and lovely passage,
which branched in two directions. These passages
opened here and there into chambers filled with crystal
columns. Sometimes it was difficult to move in the
passages leading from chamber to chamber, as the
space between the ceiling and the floor was almost
too narrow for one to pass. Along this succession
of chambers and passages the explorers roamed, for
hours
bewildered, nor could guess
What meant this maze of light and loveliness.
There are more crystal forms in this cave than
in the others. The “ Pine Forests,” for example,
are composed of many thousands of tiny crystals
tapered like pine trees, and divided into sections by
ridges of the same substance, which look like minia-


ture walls. But it is difficult, nay, impossible,
to find comparisons suitable for describing limestone
caves. When comparisons are employed, the mean-
ing is implied rather than expressed ; and some of
the names given are fanciful indeed, and at times
grotesque and odious.
THE ‘ NEW ’ CAVE.
At one time there were only the * Old ’ and the
N ew caves, and it was customary to visit both.
Since the addition of the ‘Wollondilly,’ however,
the ‘New’ caves have fallen into neglect. This is
due to the distance more than the absence of
grandeur. Moreover, when the ‘ Old ’ caves and the
‘ Wollondilly ’ have been examined, visitors feel that
they have no vital energy to spare for the ‘New,’
and it is, after all, more a matter of convenience
than anything else.
The formation in the ‘ New ’ differs from that
in the ‘ Old ’ and in the ‘ Wollondilly ’ caves. The
‘ New ’ seems to be unfinished in a state of
transition, so to speak, just as though Nature had
not given to it its finishing touches. There are
large bodies of mud in these caves in a plastic
state ; and most of the beautiful objects have mud
for their foundation or ground-work. On this
account, many of the loveliest stalagmites resemble,
when closely examined, the goods of confectionery
encrusted with sugar. A' thin crust of carbonate
of lime is formed on the outside, and although
the objects may be very attractive, the beauty never-
theless is only skin deep.


JENOLAN AND WOMBEYAN.
Comparisons are odious. — Burton.
Comparisons are odorous. — Shakespeare.
€ COMPARISONS may be odious, as Burton says,
J or odorous , as Shakespeare affirms, but they
are in any case very necessary for conveying
correct and lasting impressions. Jenolan and Wom-
beyan are frequently compared. A few enthusiasts
extol the beauties of Jenolan and under-rate those
of Wombeyan. The majority, however, see grandeur
in both, but place the caves in two different
categories ; while some, without apology, state their
preference for Wombeyan. But in this, as in other
matters due to a dispensation of Nature, the
unprejudiced will always find “an equal portion
dealt to all mankind.”
However, it is only natural that a little
rivalry should exist between Wombeyan and Jenolan.
They are both claimants in the field for honors.
Both are very grand, and offer to the sightseer
and pleasure-seeker visions of exquisite beauty, and
views of transcendent loveliness. But, owing to
adverse circumstances, the Wombeyan Caves have


JENOLAN VIEWS.I*
BATHING POOL.




been little known. They have lived a kind of
Cinderella life of neglect, but are now about to
participate in the attentions bestowed so lavishly—
and, indeed, deservedly—upon Jenolan. Wombeyan
has hitherto lacked self-assertion, or, rather, friends
who would prompt this Cinderella in the world of
natural wonders to make her claim to recognition.
But the rivalry between the two need not be
of the destructive order. It may be confidently
stated that the completion of the new tourist road
from the Southern Line, and the discovery of other,
and, possibly, more beautiful caverns than those
already known, will not detract one iota from the
extraordinary popularity of Jenolan. On the contrary.
The new road to Wombeyan, and revelations of
splendour, which exploration is even now holding
out the promise of, will not benefit Wombeyan
alone, for when the proposed Alpine road is made,
which will connect the Caves, the interests of the
two places will become identical. Benefits accruing
by circumstance will be multiplied and mutually
enjoyed by each.
The question of superiority has in some quarters
given rise to dispute, but with those not pre-
judiced one way or the other, it has always been
an open one. It is really a matter for private
opinion to decide, and depends upon that unknown
quantity the taste of the individual. As a matter
of fact, honours are divided, and those competent
to judge between the rivals have failed to arrive at
a definite conclusion, and the natural answer to the


question therefore is : —“ When doctors differ, who
shall decide ?”
It is possible, however, to make a distinction
without setting up a difference. The Jenolan Caves
are vast and grand, —of magnificent proportions.
The Wombeyan are not so extensive —their dimen-
sions are not so vast ; but the Caves are crowded
with objects of marvelleus
in a word, are prettier,
invidious distinction, and
rarity and delicacy, and,
Now this is not an
it does not profess to
decide the vexed question of superiority, but allows
to each pre-eminence in its own particular sphere.


THE CONNECTING LINK,
E’en now, where Alpine solitudes ascend,
I sit me down a pensive hour to spend ;
And placed on high above the storm’s career,
r d Goldsmith.
Look downward
five years ago this connecting route was
surveyed. It extends through broked, rugged
country for a distance of forty-seven miles.
The writer has twice toured through this wild
domain of Nature’s, as a pedestrian with knapsack
and “ billycan,” as a cyclist with camera and
outfit. The tract of country lying between the
two caves is a kind of ten a incognita. The lofty
peaks, standing in sad and solemn isolation, are
crowned with sombre piles of rock. But “rocks,
by custom, turn to beds of down,” and in between
these mountains so rugged, stern and wild are
fertile valleys occupied by the brave selector. The
whole district is, however, so inaccessible, and,
therefore, so secluded and shut-off from
the agitated strife,
The madness of the world of life
that it is practically an unknown land.


Speaking comparatively, the surveyed road is
level. In view of facts just stated this may
appear a contradiction. But absurd and paradoxical
as the announcement seems it is perfectly correct.
The surveyed track, soon after leaving Wombeyan,
climbs the eastern slope of the Great Dividing
Chain, and follows the summit-line through the
roughest section of the intervening space. The
Range here is like a railway enbankment of vast
proportions, and its summit-line is unbroken. The
sides, to the east and the west, are fearfully pre-
cipitous, but the summit itself varies from half-a-
chain to a chain in width. A stunted forest struggles
for a precarious existence in this exposed position,
while the stems mostly lean one way and indicate
the direction of the prevailing winds. Along the
crown of the range there is a disused track, on
which it is possible to ride a bicycle, but frequent
dismounting necessary on account of fallen trees,
makes the undertaking tedious indeed. These im-
pediments, however, do not belong to the surface
of the soil, which, in its natural state, is level
enough for vehicle traffic.
Geographically, the Great Dividing Chain is an
important featureits western slopes form the
watershed of the most extensive river system in
Australia. Rain falling on this slope finds its way
into the various inland streams, which empty, after
endless circumvolutions, into the River Murray, and
then into the Southern Ocean, while rain falling on
the opposite or eastern slope supplies the costal
streams and descends rapidly to the Pacific. The


THIRD CASCADE, FITZROY FALLS.




ridge being narrow, the line of demarcation is very
finely drawn, and the drops of rain as they fall
would seem to be split in twain and diverted—one
to the east, the other to the west.
The proposed route intercepts one valley only;
this is the only serious interruption. Here descent
is necessary on account of a large horse-shoe bend
in the summit-line of the range. As soon as the
base of the hills is reached, the Abercrombie River,
the head-waters of the Lachlan, is crossed; and,
almost immediately, the ascent of the range is again
made Nestling in this valley, amid an amphi-
theatre of wooded hills, is the sheltered cottage and
cultivated farm of Mr, J. Murdoch. After the
range is again ascended, the country is unbroken
right to the escarpment of the Jenolan gorge.
Mount Werong, a gold field, is passed en route.
The distance to the Jenolan Caves is a little over
thirty miles, and, on a bicycle, seven or eight
miles an hour can be accomplished.
The fact that the writer, early this year, got a
bicycle, with other impedimenta (weighing collectively
371bs) through from Wombeyan to Jenolan in four-
teen hours, carrying and riding, points to the accessi-
bility of that narrow strip of country along which
the survey passes. Five or six hours of the
fourteen were occupied carrying the machine up and
down the mountain side; and, when allowance for
time thus spent is made, the fact receives greater
weight and emphasis. When this road is made, the
grandest route in Australia will be available for
the use of the tourist.


GEOLOGICAL SKETCH.
Within the mountain’s hollow womb there lies
A large recess, concealed from human eyes,
Where [once the] billows, driven by wind and tide,
In form of war [did] watery ranks divide.— Virgil.
|M|HERE caves are concerned —that is to say
TUjMs caves of the class to which Wombeyan and
Jenolan belong —limestone is a sine qua non.
Without limestone it would be impossible to imagine
either Jenolan or Wombeyan. In addition to lime-
stone water is needed. Its active agency, its rest-
less energy, is indispensable. Water stands in rela-
tion to limestone caves in the same position that
the artizan stands in relation to the machine he
has made. It is the skilled mechanic; the cave
its handiwork. Indeed, its work is so artistically
done, that this agent may be fitly compared to a
sculptor who works with consummate skill. Under
widely differing conditions, water has laboured,
ceaselessly and silently, through long ages, carving
out these catacombs, and fashioning the fanciful
forms that fill the halls and corridors.
Limestone abounds both at Jenolan and Wom-
beyan. The mountains in each vicinity are formed


of masses of this rock huddled together in wild
confusion. The creeks are filled with waterworn
boulders of the same rock. Limestone, in fact,
pervades the place in the country. Between the
two caves, limestone deposits occur at intervals, and
these deposits, having come under the influence of
the same geologic activities, are scored, furrowed,
hollowed, and honeycombed like the rocks of
Wombeyan and Jenolan. In all probability, these
deposits embrace many hidden subterranean wonders,
as yet unexplored. These are on the eastern slope
of the Great Dividing Chain. The fact is note-
worthy, and seems to lend the weight of its
influence to the supposition that all these limestone
deposits, including those of Wombeyan and Jenolan,
are ancient coral reefs. When the Great Dividing
Chain formed the coastline, —when the boisterous
billows surged over land now under occupation, and
broke in long lines of phospheresence at the base
of the everlasting hills, the tiny coral insects were
engaged building these monuments of time.
Adjacent to the ‘ Old ’ cave at Wombeyan, there
is a small grassy flat. It is surrounded with hills,
which form an arena and a natural amphitheatre.
The only outlet is the mouth of the Old cave. If,
therefore, this opening were closed, the valley
would become a lake, which it was, doubtless, at
some remote period. This conjecture may be based
on evidence the place supplies in the line of
lacustrine deposits. Probably, the following is the
order of progressive development First, the oceanic


period; second, the lacustrine period; and third,
landscape intercepted by a watercourse.
This order places these limestone deposits under
the varied influence of three distinct periods, each
of great duration. But the work of formation was
being carried on all through by the one agent
Water. The action of the receding sea, first; the
action of the lake waters, in effecting their escape,
second; and the action of rain water, by percolation,
third. In positions far beyond the reach of water,
during the third and last periods, are water marks.
Ceilings are water-washed, —huge impending crags
show the hard veins and soft spots ridges and
hollows formed by the constant laving of the
primitive sea, or of the waters of the lake.
The forming of these Caves falls naturally under
two separate heads :—First, the wasting and fretting
of the solid rock, the scooping out of the caverns ;
second, the adornment of the vast and drear
passages space would have to be made before
adornment could be attempted. The first represents
the rude stone age; the second the age of refine-
ment and of art. The first was simply the result
of force; the second of design.
Rainwater carrying carbonic acid gas has power
to percolate and dissolve the limestone strata.
Passing through varying thicknesses of this rock, it
reaches cavities formed during an earlier period. From
the ceiling it drops to the floor of the cavities ;
and both above and below it leaves a deposit of
carbonate of lime. The drip, continually recurring,


forms in course of ages the stalactites and stalag-
mites, and the other formations of infinite variety
and beauty, which fill the caves. The quantity of
solid matter deposited by each drip must be infini-
tesimally small, for after a space of ten years the
growth of a stalagmite is scarcely perceptible.
The lacustrine deposits referred to, the cave for-
mations that abound, the great antiquity of the
coral reefs now transformed to limestone, and the
records of recent periods found in fossil remains,
add a charm to Wombeyan, and should simply
fascinate the geologist.


HOW TO GET THERE.
■fflljiNTlL quite recently, Goulburn was looked
upon as the most convenient starting-point
for the Wombeyan Caves. Indeed, for upwards
of a quarter of a century, no other place was
thought of as a rendezvous; but by the construc-
tion of the road from the Mittagong, Bowral, and
Moss Yale district, the distance is shortened seventy
miles. Goulburn, of course, will continue to be
used by visitors from Southern districts; but for
tourists from Sydney and suburbs, and visitors from
the north, the old route is too roundabout.
Mittagong is seventy-seven miles from Sydney,
Bowral is eighty, and Moss Yale eighty-six. These
stations are within the southern tourist district,
and subject therefore to the liberal concessions
granted to the travelling public by the Railway
Commissioners. From each town the distance to
Wombeyan is about forty-two miles. Regular
coaches will run during the season, but tourists
intending to take a holiday trip to the caves are
advised to consult beforehand advertisements in this
Guide from proprietors of local livery stables. A
post-card, letter, or telegram will receive prompt


attention from any firm advertising. The same may
be said for the hotel-proprietors of Mittagong,
Moss Vale and Bowral, also advertising in this
Guide.
It is a day’s journey to the caves. Visitors
will not feel satisfied with less than a day to look
round, and a day will be needed for the return
journey. Of course, the journey there and back
can be accomplished in less time; but hurried
visits are not satisfactory, and experience teaches
the tourist to avoid them when possible. A cyclist
may ride out in six hours, see the caves, and
return within twenty-four hours from the time of
starting.
At the caves there is an accommodation house
where bed and board may be obtained. A care-
taker, whose duty is to show visitors over the caves,
lives on the spot, and for each inspection the sum
of half-a-crown (fixed by the Mines Department) is
charged. The payment of this sum is shared by
those who compose the party viewing the caves,
but the minimum is sixpence. Therefore, a party
consisting of five just makes up the fee. An
additional charge of threepence is made for candles.


OTHER SIGHTS.
A visit to the Wombeyan Caves will in most
cases prove a double-barrelled performance, the
visitor may accomplish a two-fold object. Osten-
sibly the caves may be the object of his visit, but
besides seeing the caves he may see the ‘ sights
of this famous tourist district. Twelve miles or so
from Moss Yale are the famous Fitzroy Falls. The
water is precipitated several hundred feet, and from
the spot where the stream takes this mighty
headlong leap, a fine view of the cafion is obtained.
Then there is the Belmore Fall, with its lovely
cascades, and also that favourite picnic rendezvous—
the Macquarie Pass.
Berrima is a town of great interest. It figures
in the early pages of colonial history, and its gaol
repays a visit. There is a peaceful air of anti-
quity pervading the old town. Near Mittagong is
the Fitzroy Iron Mines, now in a state of dilapidation
and mouldering ruin. The blast furnaces, the huge
rollers, and the machinery now so antiquated serve
to remind one of the brave attempts made in the
early days to establish colonial industries.
There are other chapters of early history found
in fragmentary form in and around the district,
weather-beaten, time-worn witnesses, reminders of
earlier times. But
Of all that Past, these wrecks of wind and rain,
These touching memories—these alone remain.
THE END.




o
z
o
o
<
h
h
s
oT
h
tE
<
U.
o
-I
o
o
X
o
(0


MITTAGONG.
Situate on the Main Southern Line, elevation
2069 feet over sea level, position and surroundings
of great natural beauty, and during the summer
months it is one of the chief favourite resorts for
visitors and tourists, and excellent hotel accommo-
dation is provided. The climate is perfect, and in
the town is a chalybeate spring much sought after
by invalids. The far-famed Wombeyan Caves are
reached from here, this being the nearest starting-
point for them by the new road made at great expense
by the Government. Excellent macadamised roads lead
to all points of interest, while within easy reach
delightful spots in glen, dale and gorge abound,
also several waterfalls. An excellent band plays
weekly in Alexandria-Square; and altogether Mittagong
presents many natural advantages not to be beaten
in the colony. Besides hotels, there are many
private establishments and furnished houses. The
new School of Arts forms a feature of the town.
Visitors may enjoy its advantages pro tem. for a
nominal subscription. The town is incorporated;
and a vigilant Progress Committee guards the
interests of it and neighbourhood.


exchange Rotel,
STARTING POINT
P ? R WOJTBEYAN CAVES.
First-class Accommodation at Moderate Rates.
MAIN STREET (near Railway Station).
THOMAS MORRIS, Proprietor.
Wines and. Spirits of- tlio Best Brands
only kept in Stock.


BOWRAL.
Three miles further south than Mittagong is the
English-like little town of Bowral. Its altitude
above the sea level if about 2171 feet, and the
surrounding hills are several hundreds of feet higher.
In summer time Bowral is one of the most fashion-
able towns in New South Wales, the many boarding
establishments, large hotels, and furnished houses
being taxed to their utmost. One of the principal
points of interest is the Gib, 2800 feet high, over-
looking the town, and the beautiful undulating
country for miles around. From the side of the
Gib our picture of Bowral was taken, the other
view is one of the many pretty landscapes which
abound. The normal population is about 2300,
nearly doubled in summer. The town enjoys all
the advantages of larger cities : Postal, Telegraphic,
M. 0. Office, Savings, and other Banks, large and
commodious Railway Station, Stores of all kinds,
Police Court, Town Hall, Library, Hospital, Churches,
Schools, etc. The livery stable proprietors are well-
equipped, and make special trips, as arranged, to the
Wombeyan Caves, Fitzroy Falls, and other places
of interest. The town is incorporated, and good
roads for cycles or vehicles are the rule rather than
the exception.


MOSS VALE.
Eighty-six miles from Sydney, on the Great
Southern Line, and 2205 feet above sea-level, is the
old town of Moss Vale. It is the centre of the rich
agricultural and dairying districts of Burrawang,
Kangaloon, Wild Meadows, Sutton Forrest, Bunda-
noon and Meryla. Moss Yale has its water supply
reticulated through the town, is lit with electricity,
is incorporated, enjoys postal, telegraphic, and bank-
ing facilities, etc. The summer residence of the
Governor is about two miles from the town, on a
beautiful elevation, and surrounded by spacious park-
like grounds. The vicinity has also been chosen by
many Sydney gentry for their country homes, and
very handsome places abound. Hotel accommodation
is plentiful and good, and conveniences abound for
tourists to visit the Wombeyan Caves and other
sights. The railway station is very large and com-
plete. Stores, churches, schools, friendly societies,
and other institutions are thoroughly represented in
Moss Yale, and it is also the head-quarters of an
Agricultural Society, Musical Union and Rifle Club.




ill" i>
|sc> ’i •’. * •■•.-,
- T iffy' t.-- ' »■■■■ ' »*■
tWBsR.JBBr > ■*•>%■ 3g?<oi W '**: *4i. ■ W-k
'*- * jr ’ - 4 **NMfc#* s *|* 4h£&a
•3?t* .; V 1 *-#•
£T' **. gp-* v *V * $Jjj| ift&Z' &
*- u r *' * " - 1* jB jfe* * fl > **•? *
BIRD'S EYE VIEW OF BOWRAL FROM THE GIB.


“The Bowral Free Press.”
[Established 1883.]
PUBLISHED EVERY WEDNESDAY <& SATURDAY,
PRICE ONE PENN V.
The Leading Local Paper and Tourists’ Friend. For years the
staunch advocate of the New Eoad from Bowral to
Wombeyan Caves.
A Large Connection. A Live Paper. Best Medium for Advertisers.
ALL DESCRIPTIONS OF JOB PRINTING.
W 11,1,1 AM BEER,
GORDON & GOTCH,
Proprietor.
Sydney Agents.
Piggott’s = Livery = Stables,
BONQ BONO STREET,
First-class Horses and Vehicles of all descriptions on Hire.
Ladies’ and Gents’ Hackneys. Children’s Ponies.
The Largest Four-in-hand in the District for Picnic Parties.
Careful Drivers only Kept.
Special Arrangements may be made for
conveying Tourists to the Famous
Wombeyan Caves. . . .


QEORQE M. PUGH,
BOWRAL.
♦ ♦
Stationery, Books, Glassware, Wall Papers,
Paints, Oz/j', Etc., Etc.
ALL BEST MAKES OF BOOTS AND SHOES.
V L Without Exception the Best House in
W THE District foe Good Value. T
JOHN LAKE,
Livery Stable Proprietor,
IYT ITTAGONG.
Hjggp 1 ' N.B —Coach and Four for Wombeyan Caves
during Summer Season.
FOR BEST PRINTING
AT LOWEST PRICES
PATRONISE
Cbe “ flrgus ” Office, Parramatta.
LITTLE & CO., Proprietors.


Cbc * Royal«pel
Under Vice Regal Patronage.
Leading Hotel in the District
Families , Tourists and Commercials.
—FOR
Every Comfort.
Electric Light.
Moderate
Charges.
Opp. RAILWAY STATION & POST OFFICE.
Telegrams Attended to.
EDWARD GOODRIDGE, Proprietor


The Grand Hotel,
BOWRAL.
J. L. CAMPBELL, Proprietor.
THE RENDEZVOUS FOR THE WOMBEYAN CAVES.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
First=class Chef.
Porters Meet All Trains.
I|3* OWRAL is situated on the \lreat Southern Railway, 80
miles (8J hours) from Sydney, at an elevation of 2,171 feet.
It is in the very heart of Tourists’ District, and
enjoys a most invigorating (ilimate in the centre of scenery un-
surpassed for grandeur ahcUnatural beauty. Being convenient to
the many great attractions in the district—Fitzroy Falls, Macquarie
Pass, Wombeyan Caves, &c., &c. it is now the deservedly
Recognised Holiday and Health Resort on the Southern Line.
Grand Hotel, Rn " rHnl — 1
This Hotel contains 44 Large and Lofty rooms, Private
and Public Sitting, Dining, Billiard, Smoking, Reading
and Reception Rooms, replete with all that can conduce
to the comfort of Visitors.
The Bedrooms are thoroughly Ventilated, and connected
by Electric Bells with the Business portion of the Estab-
lishment.


11l 1
lllliil
1 3 1508 00333127 4


