

THE
"Miltiades Record."
A JOURNAL OF INCIDENTS
ON
Bord the good ship "Miltiades ,"
DURING HER VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO AUCKLAND, NEW ZEALAND,
WITH EMIGRANTS.
PRICE: NINEPENCE.
Auckland:
REED & BRETT, PRINTERS, “EVENING STAR” OFFICE.
MDCCCLXXIV.




The Miltiades Record:
A JOURNAL OF LIFE ON BOARD THE SHIP “MILTIADES.”
No. I.]
FRIDAY, MAY 15tii, 1874.
Introduction.
fO say that a long sea voyage
grows tedious and wearisome
from its monotony and sameness
of life day after day is to state no
no new but a well-known and oft
realised fact.
Knowing this, not from any personal
experience of his own, but from the
experience of others, it was a matter
of some thought with the writer, be-
fore undertaking such a voyage, as to
how this monotonous sameness might
be pleasantly relieved. The result of
which was the idea of starting a weekly
paper, to bo supported by the joint
contributions of all on board willing
to contribute, and thus supplying a
needful and pleasant occupation for
those who else would have nothing to
do, and also providing amusement for
those who have.
Finding this idea to meet with the
approval, and being promised the help
of others, it is with much pleasure
therefore that the first number of “ The
Miltiades Record ” is issued by the
editor.
He makes no pretence to literary
ability, and does not invite the criti-
cism of those inclined to do so ; but
would be thankful to receive the kindly
advice of any.
He aims to give such pleasant and
interesting employment to those who,
unemployed, would ere long be suffering
from ennui, as shall be to them both
work and amusement. Also to amuse
and instruct those who have been
•working, and in fact to benefit all.
And as he aims to benefit all ho
earnestly hopes all will sympathise
with him in his endeavour, and heartily
co-operate with him to produce the
desired result. Contributions in the
shape of articles upon passing events,
correspondence, original poetry, conun-
drums. and any useful information will
be thankfully received by the Editor,
F. A. Hill.
HISTORY OF THE “ MILTIADES .”
The good ship “ Miltiades,” 1452 tons
register, belongs to the Aberdeen
clipper line of packets plying between
London and Australia. Owned by
Messrs. Geo. Thompson, jun., and Co.,
of London, she was built at Aberdeen
(Walter Hood’s yard) in 1870, and is
one of the finest and fastest vessels-of
her class afloat. She has already made
three voyages to Melbourne, carrying a
mixed cargo of live stock, hardware,
itc. She is in this present voyage
chartered b)- Messrs. Shaw, Savillc and
Co., with over 400 emigrants and 13
saloon passengers, her destination being
Auckland, New Zealand. The name
“ Miltiades ” was given to her by Mr.
Geddcs, Professor of Greek, Aberdeen,
who probably, from his partiality to
Greece, called her after a celebrated
Grecian hero.
COLLISION WITH UNKNOWN
VESSEL
On the morning of Wednesday, the
Gth instant, about half-past one o’clock,
our good ship “Miltiades” was run


into by some vessel unknown, to the
great danger of our lives generally, and
of that of the man at the wheel in par-
ticular. Our gallant ship was at the
time of the accident on the starboard
tack, the stranger on the port, and con-
sequently bound to make way for the
“ Miltiades.” Those on the look-out,
seeing the vessel approach apparently
blindly, gave timely warning, and
vigorous attempts were made to warn
her off. In vain ! On she came, and a
collision was inevitable. She ported
her helm too late, and her jib-boom
struck through our rigging, carrying
away our spanker and cross-jack sails
and laying the boom prostrate on the
deck, smashing the taffrail in its fall.
She steered away in a direction almost
opposite to ours without discovering
herself, and apparently regardless of
the amount of damage the “ Miltiades”
might have sustained from the collision.
Our great regret is that we were not
able to turn and follow her, but the
mainbraces being broken this was im-
possible. What the consequences might
have been had it not been for the supe-
rior management of our captain, ofliccrs,
and men we might shudder to contem-
plate. Taking the most lenient view
possible of the conduct of the vessel on
the port tack, we cannot but consider it
most culpable. There are two distinct
charges to be made against it. In the
first place, nothing could be more re-
prehensible than the careless steering of
the vessel. Whether it arose from
negligence on the part of the look-out,
or whether, like the Irishman who con-
sidered that his reputation for good driv-
ing rested on his bringing the wheels
within an inch of the precipice, those in
command wished to prove theirinimitable
seamanship by almost grazing the stern
of our ship. Again, her leaving us
without a sign of regret for the mis-
chief done, and utterly regardless of the
danger in which she might have placed
us, is only to be paralleled by those ship-
wreck monstrosities of which the
“ Northfleet" is the most recent and
most sorrowfully imprinted on our
memories. Had our slap gone down
with her 500 souls who would have
been the wiser hut the tarnished vessel
that crept away—Murillo-like—under
the shadow of the night.
F.
Useful Information.
PORPOISES.
On Friday and Saturday last were to
be seen a number of animals sporting
in the water, jumping out and gam-
bolling about in the most lively
manner, indicative of intense enjoy-
ment. These animals are not fisheh, as
some have supposed. Fishes are cold-
blooded animals, the temperature of
their blood scarcely exceeding the tem-
perature of the water in which they
live. They breathe by means of gills,
which are bathed by water, whereas the
animals we saw on Saturday are warm-
blooded animals, maintaining a tempera-
ture of about 98° at all times. They
inspire air and are therefore obliged to
come to the surface to obtain it. Their
place in the animal kingdom is with
that great class called “ Mamalia,” be-
cause they suckle their young. These
animals do not spawn like lishes, but
bring forth their young alive. The
order to which they are referred is the
“ Cetacea,” and it includes the whales
and dolphins, or porpoises. The animal
we saw was, I believe, the common por-
poise (EolpMnus P/wcwnn). It is the
smallest of the “ Cetacea,” seldom ex-
ceeding four or five feet in length.
M. H.
Why does the colour of the sea vary
so, being in'somo places green, others
light blue, and others very dark blue ?
This question has been asked many
times. Professor Tyndall’s last theory
in explanation of the same is, that the
colour of the water depends entirely
upon the matter held in suspension by
it.


Correspondence.
Mr. Editor, — Sir : I cannot but admire the
spirit which aims (anil so highly) as the relief
of the monotony of a sea voyage. The
I’ecoud, under such auspices, shall not be
otherwise than a great success. Your enter-
tainment of the 14th instant has been hailed
by the sailors with eclat, and should the
weather permit will meet with an admiring
audience. With ray earnest wishes for your
success,
I remain,
Your sincere ad™ : -'”
NEPTUNE.
[While thanking our friend “Neptune”
for his kind wishes I would remark that the
credit of Thursday’s entertainment is due
wholly to Messrs. Hasleham and Tronson.—
Ed.]
[Cory of a Letter Written by one of the
Emigrants].
“ Miltiades,”
May 12th, 1874.
Dear M —i rite this to let ye know that i
am in good liclth hoping always that this will
find yc in the same condition i hev not bin
ahel to rite anuther cpistcl to you sence that
big pilut that i told you of left the ship in a
smal kanoo as was too smal to fit him, poor
man I with only them hard sec biskuts and
salt pork to last him six days (so cuzin Betsy
says) wich was more like he’d take a fort-
night to reach lands end in a tub too small
to hould him Well i wos that sec-sick thati
didn’t now wich side of me wos topmost, wich
wos no wonder, not been able to ate a bit of
mate cept my brekfust an dinner only a piece
of bred and cheese to kep my heart up afore
i turned into my hunk of a nite wich i bed
in my privet store we singel wimmin is
alowed to cum on the part of the deck they
calls the poop to are oursels among the pas-
senger folk as lives in the saloon ther is one
young man as goes by the name of Captain
Jack as is very funny and is allays goin on
with his redicles nonsens, makin ns all laff as
is ahel from see-sickness and fastin im and
another young gentleman is gettin up
theatricals wich is to cum off Thursday
evenin they arc at presen painten a scan
wich i sumtimes ketch a glimpse on and wich
appcrcs to me like a sailcloth fitted with cab-
bidgea at a distance but I dare say they will
do there best and very nice too. The captin
as the new arrival among the married folk is
to he cald after is a very nice gentelman and
is as kind to us wimmin as if we was saloons
the docktcr is a nice spoken kind good
creeter as has a good deal to do to kep us all
in order i’m sure i think he must he a very
lerned man for i allays cars im a tacklen the
Other saloons about porpuses an dolfins an
sich things as i never heard on afore and
what do you think a strange ship came rolin
against us one nite (its lletsy as touhl me
for i never see nothin myself) and runs her
jibbyoom rite through the captins cabin as
woke him up in a jiffy an sent im up in is
trowsers but the ship wich was called the
Murilleo drew out her jibbyoom and run
away with our spanker and crojuk (if you
know, what them be c s I dont) and left our
boom a lyin on the deck but the carpenter
must hev put up the boom and stopt the hole
in the captins caben by the morning for we
was saling along alright by that time as was
all owing to our captin and officers and salors
bein .of the right stuff. It was awful de-
lightful on Sunday we wos in sight of ilade-
ria as made me long for the ould home with
such a thing as never wos at ten we had publick
worship fust we sung a him to the tune of
the ould ’undred as the sound of almost maid
me cry an then the captin red prayers and
wen it cum to prayin for them left at ’ome i
didn’t elp cryin and so cudu’t a many others
i will toll ye more in my next deer mary and
with best lov to yourself an janie
I reraane
Your afeeshunato sister
MARTHA.
K.
CRICKET'S GOSSIP.
Dear Mu. Editor, —
Hopping about tlie chief mate’s cabin the
other day I heard that a paper was about to
he started, and that all on hoard were invited
to contribute to it. Now lam not of a very
conceited disposition, hut I hatter myself X
can make as much row as anybody. My
personal appearance is certainly not very
attractive, and I have rather an objection to
shewing myself to die vulgar gaze, yet,
being a little fellow, I have opportunities of
seeing and hearing everything ; being able to
pop in and out and round about everywhere.
1 therefore beg to offer my services as special
correspondent to the “ Miltiades llccord.”
Trusting you will have the good sense to
appreciate this, my condescension,
I am,
Dear Mr. Editor,
CRICKETUS CRICKET.
PETTICOAT ATTRACTION.
Wednesday morning two young gentlemen,
saloon passengers, had the impudence to
venture down into the compartment set
aside for single females on pretence of look-
ing after their luggage in the hold. They
found themselves literally caged by having
crinoline thrown over them, and had to pay
a penalty for their audacity.


DAILY RECORD.
[On account of want of space this week’s
record will be very concise,]
Miay 3—Left Gravesend early in the morn-
ing ; towed by steamer “Victor” down the
river.
4th—Left pilot off Start Point, 11.30 p.m.
sth—Noon, lat. 49deg. 24min. N. ; long.
sdeg. 24min. W. Course : 44deg. W. ;
distance, 94 miles.
Gth—Collision, 1.40 a.m.; weather fine ;at
noon, lat. 47deg. 45min. W. ; long. 9dcg.
23min. AV. Course :S. SSdeg. VV.; distance,
189 miles.
7th —Fresh breeze. Course : S. 34dcg.
W.; lat. 44deg. 2Smin. N. ; long. 12dcg.
3Gmin. W. ; distance, 239 miles.
Bth—Good breeze. Course : S. 221 eg.
W. ; lat. 40deg. 19min. N. ; long. 14deg.
53miu. AV.; distance, 277 miles.
9th—Fresh breeze. Course : S. 7dcg.
AA’.; lat. 35deg. 19min. N.; long. 15deg.
40min. AV.; distance, 30G miles.
10th—Very fine weather off IMadeira.
Service—morning by Captain, and in after-
noon and evening among emigrants them-
selves. Lat. 32deg, 28min. N.; long. 17deg.
45min. AV. ; distance, 212 miles. Course :
S. 3Gdeg. W.
11th—Lat. 30dcg. 43min. N,; long. ISdeg.
3Gmin.; distance, 142 miles. Course : S.
2,[deg. W.
12th—Lat, 28dcg. IGmin. N.; long. 19dcg.
ISmin. AA’.; distance, 9G miles. Course, S.,
2dcg. AV.
13th—Lat. 2Gdcg. 32min. N.; long. 20deg.
22min. AV.; distance, 124 miles. Course:
S. 2d eg. AV.
14th—Lat. 23dcg. oSmin. N.; long. 20deg.
58min. AV. Course : !S. 12dcg. AA’.; distance,
158 miles.
Interesting—Sunday, Alay 10th, the wife
of Mr. Jno. Henesscy of a son.
AVcdncsday, 2 a.m., the wife of Mr. P.
Petersen of a son.
AFTERNOON CONCERT AND
THEATRICALS.
The entertainment announced for
Thursday of this week, and so anxious-
ly looked forward to by the passengers
and crow, came off yesterday with
greater success than was hoped for by
the most sanguine of the performers.
The central attraction of the entertain-
ment was an original farce entitled
“Tit for Tat,” written by H. Tronson,
Esq.; the only two characters in the
piece being taken by the author and
Mr. Hasleham. The meric of a farce
is to bo judged by its power of keeping
the audience in a continual scream of
laughter. Judging this standard
the convulsions in the whole theatre,
from the reserved seats downwards,
afford proof enough of the merits both
of actors and piece. Mr. Hasleham,
as Charlotte MclVhirtcr, was inimitable.
Mr. Tronson’s role of Captain Gruffer
was not so prominent, but was taken
with spirit. The new scene, painted
by Mr. Tronson, did the artist infinite
credit considering the disadvantages
under which ho laboured as regards
time and materials. A grand baronial
residence rears its proud towers in the
distance. In the foreground is a rich
expanse of parterre and lawn, with
here and there an orange tree (it is
summer), and a magnificent bed of
scarlet rhododendrons. A. huge chimney
stalk (what work is perfect 1) rears its
ungainly head athwart the sky towards
the east of the scene. Various conjec-
tures have been made as to its existence
there ; some will have it a factory
chimney, some a bakehouse, but may it
not have been meant to place a dovecot
on l At any rate there is satisfaction in
the thought that the artist has expressed
contrition for his very inartistic idea.
The rest of the programme, half of
which came before, half after the farce,
was executed with much spirit. Mr.
Baker’s solos on the flute had an
enlivening influence which we cannot
over estimate. Dr. Harding’s reading
from Dickens was decidedly too long.
The doctor is a good reader ; but, for
his style, he made on this occasion an
unfortunate selection. In our opinion
he ought to devote himself to exposi-
tion, where his slow and distinct utter-
ance would be more tolling. Space
forbids further criticism, but we cannot
omit to mention the effective reading
of “ Sennacherib ” by Mr. Hill, and
the feeling rendering of “Tom Bowline”
by Air. Hasleham. The proceedings
were closed with a vote of thanks to
the chairman, Captain Berrctt, and the
performers, and three hearty cheers
were given for our worthy Captain.
F.


No. 2.]
FRIDAY, MAY 22nd, 1874.
BURIAL AT SEA.
On* Friday last the infant child of
John and Louisa Owen (emigrants to
New Zealand) died in a fit of convul-
sions at about 2'25 a.m. The body
was committed to the deep the same
morning. As this was the first oppor-
tunity of witnessing a burial at sea we
had had it was with great interest and
curiosity that wo watched the ceremony.
The little corpse, looking more like
a wax model than aught else, was
enclosed in canvas after the usual
manner, and then covered with the
Union Jack. Soon wrs heard the gentle
Tolling of one of the ship’s bells, and,
standing on the poop, wo saw them
carry the little corpse to the port-hole,
from whence it was to bo cast into the
deep. The Captain—bare-headed—
stood there to receive it; and around a
little crowd had gathered with silent,
sorrowful faces ; that on some was to
bo seen an idle curiosity only.
Prominent among the group stood
the father and the mother; he, the
strong man, supporting his wife with
his arm round her; she grieving for
the one that was not. A very touching
scene it seemed indeed. Meanwhile
the service proceeded, being read by the
Captain in a low and solemn voice.
When it came to the part “Commit
the body to the deep ” the first and
second mates lifted and gently swung
the little corpse into the blue sea—a
splash, and that was all. The service
concluded in silence, and the crowd
quietly dispersed. Rah ! only a baby,
perhaps some callous-hearted observer
might have said ; but that baby had
an immortal soul, and Ho who came
to teach men said “ that of such was the
kingdom of Heaven.” Though lost to
the sorrowing parents here below—
She is not lost, but gone before,
Gone to a better shore.
Oh ! who can unravel the mystery
of life ! Why should men be born to
die? What cometh after death ? When
will death come to me 1 Such thoughts
as these may have been in the minds of
many that morning.
How necessary to sot one’s house in
order, seeing that at any time death
may call us. Some look upon death
as the King of Terrors, a tyrant, and a
despot; others regard him as a friend.
What causes the difference ? What
called forth the following beautiful
expression of Isaac Watts—
If life be long, I will be glad
That 1 may long obey ;
It short, then why should I be sad
To soar to endless day.
Religious fanaticism,” “ childish
delusion,” snecringly says the sceptic.
Is it so 1 Then it is a very happy
delusion (if such it bo), and much to be
preferred before that fearful-looking
for and expectation of one knows not
what.
CAUGHT.
“ Will you walk into my parlour?” said the
spider to the Hy.
Flics have six legs, and spiders have
eight; nevertheless two of our saloon
passengers looked extremely like the
former, and some of our crow closely
resembled the hitter last Friday evening
as the bell rang for tea. Two young
gentlemen—inmates of the saloon—at
a loss for something better to do—went
The Miltiades Record:
A JOURNAL OF LIFE ON BOARD THE SHIP “MILTIADES.”


buzzing anil fluttering up tlic rigging ;
when flash ! as if they felt the tremor
of their webs, four of the most nimble-
legged of our crow started in pursuit,
and overtaking the unfortunate flies
inveigled them in their inextricable
meshes, leaving them a trembling
spectacle for the other flies below. We
aro glad to say that the spiders did not
devour their victims but released thorn
in time for tea.
X.
A TROPICAL RATH.
Sometimes men very nearly approxi-
mate some of the lower animals. The
goose, sheep, donkey, dove, aro all
reproduced in man at some period of his
existence. Last night the saloon gentle-
men very closely resembled a flock of
ducks. The heavy tropical rain came
patter ! patter ! patter ! Immediately
our friends of the saloon (wc were
going to say our wob-footod friends,
but not having examined their toes
will not go to that length) began to
leave their coops and waddle on deck',
having first divested themselves of
their plumes, to receive the full benefit
of the rainfall. One duck more dilatory
than the rest resisted the temptation
for awhile, but the flesh is weak, and
it too (the dilatory duck) at last suc-
cumbed and waddled on. Alas ! only
in time to catch the last few lingering
drops. The Captain did his best to
soften the disappointment by throwing
a bucket or two of the fresh liquid
over its shoulders.
READINGS FROM SHAKE-
SPEARE.
Whether Shakespeare has been un-
derstood, or whether the master minds
of English writers (wc will not be so
ocho-like to say poets) has yet to be
explained, we will not venture to say-
but that in these enlightened days of
ours it is the correct thing to bo more
or less up in the works of the popular
idol is beyond all question. Away from
the stage (with which we have nothing
to do) it must bo evident to all what a
mine of wealth there is to the public
reader; and doubtless many of our
reader s will call up memories of how,
under (he power of a Montgomery or a
Bellow, they have seen the real living
character before thorn. And what
characters they are ! Xo wonder that
real ability often shrinks from the ex-
pounding of them. It was our good
fortune on Tuesday to be present at the
entertainment where Messrs. F. Hill
and A. Wilson read what is generally
called the “quarrel scene” from Julius
Carsar. Both gentlemen have more
than ordinary claim to rank as readers,
and both have evidently been devoted
students under a beloved master. That
per fect Roman, Brutus, was admirably
represented by Mr. Wilson. Rage,
indignation, sarcasm were in them
portrayed ■without any attempt at
exaggeration. Cassius in Mr. Hill’s
hands was rrot the common-place mortal
ho is sometimes represented to be—but
the eloquent pleader who moves even
Brutus. Wc greatly regret our space
will not allow us to go into the matter
more fully. In the meantime we trust
these gentlemen may again be induced
to read. They may rest assured that
they aro appreciated.
USEFUL INFORMATION.
TRADE WINDS.
Just as wo have entered the latitudes
where the north-east trade winds pre-
vail it may be interesting to some of
our readers to know the physical causes
to which they are to be ascribed.
The law of nature on which depend
these important and almost constant
atmospheric currents is the well-known
one of expansion by heat. A sun
almost directly' overhead pours its
nearly perpendicular rays on the torrid
regions, on either side of the equator,
causing by its great heat a rapid expan-
sion of the surface air in those parts.
The expanded air, rendered light by
its rarity, rises to the upper regions,
and the partial vacuum thus created is


instantly filled by a stream of cold,
dense and heavy air, which rushes in
from the north and south poles. Where
the earth still this would produce winds
blowing duo north and south, but
owing to the diurnal motion of the
earth their direction is considerably
modified. At the poles this motion is
nothing; on the borders of the temperate
zone it is several hundred miles per
hour, and at the equator it is 1,000
miles.
Now suppose a current of air to start
from the north pole along meridian
25deg. W. If the earth were still it
would in due time, on a course duo
south, reach the Capo Verde Islands.
But as those islands are moving east-
ward at a rate estimating roughly of
GOO miles per hour, when the current
reaches their latitudes it will be at a
point much further west. And thus
the course of the air current or trade
wind is north-east. And in like manner
currents rushing from the south pole
will assume a south-easterly direction.
About the equator, where opposite
trade winds will meet, there is a zone
of calms of between three and four
hundred miles in breadth. This belt is
bounded on the south by the equator,
thus lying wholly in the northern
hemisphere. This fact is owing to the
disturbing influences caused by the
preponderance of land to the north of
the equator.
FEILX.
FLYING FISH.
Many of our passengers have, since
the time when we entered the Tropics,
been on the look-out for what is popu-
larly termed a “ flying fish.” The in-
terest shown concerning this little
wonder has led me to venture a few
remarks in our paper, endeavouring to
point out what it is, and what its
habits are.
It belongs to the sub-order of the
Malacopterygii&hdomvaa\s, orabdominal
soft-skinned fish, and to the family of
the Esoces.
The family of the Esoces is distin-
guished from the class Mnlac ahdoms
by the fact that it has the upper jaw-
movable ; a largo mouth furnished
with strong, sharply-pointed teeth, and
their bodies are generally covered with
scales. Flying fishes may easily be
recognised by the extreme length of
their pectoral fins, which are capable
of sustaining them in the air for a
short time.
They swim in shoals, and are pur-
sued in the water by the bonita, and
when they arc clear of the water in order
to avoid this voracious fish they are
seized upon by sea birds, such as the
frigate, phaeton, <kc., which, like the
giant in the fairy tale, prove their
affection to those beautiful creatures by
devouring them.
I believe the specific name of the
flying-fish is the Esocelus minor. Their
so-called wings are merely extended
pectoral fin rays united by a pellucid
membrane.
Their colour is on the hack of a purple
tinge, and on ■ the stomach of a
bright silvery hue, giving to them when
passing through air on a sunny day a
very beautiful appearance.
The length of time during which they
support themselves in the air is about
32 seconds, and the extreme distance
of their flight from 200 to 250 yards.
EXOCETUS MINOR.
Correspondence.
Mr. Editor, — Sir ; Seeing that you devote
part of your space to the consideration of
scientific points bearing on the voyage it has
occurred to me that 1 might through your
columns obtain the solution of a problem that
puzzles me. I have observed that since we
have crossed Cancer daylight appears and
disappears with magic rapidity. Standing
on the deck at early morning I can realize
better than I ever could before the verses in
the first chapter of Genesis, “And darkness
was upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit
of God moved upon the waters,” and God
said “let there be light, and there was
light.” For there before me is black, mirky
darkness, when suddenly, like a panorama of
night and day, the blackness rolls away, and
is replaced by a shifting scene of light and
beauty tobeaoonfollowed by abrilliancy almost
too bright for the eye too look upon. Where


is that waiting for the day through a long
grey dawn with which every early riser in
Britain is familiar ? The same thing reversed
happens in the evening. We stand on the
deck, in the gleams of the sunset, when lo !
in the twinkling of an eye, a black veil
(jewelled certainly with silver) envelopes sea
and sky. Where is the long twilight, when
wo used in Kngland to sit and watch the day
dying by inches t Any of your readers who
will explain the phenomenon will relieve my
mind from much wondering speculation.
I am, sir,
Vour obedient servant,
E.
Original Poetry.
Tun “ Miltiades ” is a happy ship,
We all pull well together,
And everything goes swimmingly
In every kind of weather.
The skipper is a jovial soul,
“ Al” our noble mate ;
The others all good in their way,
And “Fills ” is truly nate.
The passengers good fellows are,
The ladies we adore :
For who could wish on seeing them
To be a bachelor.
Scotland claims two for her own,
An i proud of them may be ;
She has, if others are the same,
The swatest family.
And now in bidding all “ Bon Voyage”
I hope you will accord
A little favour to us in
The Miltiades Hecord.
NOSTNORT.
DAILY RECORD.
May 15th.—Fresh breeze, fine weather ;
lat., by account, 20ileg. 49min. N.; long.
21deg. 18min. W. Course, S. 4 W.; dis-
tance, 189 miles.
IGth.—Fine weather, moderate breeze ;
lat. 17deg. MOmin. N.; long. 22deg. 0 2 min.
W. Course, S. 12dcg. W.; distance, 204
miles.
17th. —Fine weather. Services as last
Sunday. Sea very beautiful. Lat. 14deg.
50min. N. ; long, 22deg. 13min. West.
Course, S. j W.; distance, ICO miles.
18th. —Warm and close. Lat. 12deg.
28min. N.; long. 22deg. Slmin. W. Course,
S. 7deg. W.; distance, 14C miles. Meeting
held to-day in the single men’s compartment,
at which it was resolved to form a Mutual
Improvement Society. The officers were
chosen, and Mr. Hill invited to be president.
First meeting to he held Friday, the 22nd.
19th.—Gentle hreeze, line warm weather.
Second entertainment of the voyage, con-
sisting of readings, singing, &c. Lat. lOdeg.
20min. N.; long. 22Jeg. 32rnin. W. Course,
S.; distance, 128 miles. Young man fell
down one of the hatchways and injured his
head, but not seriously.
20th.—Cloudy and close weather. Lat.
7deg. 59min. N. ; long. 23deg 23min. W.
Course, S. 2deg. W. ; distance, 150 miles.
Very heavy rain sudden gust took the ship
aback. Sharks seen for the first time.
21st.—Close and warm. Child christened
and named after the ship John Miltiades
Hennessy, Dr. Harding and Miss Meredith
standing sponsors. Lat. (ideg. 41min. N.;
long. 23deg. 40min. W. Course, S. lldeg.
W.; distance, 81 miles.
SECOND ENTERTAINMENT OF
THE VOYAGE.
Our second entertainment took place
on Tuesday, the 19th inst., and con-
sisted of a variety of songs and readings.
The chai" was taken by our first ofiicer,
Mr. Bread), who discharged his duties
in a most able manner, and contrived
by his jocularity and good humour to
throw an air of cheerfulness on the
proceedings. The entertainment com-
menced with a reading from “ Julius
Cmsar,” the selection being made from
act 4, scene 3. the altercation between
Brutus and Cassius in the tent of the
former. The characters were repre-
sented respectively by Messrs. Alex.
Wilson and F. A. Hill. Further com-
ment is made on this performance else-
where in our columns. So we shall
pass on to the other parts of the
programme. Recitations were given
during the course of the evening by
Messrs. C. Wilson, Packer, and White-
head, all of which were creditably deli-
vered. Mr. Packer, as Buzfuz, recited
in character, and created considerable
merriment. Mi - . C. Wilson’s “ Little
Jim,” and Mr. Whitehead’s “Pilgrim
Fathers” abounded in pathos, and the
latter must have appealed to the feelings
of many present. Many good songs
were sung. Amongst the singers were
Miss Kelly (the first appearance of one


of the fair part of the ship’spopulation on
the boards), Messrs. Haselham, Tronson,
Seton, Laws, Whitehead, and (J.
Wilson. Miss Kelly’s “ Gome back to
Erin ” was sweetly though not power-
fully sung. Mr. Hasleham gave the
“ White Squall ” and “ The Sea King’s
.Burial ” in a manner calculated to
justify the high opinion we have already
expressed of his vocal powers. One
of the most popular songs of the after-
noon was “ A Starlight llamble,” given
by Mr. Laws, in such a hearty manner
as convinced us that he sang feelingly
and with intense appreciation of his
subject. Judging by tho chorus the
audience seemed to appreciate it too.
At the conclusion a vote of thanks was
proposed to Mr. Breach for so kindly
presiding, and to Miss Kelly for her
services on the occasion, after which
three cheers were given for Captain
Perrett.
X.
Original Poetry.
THE ISLES OF FIJIS.
Where the sweet gentle smith balmy gales
Sigh o’er the peaceful blue sea,
The cotton plant waves in the vales
Of the beautiful Isles of Fiji.
If you want to be happy ami rich,
Respected, contented, and free,
The plan, sir, simply is this—
You have only to go to Fiji.
Would you look for a shark or a whale,
The wonders of nature to sec,
You have only at once to make sail
To the beautiful Isles of Fiji.
Or if you’re in want of a wife
Your guide and companion to be,
’Twill make you quite happy for life
If you seek in the Isles of Fiji.
Then, when we at Auckland arrive,
At once take your passage with me,
I’ll take you all brisk and alive
To the beautiful Isles of Fiji.
LIVING MEMORIES.
A pebble dropped in mountain lake,
The circling ripple shore-bound take
Their graceful way, and lightly wake
The still forget-me-not.
A gentle plunge, a passing gleam,
The sunlight kisses with its beam
The wave-lit lips of placid stream,
And what remains ?
The circles widen one by one, [done
They reach the shore, their course is
The startled floweret slumbers on,
And what remains 1
Immersed in life, we know not why—
The radiate waves of sympathy—
But do they live, or do they die ?
And what remains ?
Sweet is the charm around us cast
By gentle wavelets of the past,
That vibrate music to the last—
Joyous refrains.
Will sympathies immortal stay ?
Or will they, leaf-like, fade way !
My inmost heart gives answers “ nay,”
“ Something remains.”
FELIX.
MY NATIVE LAND.
Dear England, when I’m far away,
Severed by many miles of sea,
Often alike by night and day
My thoughts and dreams shall be of thee.
I’ll think of thec when down the tide
Of life my bark doth smoothly How ;
I’ll think of thee when surges hide
The thought of all else dear below.
When troubles weigh my spirit down,
When care and pain I’d fain forget;
Again I’ll tread thy sacred ground,
And in my thoughts bo with thee yet.
Should friends bo false, or friends be true ;
Should fortune smile or fortune frown,
Dear home ! thy memories ever new
Shall every other pleasure crown.
Where’er. 1 end my chequered life,
Whatever may be my future lot,
Until I end the weary strife
Thou’ll never, never be forgot.
J. K. CANCA—J.P.


No. 3.]
FRIDAY, JUNE Stii, 1874.
CROSSING THE LINE.
Neptune’s realm is very wide. From
tlic barriers of northern ice that defy
all human prying into the secrets of
the North Pole, to the insurmountable
glazier-cliffs of the Antartic, stretches
the sea-god’,s watery kingdom. King
Neptune and Queen Terra hold this
world’s sway between them, but by far
the largest portion belongs to the king.
Little did his faithful and loyal sub-
jects of ancient Greece and Romo
imagine (when they slew their heca-
tombs, and poured their libations to
propitiate the deity who held the fate
threads of commerce and naval' enter-
prise in his hands)- —little did they
imagine that his dominion extended so
far beyond the pillars of Hercules.
True ! their adventurous spirit had
penetrated so far as the Tin Islands—
now the Scilly—or, it may be, even as
far as the sea that beats on Oban, or
resounds in the, cave of Fingal, but
little they dreamt of a spheroid world
sunning its boundless oceans over areas
that to compare with the Mediterranean
were as the drops to the bucket. But so it
was, though all undreamt by them, and
so it is, though centuries have rolled
away since the votaries of Neptune
sacrificed to him hundreds of the fairest
of their flocks.
Has then the hoary king ceased to
rise from his watery throne 2 Does he
no longer ascend from the azure depths
where stand his countless palaces of
coral to exact the homage and receive
the tribute of men. Our voyage ex-
perience shows us that Neptune still
reigns. That though ho has shifted his
regal residence from the shores of the
Levant to the more central position
where an invisible boundary line
separates the northern from the southern
hemisphere, yet he is ever alive to tho
interests of his kingdom and the main-
tenance of his dignity. On the night
of Sunday, May 24th, about 1 2 o’clock,
the “ Miltiades ” touched the equator.
Doubtless attendant sprites were on the
look-out, and duly telegraphed to his
majesty our arrival on the royal de-
mesnes. However that may be, no
sooner had wo done so, and passed the
boundary, than “ Ship ahoy ” sounded
from beneath tho bows of the vessel.
Presently his Oceanic Majesty appeared
on the [loop, arrayed in a long loose
rebe, his hoary beard falling to his
waist. After inquiries duly made and
answered regarding the welfare of her
Majesty tho Queen, Ncptuna, and tho
royal infants, it was suggested that
Neptune might like something to drink.
Alas ! owing to the untimely hour of
his visit, nothing was to bo had but a
cup of claret—a most unkingly beverage
to judge by Neptune’s manner of
drinking it.
After some further conversation his
august Majesty, wishing no doubt to
get back to supper, retired, saying that
he would send his collector of revenues
to collect his dues, which he accordingly
did next day. Such are the facts of the
sea-god’s visit to us ; tho form perhaps
less heartily—but decidedly more agree-
able to passengers—than in the golden
days of old when the practice of shaving
was in its prime. Then Neptune did
not condescend to walk, but was
drawn in a chariot yoked with
dolphins and followed by a train
The Miltiades Record :
A JOURNAL OF LIFE ON BOARD THE SHIP “MILTIADES.”


of noisy imps. Then woo to the luck-
less wights who had not before crossed
the lino, for their lacerated skins
testified to the roughness of Neptune’s
minions, who with tarry brush and
rusty razor lathered and scraped their
hapless faces. Fortunately for us such
days arc over, and the unfledged
voyager may now look forward to
crossing the lino as the occasion for a
little harmless fun and jollity.
L.
“ LAND HO ! ”
Owing to tho ordinary trade wind
blowing so much from the south wo
were driven towards the Brazilian
coast, so that on Saturday, tho 30th,
and again on Monday, wo sighted land.
Directly the look-out reported “ land
ho !” the nows was telegraphed through-
out the ship, and the side of the vessel
was crowded with eager spectators
anxious to got a glimpso ol land— that
long absent land ; they seemed to sniff'
up tho breeze with avidity, as if
resolved to taste something of land
again. But tho pleasure did not seem
to bo shared by all ; the captain and
officers of tho ship did not much like
the sight of land if one might judge
from the elongated expression of their
faces.
But what a crowd of memories, both
pleasant and mournful, came rushing
through one’s mind as we thought
involuntarily of old England and the
days now gone by: of that homo which
many of us perhaps may never see
again; mingled with these were hopes
and fears of the future concerning that
land which is to be our future country
and home. Many an unbidden tear
may have rolled down the cheek and
silently brushed away as these thoughts
crowded into our minds. But
‘ ‘ Lot the dead past bury its dead ;
Act, act in the living present,
Heart within and God o’erhead ;
and
In the world’s broad field of battle,
In tho bivouac of life,
Be not like dumb-driven cattle,
But be heroes in the strife.”
THE “DEAD HORSE:"
On Saturday last the “ Dead Horse ”
was heaved overboard amidst great
rejoicing. The origin of this custom
of tho “ Dead Ilorso ” is somewhat
curious, and an account of it may bo
interesting to some of our readers. It
is customary for sailors before leaving
port to receive a month’s pay in
advance, which, owing to tho not very
provident nature of the recipients, is
too often spent before they set foot on
board. Thus to the majority of seamen
it appears as if their work of the first
month went for nothing, and they feel
a desire to wreiik their vengeance—
which properly ought to bo directed
against their own improvidence—on tire
period of time that they have been
working to no account. As it is
impossible to gratify tho vindictive
fooling on a more abstract idea, the
“ first month ” is substantially repre-
sented by tho figure of a dead horse,
which is dragged round the deck and
belaboured and kicked to their hearts
content. The belabouring, kicking,
singing and shouting atteniliiig tho
tho progress of tho dead horse on
Saturday last was peculiarly hearty.
When the defunct animal arrived at
the poop his rider very humorously put
him up to auction, when he was bought
by Mr. i lasi chain for the sum of thirty-
seven shillings and sixpence. After
the auction, horse and rider were
pulled up to the yard-arm, whence,
amongst the ghastly flare of blue lights,
tho steed was dropped into the seething
water. Some singing commenced
afterwards, but a storm of rain
summarily closed the proceedings.
F.
Correspondence.
Dear Molly,—
IS'iver a ship hcv we seen as wud take
home a telegraph, not to say a hole post-
office of letters as is sure to bo scent when-
ever the “Miltiades” fokes can get a
opportoonity, so you must not winder if ye
don’t heer from me till we gets to Auckland,
as wont be for weeks yet to cum, if we plays


hide and seek at tills rate between South
Amcrika and Indier, wicli Betsy says is east
of us, as is were Woolsey fried three
oundred Shantees alive in one day, cos they
spoke ill of Queen Wictorier behind her
hack. For Molly you shud sec the geulmeu
on hord here ow they runs about with niver
a shoe or stocking to there feet, a showin of
there corns like so many wild Ingius. I
niver seed genleu as thort so much of their
shins afore, purtikler in rainy weather.
We’ve hein scein many sorts o’ curious
things lately. Wuu nite wen we was crossin
the line (I donno xactly what that is, cos I
didn’t see it, hein lock’d helo at the time,
neither did I beer or feel anything wen we
went over it) a old man as they call Neptune
came on board out of the sea, to ask for sum
licker, wich he cudn’t hav, through it hein
so late, hut was promised next day. They
doo say as won chap guv him sum sour stuff
as they call clarrett, as Neptune cudn’t abide
and spat it out duhble quick, and disapeered
from the end of the boom in a flame of fire.
Its Betsy as told me this cos I didn’t see it
mysel. Anither nite I heerd a dredful noise
and what was this hut the sailors bed got a
orse maid up ov ocum and clouts, and sum-
body on its back, wich they drov and beet
with sticks, ami sung that loud sumthink or
uther about the onld orse. Betsy says that
the salors do this wunce a year as was this
day when the ‘ Miltiades ’ was launched
wich was called after a famous orse as liv’d
in Grease long ago, and the salors gets a
month’s pay and as much rum as they can
drink for doin it. After they was dun of
pullin him about, theys draws im an the
man on his back up to the mane-yanl arm
(as is called sich cause of the orse) and drops
im into the sea, and it wos a mercy the man
didn’t dropp with im, as had a narrer escape
by hangin on to the yard-arm, and away it
floted into the wide wide oshin. But now
deerest Molly good-by, I will rite you
anuther letter when I ov more to say.
Your affcckshunatc sister,
MARTHA.
Useful Information.
THE SHARK.
This ferocious animal is a fisli breathing
by means of gills in the water; is cold-
blooded. Its skeleton is made uji of
cartilage, not true bone, and this fact
distinguishes the tribe from what are
called the “ Osseus,” or bony fishes.
The mouth opens on the under sur-
face, some distance from the snout, and
this also is noticed by naturalists in
their classification. The skin of the
shark is rough and hard, so as to be
used as a file when dried.
The shark may not inaptly be termed
the tiger of the seas. Its strength is
enormous ; it attacks even whales,
biting largo pieces out of their living
bodies, and men frequently fall victims
to his voracity. Ilis appetite is not
discriminating—tin pots, sacking, large
pieces of iron, etc., have been found in
Ins stomach ; but in his natural state
seals, cod-fish, tunnies, and other fishes
form its staple food.
The white shark is the largest and
most formidable of the tribe ; it at-
tains a length of twenty-five feet
or even thirty. Its vast mouth is
armed with sharp, movable triangular
teeth, in rows increasing in number as
it grows. It is very active, swimming
near the surface of the water, its back
fin sticking up ; and as the shark has
not a swimming bladder considerable
muscular exertion is required to keep
the fish near the surface. As the shark
seizes its prey it may be seen to turn
over, its white belly glistening, and its
vast jaws close with such force as to
break the thigh of a man witii ease.
There arc several varieties of the
shark, but the white one may be con-
sidered the type of the race.
M.H.
Amusements.
The entertainment of Thursday, the
28th ult., owing to the state of the
weather, was postponed until Tuesday
last, when several songs, recitations, &c.
were given, but owing to some mis-
understanding several of the singers
did not appear. Most worth} of notice
was the singing of Mrs. Morgan and
Miss Angrove, who sang with much
sweetness and feeling.
Notwithstanding the short interval
between Tuesday and yesterday the
promoters of these entertainments
seemingly were so pleased with the


success they had achieved, that they
did not wish to lose an opportunity of
giving one, and certainly yesterday’s
gathering and performance were of the
best that we have yet had the pleasure
of witnessing.
The principal part of the performance
was an original comedy written ex-
pressly for the occasion by Alex.
Wilson, Esq.,entitled “Stormy Petrels.’
The plot was good and exceedingly
well worked out allowing for the
limited resources at command in the
way of costumes and scenery.
Two old friends, one a merchant in
London, and the other a sea captain,
betrothed their children in infancy.
The merchant’s son, a scrapegraco,
refuses to obey his father’s wishes and
marry, so runs away from home to
Auckland, and, assuming an alias,
accidently meets with the young lady,
and falls in love with her, and cannot
obtain her father’s consent because ho
had already betrothed her to an old
friend’s sou. In the last scene comes
the denouement, when ho finds out she
is the very lady whom his father wished
him to marry.
Dr. Harding, as Mr. Petrel, the
merchant, enacted his part very credit-
ably, his costume being appropriate,
and manner most natural.
Mr. Hasleham, as the sorapegrace,
fulfilled his part very- fairly ; but, if we
may be allowed to say so, burlesque is
much more his forte than the senti-
mental.
Mr. Wilson, as Captain Porpus,
skipper of the ship in which Jack sailed
to Auckland, and father of the young
lady, deservesmuch praise for hiscoolness
and self-possession, though the character
was hardly suitable to him.
Mr. H. Tronson, as Lieut. Walrus,
Jack’s friend, made a good appearance
in an unthankful part.
Many thanks, we think, are due for
the capital arrangement of tho stage to
Captain Ferret and his obliging officers ;
also to the energetic efforts of Mr.
Jekyll in shifting scenes, &.C. Several
good songs and recitations finished up
tlio afternoon. One of the rnott inter-
esting was recited very amusingly by
Mr. Jocelyn, entitled “The Jackdaw
of Rheims.”
The proceedings then closed in the
usual manner with “ God save the
Queen.” Thanks were proposed and
seconded to Captain Perrett for pre-
siding, and three hearty cheers given
for him and for Dr. Harding.
The young men forward, incited by
the success of These entertainments,
and partly from a spirit of rivalry, got
up an entertainment on Monday night
and one on Thursday night, both of
which we believe were very amusing
and successful. They, as we hear, intend
holding two every week ; the next one
they hold wo will give an account of
HOW PAT MURPHY GOT TO ENGLAND.
“ I say r , Mike, did I ever tell ye how
I worked me passage ouver from Cork
to Liverpool,” said Pat Murphy to his
friend Mike Magreo. “ No, niver,”
says Mike. “ Wall, then I will, bo
gorra ! I shall never forget it.” You
know there bo a lot of stamers as calls
at Cork and takes people to England.
Thor was one the ‘ Carry-ura-quick ’ a
getting ready to be off the very day I
happened to ask Mary McGrath to hev
mo, an she wudnt, but told me I warnt
wuth the salt I ate. Wall, I sees the
stamer, and pops oil bord an axes the
Capen to giv mo a job to fade the pigs
he wur a taking ouver. And, sure
enuff, he says come along Pat I’ll giv
yez sumthing to do. Soon after that
he sens me to chine up sum brass work
on top of a ladder, but the ladder
warn’t long enuf and I didn’t rache ;
so I axes the carpenter for a sar, an wos
agoin to lengthin the ladder, wen up
he comes and sez he, ‘ What is ye
going to do V “ Why,” says I, “ I’m
agoin to make the ladder longer to be
sure ” “ How ?” says he. “ Cut a
bit of this ere end and fasten it on to
the other,” sez I. When out he busts
a lafiin, and sez, “ Get along wid ye,
and bring none of your Irishnotionsere


Soon a’tcr that wo began to move,
anti Mike, be gorra! what quare
sonshashun kum ouver mo won I began
to fale as if I bed a fish inside o’ ir.o a
rollin and heavin like anything.
Oil ! how I did wish meself back
agen ; but the wust of it wos wen I
wos lielpin the steward to carry in the
dinner. I jest bad a foiue leg of pork
in mo hands, when I was obleged to up
with it, and it went all over the pace
of pork as wos for dinner. How the
steward did swear to bo sure, but ho
jest wipped it into a pail of water and
took it in for dinner as if nothin hed
appened. Now I must get off to work,
but will tell ye. more next time I see
ye-
DAILY RECORD.
May 22ml.—Stormy weather, unsteady
wind. Lat. sdcg. 34min. N. ; long. 2,‘ldeg
43min. W. Course, S. J AV. ; distance, (!S
miles. Passed the ship “Thunderbolt.”
23rd.—Squally with rain ; ship plunging.
Lat. 3deg. 29rain. N. ; long. 23deg. > r >2min.
W. Course, S. sdeg. W.; distance, 125
miles.
24th.— Very warm and light breeze.
Services as usual. Lat. Ideg. o.2min. N. ;
long. 25dcg. 4(!min. AV. Course, S. 37deg.
W. ; distance, 185 miles. Neptune came on
board at , midnight, making a short visit,
promising to send next day.
25th—Pleasant breeze, beautiful weather.
Neptune’s clerk came and collected bis dues,
after which his subjects regaled us with some
singing, etc. Lat. Ideg. 40min. S. ; long.
27deg. 20min. W. Course, S. 30dcg. Vv. ;
distance, 18G miles.
2Gth.—Fresh breeze, mild weather. Lat.
4deg. 33min. S. ; long. 30dcg. O.lmin. AV.,
S. 43dcg. AA'. ; distance, 237 miles.
27th.—Fresh breeze and fine. Lat. 7deg.
12min. S. ; long. 32deg. O.Smin. AV. Course,
S. 39deg. AA - . ; distance, 205 miles.
28th.—Moderate breeze, and mild. Lat.
9deg. 3(!min. S. ; long. 34deg. 59min. AA T .
Course, S. 50deg. AV.; distance, 224 miles.
29th.—Very rough squally weather, with
unsettled winds. As the men were on the
forecastle hauling down the Hying jib she
shipped a heavy sea, washing them nearly
overboard, and unfortunately injuringseveral.
AVm. Howard, one of the sadors, had his
leg broke, and two others were hurt severely.
Lat. 1 Ideg. sGmin. 8. ; long, 3(!deg, 33min.
AV. Course, S. 33dcg. AV.; distance, IGS
miles.
30th.—Fresh breeze with head sea, ship
plunging violently. Howard doing well ;
leg set last night by the doctor in the
Captain’s cabin. To-day lie was placed in a
hammock in one of the deck-houses ; others
doing well. Lat. 13dcg. 59min. S. ; long.
37deg. lOmin. AV. Course, S. 23deg. AV. ;
distance, 130 miles. Land sighted on the
starboard bow—part of the Brazilian coast.
31st.—Moderate breeze and fine weather.
Service hold in evening instead of morning.
Lat. 14deg. 44min. S ; long. 37deg, 2(imin.
AV. Course, S. 19deg. AV. ; distance, 48
miles.
June Ist. Fair breeze, cloudy weather.
One of the emigrants—J. McGrath —having
shown symptoms of insanity was placed in
care of keepers, and one man put in irons for
teasing him. Lat. IGdeg. 52min. S. ; long.
3Sdeg. 40min. AA'. Course, S. 29deg. AA r . ;
distance, 14G miles.
2nd.—Gentle breeze and fine. Two others
were placed in irons to-day for again teasing
McGrath. Lat. 18deg. 7min. 8, ; long.
3Sdeg. IGmin. W. Course, 8. 18deg. E. ;
distance, 79 miles.
3rd.—Light wind, fine weather. McGrath
put in irons to keep him from injuring
himself. Mutual Improvement Society held
a meeting in single men’s department. Lat.
20deg. 11 min. S. ; long. 38deg. 21 min. AV.
Course, S. 2deg. AV. ; distance, 123 miles.
4th. —Fair breeze and fine. Lat. 23dcg.
O.lmin. S. ; long. 22deg. o.4min. AV. Course,
S. sdeg. E. ; distance, 171 miles. Passed
and hailed the “ Alary llhymc,” a small
schooner, from Lisbon to llio Grande, out 40
days.
Death
Alay 20th.—Sarah AVeightraan, aged 12
months.
June Ist.—AV. H. Tattersall, aged 11
weeks.
TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Contributors are requested to send in their
contributions, etc., by Monday, the loth,
proximo.


ERIDAY, JUNE 10th, 1874.
No. 4.]
BIRD CATCHING.
The favorite amusement—indeed as we
might say the only amusement —in the
after part of the vessel for the past few
days has been bird-catching, and that
after a fashion that must, from its
novelty, interest all who have never
been to sea before. To most on board,
whether they arc given to the study of
natural history or not, the motion of
the hosts of bright creatures that fol-
low in the wake of the vessel must be a
source of never-failing delight. The
graceful movements, and the wonderful
instincts of the sea birds as they curve
in mid-air, with eye alert to anything
that floats below, or skim along the sur-
face of the water to investigate more
closely what they have scon from above,
are equal to anything that can be ob-
served in the feathered tribe on land.
The beautiful Capo pigeon, like a hy-
brid of the rock-dove, and magpie the
daring petrel, and tne arrogant and
exultant albatross—as they hurry here,
there, and everywhere—contribute to
form a scene in animal life which ex-
ceeds in liveliness and variety anything
we have hitherto seen,
One cannot help wishing for the
wingsof a sea-bird to follow those bright
creatures to their land abodes, and visit
the caves of their home joys and af-
fections, the haunts
Of those that make their homo
Where the white billows roar and foam
Around the overhanging rock !
Fearless they skim the angry wave,
Or sheltered in their sea-beat cave.
The tempest’s fury mock.
But to some a thing of beauty is not a
joy—except with possession—and ac-
cordingly several enthusiastiesportsmen,
assisted by single females, have devoted
much time and perseverance to catching
a few specimens. Hour after hour, in
the face of wind and rain, lines were
let out and pulled in, and shaken with
the most praiseworthy patience, until
at last—joyful to be told a bird
(measuring Oft. lOin. from tip to tip of
the wing,) of whose name wo are afraid
to attempt the spelling, was entangled
in the captain’s line, and triumphantly
hauled on board. After this another
specimen of the same kind, but slightly
larger, several Capo pigeons, and a petrol
were captured. Still those ungrateful
birds do not seem sufliciently to appre-
ciate the efforts made to catch them, else
surely more of them would have done
themselves the honour of being caught.
Some might be inclined to think so
much time and energy misspent. And
possibly if Dr. Johnson were on board
lie might define a fishing line as a string,
with a piece of fat at one end anil
something uncomplimentary at the
other. But, after all, were not seagulls
and albatrosses created for the special
behoof of the lords of the creation,
and do not wo, rational beings, show
that we fully appreciate the gift by
catching them and skinning them 1
F.
On Saturday, the Oth inst., the ship
being becalmed and the weather fine,
the Captain very kindly had one of
the boats lowered to allow several of
the saloon passengers a bathe in the
sea. After rowing some distance from
the vessel’s side we had a beautiful
view of the ship, all sails being set, and
The Milt iades Record:
A JOURNAL OF LIFE ON BOARD THE SHIP “MILTIADES.”


showing tip grandly against the back
ground of sky. It was a sight not
soon to be forgotten by those who were
unaccustomed to such sights ; but the
chief officer, Mr. Breach, who was in
charge of the boat, seemed not to
perceive the beauty of the picture so
much as the defects, for his eyes seemed
to fix upon the sides of the ship where
the dirty water had been thrown away ;
and, after wishing that people would
learn not to throw clean water down
the size of the vessel, he finished up
with “ Well, we are an emigrant ship.”
When at a respectable distance the
bathers began disrobing themselves, and
Ci O }
one by one entered the water, ap-
parently enjoying the bath immensely.
The doctor especially swam very easily,
and Messrs. JekyllandTonson appeared
to be at home in the water. On re-
turning to the ship three hearty cheers
were given to the captain and ship,
and thanks to the mates.
GETTING UP THE BOXES.
This arduous task occurs three or four
times during the voyage, as the weather
will permit. It consits in getting out
all the passengers' luggage which has
been slowed away in the hold of the
ship, and bringing it on deck where all
may have a chance of opening their
own especial treasures. The day is
anxiously looked for by most of the
emigrants, fur then they are able to get
out fresh changes of linen, Ac.
It is a most exciting scene : the large
open hatchway is crowded with spec-
tators anxiously peering into the hold,
some on hands and knees, trying to get
a glimpse of their own particular
luggage. Down below there they arc
at work—[lulling, heaving, hauling and
hoisting up as (prickly as possible.
It would need the pen of a Dickens
to fully paint this scone, and it was one
that he would eagerly attempt to re-
produce had ho seen it—so many and
various are the expressions on the faces
around—some making fun, others being
made fun of! Here they are hauling
up a great oak chest, evidently some
old heirloom left in the family. Many
are the observations made on this :
Some suggest that the man has brought
his coffin with him ; but, “ no, no,”
says another, “ it is the family sepul-
chre that he did not like to leave
behind him,” and so on. There they
are, laughing at a box marked with the
finger; but soon the rain comes down
heavily and puts a stop to the process,
leaving many more disappointed than
if they had not them up at all; for it
is hard to have the cup one is about to
drink out of dashed from one’s lips
again without having a taste.
MILTIADES MUTUAL IMPROVE-
MENT SOCIETY.
This society, formed by the young
men forward, had tho pleasure last
Friday week of listening to a very in-
teresting lecture upon New Zealand,
given by Mr. A. Wilson, one of tho
saloon passengers ; Dr. Harding taking
tho chair. The subject was very appro-
priate, and certainly seemed to be
thoroughly appreciated by the audience
if wo may judge from the attention
with which they listened to it.
Last Friday, in connection with the
society, a debating class was started—
(to be held on Tuesday evenings in
future) —the first debate being “Is
Emigration good for England or not 1 ”
Although it was at first difficult to get
those present to advance their opinions
in regard to this subject this feeling soon
wore off, and a pleasant and profitable
meeting was held.
To-day (Friday) Dr. Harding has
kindly consented to give a lecture upon
“ Respiration ; or, How we breathe and
why we breathe.”
Correspondence.
[Corv oi- ax Kmhiiiast’s Lettek Home.]
]leak Molly,—
'l'lie see is osliins high, ami a very difficult
it is to rite. No sooner does I sit down at
the big form with mi pen and papier than up


eves the ship all of a sudden, and I gets that
bumped about in all directions till I’m reglar
black and bloo with brooses, and I as to
crawl about after mi ink and papier, which
no sooner found than down the ship goes to
tother side, and away I rolls till mi bunk
stops mi “ignoble carrier,” as the novels
used for to say. But la ! Molly, that aint
nothin to wat it is on deck sometimes, wich
is that slippery and the ship rollin that
outrajous as one kant move without comin
kerflop on one’s back, as is what I have seen
several do, and pittiable objeoks they look
and no mestake. One fine cawm day the
Captain he lowers a boat into the water,
with the first oflishcr and too or three saliers
in it, and then sum of the saloon passengers
they climbed down the side of the ship by a
ladder, an ho ! Molly, ow mi heart did beat
when I see them a danglin over the water,
for all the world like eels on a fishing line,
and ardly able to tutch the boat, and away
they goes round the ship, a hollerin out
someshing about “ Marchm to Georgie,” as
they often does, tho’ I doant know what
Georgie they refers too, as is likely some of
there friens at ome. And when they was
out sum distance from the ship what does
they, of them, but jumps of the boat into
water, and it were a mercy as they cood
swim, or else they wood hev been drounded.
Betsey says that one of them put ov all his
close, and was swimmin about, wen someone
calls out “ Sharks !” as so fritened the poor
man that he swum to the boat, and cud’nt
get in till ho was hawled up by some of the
saillers. By and by they cums back to the
ship awl dripping wet, as put me in mind of
the sheep at ome after they had been washed.
One day tho second mate (Betsey Says ho
wur a sitting at the boom) he oilers out all or
a sudden “ Wales ! ” and we all rushes to the
stern of the ship, and, shore enuf, there was
wun down belo as looked about as big as a
good-sized codfish. The secund mate he says
“ Its a young sperm whale,” and wun fare
young gentleman as wur there he shook his
lied quite wise and says “Ah! it! has mis-
took the ship for its mother.” Others as
seem to know perfeokly says it is a Grampius
—as praps it is—tho not luiowin kant say—
I must bid ye good-bye now for I kant stand
no more bumping.
Yure affeckshunato sister,
MARTH A .
Useful Information
THE WHALE.
About a week ago one of the
monsters of tho deep was seen swimming
about tho stern of the ship, and so a few
words about it may prove interesting.
The animal was of the whale kind.
Whether it was a young whale or a
grampus lias provoked some discussion,
and I will leave the determination to
others while I explain very briefly
what a whale is.
A whale is not a fish, but is a hot-
blooded animal, bringing forth its young
alive, and suckling them ; the young
whale is called a calf. The whale has
lungs, and requires to come to the
surface to take its breath, or it would
be drowned ; and to enable it to do so
with rapidity the tail is flattened hori-
zontally instead of vertically, like that
of a fish, and so a stroke of the tail
brings it to the surface.
In the snout are two blow holes,
and the whales may be seen to discharge
a largo quantity of water through them
into the air. The body of the whale is
encased by a deep layer of fat or oil
called blubber, and it is tor this that
men brave perils to pursue them, as the
commercial value of the oil is very
great. The whale in the Northern
hemisphere inhabits that great expanse
of ocean north of about GOdeg. latitude,
and in the Southern hemisphere that
part south of 35deg. The whalebone
whale, or cachelot, have enormous heads
in proportion to the size of their bodies,
and inside their jaws is found that
peculiar horny substance called whale-
bone, arranged in layei-s-upon the upper
jaw. The spermaceti whale has no
whalebone, but teeth, and is principally
sought for the great and rich quantity
of oil it yields. Tire length of these
animals is generally about 70 foot, and
its circumference 50 feet.
Oirginal Poetry
“BOTTLED STOUT.”
Ye muses nine, pray don’t repine,
If I should wear you out;
I sing the praise, assist my lays,
Of honest “ Bottled Stout. ”
All other drink, as you may think,
I swig with grace devout ;
For black and tan, ho ! here’s your man,
Hurrah ! for “ Bottled .Stout.


Of every wine and eau divine,
Fair turn and turn about!
But oh, ye gods ! by all that nods
Give me some “ Bottled Stout.”
A cry was heard, I nigh c espaired
At this heart-rending shout ;
No more, no more ! this ends the store
Of Guiness’ “Bottled Stout.”
At this false cry the whole ship’s fry
Began to droop and pout ;
When joy untold ! tho stores unfold
New fonts of “Bottled Stout.”
False stewards ! now, pray tell me how
Mankind could do without
The matchless joy, free from alloy,
Of honest “ Bottled Stout.”
Then mates, cheer up, and drink me a cup
To no ungenerous lout; [thing,
“Our froth-crowned king!” a glorious
Is jovial “ Bottled Stout.”
F.
THE “MILTIADES.”
From London port the good ship hailed,
"With a right fair wind the “Miltiadcs”
sailed,
And a very good ship was she.
Of women, men, and children small,
Norweigians, Irish, Germans tall,
She carried variety.
The Captain he was very kind ;
When fair and easy was the wind
He sang right merrily.
Bright and well he looked and jolly,
The girls he pleased with “ Irish Molly ”
As we rode on the deep blue sea.
The Doctor he was very thin,
And all unshaven was his chin ;
But not a had sort was he ;
He was mighty learned in his talk,
But not very steady in his walk,
Because of the rolling sea.
Then there was Mrs. Seton, fair,
And her husband good, a bonny pair
As ever you did see.
Seton’s jokes were very strange
On his little dog that had the mange,
As we sailed on the Atlantic sea.
Tin'll came two young ladies fair,
And a tall brother with thin black hair,
Who talked Philosophy.
In Scotland he was a Master of Arts,
And ho gave a lecture on foreign parts,
And wrote a comedy.
A Manchester boy was Captain Jack,
For Melbourne bound on the wallaby track,
And a comical dog was he.
Thro’ the ship ho wandered all about!
He smoked and drank a deal of stout,
And his manners were very free.
Mister Tronson was fair and bold,
Tho’ sometimes blue and very cold ;
Quite a sailor he seemed to be.
He could tell you when a gale would blow,
And how they would act in the P. and 0.,
For fifth officer was he.
Mr. Breach the first watch kept,
And when the sea o’er the bulwarks swept
“ That nothing, that’s nothing,” said he.
“ Before we to New Zealand get
You’ll every one get thoroughly wet,
For such is what we expect at sea.”
Mr. Laws was a knowing card
As ever squared the cro’jack yard,
Or hauled tight the main brace at sea.
With a deep bass voice his song he trolled,
And paced the deck like a sailor bold,
And a master that was to bo.
Full sixty young women blytho and fair,
Walked on tho poop to take the air,
And gaze on the changing sea,
To laugh and sing, and quarr el, and squeal;
Sing “Como back to Erin,” and “Teddy
O’Neil,”
And be happy as happy could be.
Then rich and poor, then young and old,
Maidens fair, and sailors bold,
Take this advice from me :
Keep your temper, give and take,
The best of all misfortunes make,
To be happy together at sea.
Amusements.
HOW PAT MURPHY GOT TO ENGLAND.
(Continued).
“Where did T lave off, Mike !”
“ Where did ye lave off, Pat, why
when ye had jist basted the pace of
pork for dinner.”
“ Well thin, Mike, that same night
the wind began to blow and the saa to
jump about fareful like, and in the
midst o’ it the injun breaks down, and
the passenger foulk gets skecrcd a bit;
but the Capen to comfort um sez that
was nothing, for ho hed hed it break
down two or three times afore, and that
it was only an ould one they needn’t
mind. (Guess that was the way to


comfort them, an no mistake.) Well,
soon after I went below to got a mouth-
ful to ate, when I heor.s a hollowin an
shouting on dock. Thin some follow
hums to the hatch and sez ‘ Hi there !
all hands on deck directly.’ ‘ Shuro an
whats that for? sez I, as up I jumped
and claps mo hands down on the deck as
the feller said, when all the thanks I
got was sum fellers stepping on cm, an
nearly smashing me little finger. ‘ That
wont do for me,’ sez I, and I walks up
to the Capon to know what it ment,
but he was in an awhful state cos the
vessel had sprung a lake (thets a hole
you know, not a shatc of wather, though
be gorra it lets in a foine shato of
wather in no time). Wen I found
what was the matter I seed in a minute
what was to be done, and sez I to the
Capen, ‘ If you will listen to me,’ I
sez, ‘ I can soon take that wather out
of the ship.’ ■ How V sez he. ‘ Why,’
I sez, ‘ Shuro an if ye bores a hole in
t’other side there the wather will run
out directly.’ As kindly as possible I
sez this, and what do ye think he did ?
Up with his foot an was agoin to kick
me over, but be jabers that didn’t suit,
an I hooked it. Well, the fools got at
the pumps, and instead of taking my
advice went pumping away fit to bust
themselves. While the Captain hollows
out— ‘ I’d give a £IOO if the saa would
go down jes now T As soon as I cor’d
this I sez to meself— ‘ Pat, me boy,
youre a man with a fortune;’ and
down the hatch I jumps, gets out all
the bran I could find and begins a
shoving it out of the port hole ; and
then I goes up to the Capen (taking
care to keep a good distance though)
and sez to him, ‘ Capen, I wants yer
£IOO, for I’m the boy to take down
the swellin.’ ‘ What dye mean, ye
lubber ?’ sez he. ‘ Why,’ I sez,
‘ Mither Tile Fa e said as how a bran
poultice was the most sartin cure for a
swellin all the world ouver, and Capen,
me boy, Ivo put a bran poultice on the
saa,’ What a way he did get in to be
shure: I had to run for it, or he wud
hev given mo the £IOO and no mestakc.
But jest at that moment up comes
another stamer, and when she hcerd
what was tlio matter she took us in
tow, and we got into Liverpool next
morning ; and thets how I worked me
passage ouver to England, Mend
Mike.”
DAILY RECORD.
June sth. —Weather calm and fine. (Boat
lowered in the afternoon and several passen-
gers went to bathe, see Saturday 6th.) Lat.
2Gdeg. 25min. S. ; long. 36deg. 43min. W.
Course, S. 21deg. E.; distance, 219 miles.
(Ith.—Weather fine. Boat lowered for
bathing. Lat. 28dcg. 25min. S.; long. 35deg.
39min. W. Course, S. 21deg. E. ; distance,
155 miles.
7th.—Light winds, cloudy. Service in
evening. Lat. 29deg. 25min. S.; long.
35dcg. 31min. W. Course, S. 2deg. E. ;
distance, 41 miles.
Bth.—Dull cloudy weather. Lat. 30deg.
30min. S.; long. 34dcg. 50min. W. Course,
S. 23deg. E.; distance, 71 miles.
9th. —Moderate breeze and fine. Lat.
32deg. 3Smin. S.; long. 35deg. 59min. W.
Course, S. 21deg. W.; distance, 179 miles.
10th. —Fresh breeze and showery. Lat.
35deg. 17min. S.; long. 34deg. 47min. W.
Course, S. 19deg. E.; distance, IG9 miles.
11th. —Fresh breeze and fine. Lat. 38deg.
O.Omin. S.; long. 32dcg. O.fimin. W. Course,
S. 3Sdeg. E.; distance, 208 miles.
12th.—Moderate breeze and thick weather.
Lat. 40deg. 31rain. S. ; long. 29deg. 2Gmin.
W. Course, S. 3J E.; distance, 195 miles.
13th.—Thick weather, good breeze. Lat.
41deg. o,7min. S. ; long. 2lideg. O.omin. W.
Course, S. 77dcg. E.; distance, 156 miles.
14th. —Thick weather. Lat. 40deg. 41min.
S.; long. 20deg. 23raiu. W. Course, E. J IN 7 .;
distance, 262 miles.
15th. —Fresh breeze, thick weather. Lat.
41 deg. 41min. S.; long. ISdeg. 24rain. W.
Course, S. sdeg. E.; distance, 108 miles.
16th. —Strong gale with heavy sea. Ship
plunging heavily, shipping much water. Lat.
43deg. o.4min. S. ; long. 16deg. 33min. W.
Course, S. 44deg. W.; distance, 117 miles.
17th. —Moderate breeze, showery. Lat.
45deg. 27rain. S. ; long. 14deg. 12min. W.
Course, S. 77deg. E. ; distance, 105 miles.
18th.—Weather fine, good breeze. Short
showers of hail in evening. Lat. 40deg.
43min. S. ; long. lOdeg. 27min. W. Course,
N. 45deg. E. ; distance, 233 miles,


Births.
June 15th.—The wife of Ole Andreaseu
of a son.
June 18th.- The wife of H. Jennings of
a daughter.
Death.
Juno 7th.—lnfant child of Mr. and Mrs.
W. Miller.
June 13th.—George Walters, aged nine
months.
Juno 14th.—Albert E. Woskctt, aged four
months. ■
June 14th.—Thos. Jackson, aged 1 year
and 8 months.
CONUNDRUMS.
1. What is that which flies high, flies low,
has no feet, and yet wears shoes ?
'2. Why is a chicken just hatched like a
cow’s tail ?
3. Why is a man who marries twice like
the captain of a ship ?
4. Why is a coachman like the clouds ?
[Answers will be published in our next
issue. ]


The Miltiades Record:
A JOURNAL OF LIFE ON BOARD THE SHIP “MILTIADES.”
No. 5.]
FRIDAY, JULY 3rd, 1874.
The general topic of conversation and
constant source of speculation through-
out the ship at the present time is the
number of days which must now elapse
before we arrive safely at Auckland.
Over and over again have the number
of degrees left been counted, and the
number of miles to each degree added
up; and most varied the results
obtained by some —one protesting that
it is only 4,000 miles, another equally
certain asserts that it is 5,000, and so
on until we are quite struck with the
number of clever men amongst those
who have never been to sea before who
apparently seem to know more than
the sailors themselves about nautical
affairs. However, the general conclu-
sion is that in about nineteen or twenty
days (if nothing extraordinary happens
to prevent it) we shall arrive at our
destination.
From the experience of those who
have been in an emigrant ship before
wo have gathered a few facts which
may be interesting to our readers.
The first thing on nearing Auckland
will be the Pilot’s coming on board ;
next after him the Health Officer will
hail us, and on finding that the. ship
has emigrants on board ho will call for
the Doctor, who will answer all his
questions with regard to the health of
the ship, and hand down to him a bill
of health, which if after perusal he finds
satisfactory ho will then come on board.
In some places so careful are they to
avoid taking infection that they bring
a long pair of tongs with them to take
hold of the bill of health with and open
it. When on board he will proceed to
inspect the cleanliness of the ship be-
tween decks, remarking especially the
bertlis, ladders, floors, utensils, &c. So
particular are they sometimes that a
ship has boon known to bo sent into
quarantine for seven days only on
account of dirtiness. We sincerely
hope such a disgrace may not fall upon
this ship, and would urge upon- all to
take great care in regard to this mat-
ter. After the pilot has appointed the
ship’s position the Commissioners will
come on board and also examine us
after their duty, mustering all the
emigrants and enquiring into any com-
plaints or differences they may have,
which wo have reason to believe will
bo few if any at all, so much care and
attention having been taken to meet all
their wishes.
If the examination proves satisfac-
tory, and the Commissioners have little
trouble, so much sooner will the pas-
sengers be at liberty to leave the
vessel.
First all the single females not
claimed by their relatives will, wo
believe, be escorted to a depot prepared
for them, and then the remainder—
namely, married folks and single men
—will have liberty to depart at once.
Amusements.
Of amusements on board ship there
is naturally but a limited choice.
During the warm weather, when the
heat compelled usto live almost entirely
on deck, the only way of agreeably
passing the time was in reading and
conversation, occasionally relieved by a
game of quoits. Rut as we left the


tropics behind, and the weather became
gradually colder and the nights longer,
recourse was had to other games, by
which the evenings have been made to
“ drag their slow length along ” a little
more pleasantly. A rubber at whist
here, a game of bezique there, a quiet
game of chess in some other corner,
constitute the almost nightly occupa-
tions of the saloon passengers. A
chance visitor, suddenly dropping into
the saloon, would certainly lose sight
of the latter two in admiration of, and
interest in, the doings of the whist
players. But their play forms the
least interesting feature of the game;
the badinage and power of the repartee
of the players is much more calculated
to impress an on-look or with wonder.
He must be struck with surprise at the
amount of recrimination and noise
which a game (the very name of which
implies silence) can give rise to. The
clamour may arise from a variety of
causes. Player No. 1 leads a card and
hastily picks it up again. Player No.
2 insists on said card being tabled.
Player No. 3 retorts that No. 2 had
done the same thing himself the
previous evening ; No. 2 quietly
ignores No. 3, and insists on the card
being put down “ according to the law
of whist,” on which No. 1 pays No.
2 some ambiguous compliment, and has
at last to yield to No. 2’s “ strict game,”
taking care, however, to show his
displeasure at intervals in explosive
bursts of wrath, something like the
efforts of a partially extinct volcano.
But No. 1 fails not to plan revenge.
As soon as the game is done he attacks
the play of No. 2, and proves as clear
as ABO that No. 2 has no more idea
of whist than a schoolboy ; strict rules
indeed. The game proceeds, occasion-
ally varied by some mild taunt from
No. 1, when (alas ! that I should live
to record it!) No. 4 actually trumps
No. 2’s winning card. This is too
much for human endurance, and the
consternation and indignation of No_
2 at the blunder is beyond description _
Nothing is left but to throw up the
game, and the disconcerted player
retires from the table to pass the rest
of the evening in silent railing at the
freaks of cross-grained fate and a
tripping partner. Meanwhile the
other games are pursued with equal
ardour, and their progress may he
marked by a few excited exclamations
at the declaration of double bezique, or
the capture of a chess queen, or perhaps
at the checkmate long fought for and
warded off. Gradually the players drop
off to their cairns or elsewhere, —and so
ends the evening, and the others arc like
unto it.
I.
AUCKLAND.
With the possibility in prospect of
reaching Auckland at our present rate
of sailing in something loss than three
weeks, a short account of the rise of
the town, which may become the
permanent homo of many of us, must
bo interesting to all who are not already
acquainted with its history. When in
1839 Great Britain resolved to take
formal possession of New Zealand, and
proclaimed it a part of the colony of
Now South Wales, Captain Hobson,
who was sent out to govern the country,
landed at the Bay of Islands, to the
N.E. of the North Island. It was
here, at Waitangi, that the treaty was
signed by the natives on which Britain
bases her claim to the government of
the country. The Bay of Islands not
being a suitable situation for a town,
Captain Hobson moved south to the
isthmus that separates Manukau
Harbour from the Hauraki Gulf, on
which ho built a town which he called
Auckland. This town naturally be-
came the capital and head-quarters of
the government, and continued to
occupy this position till 1805, when
the General Assembly having been duly
constituted, and the seat of government
established at Auckland, it was found
that owing to the rapid colonisation of
the southern parts of Now Zealand,
the position of the town was not centra


enough to moot the interests of the
large and important towns of the South.
Accordingly w r c find that in 1805 the
scat of government was shifted from
Auckland to Wellington, which is
situated in tho extreme south of the
North Island, on Cook’s Strait.
Historically, no other province in
New Zealand offers so many points of
interest as Auckland. It was here, at
Kororeka, that the Maori Chief Hoke
repeatedly cut down the British flag-
staff, supposing it to bo the cause of
tho increased prices of various
goods, which aggressive act on the
part of this chief was the commence-
ment of tho Anglo-Maori war. Hither
came Bishop Selwyn in 1842, and
exercised an influence on Maori and
European which is bearing fruit oven
now. In the streets of Auckland the
.Maori may frequently be seen, still
showing many native traits of charac-
ter ; whi st Dunedin, tho largest of the
Southern towns, as one writer remarks,
“ hardly knows tho appearance of a
Maori, as well as does London, where
the interesting stranger has been seen
at Exeter Hall.”
In Auckland are centred the various
Maori traditions and the histories of
tho native civil wars.
And, finally, Auckland was tho
principal scene of the efforts of the
early missionaries to civilise, and, as
far as possible, christianise tho original
inhabitants of the islands.
F.
{This v;ill he concluded next Issue.)
Correspondence.
Gough Island,
June 2oth, 1874.
Ladies ami Gentlemen-, —
No notice having been taken of us in the
last issue of the Miltiades Record, we,
feeling ourselves to have been neglected after
our condescension in showing ourselves to
you, have determined upon taking the
matter in hand, and giving you an outline of
our own lives. We trust that you will not
set ns down to bo conceited, for “I,” the
accredited writer of this sketch, pledge my
word on behalf of my brother Albatrosses
that our aim is to give to the general
company of the good ship “Miltiadea” a
little more knowledge of us than they as a
body at present possess. Well, to begin at
the beginning, we belong to the order of
Palmpcdes or Webfoots. We are well
adapted for swimming, as our legs are placed
far back upon our bodies, and are terminated
by some very useful feet, each foot consisting
of three toes united together by a strong
web. Our plumage is very thick, well
impregnated with oil, and closely packed with
down in order to preserve our feathers from
contact with the water, in which we spend
so much of our time. Our order is divided
into four families. We patronise the family
of the Longwiugs. We are distinguished
from our poor relations by the length of our
wings, the swiftness of our flight, and by
our hook-shaped beaks, which are made up
of several distinct pieces, with two tubes
laid along the upper part for nostrils. Our
class name is the Diomedea Kxulans. Wo
have for our dwelling place the wide oceans
of the south, though mind, we don’t confine
ourselves to the south, hut occasionally take
flying tours as far north as the Behring
Straits, where fish are generally plentiful.
We live on fish, roots of sea-weed, and
refuse from ships. We spend a portion of
our time on shore in order to rear our young.
Onr nests are composed of earth raised up
and well kneaded by incessant use of our
feet. Whilst the feminine part of our
community hatch the eggs the males hunt
for food for them. Of course we have to
swallow the food in order to take it home,
and disgorge it again by placing our backs
on the ground. Our great pride is our wings,
which often measure 12 feet from tip to tip,
the hones of which are filled with oil, form-
ing a splendid example of strength and
lightness. Hoping you will think more of
ns after this,
I am, yours* truly,
UIOMEDEA, JUNIOR.
MILTIADES MUTUAL IMPROVE-
MENT SOCIETY.
Tins Society, so quietly and unob-
trusively instituted, has done much, wo
have good reason to believe, to add to
tho pleasure and minister to the intel-
lectual improvement of the male portion
of our emigrant passengers. Last Friday
week, as announced in our columns, a
lecture was delivei'ed by Dr. Harding
in the single men’s quarter upon
“ Respiration ; or, Why we breathe and
how we breathe.” The lecture being
given in a very simple and explantory
manner it was both understood and


appreciated by the audience, who, at
the conclusion, heartily thanked the
doctor for his kindness, and expressed
a wish that he would come more often
amongst them, ending by giving him
three cheers, with the same for Mr. A.
Wilson, who took the chair.
The Tuesday following a debate was
held by the members of this society
upon “ Abstinence versus Moderation.”
A good number were present, and much
interest manifested in the discussion,
some of the remarks being very amus-
ing. The T. T.’s certainly had the
advantage so far as argument was
concerned, but few of the Moderators
standing up to defend their convictions
with reasons, though at the close, when
the vote was taken, they were in the
majority.
Last Friday the second lecture upon
New Zealand, kindly promised by Mr.
Wilson, and which had been anxiously
expected and looked for, was delivered
to the gratification of all present.
And on Tuesday the subject of debate
was “ Republicanism versus the Mon-
archical form of Government,” in-
troduced by an essay from Mr. Smart.
There was some difficulty in getting
remarks upon this subject. The con-
clusion arrived at was that the mon-
archical form of Government as re-
presented in Great Britain was better
than any form of republicanism at
present existing.
This evening Dr. Harding will give
a lecture to the society upon “ Food,
and its uses.”
ACCIDENT.
Sunday, the 21st ultimo, at about
noon, in the midst of a squall, the ship
took a very heavy sea, which reached
almost to the top of the mainsail, and,
falling on the deck with great force,
carried away the main-hatch covering
and supports, injuring several persons,
breaking one young fellow’s leg, and
much bruising one of the married
women, and nearly carried away a little
boy out of one of the ports. A quantity
of water went down between decks to
the no small inconvenience of the
passengers ; some also rushing into the
cabins of the saloon through the poru-
holesboinglcft open, much to the dismay
of the occupants.
DAILY RECORD.
June 19th.—Strong wind and fine. Lat.
40deg. 54min. S.; long. 3dcg. 25min. AV.
Course, E. A 8.; distance, 322 miles.
20th.—Strong wind, high sea, squally,
storms of hail and snow. Lat. 41deg.
45min, 8.; long. 2deg. 52min. E. Course,
S. SOdeg. E.; distance, 290 miles.
21at.—Moderate gale and high sea; shipped
very heavy sea, injuring several. Lat.
41dcg. 29min. 8. ; long. 9deg. iiltnin. E.
Course, N. STdeg. E. ; distance, 320 miles.
22nd.—Strong wind and fine. Lat. 41deg.
O'Smin. S.; long. 17deg. o'2min. E. Course,
N. SOdeg. E. ; distance, 320 miles.
23rd.—Fine weather. Lat. 41dcg. 33min.
S. ; long. 22deg. 53min. E. Course, S. 85
deg. E.; distance, 201 miles.
24th.—Fresh wind, and fine. Lat. 42deg.
lOmin. S.; long. 2Sdeg. 34min. E. Course,
S. Sldeg. 31min. E.; distance, 258 miles.
25th.—Moderate breeze and fine. Lat.
42deg. 44min. S. ; long. 34deg. o'2min E.
Course, SOdeg. E. ; distance, 204 miles.
2(ith.—Strong wind, squally, with rain.
Lat. 43deg. 28min. S. ; long. 40 deg. 54min.
E. Course, 8. rj E. ; distance, 305 miles.
27th.—Fresh breeze, high sea, ship rolling
heavily. / Lat. 43deg. Slmin. S. ; long.
47deg. 4Cmin. Course, S. SOdeg. E. ; dis-
tance, 298 miles.
28th.—Fresh breeze and thick weather.
Lat. 44deg. ISmin. S. ; long. 54deg. 38
min. E. Course, S. SOdeg. E. ; distance,
305 miles.
29th.—Fresh breeze, and fine. Lat. 44
deg. 28min. S. ; long. (J 1 deg. 14min. E.
Course, 8. 87deg. E. ; distance, 287 miles.
30th.—Moderate breeze, thick and cloudy
weather. Lat. 44deg. 37min. 8. ; long.
07deg. 24miu. E. Course, S. 88deg. E. ;
distance, 207 miles.
July Ist,—Good breeze, and cloudy. Lat.
45deg. 0. Imin. S. ; long. 73 deg. 12min. E.
Course, E. A S. ; distance, 248 miles.
2nd.—Thick weather, steady breeze. Lat.
45deg. olinin. 8. ; long. 79 deg. 15min. E.
Course, 7 points E. ; distance, 257 miles.
ANSWERS TO CONUNDRUMS.
1. Dust. 2. Because it was never seen
before. 3. He has a first and second mate.
4. lie holds the (reins).
24
THE MILTIADES RECORD.


CONUNDRUMS.
5. For what port is a man in courtship
generally hound '!
<!. When is an umbrella said tr he like a
person convalescent ?
7. AVhen does rain seem inclined to be
studious !
8. AVhy are clergymen like railway
porters ?
[Answers in next issue.]
Birth.
Juno 25th.—Mrs. Taylor of a son.
Death.
June 29th.— S. A. Kite, aged 4 years 3
months.
NOTICE.
If those who are desirous of having a printed
copy of “The Miltiades Record” (costing
about 6d.) will kindly give in their names to
the Editor he will he able to calculate the
number required.


No. G.]
FRIDAY, JULY 17tii, 1874.
Quite a mania for cleaning seems sud-
denly to have possessed all on board
from one end of the ship to the other ;
every one seems bustling about, and in
the best of spirits. Here in one part
of the ship are the sailors swilting and
brushing the masts, deck, and deck-
houses, making the paint-work look as
though the painters had just left the
ship ; farther aft the cooks ar e turning
out the contents of their galleys, and
scrubbing and polishing away ; like-
wise the engineer and his man next
door ; while the boys arc routing out
all their chests, scouring and scrubbing
like so many charwomen. The emi-
grants are not idle; the women arc
busy at their wash-tubs washing the
dirty clothes, while the men are hang-
ing them out to dry ; others are helping
the sailors, and cleaning their ladders,
berths, floors, etc.
There, close to one of the deck-houses,
is the carpenter planing up the spars;
and near him is the old boatswain, up
to his neck in “ sugeo mougee,” oils,
paint, itc. The officers are walking
about the decks grumbling and growl-
ing at every speck of dirt or untidy
rope they can see; in fact no one would
doubt our chief officer, Mr Breach,
being an Englishman if they heard him
grumbling sometimes. All this bustle
and work is mostly confined to the
main deck, but the poop comes in for
its share. The canvas cloth put round
the railing for bad weather is taken off
and stowed away ; the steward and his
helps arc washing down the companion-
ladder, and oiling the bright work ;
while the captain is walking up and
down the poop with a smiling face as
if all liis troubles were over. Any one
not in the secret would wonder what
all this meant. Evidently it portends
something very pleasant coming to
pass, for not often is cleaning done with
so much gusto as this is being done.
It means that in about three days at
the most now we shall be safely in
harbour, at our journey’s end, wind and
weather permitting ; and, if after eleven
weeks on board ship, that is not a
matter for rejoicing, then sea life must
ho more enticing than it has been to
us.
RETROSPECT.
Looking back upon the leading in-
cidents of our voyage we find very
little that is worthy of remark saving
that which might have proved so
terrible a calamity but for the prompt-
ness and energy of our captain and
officers, namely, the collision of Wed-
nesday morning, May Gth, which stands
out prominently enough, and will never
be forgotten by most of us. When we
think of what might have happened
through the carelessness of that un-
known vessel w T e shudder at the vision
our fancy conjures up before us.
Apart from this our voyage has been
like most other Australasian voyages.
We have had beautiful weather all
along, and the winds have been on the
whole tolerably favourable, except when
it took us near the Brazilian coast,
where, unfortunately, wo made little
progress for several days. Our run
down the Channel, and as far as the
Equator, was excellent; and that from
the Cape of Good Hope to Cape Lewin
The Miltiades Record:
A JOURNAL OF LIFE ON BOARD THE SHIP “MILTIADES.”


also could not have been done in much
less time than wo did it in, viz., sixteen
days.
The general health of all on board
has been excellent. At the commence-
ment of the voyage the doctor had
several children sick with the measles ;
but happily, with the exception of a few
fatal cases, they have recovered. The
sea voyage seems to have been very
trying to the little children, and it would
be advisable for parents to be more
cautious about bringing very young
children to sea.
We have had several accidents, but
nothing fatal or very serious, with the
exception of those which happened to
Howard, one of the sailors, who had
his thigh broken, and to Pietro Paish,
who had his shin broken. Mr. Parkes,
one of the emigrants in the single men’s
compartment, also fell on the deck,
and broke his collar-bone ; but they are
all progressing very favourably. Every-
one Seems in good spirits, and well
satisfied with the safe passage wo have
had.
FIRE.
On the morning of Wednesday, the
Bth inst., an alarm of fire was given in
the married people’s quarters. The
officer on duty on going down found
the deck on tire, which, upon exami-
nation, proved to have originated
from the excessive heat of the engine-
fire, which had set the pitch burning
between the seams. Everything being
at hand it -was soon extinguished with-
out any damage.
AUCKLAND.
(Continued from our last issue.)
The position of Auckland, in New
Zealand, is such as to render it particu-
larly well adapted for commercial pur-
suits. Standing as it does on an
isthmus it has the advantage of a
double harbour. The Manukau harbour,
lying to the west, gives access for
smaller vessels to the port of Onehunga,
which is distant about six miles from
Auckland. But the principal harbour,
accessible to huger craft, lies to the
cast, and stretches along to the mouth
of thot Thames and the Coromandel
coast, the seat of the Auckland gold
diggings. It is into this harbour the
11 Miltiades ” will sail, and, in order to
reach it, the ship must consequently
round the North Cape, passing on the
way the small islands known as the
Three Kings. Auckland promises to
become pre-eminently an agricultural
province. The fertility of the climate
rendois it particularly suitable for tho
growth of wheat and fine grasses.
Strange to say up to this time the
culture of wheat has been very much
neglected throughout the province,
probably on account of its requiring
more extensive and expensive cultiva-
tion than is necessary for the raising
of meat and wool. Fruits are very
abundant. All the English fruits are
easily grown, and several, which in
England require the protection of glass,
and tho aid of artificial heat, ripen here
in the open air. Amongst others—
grapes, grown without cover, arc very
eatable, though inferior in size and
quality to those raised under glass.
Peaches are very plentiful, and of
superior quality. As distinguishing
features of this province may be noticed
the existence of hot springs and lakes,
producing quantities of sulphur,—and
the presence of the kauri pine, the
typical tree of New Zealand, which
however is in danger of becoming
extinct owing to the unsparing depre-
dations of the woodmen, who fell it in
great numbers.
MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT
SOCIETY.
On Tuesday, tho 7th, an open dis-
cussion was held in the single men’s
quarters upon the advisability of at-
tending theatrical performances, which
the majority decided in the affirmative.
Friday, the 10th, Dr. Harding
delivered his lecture on food and its


digestion to a very attentive audience,
which (the lecture) was thoroughly
enjoyed by all, some expressing their
opinion that it was one of the best they
had had.
Tuesday last the evening was spent
in the practice of elocution, several
miscellaneous pieces being read and
recited.
COMMENCING LIFE AFRESH.
“ There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to
fortune.”
How many would eagerly seize at
the opportunity of commencing life
over again were it possible, so that
they might retrieve the errors and
avoid the mistakes into which they
may have fallen. Few are so blind and
callous not to feel they have made some
mistakes in life.
Though it is not possible to commence
it all over again there are certain
breaks or periods in a man’s life when,
as it were, he takes a fresh start in the
race and turns over a new leaf; and
those on board this ship who have left
the old country and their past life
behind them are beginning one of
those new leaves in the book of life.
It remains to be seen whether on this
clean page spread out before them
there shall be the same blots and dis-
figurements that characterised the
preceding ones, or whether, taking heed
from the lessons of the past, the page
will be such as shall merit the appro-
bation of Him unto whom all men are
accountable.
Correspondence.
To the Editor of the MILTIADES RECORD.
Sie, —As we are now fast approaching the
end of our voyage, and consequently the
finale of the llkcoku, I respond to your oft
repeated invitation to emigrants to contribute
an article to your excellent, and 1 think I
may add, much appreciated paper ; I also take
this opportunity of thanking you for the
amusement and information which, I am
sure, the majority of the emigrants together
with myself, have derived from it. With
your permission, sir, I will try as briefly
as possible to give to your readers what,
from close observation, I believe to be the
thoughts and feelings of the majority of the
emigrants and myself upon the voyage, and
our life on board ship.
We all feel proud of the ship in which we
are, and justly so, for some on board have
been in emigrant ships before, and it is our
desire to state that we never knew emigrants
better treated. Of course the change of diet
was not very acceptable to most of us, but
in justice we must say that though different
from what we were used to, our provisions
have been invariably good, and supplied in
sufficient quantities ; and I must bear tes-
timony also to the excellent and just arrange-
ments for serving them out. In fact Ido
not recollect hearing any complaints all
through the voyage on this matter. There
was some little fuss at first in getting all
arranged properly though, and that was all.
The cooking of the food has not pleased every
one, though I am sure our cooks have worked
hard and done their best ; and if now and
then a pic got burnt, or a loaf was not quite
light or heavy enough to please its owners,
these occurrences were few and far between,
I for one can bear testimony to the uniform
courtesy and obliging civility of our cook.
So much is this appreciated that on every
hand I hear talk of raising a subscription to
make him a handsome present; and by the
way, sir, 1 may tell you that not only is he a
good cook, but he is quite a wit, always a
joke under all circumstances. I have seen
people go to the galley grumbling (that pri-
vilege of the Englishman) and come away
laughing heartily, and as it does us good to
laugh, our cook acts as a bit of a doctor.
There is one thing more I must notice, sir,
and that is the fact of our cleaning, feeding,
&c., being so arranged as to find us con-
tinually plenty to do. This, sir, has perhaps
helped the doctor to take us into port with a
clean bill of health. I also think, sir, the
sanitary arrangements have been very good.
I for one, sir, do not fear quarantine, for our
place between decks I am sure will bear
inspection.
Wo are agitating a plan for all of us to
hold a tea meeting together before we
separate for good if it can be arranged some-
where at Auckland, but we must ask the
Captain first, as he must be the best judge
of its practicability. That it will do us all
good there can be no doubt, but we must
wait awhile yet.
In your last paper you said, sir, there
would be few if any differences for the Emi-
gration Commissioner to arrange. You were
right; the utmost harmony and good feeling
exist on board, and I think all little dif-
ferences have been settled ago. I ought now
to conclude my letter ; but before I do so
I must speak of the kind and obliging manner


in which all the officers have treated us.
The Captain has boon very kind, sending
fresh meat from the saloon table down to the
little ones who were sick several times.
> ow, sir, I will conclude my letter, for I fear
it is already too long. However, you have,
sir, in these few lines the opinions from ob-
servation of.
A MAPRIED EMIGRANT.
[We are very pleased to receive this testi-
mony direct from one of the emigrants them-
selves. — Ed.]
Econo my of Food.
Dr. Harding, in order to supplement
his lecture on “ Food and its Digestion,”
has kindly sent us some observations
on the economies of food.
INFANTS.
Milk is a perfect food, and should, if
possible, be the sole food for the first
three months. If the mother’s milk be
deficient in quantity or quality, cow’s
milk should he given; but as it con-
tains too much Casein, and too little
sugar, a little water and sugar should
be added to good new milk. Condensed
milk is very good, and requires no addi-
tion. Milk should always be given
warm—that is, at the same temperature
as the mother’s body, 98deg., and the
quantity about three pints in twenty-
four hours.
DIETARY FOR ADULTS.
Wheaten Elouu contains 1.72 per
cent, of nitrogen, that is, about In-
grains in every hundred ; also carbon
38 per cent. Hence iu each pound
there are 2,GGO grains of carbon and
120 grains of nitrogen.
Bread is tire cheapest and most eco-
nomical food, and, in extreme cases, is
capable, with the addition of some fat
—as dripping, bacon-fat, itc. —of afford-
ing sufficient nourishment. A working
man requires about 21bs. of bread daily.
Indian Corn, or Maize, is a strong
nourishing food, cheaper than even
bread. Made into hasty pudding, and
eaten with treacle or sugar, it is an ex-
cellent food.
Potatoes. —Next to bread potatoes
are the most valuable and economical
articles of food. They contain carbon
and a little nitrogen, but much less
of the latter than wheaten flour.
The most economical method of cooking
potatoes is to boil them in their skins,
as much loss is thereby avoided. Pota-
toes and buttermilk together form an
excellent food ; and an Irish labourer
using this food consumes about lOlbs.
of potatoes daily.
Oatmeal is a good nourishing food,
but certainly not superior to good
wheaten flour. The Scotch use it as
porridge and brose ; the former is made
by stirring with boiling water, the
latter is made away from the fire, and
therefore the water is not always
boiling. Oatmeal contains 2 per cent,
of nitrogen and 40 per cent, of carbon,
and is therefore a little stronger than
wheaten flour; but in England is not
so cheap.
Peas and Beans. The nutritive
value of these is greater than that of
any other vegetable. Peas should never
be cooked whole.
Fats. —Generally eaten as butter ;
it is the most agreeable form. Dripping
and the fat of bacon are however more
economical, and in every respect as
good. Suet should always be cooked
and mixed with flour, &c., forming a
very nourishing and economical food.
Meat. - The value of moat is
undoubted, and its use only limited by
consideration of expense. When boiled
meat is used the water in which it was
boiled should be taken, as it contains
the salts of the meat, and they are of
great value. The cheapest parts of the
cow are the check, heart and liver.
Bacon is an excellent and economical
food, only inferior to butchers’ meat in
that the proportion of lean flesh is
smaller. Bacon supplies both nitrogen
and carbon ; the fluid fat spread over
bread is very nourishing, supplying
what is called fuel food.
Cheese.— The casein of cheese is a
substance rich in nitrogen ; but the
economy of using cheese largely as an


article of diet is doubtful, as it is not
easily digested, and a large portion
therefore leaves the body unused.
Original Poetry.
The time is come when we must part,
As part we surely shall;
I’m sure I’m sorry from my heart
That we should part at all.
But so it is ; we soon must go
In peace our several ways ;
God give us plenty here below,
And health and length of days.
For eighty suns we’ve sailed the sea
In every kind of weather,
And now we’ll shortly land (D. V.)
In Auckland all together.
And should it be that in this land
Prosperity we find,
We must receive with thankful hand
And a contented mind.
But if adversity should chance
To visit us out there,
Then we must strive to break a lance
With rancourous despair.
Hope on ! however long, no lane
But has some turn at last.
Look ever forward ! ’tis ni vain
To dwell upon the past.
DAILY RECORD.
PfJuly 3ri.—Strong wind, with hail squalls.
Lat. 45deg. 4Gmin. S; long, 87deg. 17min.
E. Course, East; distance, 347 miles.
4th. —Fresh breeze, and fine. Lat. 45deg.
55min. S. ; long. 03deg. 55min. Course,
E. J S. ; distance, 27G miles.
sth. —Good breeze and squally. Lat. 45
deg. O’Omin. S. ; long. 99deg. O.Omin. E.
Course, 77dcg. E. ; distance, 221 miles.
6th.—Light wind but squally; a whirlwind
passed astern of us. Lat. 43deg. 44min. S. ;
long. 104 deg. 27min. E, Course, N. 72deg.
E. ; distance, 240 miles.
7th. —Fresh wind and fine, ship rolling
heavily and high sea. Lat. 43deg, 48min.
S. ; long. 108 deg. OTmin. E.
Sth. —Fresh wind and rainy weather, high
sea running and. ship rolling. Lat. 45deg.
11 min. S. ; long. Hod eg. 20 min. E. Course,
S. 75deg. E. ; distance, 328 miles. Fire in the
engine house; squalls carried away lower
mizen topgallant-yard.
‘Jth. —Fresh breeze and cloudy. Lat. 4G
deg. OTmin. S. ; long. 122 deg. 3Gmin. E.
Course, S. 81dcg. E. ; distance, 312 miles.
10th. —Strong wind and fine. Lat. 4Gdeg.
29min. S. ; long. 129 deg. 15 min. E.
Course, S. 84 deg. E. ; distance, 280 miles.
11th. —Fresh breeze and fine. Lat. 4Gdeg.
47min. S. ; long. 13Gdeg. 22min. E. Course,
S. BGdeg. E. ; distance, 298 miles.
12th.—Moderate breeze and fine. Lat.
4Gdeg. 47min. S. ; long. 141 deg. 41min. E.
Course, N. 84deg. E.; distance, 223 miles.
13th. —Fresh breeze and fine. Sighted
land (part of Tasmania) on the port bow.
Lat. 43deg. 50min, S.; long. 144 deg. 45min.
E. Course, N. 47dcg. E. ; distance, 197
miles.
14th. —Light winds and fine. Lat 4tdeg.
43min. S.; long. 145 deg. O'Gmin. E. Course,
S. by E. ; distance, G 8 miles.
15th. —Fresh breeze and fine. Lat. 44deg.
52min. S.; long. 147 deg. 37min. E. Course,
S. BGdeg. E.; distance, 118 miles.
IGth. —Fair breeze and beautiful weather.
Lat. 42dcg. 45min. S. ; long. 152 deg. 47min.
E. Course, N. GOdeg. E. ; distance, 258
miles.
17th. —Fair wind and fine. Lat. 39deg.
50min. S.; long. 15Sdeg. o'7min. E. Course,
54deg. E,; distance, 304 miles.
Birth
July 17th. Mrs. Morris of a still-born
child.
Death.
July 7th. —E. E. Smith, aged 13 months.
ANSWERS TO CONUNDRUMS.
5. Bound to Havre (have her). G. When
it is recovered. 7. When it pores over a
book-stall. 8. Because they do a deal of
coupling.
The Editor begs to offer his grateful thanks
to conlributers and subscribers.
asr All Eights of Publication Reserved,


Supplement to the "Miltiades Record."
Which contains a Report of the Commissioner's Visit and an account
of our Arrival in Auckland.
AMONG THE ISLANDS.
Pr. mi A ps the most interesting, though
not the most pleasant part of our voy-
age, is that extending from the time
when we sighted the Three Kingsat 2 p.m.
on Monday, the 20th inst., to the time
when we hove-to opposite the wharf this
morning, about eight o’clock. Shortly
after passing between the Kings and
the mainland a head wind set in, which
continued with little or no variation
until the vessel reached its destination.
But if it was unpleasant to crew and
passengers to have their hopes of land-
ing daily deferred, still to the latter the
interest attending the navigation of the
vessel with an adverse wind and in a
difficult track was in a great measure a
compensation. On Tuesday we passed
the lien and Chickens, and sighted the
Great Barrier Island. On Wednesday
morning, rounding the Needles, we
passed along the north of the Small
Barrier, and about six o’clock in the
evening sighted the Tiritiri lighthouse.
On Thursday the ship got inside Tiri-
tiri, where she had the misfortune to
touch a sandbank at Gull Point (just
where it appears another vessel had
done the same). With some slight
assistance from a little steamer called
the “ Lady Bowen,” which was passing
at the time, however she was socn
free again, and towards evening received
the pilot on board. The mail steamer
“ Cyphrenes” passed our ship about
three p.m. on her way out to the
Southern ports. Last night the “ Mil-
tiades ” lay at anchor between Bangi-
toto Island and the mainland, and this
morning at about 7.30 we hove anchor
and proceeded up to the spot where she
now lies opposite the wharf, having
made the run in 75 days from land to
land, and 80 days from pilot to pilot,
one of the best voyages of the season.
AT AUCKLAND.
Directly we came near the city the
side of the vessel was crowded with pas-
sengers anxious to get a glimpse of it.
It has a clean and very picturesque
appearance, and was much admired by
all. The houses appeal- scattered along
the shore for some distance, and some
of them are most remarkable, being
built entirely of wood, and presenting a
very tasteful appearance, with their
little verandahs in front and ornamented
work. A few nice buildings are to be
seen in the main streets, but all appear
to be of very recent construction. Some
provisions which we noticed during a
short visit this morning seemed to be
sold at very reasonable prices, and but
little different from what they are at
home. At nine o’clock Mr. Ellis and
Dr. Philson came on board—the former
as Immigration Commissioner and the
latter as Health Officer—who subjected
the emigrants to a very strict examina-
tion without finding any signs of dis-
ease nor any complaints of the treat-
ment during the voyage; everyone
appeared thoroughly pleased and satis-
fied with what had been done for them.
Some spoke very highly of the kindness
they had received from captain, officers
and surgeon. A clean bill of health
w r as at once granted, and in the after-
noon the emigrants went on shore in a
steam-boat and were taket to the Depot.


The Auckland papers speak very highly
of the ship, representing her to be one
of the finest vessels seen at the port.
MILTIADES MUTUAL IM-
PROVEMENT SOCIETY.
The last meeting of this Society was
held on Monday, May 20th, when a
lecture was delivered upon “ Geology ”
by Mr. A. Wilson, which we think was
a fitting close to the short course of
lectures delivered under the auspices of
this Society, and which have been so
interesting and so much appreciated by
the emigrants. The chair was taken
on this occasion by the president, Mr.
F. A. Hill. At the close of the meet-
ing a vote of thanks was proposed and
seconded to Mr. A. Wilson for the kind
interest ho had taken and the substan-
tial help ho had rendered to the Society.
Also a vote of thanks was given to Mr.
Hill, the president, for his services, and
the trouble he had taken to promote the
moral and intellectual welfare of the
young men on board.
DEPOT.
Tilt! Immigration Depot at Auckland
was found to bo largo and commodious,
but tlio immigrants complained yery
much of the dirty state they found it
in.
