

THE
“WASHERWOMAN” OF MELBOURNE
TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR OF VICTORIA.
BY THOMAS PARSONS, ESQ., BARRISTER-AT-LAW.
KENEALY'S CASE.
SIR, —
The “Washerwoman” is in agony at this decision, and will not be comforted
but by this representation to your Excellency.
The British Legislature rarely now infringes the maxim “ nobody should be
twice punished for one crime ” — nemo debet bis puniri pro uno delicto.
By the Act of George the First, an attorney convicted of forgery or perjury
is, however, made liable to a second punishment of seven years’ transportation
if he resume his profession.
Yet, neither the Bar, Law Institutions, Law Officers, nor Judges, in England,
ever considered that Act to include a pardoned convict, though the case of the
attorney convicted (see 1C and K, 434), transported and pardoned, underwent
much consideration, by all of them, before he resumed the practice of his
profession.
All crime is against the State, and the prerogative of pardon is, as much as
the Court that convicts, part of the State’s administration of justice.
That prerogative, not being expressly, is not impliedly excluded; and pardoned
and unpardoned convicts are not, therefore, placed on the same footing, and
the State condemned to inflict on its pardoned convict, whose punishment it
has abridged, the new punishment, in like manner, as on the unpardoned, and
thus frustrate its own pardon. The pardoned convict is not the convict
designated by the Act.
The Colonial Act, “to prevent the influx of criminals into Victoria,” subjects
any person found guilty of any transportable felony, in any other of the Queen’s
possessions, whose sentence has not expired more than three years previous
to his arrival, on coming into Victoria, not only to a sentence to a second
punishment of hard labor, in irons, for three years, but to a repetition of
such sentence, and of every repeated sentence, as often as it expires.
Where, in the whole code of British jurisprudence, is a single line that
countenances the application of this barbarous law to pardoned and unpardoned
guilt alike, and justifies the colony in punishing guilt incurred and pardoned
in the parent State, in the same manner as unpardoned guilt, and thus defeating
the pardon ?
I have the honor to be,
Your Excellency’s
Most obedient servant,
THOMAS PAESONS.
TEMPLE COUET,
Melbourne,
6th Sept., 1809. [H. ROULSTON, PR., RICHMOND.]


