

THE POPE v. THE QUEEN
IN THE VATICAN DECREES.
A LECTURE
By PASTOR D. ALLEN.
DELIVERED ON FRIDAY EVENING MARCH 12th, 1875, IN THE
OLD TEMPERANCE HALL, PITT STREET, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
The Rev. Dr. LAITG- in the Chair.
Being an answer to the Lecture of the Roman Catholic Clergy-
man of St. Joseph’s, Woollahra, upon “Allegiance
and the Vatican Decrees,”
PRICE SIXPENCE.
j
LEE & ROSS, MACHINE PRINTERS, 231 CASTLEREAGH-ST.,
EIGHT DOORS SOUTH OP MARKET STREET.


PREFACE.
—♦—
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, —If the priest of St. Joseph’s, in his
lecture last night, at the School of Arts, could repudiate controversy, and yet
denounce Protestants, Queen Elizabeth, our nation, and Mr. Gladstone, as mon-
strous, untruthful, and tyrannical, so much so as to provoke a justifiable rebellion
in Ireland, and an attempted destruction of our nation by the awful Spanish
Armada —my reply to him, in vindication of Protestants, Queen Elizabeth, and
Mr. Gladstone, must, I think, be justifiable, loyal, and honorable.
The whole of his assertions relative to his church, not rejecting the civil
power, only in matters of consience, as all other religious bodies do, is refuted
by Dr. Manning as follows—“ There is not another Church so called (than the
Roman), nor any community professing to be a Church, which does not submit, or
obey, or hold its peace, when the civil governors of the world command.”—The
Present Crisis of the Holy See, by H. E. Manning, D.D. London, 1861, p. 75.
Mr. Gladstone says—The Rome of the Middle Ages claimed universal
monarchy. The modern Church of Rome has abandoned nothing, retracted
nothing. Is that all ? Far from it. By condemning (as will be seen) those who,
like Bishop Doyle in 1826, charge the mediaeval Popes with aggression, she un-
conditionally, even if covertly, maintains what the mediaeval Popes maintained.
But even this is not the worst.
Compare the recent and ominous forecasting of the future European policy of
the British Crown, in an article from a Romish periodical for the current month,
which has direct relation to these matters, and which has every appearance of pro-
ceeding from authority.
‘ ‘ Surely in any European complication, such as may any day arise, nay, such
as must ere long arise, from the natural gravitation of the forces, which are for
a moment kept in check and truce by the necessity of preparation for their inevi-
table collision, it may very well be that the future prosperity of England may be
staked in the struggle, and that the side she may take may be determined, not
either by justice or interest, but by a passionate resolve to keep up the Italian king-
dom at all hazard.”—The Month for November, 1874 : “ Mr. Gladstone’s Durham
Letter,” p. 265.
Prince Bismarck, in the course of his reply to Herr Windhorst in the Reich-
stag, said : “I am in possession of conclusive evidence that the (Eccumenical
Council was cut, short on account of the Franco-German war. The Council’s vote
would have been very different had the French been victorious. I know from the
very best sources that Napoleon was dragged into the war, very much against his
will, by Jesuitical influences. At the eleventh hour he determined on peace, and
kept his resolution half an hour. Ultimately he was overpowered by persons
representing the Vatican.”
Dr. Jorg had alluded to the attempt Kullmann, calling him a maniac, and
Prince Bismarck, in tones of suppressed fury, denied this, declared that Kullmann
avowed himself a member of the faction, and turning to Herr Windhorst,
the leader of that party, exclaimed to the Centre, “ Discard that man as much as
you like, he is hanging to your coat-tails, nevertheless. ” This insult was received
by the majority with enthusiasm, and by the Centre with cries of “ Pfui!”—
“ Shame, shame !”—to which the Chancellor retorted that he also wanted to cry
“ Pfui !” but was prevented by good manners. Herr Windhorst’s reply, in sub-
stance, was, that the Prince, by giving a cue to his papers to attack all Ultramon-
tanes, had brought Dr. Jorg’s assault upon himself.
Here we have, firstly, Dr. Manning declaring the very opposite to our lecturer,
namely, that the Church of Rome claims something more than all other churches,
and that is civil authority over the kings of the earth and their subjects.
Secondly, we have a Roman paper declaring an impending and most bloody war
to avenge the Roman Church. Thirdly, we have Bismarck’s uncontradicted evi-
dence that the Roman authorities led to the Franco-Prussian war against the will
of the Emperor of France. Fourthly, we have one of the Pope’s vassals attempt-
ing to take the life of Prince Bismarck. Does any other church but the Roman
Church have conscientious deeds of this kind ? Does any other religious body seek
from the depths of their holy convictions to murder nobles and overthrow nations


’33!5 z)p£ njf 1“?
la
3
after this fashion ? Thus, then, the present oracles of Eome in England, and the
present deeds of Eome in the nations, contradict the fallacious assertions of the
priest of St. Joseph’s, and clearly prove that “the Vatican Decrees” mean dominion
over kings and nations.
The lecturer s assertion that the Spanish Armada arose out of the monstrous
and unendurably cruel religious intolerance of Queen Elizabeth, and was designs
to root out religious tyranny, and establish religious freedom in the ear Hi,
exceeds in untruthfulness all we have heard or read before. The confession of
Don Pedro, one of the Spanish captains, taken by Sir Francis Drake, before the
Lords of the Privy Council, as to what was their design for invading England
shall settle this point. He said, “To subdue the nation, and root it out.” The
Lords asked, “And what meant you to do with the Catholics?” He said,
“ Send them good men to heaven, and you heretics to hell.” They asked, “For
what were your whips of cord and wire?” He replied, “To whip you heretics
to death.” “ What would you have done with the young children?” they asked.
He replied, “ Those above seven should have gone the way their fathers went,
the rest should have lived in perpetual bondage, branded in the forehead with
the letter L, for Lutherian.” Is this the religious freedom of St. Joseph’s? Yes,
this is Eome’s religious freedom. This is their meaning of the term. Only think
of the Pope giving a million in gold, and the King of Spain two millions more, to
effect this bloody design, called by our lecturer “religious freedom !! !” But God
saw the wickedness of that infernal design upon our nation, and did as Queen
Elizabeth placed upon her medals to commemorate His deliverance, namely,
“ Jehovah blew upon them, and the sea covered them.” This she did, because the
Spanish said, ‘‘ It was not the English that overcome them, but the dreadful
storm.” Such was the visible manifestation of the hand of God in the destruction
of this fearful Armada, that the Spanish admiral—the Duke of Medina Sidonia—
blasphemously swore, “ That he feared Jesus Christ was turned Lutherian.” But
the King of Spain, hearing of the strange defeat and ruin of his fleet, and seeing
the hand of heaven in it, said more soberly, “ That he did not send his fleet to
fight against God, but against men.” To God’s power and providence he attri-
buted his loss. Thus the Lord, who is a man of war, overthrew them in the great
sea, “ for His mercy endureth for ever.”
From these facts, it will be evident that both England and Spain confessed that
the destruction of this deadly, murderous fleet of the Pope, designed to execute his
bull against Queen Elizabeth, was by the immediate hand of God. If this Armada
was for the establishment of religious freedom, as our lecturer said, would the
Lord have thus mightily fought against such freedom ? No ; it was a devilish and
most bloody design upon our nation, therefore God poured out his wrath upon it,
and made an open show of it before all nations, so that all might know that this
Pope’s party are the people of His curse, and that those who love and read the
Holy Bible are the people whom He preserves and blesses.
1. Thus we have shown that the position our lecturer has taken is in violation
of the dogmas of his Bishops, the bulls of his Popes, and the modern and past acts
of his Church.
2. We have shown that the confessed designs of Eome relative to the Armada,
with the acknowledged hand of God in its overthrow, proves that its designs were
the very opposite to what our lecturer said they were. He said it was to root out
religious tyranny, and establish religious freedom. We have proved that it was
to effect religious murder, flames, and tyranny.
3. He said the Pope’s infallibility had its resemblance in Moses. I proceed to
prove that it had not.
4 t He said it was clearly set forth in the New Testament. I proceed to prove
it is not.
5. He said it was committed to Peter. I proceed to prove that Peter dis-
avows it.
6. He said it was declared by the first Bishops and Popes, I proceed to prove
that their writings deny this.
7. He said the Popes did not interfere with the civil powers, only in matters
of conscience. I proceed to prove that all their dogmas and histories deny this.
I extract from Bishop Barlow upon “Popery dangerous to Protestant Princes,”
Mr. Isaac Barrow upon “ The Supremacy of the Pope,” and Dr. Crackenthorpe
upon “The Pope’s Temporal Power.”


Vatican or, Cjre fr. tlje Quwn!
Mr. Chairman, —Our object in giving this lecture is to endeavour to
ascertain whether it be possible for any person to give to the Pope all
that he demands, as a Supreme Political Head in his Vatican Decrees,
and at the same time remain in true allegiance to the Protestant Queen
of England 1
From my own investigation and examination of Poman Catholic
writings during the last twenty-five years, I am convinced that no person
can be true to the Decrees of the Vatican and loyal to any Protestant
Prince at the same time. Therefore as lam obliged to look upon every
man, true to the Pope, as disloyal to the Queen, I feel it incumbent
upon me to show why I do so,
I presume all true Protestants have been much gratified with the
calm, understated, declarations of Mr. Gladstone of late, which have
been fully confirmed by the testimonies of the Catholic Peers—Lord
Acton and Lord Camoys. The Press in this colony have our most sin-
cere gratitude for the large amount of reprint with which we have been
favoured of those noble utterances of these great-minded, and truly
loyal-hearted men.
It is highly gratifying, and powerfully confirming to one’s long
entertained convictions, to find also that a very large number of Catholic
Bishops, Priests, Schoolmasters, Princes, and people in Germany, and
other nations, have come to the same conviction as that entertained by
us for these many years, viz., “ That no believer in the Vatican Decrees
can be loyal to the Queen of England, or any other Sovereign who shall
dare to repudiate them.
This treasonous revolt from true allegiance to the Queen, by firm
adherence to the Supreme Headship of the Pope, has shocked many a
loyal heart in this colony, as well as in our fatherland, by hearing very
often of “healths ” being drank to the Pope first, and the Queen next;
and at some meetings it has been- —“ To his Holiness the Pope,” and no
health to the Queen.
When we remember that we have had some in high authority in
Victoria, who, being true adherents to the Pope, have not hesitated to
declare themselves “ Rebels to the back bone,” and that their fellow-
adherents to the Pope, in Ireland, published to the Pope’s subjects there,
that “ These two Irish cliques would soon lay the golden Colony of
Victoria at the feet of the Pope.” And when we remember that out of
an organization of the Pope’s followers, an attempt was made in this
colony upon the life of one of the Queen’s sons, I do think it becomes
all loyal subjects of the Queen, to endeavour to ascertain whether
adherents to the Pope, and his Vatican Decrees, can be loyal to our
Throne.
This is the more incumbent upon us, inasmuch as so many truly
great and noble Catholic minds in Europe, have now declared this to be
impossible. As the Pope, by assumption, presumes to have civil authority
over all the princes of the nations of the earth, which we shall prove
by their own utterances presently, let us enquire in the first place—


I.—Did the High Priesthood in God’s model nation of Israel presume
to have civil authority over the Kings of that nation 1 Every reader of
the Holy Book must answer, No. 1. Moses was King in Jeshurun, not
a supreme priest, by the direct command of God. Moses is referred to as
a “ King, Prophet, and Lawgiver,” but never as a priest. Now, did the
Supreme Priesthood presume to have authority over this King and Law-
giver lor did this King exercise authority over them 1 Every reader of
the Bible knows very well that the Supreme Priesthood was subject to
this King—Moses, in all civil questions in that nation. The Supreme
Priesthood exercised his authority in all ecclesiastical matters pertaining
to the Tabernacle, but never presumed to hold authority in civil or
legislative questions. Therefore the Pope of Rome has no presidential
or preceptive warrant for his assumption of civil or legislative authority
over the nations of the earth in the Supreme Priesthood of the nation of
Israel. 2. The same distinction between the ecclesiastical and civil
authorities was observed during the time of the Judges ; the same
distinction was observed after that. Samuel, the last of the Judges,
had made Saul King, and deposed him, anointing David King in his
stead. You will do well to observe that in this awful crisis, when this
nation rejected God as their King, ruling them by the Judges, Samuel
did not act in this matter as the Supreme of the Tabernacle, but as the
Prophet and Judge for God over the people. Therefore, as the last civil
ruler of the Judges, and as God’s prophet, he anointed Saul King over
Israel; and then, by the command of God he deposed him and set up
David. 3. When David was raised from the sheepfold to be king over
the Lord’s nation, and was followed by Solomon, his son, and after him
his descendants, we find the same subjection of the Supreme Priesthood
to these civil rulers or kings in all the national affairs of the kingdom.
The Supreme priesthood never presumed to exercise authority over the
kings in civil questions. True, they had all authority in the Temple—
the national Church. They would not permit even a king to violate
the laws of God in His house. Therefore Uzziah, when he went into the
Temple to offer incense, was prevented by Azariah and fourscore priests
who followed him, and withstood him, and they had the approbation of
God, for before the King could get out of the Temple he was smitten
with leprosy-—2 Chr. xxvi. 16. Here we have ecclesiastical authorities
resisting a king in God’s house. Surely this is very different to their
resisting a king in his God-given and God-justified civil authority in a
nation. Bishop Latimer, in a similar manner, rebuked King Henry
Till, for his sins when preaching to him at Church. In like manner,
when President Davis preached to one of our kings and the Royal
Family, the king was observed to be speaking to those around him, as
he was delighted with the sermon. The preacher saw the king talking,,
and said : “ When the lion roars, the beasts of the earth tremble ; when
King Jesus speaks, the princes of the earth should keep silence ! Thus
a minister of God’s Word may, and must, rebuke kings for their sins ;;
but they must not interfere with their civil authority. If the king acts
contrary to the constitution of his nation, and the welfare of hrs people,
the people must put him right, not the priest; as when Saul wanted to
murder his son Jonathan, the people would not permit him to do it—
-1 |Sam. xiv. 45. Thusjwe find nothing in the history of the Kings and


Priests of Israel in the least to favour the Pope’s most daring assumption
of supreme authority over the kings of the earth in civil affairs. 4.-—lf
we glance at the history of this model nation, at and after the captivity,
we find the same distinction kept up between the Supreme Priest and
the Supreme Governor. Ezra and Joshua have charge of all the Temple
and its worship—Nehemiah and Zerubbabel attend to their national
affairs. Though these civil authorities helped those ecclesiastical func-
tionaries greatly, the Supreme Priesthood never usurped authority over
the civil rulers in national affairs. True they rebuked, counselled, and
advised them, but never arrogated their authority.
ll.—Let us now pass over from the Old Dispensation to the era of
the Gospel, and enquire—-Is there anything in the life and ministry of
the Lord Jesus, and His Apostles, which will give either precedent or
precept to the Pope for his assumption of civil authority over the kings
of the earth 1 lam persuaded that every fair, common-sense reader of
the New Testament must answer—No !
1. Did not the Saviour as a Supreme Minister of the Word of
God—who has spoken unto us in these last days by His Son—in every
part of His blessed life, submit to the civil authorities in everything 1
As He was born during His parents’ journey to Bethlehem, commanded
by civil authority, in the payment of their taxes, so every act of His
blessed life, from His birth to His death upon the cross, was in the
strictest obedience to the civil powers under which He lived, a Supreme
Servant of God, to proclaim good tidings to men. I defy the production
of one single act, in the life of this Supreme Church-Minister, as opposed
to the civil authorities under which the nation was placed; although
those authorities were pagan and foreign. True He rebuked the Jewish
Church authorities, and cast them out of the Temple, in those things
wherein they had made void the law of God by their traditions. But
these corrupted Temple functionaries were very different to the civil
power under which God had placed them all; to these Jesus yielded the
most perfect subjection. Not only did Jesus and His parents live in
entire subjection to the civil Homan authorities after the sceptre had
departed from Judah, but we never find that He ever exercised any
jurisdiction, contradiction, or authority over that civil power. He
refused positively always to be a judge, or a divider of property, or in
any way to interfere in civil matters. He said—“ Who made me a
judge T &c. He never was heard to speak against this civil power—
never once. He often urged submission to it upon His followers,
exhorting them to pay their taxes, and to “ Bender unto Caesar the
things which were Caesar’s.” Thus in every word of His lips, in every
act of His life, this Bishop of all bishops, yielded implicit submission to
civil authority, and never once assumed it, or interfered with it. Herein
is the greatest and holiest example ever set before man, to provoke him,
by emulation, to a true loyalty to that King or Queen whom God has
set over him in all civil authority.
The British Christian, or any other Christian, seeing this holy
example of his Christ, feels his heart glow again with a holy veneration
to Her Majesty the Queen, His rightful Sovereign in all civil jurisdic-
tion ; and whilst a loving reverence fills his heart to his Sovereign, a
humble submission to her authority will characterize his life in all things.


Such a Christian, in the heartfelt realization of such reverence and sub
mission, will often send up his loyal prayer —“ God save the Queen !”
u Oh save our glorious Queen.”
When such a man as this is thus fired with this spirit of holy
loyalty is compelled to hear such treasonous healths as—“ The Pope
first, and the Queen afterwards,” his soul burns with indignation against
such insult to our crown, by a foreign vassalage, to a most blasphemous
pretender, to be “ Lord of lords, and King of kings.” I say again, every
loyal heart, which beats true to our Protestant Queen, in her civil juris-
diction, demands a reason why this kind of insult should be offered to
Her Majesty, and England’s throne.
How the Popes could dare to presume to have all supreme civil
authority, so as to put down kings, princes, and monarchs, as they have
done, and set up others at their pleasure in the face of the life and lips
of the Great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, we cannot tell. How this
can be accounted for, 1 am at a loss to know, except it be by a considera-
tion of “ the heart of man being deceitful above all things, and desper-
ately wicked.” And again, “ A lying spirit filled the mouths of all
Ahab’s prophets,” that they might deceive him unto his fall in death, and
endless condemnation.
Should the Pope say he follows the example of Christ as He is in
heaven, “ King of kings, and Lord of lords this in effect he does say ;
but by what authority does he say this 1 Where are poor finite men
commanded to bear resemblance to the glorious majesty of the Eternal
God 1 ? Where are we commanded to take the prerogatives of Jehovah 1
If dying men are, without a word from God about it, are to take to them-
selves the names, titles, and prerogative of the Divine Majesty of heaven
and earth, why does He say—“ I, even I, am God alone, and beside me
there is no Saviour 1” The Lord Jesus is gone into heaven, not only as
risen man, but as the Lord God Almighty, ever present in heaven,
earth, and hell. Dare the Pope say in nature or office he is this 1 If not,
to presume to do so is an awful and a blasphemous sham.
Has God ever informed men in His Word that He has exalted any
other besides Jesus to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance and
remission of sins ? Where is it said that another beside Jesue is exalted
above every name in heaven, and earth, and bell, that at His name every
knee should bow ? This act of the Pope in presuming to be like unto
the glorious majesty of the Son of God in heaven, and not to be as He
was when He was the Supreme Minister of God’s word on earth, can find
its parallel in presumption nowhere, only in the chief of the fallen
angels, who once sought to be chief in heaven, and for which assumption
he was expelled from that holy place.
2. Now let us pass on to the lives of the Apostles who had heayj
and learnt so much of Jesus upon this subject. Did they ever r efuse
subjection to the civil authorities in civil things 'I I say they ny ver did
so, never once. Did they ever once presume to exercise any civil juris-
diction 1 I affirm they never did. They paid, they lost, they suffered
in all things, everywhere, in their entire subjection to the civil powers
under which they were found to live, from time to tiiTie. I again defy
the whole Catholic world to produce one testimony of their insubordina-
tion to civil power; or that they ever dared or desired to exercise it.


I am aware that Roman Catholic writers frequently refer to the conduct
of Peter, recorded in Acts iv., where it is said he replied to the priests
party, when that party ordered him to speak no more in Jesus name,
he said—“ Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you,,
more than unto God, judge ye, for we cannot but speak the things we
have seen and heard.” To this I reply—l. These were the Temple
authorities, and not the civil. The Highpriest’s party made up this.
Bishop’s couxt), which presumed to stop these mouths of God. This was.
not the Emperor’s civil court at all; this was the court of the priests,
which Peter answered in this way. The civil authorities did not impose-
silence upon the Apostles until long after this. 2. This was not a
question affecting civil authority at all; but was a matter of conscience
between God and these men, and upon this ground no earthly monarch
has any right to tread, any more than he has upon the rights of angels.
The things pertaining to a man’s conscience before God are as foreign to-
civil government, as the employment of angels before God. If a king
steps out of his throne and kingdom of civil jurisdiction into the spirit-
ualities of God’s Church, where God reigns monarch alone, he can no-
more be obeyed than he would be in a foreign nation, or if he commanded
fallen or unfallen angels. Therefore this obedience of the Apostles to-
God in this region of conscience, so foreign to civil 'governments, is no-
proof that the Apostles ever disobeyed, much more assumed, civil
authoi’ity. And before we leave this department of a man’s soul alone
responsible to his Maker, permit me to notice, no class of men that ever
lived, Pagans included, ever encroached upon this domain of God so
much as the Popes. How many millions of human beings they have
slaughtered, because they could not disobey God to obey them, none but
the Almighty can ever know, as it is a number which no man can num-
ber. Let not the Pope and his followers ever mention “ liberty of con-
science ” until they can account for the rivers of blood which they have
shed upon this question. Thus we find it still remains that there is not
one instance upon record, anywhere, that either Jesus or His Apostles
ever resisted or assumed civil authority thus defined.
We have further to notice that they not only lived in subjection to-
this authority themselves, but they exhorted their followers to do the
same, as followers—“ Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for
the powers that be are ordained of God.” Romans xiii. at large, insists
upon this by the Apostle Paul. His brother apostle, Peter, whom the
Pope professes to be his predecessor, says—“ Submit yourselves to every
ordinance of man, for the Lord’s sake, whether it be to the king, as
sv'oreme, or unto governors as unto them that are sent by Him lor the
punishment of evil-doers, and for the praise of them that do well.”—
1 Peter’ ii. 12-14. Here we cannot but be astonished that any rational
being, pron ess i n g to be a successor of this very Petei*, should ever dare
to resist civil newer, and down with kings, and then proclaim himself—
“ Lord God upo^ l earth, and Supreme Ruler of the nations.” Let it be
possible to take thv s book of the lives and teachings of these Apostles
unto some world of national beings, remote from this, and tell such
rational beings that a ciass of men had risen up in this world who pro-
fessed te be followers of and these Apostles, yet that they had
presumed to be invested with authority to slay kings, and dethrone


earthly monarchs at their pleasure, and assume all civil dominion as
subordinate to themselves. Would not such rational beings conclude
that such a class of men were mad, insane, furious, and most desperate
revolters from the God they professed to serve 1 I am certain they
would. 1. Paul and Peter lived in subjection to civil authorities ; the
Popes have lived in rebellion against them for 1200 years. 2. Paul
and Peter solemnly taught subjection to these civil powers though they
were pagan ; the Popes have loosed their followers from all civil allegiance-
where the kings have not been their vassals. Can these two opposites
be made to agree 1 This must ever remain a thing utterly impossible.
Therefore the Popes who have violated the Word of God, by their resist-
ance and assumption of civil governments, have proved themselves con-
trary to God, rebels against His Son, and violent opposers of the express
words of St. Peter and St. Paul. How solemn is the testimony of
another Apostle relative to those who resist civil authority as the Popes,
and their followers have done. He says —“ Such who resist shall receive
to themselves damnation, or judgment; either temporal judgment from
men or from God, as did Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, or eternal judg-
ment for those who despise dominion and speak evil of dignitaries, the
blackness of darkness is reserved for ever and ever.”—Jude 7,8, 11, 13.
As we do not find any authority for the Pope’s assumptions in the
records of the priests and kings of Israel, nor in the life of Christ, nor
yet in the lives of the Apostles, let us pass on to the history of the
church in the first centuries of this dispensation.
lll.—Can we find anything in the lives and writings of the first
bishops like the assumptions of the Popes during these last twelve
centuries ? I most confidently answer, No !
None of the first bishops up to Constantine, says anything like the
terrible assumptions of the Popes after the 7th century. I defy the
Pope’s followers to produce anything of the kind from this quarter.
When pagan rule had passed away, and Constantine had ascended the
throne of the Homan Empire, he, taking the church under his royal
wing, the subject of civil government comes out prominently. From
the writings of this age we have abundant information as to the light in
which civil power was then viewed. To all readers of these writings it
will be most evident that they were so far from claiming civil power as
the property of the church, as Popes have since done, that they were for
giving almost all the power of the church to the Emperor. They made
him head of State and Church too, and the poor bishops they made his
tails. These were their sayings. Athanasius said to the Emperor,
“ Christ taking His throne hath translated it, and given it to holy
Christian kings, to turn them back to the house of Jacob.”—Serm.
De B. Yirg. Armininum, writing to Constantins, the Arian Emperor,
says to him, “ That by Christ he had his empire given him. By Him
thou art appointed to reign over the world.” Mark you, “by Christ,”
not by the Pope, as afterwards was claimed by the Popes. Siberus
said to him, “ Fight not against Him who hath given thee this empire.”
Tynes said, “ For to join the kingdom and priesthood evangelical, is to
join in one hand things of the most differing nature.” Isidore Hispa-
lansis wrote, “ Let the princes of the world know that they must give an
account to God for the church which they have received into their pro-
tection.”—ln Sent., c. 51.


Here you will see from this small sample of the writers of the fourth
century that the fall off from the Apostles was not by the bishops claim-
ing civil authority, or by their want of obedience to it, but by their
giving up the powers of the church to the Emperor, In this they re-
volted fiom God and the spiritual dominion of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the only head of the Church. Having thus departed from the Great
Head of the Church, He gave them up to all manner of vile heresies
and uncleannesses, so that the historians of that age said, “ Sud-
denly all the world wondered to find itself Arian ” : and again, “ Atha-
nasius against all the world, and all the world against Athanasius.”
Then followed rivers of blood by those bishops who had passed over the
spiritual government of the Church, from Christ its only Head, to the
civil ruler, moving him first to banish Arius for life, and then when the
world was converted to Arianism, emperors and all, they brought Arius
from banishment, and sent Athanasius into it, and moved the sword of
Avar to flood the earth Avith human gore, and devilize mankind. Had
the Bishop still held Christ the ruling head in His Church, they would
haA T e been taught that whilst He rebuked and separated heretics, he never
punished them in their bodies, neither did the Apostles do this, nor did
they ever move the civil sword to do it, as Popes have ever done. The
making of the Emperor too much, putting him head in Zion, was the
first revolt from Cod, ever after attended with most awful consequences.
Still the Bishops continued their allegiances to the civil power, as
ordained of Cod. Pope Leo said to Leo the Emperor, “ You must dili-
gently remember that the supreme power is given to you, not only for
the government of the world, but especially for the safety of the Church.”
—Epist. 75. Socrates said, “ Ever since the emperors became Christians
the affairs of the Church have depended on them.” This is expressly
taught by Augustine, who said, “ In this, the kings in that capacity serve
God according to Divine command if in their respective kingdoms they
command good things, and forbid evil, not only in relation to human
society, but in order to religion.”—St. August., Ep. 156., con. cres. lib. lIL
Pope Gelasius, Avho was a great advocate of Papal authority, said, not-
Avithstanding this, to the Emperor Anastasius, “I, as being a Roman
born, do love, worship, and reverence the Roman prince.”—Celas.,
Epist. 8. Since this Pope did this, the Popes have demanded of the
princc, love, worship, and reverence for themselves, and have not
given it to princes. Such is the changeable state of man when once he
apostatizes from Cod. After all this change, who would think that
these poor old deluded men would pretend to have infallibility. The
wind may as well boast of its unchangeability, and the sea of its im-
movability, and the flower of grass of its imperishability. The fine
old weathercock upon the tower top has as much unchangeableness as
these poor old men of the Vatican.
Just like a weatliercock, that’s turned by every blast,
They worshipped king one day, then ride him like an ass.
The shine fine old Pope Gelasius said furthermore to the prince, “ The
prelates of religion, knoAving the empire Avas conferred on him by DiA 7 ine
providence, did obey his laAvs.” And again, elsewhere he says, “ That
Christ had distinguished by their proper acts and dignities, the offices of
.ecclesiastical and civil poAver.” Thus he gave all civil power to the-


princes as the appointment of God, while he was content simply to be a
bishop, not meddling with civil aixthority.”—Gelas., Epist. 8. Pope
Gregory I. avowed the emperor to be, “ His lord, by God’s gift, superior
to all men, to whom he was subject, whom he, in duty, was bound to
obey.” He supposed it high presumption for any one to “ set himself
above the honour of the empire.”—Pope Greg. I, Epist. 2-26. After
him, Pope Agatho, in the acts of the General Council, doth call the
Emperor Constantine Progonatus his lord, doth avow “ himself, together
with all presidents of churches, servants to the emperordoth say that
his See and his Synod were subject to him, and owe obedience to him.
—Act. Sym. YII., p. 53. Presently, after him again, Pope Leo 11.,
who confirmed that Synod, doth call the emperor, “ The prototype of the
son of the church,” and acknowledged the priests to be, “ the meanest
servants of his nobleness.”-—lbid, pp. 303, 304. After him- again, Pope
Constantine, when the Emperor commanded him to Constantinople, Ana-
stasius in his life says, “ The most holy man obeyed the imperial com-
mand.”—A.D. 709. Pope Gregory 11., in his epistle to Leo Isaurus,
acknowledged him as emperor to be the head of Christians, and himself,
consequently, subject to him.”- —Pope Greg. 11., Ep. i., p. 502. Many
more testimonies of this kind may be seen in Mr. Barrow’s work upon
“ The Pope’s Supremacy.” I have thus detained you long on this point
in order to put it beyond dispute, that so far were the first bishops from
taking temporal power into their hands, that we have to come down the
line of Popes a long way before we can find them making this horrible
assumption —“ Lord gods upon earth, and princes of all nations,” as
they have subsequently declared themselves to be. As far as we have
gone, we have seen that the first Popes declared their subjection to the
emperors, and we do not find them endeavouring to make the civil ruler
subject to the Supreme Priesthood, any more than Aaron sought to make
Moses subject to him.
IV.—Let us now enquire when did the Popes arrogate to themselves
the civil power, and commenced to brandish the sword of war, to the
slaughter of so many millions in many nations 1 I answer —about the
year 606, it began. Pope Boniface 111. having, by compliance with the
usurper Phocas, obtained a declaration from him concerning the headship
of the Roman Church, did make a considerable step forward toward the
height of papal greatness. Pope Gregory VII. went a long way in
assuming power over the Emperor—this Pope, to justify his tyranny over
the Emperor, pretended to get precedents in former Popes for this
horrible power ; to depose kings. But this was a fallacy ; he said, Pope
Innocent I. excommunicated the Emperor Arcadius for his proceedings
against Chrysostom ; but this was false, as nothing of the kind is men-
tioned in the life of that Father. He also alleged that St. Gregory
Magnus denounced excommunication and deprivation of honor to all
kings, bishops, judges, &c., who should violate the privilege g* anted to
the Monastery of St. Medard. But this was a rank forgery, as Mr.
Barrow has proved ; and the whole life of St. Gregory proves this was
a libel upon his character, for he was ever submissive to the civil power.
In page 20, Mx\ Barrow has produced a hundred proofs that the Fathers,
Bishops, and Popes, before the seventh century, did not depose or ex-
communicate the Emperors, as they have been said to do by the


{subsequent Popes who have done so. Thus we find that this doctrine of
the Pope’s power over kings, to excommunicate, depose, and kill them,
and give their kingdoms to others, had no place in the world, until 700
years after the entrance of Christ into the world, and then it entered by
the murder of the Emperor Mauritus and his family, consisting of six
sons and two daughters, by Phocas, who made Pope Boniface 111. the
Supreme Bishop of the whole world. And as this doctrine was com-
menced by this awful tragedy, it was consummated by volumes of
falsehood upon the Fathers, Bishops, and Popes, before this Gregory
VII., who did excommunicate and usurp authority over the Emperors.
Thus, lies and murder gave the Popes dominion over kings. This Pope,
Gregory VII., having thus fully established this doctrine in the holy
Homan Chair of St. Peter, proceeded to swagger, and down with kings
in the following manner : —“For the dignity and defence of God’s holy
Church, in the name of Almighty God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
I depose from all imperial and royal administration King Henry, son of
Henry, sometime Emperor, who too boldly and rashly hath laid his hands
on the Church; and I absolve all Christian subjects to the Empire from
that oath, whereby they were wont to plight their faith unto true kings j
for it is right that he should be deprived of dignity, who doth endeavour
to diminish the majesty of the Church.” “Go to, therefore, most holy”
Princes of the Apostles, and what I said, by interposing your authority,
confirm—That all men may now at length understand, if you can bind
and loose in heaven, that you also can upon earth take away and give
empires, kingdoms, and whatsoever mortals can have ; for if ye can judge
things belonging unto God, what is it to be deemed concerning these
inferior and profane things 1 And if it is your part to judge angels who
govern proud princes, what becometh it you to do towards their servants 1
Let kings now, and all secular princes, learn by this man’s example,
what you can do in heaven, and in what esteem you are with God ; and
let them henceforth fear to slight the commands of Holy Church : but
put forth suddenly this judgment that all may understand, that not
casually, but by your means, this son of iniquity doth fall from his
kingdom.”—Barrow p. 14, tom Plato in Greg. VII. ettom. vii. cone.
Horn. 3. apud Bin. page 484 and 493.
How here we have this doctrine of infallibility, or “ The Vatican
Decrees,” at its beginning fairly and plainly stated, and ever since
practiced by Rome, to the death of millions of harmless people. I say
practised by the Popes ever since Gregory VII. By this, I mean,
wherever the Popes have had priestly influence enough over a nation to
carry enough power with the populace, the parliaments, and the armies.
I defy Dr. Manning, with others of the Pope’s advocates now to prove,
in their attempts to contradict Mr. Gladstone, Lord Acton, and Lord
Camoys, that ever the Church of Rome have failed to execute this most
infernal decree where they have had the people, the parliament, and the
army, with them to do so. It is all rant and mockery to talk of loyalty
when the people, the parliament, and the army are dead against them.
This is like the fox in the stable amongst the kicking and stamping
horses, here he said —“ O friends, don’t let us hurt one another.” But
when “ rennard ” got into the foul-house, he said —“ Let every one look
after themselves here.” Let Dr. Manning, Dr. Vaughan, and others


once get hold of the people of England, gain power in our parliaments
with our lords, and our army—which is now their grand aim, and then
you will see they will at once execute these Vatican Decrees, as defined
by this Pope Gregory VII.
1. The first thing will be down with our Protestant Queen, as he
did with Henry of France.
2. The second thing will be, all her Majesty’s subjects released from
their oaths of allegiance, as Henry’s subjects were.
3. The third thing will be to seize all the wealth of the nation, as
he said they had right to do.
4. The fourth thing will be prayers to the princely Apostles to
execute the infernal decree from their heavenly powers, though they were
always subject to pagan kings, when they were on earth.
This then is their own plain interpretation, by word and deed, of
their decree of infallibility, I could here produce Pope Hildebrand,
who, for his deeds of blood, in executing this Vatican Decree, was called
the Hell-Brand, with hundreds of Roman Catholic writers who have
stated this doctrine of Rome, relative to deposing kings, just as Gregory
VII. has done, as before noticed, but time would fail me to do this, and
I must refer the enquirer to Mr. Barrow, and the many Roman Catholic
works to which he constantly refers, from all which, it will be evident,
every priest and bishop is sworn to dethrone every Protestant King, or
Queen upon earth, of course only when they can work up the power in
people, parliament, and army to do so.
To put this beyond dispute, I will here give you a part of the oath
they take to this end —“ I. IST., elect of the church of N , from
henceforth will be faithful and obedient to St. Peter the Apostle, and to
the Holy Roman Church, and to our Lord, the Lord K. Pope IST. and to
his successors canonically coming in,” * * * * * * “ The rules
of the holy fathers, the apostolic decrees, ordinances, or disposals, reser-
vations, pi-o visions and mandates, I will observe, with all my might,
and cause to be observed by others. Heretics, schismatics, and rebels to
one Lord, or his aforesaid successors. I will, to my power, persecute
and oppose.”—Barrow, p. 37.
This then is the sworn obligation of Dr. Manning, and Dr. Vaughan,
with all the priests and bishops whom the Pope has stationed in Eng-
land. 1. Is it not most evident that the Queen, the Royal Family,
and nine-tenths of our nation being Protestant, are in the eyes of all
these bishops heretics and schismatics ; do they not even call us so ?
2. Is it not evident then that they are sworn to the Pope, in the name
of the Holy God, to “ persecute and oppose,” with all their power, the
Queen, the Royal Family, the parliament, and Protestant subjects of
Her Majesty throughout her empire! What is the use of Dr. Vaughan,
the priest of St. Joseph, with Dr. Manning, attempting to prove their
allegiance to our Queen in their hot contradictions of the many bishops
on the Continent, Mr. Gladstone, Lord Acton, and Lord Camoys, in the
face of their own oaths, to persecute and oppose the Queen with all their
power.
If we ask for proof as to whether they have ever put this awful oath
into practice, let the deposed kings in Italy, Poland, Germany, Spain,
France, and England answer that question. Let the mass of charred


human bones lately dug up in Spain answer this question. Let the
spurned crown of King John, the bulls against Henry VIII, and Eliza-
beth, answer this question. Yea, let the inhuman massacres in Ireland,
oft repeated, answer too. Yea, the sleeping dust of the Queen of
Navarre, with that of her fine old general, Coligny, and the blood of the
70,000 Protestants which flooded the gutters of Paris on the morning of
August 24th, 1572, answer this awful question. Let the attempt to
blow up our King and all che Parliament by those who are canonised as
saints, answer the question as to whether the priests and bishops of
Rome have not been faithful to their oaths, to “ Persecute and oppose
all heretics,” which they judge all Protestant princes and their subjects
to be. Now, permit me to ask most calmly and deliberately, as a loyal
subject of Her Majesty, as one who from my heart ever devoutedly pray
“ God save the Queen,” can these men, sworn to execute this Vatican
Decree, sworn to “ persecute and oppose all Protestant heretics,” ever be
loyal subjects of Her Protestant Majesty 1 lam persuaded they cannot.
Permit me to ask another question. Seeing their Vatican Decree clearly
sets forth, dethroning of kings, release of subjects from oaths of allegi-
ance to kings, and then the persecution, with all their power, both of
king and subjects who shall remain in heresy or Protestantism, and that
they have ever done so whenever they have had the power to do it, can
these men be loyal to the Queen 1 I ask, are not such men most danger-
ous persons to be cherished in the nation, at an expense of about
<£360,000 per annum 1 They are foreigners, sworn in allegiance to
another civil power—the Pope of Rome. This ought, of itself, to exclude
them from our national recognition of them. So far, as others, they would
be harmless foreigners ; but when we find them sworn to persecute Her
Majesty and her Protestant subjects, we must view them as very danger-
ous foreigners.
V.—lt may be as well, in the next place, to enquire—l. What titles
the Popes have taken as agreeing with this Vatican Decree of infalli-
bility h 2. What kings have they deposed 1 3. What horrible wars
have they waged to execute this decree 1
1. The titles belonging to this decree of infallibility is as follows -
<£ Universal Bishop, Sovereign Pontiff, Christ’s Vicar, God on earth,
Lord God the Pope, His Holiness, King of kings, and Lord of lords,
Prince over all nations and kingdoms, The Most Holy and Most Blessed,
Master of the Universal World, Father of Kings, Light of the World,
Most High and Sovereign Bishop,” etc., &c.—See Council of Sienna,
printed at Paris, 1612, Pius V. Now we can pass over their church titles,
and attend to those belonging to civil authority, and here we find the
Popes daring to declare themselves, as we have shown before, lords over
lords, and kings over kings, princes over all nations and kingdoms,
masters of the universal world • therefore, the Pope presumes to be lord,
prince, and master over our sovereign, the Queen, and our nation.
When the Dr. Mannings and the Dr. Vaughans can get a majority of
people in Parliament and the army, His Holiness will assume Supreme
Prince, King and Master in a way perfectly agreeing with the six years
of blood and ashes in the reign of Mary. I say, from the deepest feel-
ings of loyalty to our Queen, to every loyal heart, let the yet speaking
dust of Smithfield confirm the late noble testimony of Mr. Gladstone


against Dr. Manning, as to whether the Pope does not presume to be a
murderous master to Protestant England whenever he can by priestcraft
get the power. He does not think his titles mere empty names, if some
Protestants are foolish enough to suppose so. That the Pope will act
according to his most formidable titles, will be evident from the fact that
the Popes have always done so, ever since they assumed them, that is,
whenever they have had priestly, parliamentary, and sword power enough
to carry it out.
2. This brings us to our second question, namely, what kings have
the Popes put down in the exercise of this lordly civil power ? Pope
Zachary I. dethroned Ohilderic 111., King of France, and invested with
royal authority the usurper, Pipin, in his place. From this time the
Popes carried two swords, to indicate their church and civil power. A
number of princes and nobles were deprived and excommunicated at this
time. Pope Innocent 111. deposed Philip Augustine, King of France,
and set aside Philip, Duke of Suabia, and put Otho IV. in his place by
thundering excommunications against Philip, and then reversed this
determination, and blessed whom he first cursed until he refused
submission to the Pope, when he again cursed him, and raised his
pupil, Frederick 11., to the throne and dignity in his place. Pope
Gregory VII. deposed Henry IV., of France. Pope Celestine 111. ex-
communicated Henry VII., Emperor. The same Pope excommunicated
Leopold, Duke of Austria, also Alphonso X., King of Galicia and Leon.
Pope Gregory IX. and Innocent IV. deposed Frederick 11. Pope Boni-
face VIII. deprived Philip the Fair, King of France. One of the
Popes deposed our King John for five days, and upon the cowardly king
basely prostrating England to the Pope, he received his crown, reigning
from 1199 to 1216. This was to the disgust of his nobles and subjects.
Pope Julius 11. deprived Louis XII., King of France. Pope Paul 111.
deprived Henry VIII., King of England. Pope Pius V. deprived
Elizabeth, Queen ol England. Pope Paul IV. summoned the Queen of
Navarre to appear before him, to answer for the crime of rejecting his
authority. She, not obeying his edict, in 1563, gave rise to her murder,
and that of her subject, in Paris, in 1572, for which the Pope and his
Cardinals gave public thanks as soon as they received the message from
the King of France, Henry IX. Pope Sixtus V. delivered a famous
oration applauding the murder of Henry 111., King of France, by a
Jacobine friar, as both admirable and meritorious. Pope Urban IT.
prohibited bishops and priests from promising allegiance to kings and
princes. - Pope Martin V. forced the Emperor Sigismund to violate his
covenant and promises, and made that diabolical decree that faith must
not be kept with heretics. Pope Clement IX. deprived James 1., King
of England of his right to the crown even before he ascended the throne,
and afterwards attempted to destroy both him and his Parliament by
gunpowder. Pope Clement XI. declared the treaty of Charles VII.,
Emperor, to be null and void, although repeatedly confirmed by oath.
This, and much more, will be found in Anti. Chr. Tri., p. 18, 19.
Now permit me to ask, if this amount of practice in putting down
kings for 1200 years, is not enough proof that the Popes have carried
out their assumed right to do with all civil authority as they please,
according to their titles—“ Lord of lords,” “ Masters of the universal


world ” what will be enough 1 Permit me to ask also whether the
bishops and priests have not kept their oaths inviolate, to “ persecute
and oppose all heretics with all their power !”
Though they have released kings from their oaths of fidelity to
their subjects, and subjects from their oaths of allegiance to their kings,
as if they were but putrid breath; yet they have ever kept their oaths
to the Pope, to execute this Vatican Decree, by their fearfully deposing
of kings, and slaughtering of their subjects who remained Protestants.
If then the Popes, according to the nature of this Vatican Decree,
have deposed so many kings, princes, and emperors from their civil
authority. What is to prevent them from deposing our Queen as they
did King John, attempted to do Queen Elizabeth, and King James I. ?
I ask what is to prevent one of the Popes from putting down our Queen
if such a Pope can but get people, parliament, and sword-power enough
to do it? Dr. Manning, Dr. Vaughan, and the priest of St. Joseph’s
say —“ Oh this is not the meaning of the Vatican Decrees ; it does not
mean an interference with civil power.” But how can these men dare
to say this in the face of the world’s history, everywhere written, that
this decree has put down many mighty kings from their thrones ? How
dare they say this in the face of their own oaths, which obliges them to
put down all such heretics as they consider the Queen to be ? I ask
again, how can they make this false statement in the face of the fact,
that never, for these last many centuries, have they had the power to
put down Protestant Princes, and kill their subjects, but they have done
so ? I can produce many testimonies from their writings, to shew that
they consider it their duty to do so, supposing that by killing us they do
God service. Why should we suppose Rome to be and to do different
to what she has been, and done for ages 1 Do any of her bishops, or
priests, or people ever pray for any Protestant Queen, prince, or king,
as such 1 They may pray that these may become Roman' Catholics, but
they never pray for them as Protestants.
3. Let us now glance through the world’s history to see the wars this
Decree of Infallibility has produced on the earth ; to enumerate all the
dreadful slaughter would be a task impossible for man, if not for angels
to perform, by various means, for not submitting to the Pope’s civil
and church power, a million of the people called Waldenses were perse-
cuted with fire and sword for many centuries. I will just notice the
testimony of Thuanus, a priest under the Pope’s government, who is
considered an historian of repute, he says—(in Praef. ad. Henry IV,,
also, Pet. Hist. Alb. c. 17, &c.) —“Against the Waldenses, when
exquisite punishments availed little, and the evil was exasperated by the
remedy which had been unreasonably applied, and the numbers increased
daily • at length, complete armies were raised, and a war of no less
weight than what our people had before waged against the Saracens was
decreed against them; the event of which was, that they were either
slain, put to flight, spoiled everywhere, of their goods and dignities, and
dispersed here and there, rather than that they were convinced of
their error and repented. So that they fled into Provence and the neigh-
bouring Alps of the French territory, and found shelter for their lives and
doctrines in those places. Part withdrew into Calabria, part passed into
Germany, and fixed their abode among the Bohemians, and in Poland,


and Livonia; others turned to the West—obtained refuge in Britain."
(Mark, this is from one of their Priests.) Peter says —“ In these wars,
when the Pope led on his troops to besiege the city of Beziers, he put to
the sword 60,000 persons, among whom were many of his own religion,
the Pope’s legate crying out—“ Kill them all, for the Lord knoweth
them that are His.”
The Queen of Navarre not obeying the Pope’s edict—on the 24th
of August, 1572 ; a few following days, there were slain in Paris and
France 70,000, and in a few years 300,000. Within thirty years were
killed in France 39 princes, 148 counts, 234 barons, 147,518 gentlemen,
and 760,000 persons of inferior rank and life. In England, during the,
time the Pope had power by Mary, after the death of dear Edward YI.
his authorities slew 1 archbishop, 4 bishops, 21 preachers, 86 gentlemen,
84 artificers, 100 husbandmen, 26 wives, 20 widowers, 9 unmarried
women, 2 boys, and 2 infants. In Ireland, in 1641, by the Pope’s
influence, 40,000 were cruelly murdered ; in Scotland, in Holland, in
Germany, in Spain, in Italy, in Portugal, in Poland, in Hungary, in
Bohemia,, and other countries in Europe; and in South America, innu-
merous multitudes have been slain by the claim, exercise, and instigation
of this civil power, so blasphemously assumed by this Vatican Decree.
They justify this slaughter in their comments upon Rev. xvii. 6, in
the Rhemish translation, after this manner—“ Protestants foolishly ex-
pound it of Rome, for that there they put heretics to death, and allow
of their punishment in other countries. But, their blood is not called
the blood of saints, no more than the blood of thieves, mankillers, and
other malefactors, for the shedding of which, by order of justice, no
commonwealth shall answer.” 1. Here then is their own confession of
slaying the millions of Protestants as before shown. 2. Here is the
light in which they view the slaughter, namely—that to slay heretics or
Protestants (such as Her Majesty and her Protestant subjects), is only
the same as killing thieves, mankillers, and malefactors, for which
slaughter of heretics, no commonwealth shall answer. Now let these
Popes, Bishops, and Priests get the commonwealth into their power,
which they are now straining every nerve to do ; then, by this their own
declaration, we heretics, must be executed, as well as murderers. This
is in full agreement with the oath of the Priest—to “ persecute heretics ”
with all his power. In agreement with this, Pope Urban YII. sent the
following bull to his Irish subjects, which endorsed the awful massacre
in 1641.—“ Urbanus Octavius, &c.”—“ Having taken into our considera-
tion the great zeal of the Irish towards propagating the Catholic
faith ; and having got certain notice, how, in imitation of their godly
worthy ancestor, they endeavour by force of arms to deliver their
thralled nation from the oppression of the heretics ; and gallantly do in
them that lieth to extirpate and boldly root out these workers of iniquity,
who in the kingdom of Ireland had infested the mass of Catholic purity
with the pestiferous leaven of their heretical contagion. We, therefore,
being willing with the gifts of those spiritual graces whereof we are
ordained the only disposers on earth, and by virtue of that power of
binding and loosening souls which God was pleased to confer upon us,
to all and everyone of the faithful Christians in the aforesaid kingdom
of Ireland, now, and for the time militating against heretics, do grant a


full and plenary indulgence, and also take remission of all their sin ;
desiring heartily all the faithful in Christ, now in arms, to be partakers
of this precious treasure.—Dated at Rome, in the Vatican of St.
Peter’s Palace, May 25th, 1643, in the 20th year of our Pontificate,
A. M. Moraldus.” See vide Trial of Lord McGuire for high treason.
He also wrote to the rebel O’Neal, Oct. 18th, 1642, and also to the
Popish clergy and nobles of Ireland to the the same effect.
By some computations, those who perished by these cruelties are
made to amount from 150,000 to 200,000 • by the most moderate, and
perhaps the most probable accounts they must have been near 40,000.
—See Hume’s History of England.
Here then is the old thing over again. The Pope by his power
moving to, encouraging in, and pardoning rebellion in a number of
British subjects, whose cry is “ The Pope first, the Queen next,” to rise,
and kill, right and left, man, woman, and child who will not acknowledge
the Pope’s supremacy. If this Vatican Decree did this by Pope
Urban VIII., why not by our present Pius IX. 1 If Dr. Manning and
Dr. Vaughan can get up enough loyalty to the Pope in a sufficient
number of persons, and Pius IX. does not do the same, ho will be unlike
all the Popes for ten centuries past. Yea, more, he will violate his own
titles, decrees, and obligations to his office, and for the first time the
oaths of the priests and bishops will be made void. Is it not right then,
that we should now ask a reason for these thing 1 Why should we ex-
pect the Popes to become what they have never been for ten centuries 1
Why should they now fail to do to us heretics what they have not failed
to do all this time 1 Why should they put down all other heretical
kings, princes and people when they have had the power, and now save
our Queen if they had the power to put her down 1 As by them I am
a heretic, and a loyal subject of one judged by them to be a heretic, I
demand an answer to these questions of a very satisfactory character,
before I can look upon any follower of the Pope as loyal to our Protestant
throne.
These are questions to which our nation and rulers should have
demanded answers before they allowed themselves to be so monstrously
falsified, duped, and deceived by Bishop Doyle in working the Toleration
Act through Parliament in 1829. Never was anything more opposed to
the whole body of Roman dogmas, Roman history, Roman deeds, Roman
Popes, Roman oaths, and Roman bulls, than the representations of this
Bishop Doyle to our statesmen at that time. Never was anything proposed
to man more opposed to truth since the world was made than his most
awful sayings before the English Parliament. As to whether we are right
in supposing that holy Popes and Bishops can go into the field of battle
and blood to execute this decree of infallibility according to their oaths
and titles, let their past history answer this. We have already seen in
the pages of history blood-stained Popes, red in the battle-field with the
blood of our brother heretics. Now take the following as a sample of what
the bishops can do in this art also : —“ King Richard 1., in one of his
battles with the French, took Philip De Dreux, Bishop of Beauvois,
prisoner. The Pope interceded for his liberty in a letter, wherein he
styled the fighting prelate Gris dearly beloved son.’ The King, byway
of answer, sent the bishop’s suit of armour, stained with blood, and


covered with dust, to the Pope, and asked him, ‘ Whether he knew his
son’s coat or not V The Pope was ashamed at the sight, and left the
bishop to Richard’s mercy.”—Toplady, p. 498. Now, if this Roman
bishop could fight so desperately in the Pope’s cause, what is to prevent
Bishops Manning, Cullen, and Vaughan 1 Certainly, almost any old
lady could manage the grand old Archbishop, but the new Dr. would
make a fine general. These prince bishops have been very prevalent in
some Catholic countries. The same writer as last named, on page 509,
gives the following : —“ The late Elector and Bishop of Cologne was par-
ticularly addicted to hunting, and kept a great number of fine horses
and excellent dogs. An intimate friend took the freedom one day to
represent to him, ‘ That it was rather unbecoming a bishop to devote so
much of his time, and affection, and reverence to the sports of the field.’
He replied, e I hunt not as a bishop, but as Prince of Cologne.’ His
friend answered, ‘ but if the Prince should break his neck, what will
become of the Bishop 1 ?’” Thus then, just as the Pope is lord of the
Church, and master of the world, so he makes his bishops chiefs in the
Church, and princes in the earth, and many have fought well to execute
the infallible decree.
As the Popes and their bishops have fought well for it, so have the
priests. The historians who record the massacre in Paris, says—“ While
the horrid scene was transacting, many priests ran about the city with
crucifixes in one hand, and daggers in the other, to encourage the
slaughter.” The effect of this was, as recorded by Thuanus, one of their
own priests—“ The very channels ran down with blood into the river.”
—A. C. T., 141. And when this was done, Pope, bishops, and priests,
all rejoiced together, and sang a special Te Deum in Rome, in their
exuberance of joy. Such then has been the fighting tendencies of the
Church of Rome, to make the Pope “ The master of the universal
world.”
VI.-—Let us now notice the voice of statesmen, and the acts of
Parliaments, which have been passed in different nations against this
Vatican Decree.
In France, volumes of utterances have been poured forth by states-
men, kings, Acts, and writers, against this dreadful decree. The follow-
ing is a small sample of them—“ The Pope hath no title at all in tem-
poral matters in the kingdom of France.” “ The French King doth not
acknowledge any to be his superior in temporal matters.” See a vast
amount of this kind in Dr. Crackenthorpe on “ The Pope’s Temporal
Monarchy.” From this it will be evident there has been a mighty voice
in the parliament and court of France for ages, protesting against the
Pope’s interference with their civil authority. A sample of which Pope
interference we have lately had in their late Emperor’s being sent to war
with Germany, against his will, to his own ruin, and his nation’s sorrow.
Spain has thundered out its national voice, in some of her great
men, for ages past, as followers. “ Supreme jurisdiction remain ever in
the King of Spain himself.” “ The Pope hath no title or authority over
the King of Spain, in temporal matters.” See much more of this kind
by the same author, all which proves the Pope’s assumption of civil
power over them, which brought their late Queen to shame, and Don
Carlos went to his late work of blood, with the Pope’s blessing.


_ The Pope’s demand upon the Queen of Navarre, and her protest
against his daring assumptions, with the sad consequences we have before
stated. The Pope’s claim of India, is stated by Cardinal Bellarmine,
who says—“ The Pope divided the Indies between the Kings of Spain
and Portugal, not to this end, that they should subdue these infidels, and
take their kingdoms unto themselves, but only that they should bring
thither preachers of the Christian faith, and defend them and such
Christians as they converted.”—Carer, and Tho. Boz. cit. cap. 1. p. 22.
This is rather odd that they should have to do all this church and war
work, and the Pope keep the Indies for himself. However, one chief in
India protested, for when one of these priest-preachers opened to this
chief his altar idols, the chief lifted up his hands in great amazement
and exclaimed—“ Ho that is the same as we have always had from our
forefathers, I do protest against our going back to those idols again.”
The Pope’s daring claims to civil authority in England, from the
very beginning of his claim to be “ Lord of lords, and king of kings,”'
until now has been most notorious, and have been most powerfully pro-
tested against from the Conquest until now. The sentence of England’s
noblemen against this assumption of the Pope, have for ages been—
“ Every subject is under the king, but the king himself is subject to
noiie, but only to God.” This has been England’s answer to the Pope ;
and this is England’s answer now. Dr. Crackenthorpe has collected a
vast number of testimonies relative to the protests of our kings, nobles,,
parliaments, and great writers, denouncing the Pope’s interference with
civil power in England.
From the very first Anglo-Saxon doom right up to this day we find
our kings and parliaments in commotion about these Decrees. There are
but few of our kings who have been servile enough to succumb to the
demands of the Pope as King John did. Most of them have been of
the same mind as William the Conqueror, who, in A.D. 1078, re-
plied to Pope Gregory when he sent for money and subjection to his
supreme authority. This king answered, “ One thing I have granted
(money), the other thing I have not granted. Fealty I would not do,,
nor will I, because I neither promised it, neither do I find that my pre-
decessor ever did it to your predecessor.” Here was one of our kings
subject to the Church power of the Pope, but beyond this the Pope
asked for his civil allegiance, which the king refused. Even so now, the
Pope asks the Queen’s submission to him as her bishop ; then he must
Lave her subjection in the civil. Such has been the accumulation of
kingly protests and Parliamentary Acts against the claims of the Popes
and their followers in England, that it took 40 sections in the Act of
Toleration passed in 1829, under George IV., to clear the way in law for
the Pope’s men to return to place and power. And in 1844, under Queen
Victoria, again, to give these subjects of a foreign civil monarch more
place and power in our nation, an Act was passed to make void 22 laws
which had long stood to repel the encroachments of the subjects of the
Pope. Again, in 1846, another Act was passed, to give these foreign
subjects more power still. This Act of 1846 removed or made void 36
standing laws, inade as barriers to these monstrous assumptions of the
Pope and his subjects, who cannot be true subjects of any Protestant
prince. In the Act of 1829, we have forty favours granted to men who*


are sworn to “ persecute and oppose ” all Protestant kings and tlxeir sub-
jects. Well might George 111. say, when that Act was presented to him
to sign, “ Before I would sign that I would lay my head upon the block,
and have it severed from my body.” God save such a king. This
blessed George was not to be deceived by the se pentine falsehoods of a
Bishop Doyle, who gulled the nation afterwards. But these forty favors
of 1829 were not enough. Oh, no ; but as O’Connell said, “We take it
as an instalment.” Therefore, 1844 and 1846 pays him fifty-eight more
golden acts of prevention, made to protect the lives and liberties of Pro-
testant kings and their loyal subjects in England. Ido not pretend to
endorse all contained in these fifty-eight laws, now made void, but this I
will say, they were made to keep back a murderous civil sword from our
kingdom, which had baptised the earth in blood, therefore they were
necessary to that end, for the safety of our Queen and her loyal subjects.
If they were not then necessary, why were they made 1 Every one of
these laws arose out of some awful deed of Rome. For the origin and
existence of these now void fifty-eight laws, Rome has only her own
black deeds to thank. Look at England’s history, and that will tell you
why these fifty-eight laws were made. Holy hearts, hoary heirs in the
way of righteousness, and lips of heavenly truth, like Bishop Philpots,
crying, “ I will pay my vows in thee, 0 Smithfield,” will tell you why
these fifty-eight laws were made. If they were needful then, in what
has the Pope of Rome changed that these barriers against him should be
removed! Has Rome taken away her mandates —“ No faith to be kept
with heretics,” “ No oaths are binding given to heretics,” “ I will to the
utmost of my power persecute and depose heretics ” 1 Has she taken
these obnoxious things away 1 Has she done this V The answer is—
“No !” Then, I say, we do ourselves great harm in opening the flood-
gates to let in their waters of death, which once were like thunder, say-
ing, “ Kill them all, the Lord knoweth them that are his.”
What was the next payment in this instalment-paying to O’Connell!
The opening of every place for the subjects of the Pope in the State,
quite up to the Throne; but there was a cry, and this payment was
stopped. The next order was the removal of the oath for members of
Parliament. This, too, was stopped. But this oath is nothing, as the
Pope has long declared such oaths given to heretics are void. So that
this oath is a sham.
Well, what is the next move of the Pope, after having so many
barriers to his Vatican Decrees moved out of his way 1 This done, he
sends his Brief, “ Given at St. Peter’s, at Rome, under the Fisherman’s
Ring, this 29th day of September, 1850.” In this, his brief, he so far
claims England as to divide it into bishoprics and dioceses, and says,
“ Having, therefore, before our eyes the illustrious examples of our
predecessors, and wishing to emulate it in accordance with the duty of
the Supreme Apostolate, and also giving way to the feelings of our own
heart towards that beloved part of our Lord’s vineyard, we have pur-
posed from the very first commencement of our Pontificate to prosecute
a work so well commenced.”
Now this, with much more like it, may seem very tame and harmless
to an unread person, but to anyone who knows what the Pope’s predecessors
have been, as we have shewn, whom he determines to follow, as he


says—to such a man, rivers of blood, mountains of ashes, and worlds of
tyrants will be set forth in this sentence of the Pope’s brief. It was very
necessary that he, with his bishops, should speak cautiously, because of
the Argus-eyes in the House of Commons, who would scan his brief and
stop his progress. Thus having, by his Church powei’s, taken possession
of England, he thought at least from 1850 to 1870, his Wisemans,
Cullens, Mannings, andYaughans would gain people, parliament, priestly,
lordly, and officer power enough to proclaim his civil and “infallible”
power in the nation. Thus, ready or not ready, the old cannon of
twelve centuries, at which William the Conqueror would not be fright-
ened, is brought out in solemn Council; in 1870 off she goes again ! and
it is a miserable flash of the pan—neither powder nor ball, thunder nor
noise ! The very school boys laugh at this delightful sham. We, too,
are disposed to laugh, in our praises to God, that the old rusty piece has
no more power to kill—no moi’e power to kill! The poor old gunner
in St. Peter’s chair—in which our holy Peter never sat, lias only told us
what he would do if he could but get the power.
Then wherefore weep for England ? What appears
In England’s case to move the Muse to tears ?
Poor England ! thou art a devoted deer,
Beset with every ill but that of fear.
The nations hurt—all mark thee for a prey ;
They swarm around thee, and thou stand’st at bay—
Undaunted still, though wearied and perplexed !
Once Chatham saved thee, but who can save thee next ?
Alas ! tides of pleasure sweep along
All that should be the boast of British song.
’Tis not the wealth that once adord’d thy brow—
The prize of happier times—will serve thee now ;
Our ancestors, a gallant Christian race,
Patterns of every virtue, every grace,
Confess’d a God ; they kneel’d before they fought,
And pi’aised Him in the victories He wrought.
I would say to those whom the Pope now curses and excommuni-
cates in Germany and England, as apostates from belief in his civil
power, by their allegiance to our Queen and the Emperor of Germany—
“ Come clean out from the shadow of this bramble which has torn many
a noble heart.”
Say ye, who put your trust in the shadow
Of a bramble, and reclined
In fancied peace beneath its dangerous branch—
Rejoice in Him and celebrate His sway !
Where find ye passive fortitude ? Whence sprixxgs
Your self-denying zeal, that holds it good
To strike the prickly grievance, and to hang
His thorns with streamers of continual praise ?


Let these loyal hearts leave this bush of thorns, the Pope s civil
power, red with the blood of kings, and let them stand under the shadow
of that monarch who gives civil and religious rights to all. They shall
see—
We, too, are friends of loyalty. We love
The King who loves the law, respects his bounds,
And reigns content within them ; him we serve,
Freely and with delight, who leaves us free ;
But recollecting still that he is man,
We trust him not too far. King though he be,
And King of England too, he may be weak.
He is ours,
To administer, to adorn, to guard the State,
But not to warp or change it. We are his,
To serve him nobly in the common cause,
True to the death, but not to be his slaves.
These are our views of loyalty to our Queen, while we reject,
disdain, and hurl back to Rome the Pope’s decree to rule the land we
love.
There are some most loyal to the Pope in Melbourne, Sydney, and
London, who are bold in rebellion against our English Constitution, and
long for the days of blood to return. These pine for the infallibility to
work as the Pope’s blessing on Don Carlos 3 their language is—
Rebellion is my throne all day, When lawless moles insult the court,
I only wish ’twould come ;
(As who knows but perhaps it may?)
A little nearer home.
Yon roaring boys, who rave and tight,
On ’tother side the Atlantic ;
I always held them in the right,
But more so when most frantic.
That man shall be my toast;
If breaking windows be the sport,
Who bravely breaks the most.
But 0, for him my fancy culls,
The choicest flower she bears ;
Who constitutionally pulls,
Your house about your ears .—Gowper.
Who, I ask, has done this so abundantly in our nation, in Ireland,
in all Europe, as the true subjects of the Pope 1 Who killed the
Lecturer Murphy in England 1 Who commenced the riots in Brisbane ?
and lately in Ireland and America 1 Who shot at Bismarck ? All these
rebels against our free press, free speech, Constitution, have been true
men of the Pope 3 firm believers in his civil power, and Vatican Decrees.
If he commands, they obey 3 if he prohibits, they stop 3 therefore he is
responsible for their deeds.
But, notwithstanding these few elements of one in ten disloyal to
our throne, we have many in the Catholic Church who, not being fob
lowers of the Pope, are truly loyal to our Queen. Millions in Germany
and England are of this kind.
I have endeavoured to keep up all through this lecture the dis-
tinction between members of the Church of Rome, such as Lords Acton
and Camoys, and subjects of the Civil Pope, such as Drs. Manning and
Vaughan. The members of the Church who remain loyal to the Queen
we hail and encourage, hoping in nowise to insult them. The subjects
of the Pope, who are disloyal, we denounce, reprobate, and condemn.
Thus, with all this majority of loyalty, and this insignificant minority of
disloyalty, I am sure we have no reason to fear for the safety of the fine
old Protestant Throne of England. But that which has removed all
apprehensions from my mind for the last twenty years is the fact that I


have believed, and do now believe, the Pope can never have civil power
again after 1866, that being the date when his power to kill should end,
and has ended, and never will again be resumed. He may turn and
re-turn, adjust and re-adjust, this old tenth-century cannon of infallibility
as he pleases, and may charge it with all the curses of the Vatican, and
then put all the matches of the universe to its old rusty touch-hole, but
it will never, never more go off so as to blow another King from his
Throne. Smithfield’s ashes shall no more multiply by the firing of this
bloodstained foul old piece of ii on-hearted cruelty. Nevertheless, let us
not sleep while devils toil, but manfully resist them, the more diligently
for our assurance of success. Let this be our cry and watchword—“ The
Roman Church permit, but no Popery.”
If chains for freedom must he forged,
If England’s Throne must fall;
If any part of our free Isle
The Pope must hold in thrall;
If we must live mean hearted slaves,
Or as brave heroes die,
The God who rules the Universe
Must know the reason why.
If we must wear his yoke,
With bent neck and sunk eye,
Our banners once again must wave
In azure sky.
Put your trust in God, brave boys,
And keep your powder dry,
The God who rules the Universe
Must know the reason why.
God save the Queen, prosper her nation, and abundantly bless this
Colony.
LEE & ROSS, Steam Machine Printers, 231 Castlereagh Street Sydney.
