

THE
CHURCH AND THE PULPIT.
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED AT THE OPENING OF THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
23 RD OCTOBER, 1867.
BY
The Rev. Dr. STEEL,
Moderator of the General Assembly.
Sydney:
JOHN L. SIIERRIFF, 18 WYNYARD SQUARE.
1867.




THE CHURCH AND THE PULPIT.
Fathers and Brethren, —I thank you cordially for the honourable
position to which your kindness and confidence have elected me In
the present circumstances of our Church in this land, when a new and
more aiisjneioi l3 era has been introduced by our recent union, I deem
it an honour to receive the suffrages of respected fathers and Brethren
and to be placed m the Moderator’s chair, lam sensible nainfnllv
sensible—ot some disqualifications for presiding over your deliberations-
and with respect to these infirmities I thus early cast myself upon vour
indigence and help. I trust that the business of this General
Assembly, composed as it is of reverend and learned ministers and wise
and pious elders may be conducted in a manner becoming the prestiac
of our ancestry, the virtues of our office, and the spirit of our Ma ter
In all free assemblies there will be free speech and diversities of opinion
Chimch^f°PV, tS - ? f ,? rder an d administration ; but in an assembly of the
kmd,i and charitj-” °“ S yS ** *° llB tho Bpirit of
The two past years, Fathers and Brethren, have taught us the
advantages and illustrated the happiness of union. Old parties have
passed away, and now interests common to all, have the
cedents” 1 We hav ° f srethrf5 rethr fJ respective of ecclesiastical ante-'
cedents. We have not found any difficulty among our people and not
?^. c 3r y ferd r Uch has forth
T* 10 spirit of union in the larger corporation of the Church has
wwj • ot Q or i fellow p 1 Ps within our Zion. Our Sabbath school
, [ s . in Sydney and its suburbs have formed an association for their
a P™ proVement aild thc morc effective conduct of the schools
instituted’™ CarC ' PPP lu udablo zeal and perseverance they have
instituted courses of lectures for teachers, arranged common lessons for
scholars, and collected statistics of schools—all of which cannot fail to
be beneficial to themselves and to the Church. Young Men’s Mutual
Improvement Societies—now happily connected with almost every
ScSaTPnd Pb alB ° formed a union for their
t d Ghnstian advancement, and for cherishing that ismit
de corps which young men of a Church like ours-so rich with historic
memories and Apostolic glories should always realise. It is interesting


Fathers and Brethren, — Our Clmrcli polity is Apostolical. It
“is founded upon the Word of God, and agreeable thereto, as our
Confession so well states the matter. It is framed upon the practice
of the Apostolic age, while yet inspired men were in the Church to
.rive authority to its doctrines, and accuracy to its history. From
these halcyon days of Christianity our Church derives its constitution.
There we get the principles that regulate all our polity. We admit,
as our Confession does, “ that there are some circumstances concern-
ing the worship of God and the government of the Church, common
to human actions and societies, which are to he ordered by the light
of nature, and Christian prudence, according to the general rulesi ot
theword which are always to be observed.’’ But we also hold “ That
the Scriptural proof of any arrangement or practice having existed
in the Apostolic Churches, ordinarily and prima facie imposes an
obligation on all Churches to adopt it,—an obligation that is impera-
tive and unlimited in regard to all those things which obviously enter
into the substance of the government and worship of the Church, and
the mode in which they are administered.”* In the Scriptures, then,
we read that a church comprehended a society of the people of God,
either in a single congregation, as in the house of Nymphas (Col.
iv 15.), or in a city, as in Jerusalem (Acts xi., 22), where there
were at least eight thousand persons ; or the whole community of a
nation, as in Acts vii., 38, where St. Stephen speaks of “ the Church
in the wilderness,” or all the Christians in the world, as where the
Apostle says (1 Cor., xii., 28) “ God hath set some in the Church;”
or finally all the people of God in heaven and on earth as in Ephes.
v. 25, “ Christ also loved the Chureh.” The word has only one
meaning everywhere, but capable of any extension. In the Scripture
we reacf that the office-bearers of the Church were elected by the people.
Whether it was the election of an Apostle to fill the vacant bishopric
of Judas (Acts i., 23), or of deacons to look after the temporal affairs
of the early Church (Acts vi.), it was unpopular choice. There we
read what will not now be controverted by any scholar, that bishops
and presbyters or ciders were identical . In. the Apostolic. Church, and
in the many references of the inspired epistles to this office there was
no difference between bishop and presbyter. The names expressed
the same office, and are used interchangeably by the sacred writers.
In the New Testament we read that there was a plurality of bishops
or elders in every church, in Ephesus, Philippi, Colosse, Derbe,
Lystra, Iconium, as well as in the larger congregations of the greater
cities. There, too, we read that, ordination to the office of the Ministry
■was an act of the Presbytery , of a plurality of elders. This was pre-
ferred by the Apostles themselves when they were all together in
Jerusalem.—(Acts, vi.) Thus S.S. Paul and Barnabas were ordained
at Antioch.—(Acts, xiii.,3.) Thus Timothy was ordained.—(l Tim., iv.,
14.) And after this model it is most Scriptural to set apart men to
sacred office. There we learn that there was a right of appeal allowed
to members of the Church, or single congregations, from a decision among
themselves, to an assembly of Apostles and elders, as the office-bearers of
the Church. Apostolic dicta pronounced by inspired lips did not settle
» Cunningham’s Historical Theology, voL 1, p. 68.


the controversies of the early Church. The appeal from Antioch was
discussed in an assembly convened for the purpose, and in which the
Apostles were members. The decision was authoritative and final.
The decrees of the Assembly at Jerusalem were binding upon the
Churches of Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, and were received with sub-
mission. _ The Government of the Church was representative, and
final decisions were given by the assembly of bishops or elders.
There, too, we read that supreme power was lodged nowhere else, not
in an Apostle, or a Prince of Apostles, a'President of Assembly, still
less in an earthly potentate—but that the Lord Jesus Christ was the
sole King and Head of the Church. His revealed will was the only stan-
dard, and His officers the only court of appeal in all matters ecclesias-
tical. There was a gradation of judicatories; but the Church was
possessed of an inherent right to settle all spiritual causes. There,
too, we read that there were elders who ruled , as distinct from those who
also laboured in word and doctrine. (1 Tim., v., 17.) They all had
equal status, but not equal functions.
These features of the Apostolic Church are clearly revealed in the
Primitive ideal as represented in the Holy Scriptures, though in
the actual realization, they were speedily obscured by the corrup-
tions which affected Christianity in the Roman Empire. They were
however discerned, and copied with more or less exactness, in the
great Reformation of the sixteenth century, when the Word of God
was recovered from the dust of ages, and perused with all the fresh-
ness of a new discovery. Every national church in Christendom
except the English, and in a very modified degree the Danish and
Swedish, returned in their reform to the general principles of polity as
practised in the Apostolic age. The case of Denmark and Sweden
will not bear argument, aDd the exception of England was an anomaly
caused by the Crown. Lord Macaulay, in his history, states that
“ the English reformers were eager to go as far as their brethren on
the continent.” And he further avers of the Protestant party
in that church that “it cannot be doubted that if the general
sense of that party had been followed, the work of reform would have
been carried on as unsparingly in England as in Scotland.” ('Hist,
vol. 1, p. 50.)
These features of the Apostolical polity have been apparent, with
varied degrees of clearness, in different ages of our Church/ The
election of all office bearers is vested in the people, and even where
patronage has been imposed, as in established Churches, the call of the
people is recognised. Thero is no distinction between Bishop and
Presbyter; and though every church court has its Moderator, he is
primus inter pares. There are several elders in every congregation,
who constitute a governing body in all spiritual affairs. There is the
right of appeal from local presbyters, whose judgment may have been
biassed by party feeling or personal animosities, to a district or pro-
vincial synod, or assembly of elders, duly elected and lawfully con-
vened, whoso decision is held to be final, and subject to no appeal to
co-ordinate courts in the State. This polity protects the rights of the
people on the one hand, and the rights of the members of presbyterv


on the other, .and when properly worked is calculated to preserve the
discipline of the Church, and promote the welfare of the people.
This mode of presbvterial action is specially adapted to a new
country. In some of 'its features it is being followed by all dis-
established churches. Synods are sought by the Episcopal Church in
all places beyond the United Kingdom. The Synod is becoming the
supreme power of that Church to "which all officers are subject. The
Synod is the court of appeal where all grievances of doctrine or dis-
cipline are to be settled. Tim Synod is the free assembly where all
parties can express their sentiments and exercise their suffrages. Con-
gregationalists are gravitating to the same mode of corporate action.
Their writers of highest authority on Ecclesiastical polity such as
Davidson and Stoughton declare that “they are wrong in splitting up
what ought to be one church, the company of believers in modern
towns, into several churches, each with its own pastor, which in their
independent individuality are patches and shreds, often incapable of a
right government, because they have lost sight of the unity and kind of
government existing in the earliest churches.’ ’ * Wesleyan Methodists
have always had certain of these elements, and their difficulties of
administration have chiefly arisen from the rules of a society designed
to be temporary becoming- the laws of a permanent and wide-spread
Church.
In all new countries the Apostolic principles of Church polity have
been proved to be most adapted to the new circumstances. In America
our own Church has advanced from a single Presbytery, with a few
members in the year 1705, to six thousand clergymen at the present
day. Canada has already five hundred Presbyterian clergy, and
Australasia, in less than half a century, and while the pioneer and
father of our colonial Presbyterian Church is still alive and vigorous,
possesses three hundred clergy. Nor are our congregations in bondage,
though bound to the Church and submissive to its laws. Their liberty
is not interfered with in all the minor details of their services or their
finances. So long as they act in harmony with the general principles
of the Church, they are as independent of one another as if they were
unconnected by ecclesiastical ties. More and more it appears that
towards the Apostolical polity of our Church all Protestant churches
are gravitating, and in this we rejoice, not because we expect in
the pre-millennial age an incorporation of all Churches into one, but
because by corporate action freer scope is afforded for the maintenance
and diffusion of truth, and for the exercise of a healthy discipline.
Our Church is Catholic. The spirit of catholicity belongs to its
Apostolical constitution. It is not exclusive. It professes to be a
branch of the Holy Catholic Church. It does not unchurch other
communions not so scriptural in doctrine or so Apostolical in polity
as we profess to be. It does not deny the validity of ordination by
other churches, or attempt to re-ordain those who have been already
set apart to the holy ministry. It does not repeat the sacrament by
which Christians have been initiated into the fellowship of the Church
* Davidson’s Ecclesiastical Polity of the. 2Veto Testament, p. 123 ; Stoughton’s
Ages of Christendom , p. 31.


of Christ. It does not shut its pulpits to the ministers of other
Reformed churches, though it has not been free from occasional bigotry
and exclusiveness, both when established and -when dissenting. It is
not hound by consecrated buildings or by a clergy supposed to pos-
sess a transmissive virtue in their ordination which belongs to no one
else, from holding intercourse with ministers and members of other
branches of the Church. It has had its seasons of defection and of
unfaithfulness, as all others have had; but it has never sanctioned as
a principle that which cuts it off from the Communion of saints who
worship in other forms, and listen to other and somewhat differently-
appointed teachers. It has recognised and encouraged the fellowship
of all the Reformed churches, and has permitted its candidates for the
ministry to frequent the universities and theological halls of Protes-
tant Christendom. It claims to be a branch of the Holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church, and lifts up its testimony to the Word of God both
in doctrine and polity, but holds out the hand of Christian fellowship
to all “ who in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our
Lord—both theirs and ours.’’ And we hope and pray for the return
of all other branches of the one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church
to similar principles and the exercise of similar reciprocal charity.
Fathers and Brethren, —There are two other points to which I
would also advert, as they are the glories of our Zion.
1. The intelligent unity of doctrine believed by all Anglo-Saxon
Presbyterian Churches. Amidst the separations which have been tem-
porarily occasioned in the application of questions of our polity to
relations to the State, there has been unbroken unity in the faith. The
Confession of Faith has been the standard of all. But it is no mere
bond of peace. It is a bona fide creed. There has never been a debate
as to its doctrinal meaning. It has never been questioned whether
the clergy might hold opposite sentiments on doctrinal points.
Hypocrisy might occasion, and unfaithfulness might tolerate doctrinal
variations, but these have been rare anomalies, and never an acknow-
ledged boast. Any man teaching any divergence from the common
creed would forfeit his office. That creed may be more definite and
even more minute than those of other communions, but it has been
rarely belied or outraged, and never glossed over by other documentary
standards or liturgical forms.
The constitution of the Church, and the free exercise of Christian
rights, and the open character of all ecclesiastical courts, have prevented
the imposition of a creed that was not believed, and the toleration of
error that was openly acknowledged, or capable of being proved against
any preacher. The doctrine of all our clergy must, like the virtue of
Caesar’s wife, be above suspicion. Our people have a guarantee that
their preachers will not follow any doctrine contrary to the gram-
matical meaning of the Confession. All who receive the imprimatur of
the Presbytery are orthodox divines.
2. The paramount importance of preaching is another glory of our
Church. Our Church does not depend upon gorgeous ceremonies or
prescribed liturgies or a lordly hierarchy for its influence over the
people, but upon its office of preaching,—the exercise of Scriptural
instruction. This was the great feature of the Apostolic Church. The


Founder of Christianity was a preacher. Its first apostles went every-
where preaching the Word. Christianity owes its greatest social
influence to the pulpit. It was a new thing for the chief officers of a
religion to instruct the common people ; hut this was the glory of the
early Evangelists. It was also the means of their wondrous success.
It was thus they overthrew the old religion of the Roman Empire, and
the social vices of so many nations in one of the most lax eras of the
world. The schools of philosophy might he for the select, and the
manuscript rolls of learning for the wealthy or the leisurely,
hut the pulpit was the new birthright of the Christian people. It
wrought the Reformation of the sixteenth century. Luther, Zwingle,
Latimer, Calvin, and Knox, and their illustrious fellow-labourers, were
all eminent as preachers. So were the Puritans who left their mark
so deep upon the thought of their age and of succeeding time. So were
Whitfield and Wesley, and those who were with them in the great
revival of the eighteenth century. So were the fathers of the Presby-
terian Church in all the ages of its history. There may have been
some want of attention to the devotional part of our service of public
worship ; but it has not been a want of length or of comprehension.
The piety of the Church has been graduated by the tone of the
preaching; and though not so much of Scripture has been read in
public worship as in some other communions, the people have been
more enlightened in the Scriptures, because the Word of God has been
more consecutively expounded. In some religious systems public
worship is almost entirely composed of praise, prayer, and reading the
Scripture. It is the general tendency of liturgical services to enhance
prayer at the expense of preaching. But the public instruction of the
people is most necessary in order to make the common prayer intelli-
gible. According to the character of the preaching so is the intelligent
piety of the people. The Prayer Boob, though in constant use, did
not keep England from spiritual decline in the eighteenth century,
when the tone of preaching fell. But the revived preaching made the
common prayer better understood and more appreciated. At the
present day different congregations or parishes show an interest in the
liturgical service common to them both, just in proportion to the
intelligent acquaintance with Divine truth by preaching. The only
explanation of the difference is the varied character of the public
instruction. “ Faith cometh by hearing.” “ And how can they hear
without a preacher * “ The Spirit of God blesseth the reading, but
especially the preaching of the Word.” f Our Ohurch has recognised
this apostolic view—the dependence of the people upon the preacher,
and has sought to provide able ministers of the Word of God to expound
saving truth to their congregations. If we have not preachers of ability
we cannot keep our people. There are no other adventitious aids by
which congregations will be sustained. They depend upon the minister
alike for the public prayer as for the sermon, and therefore require men
of high spiritual character, and of intellectual gifts and popular adapta-
tion. It has ever been a glory of our Zion to possess an educated
ministry. It may not have had splendid sinecures for the encourage-
* Rom X. 17, 14.
+ Catechism of Westminster Assembly, 89.


ment of learned leisure, and the production of the highest scholarship ;
hut it has a provision for an educated ministry. It could never
he said of it that as many as one-third of its annual ordinations
were of non-academic men who had never passed through au University.
It could never he said that either one-fifth, or a tenth, or indeed any
proportion of its clergy had not studied theology. The smallest and
the poorest of Presbyterian churches has been as_ much distinguished
for the academic and theological training of its ministers, as those who
had the dignity of an establishment and the emolument of the State.
This eminence, Fathers and Brethren, you have also resolved to sustain
in this land by the emphatic decision of last General Assembly :to
establish a college within the University of Sydney. Academic train-
ing does not necessarily make preachers, hut the want of it will] he
less likely to prepare them. It is always a lamentable sign of the
times when University candidates for the ministry are few, and when
a Church, with facilities for learning, ordains to the ministry a large
proportion of non-academic men. This age of advanced enlighten-
ment and popular instruction cannot afford to do without cultivated
intelligence as well as piety in the pulpit. “If God has no need
for learning,” said the caustic South, “he can have less of our
ignorance.’’
The pulpit of our time is in different circumstances from those it
has ever before experienced. The Press has been gaining, while the
pulpit has been losing popular power. This has not been because the
press has usurped the place of the pulpit, for it'rarely writes on religion,
but because it has sustained its work with more ability, with better
adaptation to the wants of the people, and with more equitable rewards
for the talent enlisted in its service. Accustomed to read well-written,
intellectual, and instructive papers, periodicals, and hooks, whose style
captivates, whose themes interest, and whose thoughts enlighten and
elevate, people cease to admire and listen to preachers of feeble mind,
or of listless manner. It is also not to he denied that much of the
preaching is too academic and dry, and too weak and coarse. Clerical
education has lacked an element which brings the religious teacher into
sympathy with the common people, and has paid too little attention to
the art of speaking, which is ever an effective aid to popular instruction.
People complain that they hear only good men, who do not command
their attention or stimulate their thought. Religious truth has been
uttered in technical phrases borrowed from an age long gone by, and
unfamiliar to the ear. “Divinity,” said the late Mr. Isaac Taylor,
whom it was sometimes my happiness to hear while he expatiated to
select friends on this subject,—“ Divinity fills up her weekly hour by
the grave and gentle excitement of an orthodox discourse, or by toiling
through her narrow round of systematic dogmas, or by creeping along
some low level of school-boy morality, or by addressing the initiated in
mystic phraseology, hut it has ceased to employ such lips as those of
Chrysostom and Bourdaloue.” Preachers have been prone to underrate
the capacity of their hearers, and by failing to address them in per-
spicuous language, have lost that hold of the public mind, which in tho
hands of a thoughtful, energetic,and earnest preacher, makes the pulpit
a mighty lever of spiritual and social elevation with which to bless man-


kind. The pulpit needs higher intellect. The theme with which it is
occupied is worthy of the noblest thought—has tho loftiest
elevation and the most extensive range, and grasps the two eternities
of the past and the future with the grand area that lies between them.
It has the most varied topics of Creation, Providence, and Redemption
in all their relations to the welfare and condition of man, and to man
as related to God. It has a text book made to hand within whose
ample revelation there is store for suggesting, illustrating, and applying
instructive truth. It has abundant scope for argument, invention,
persuasion, and appeal in discoursing upon the doctrines and duties
revealed in Scripture. It has the purest motives and the most sacred
interests to urge to the faithful discharge of its office. It has radiant
promises to encourage large success. It has dread anathemas to
discourage unfaithfulness. But it must possess a higher intelligence,
a warmer sympathy and more intense earnestness to make it effective.
This is an age of active thought. Its intelligence sees clearly and
is capable of apprehending close and pointed argument; but it will not
wait for prolixity and circumlocution. It has cultivation to appreciate
the beauties of style and the graces of eloquence; but its every day
experience is against the affected and the histrionic, “ the start and
stare theatric” in the Christian pulpit. Its earnestness in worldliness
can recognise and estimate the burning zeal of the preacher on other-
worldliness ; but a boisterous oratory, or even a graceful utterance,
will not atone for want of intellect. Light and love, intellect and
heart, attributes so eminently characteristic of God, must adorn those
who, in the name of God, address their fellow-men. Greater light
must come from earnest study of Divine truth—of the oracles of God,
and greater love from the baptism of fire bestowed by the Holv Ghost!
But preaching must also be adapted to the age and to the circum-
stances of the people. The great theme is never to be lost sight of
the preaching of Christ crucified; but the treatment of this themo
need not be cast in the mould of extinct controversies, or antiquated
technicalities. Every age has its peculiar necessities, and the Bible
is a book for all time and for all people. The saving doctrines of the
Scriptures are to be applied to the common life of men, to the business
and to the pleasures of the world. The pulpit has been in danger of
separation from the common occupations and thoughts of men, and
has been regarded as belonging only to sacred days and holy places.
This must not be allowed. The morals of money, of business, and of
trade must have their place in the pulpit, and bo freely and fully
discussed, and faithfully applied to the conscience. Society needs
instruction on these points. In an age like the present, when
business, politics, and pleasures are so earnestly cnltivated, and when
there are so many temptations arising from these pursuits to disturb
the equilibrium of a good conscience, it is of the greatest consequence
that those who occupy the pulpit should endeavour with solid thought,
fresh and striking illustration, elegant, and above all earnest address
to interest their congregations in the truth, and to adorn the doctrine
of God their Saviour in all things. Religion is the wholesome leaven
of life, of liberty, business, politics, and pleasure, and tho want of it is
a miserable preparation for the duties and temptations of every day


experience. The influence of the pulpit cannot fail to be great when
the doctrines of the Gospel are earnestly and practically enforced; hut
in order that the present age may be rightly. and profitably, taught,
there must be in the preacher thought as solid and suggestive, elo-
quence as brilliant and attractive, as are found among lawyers and
politicians; point as precise, sagacity as keen, labour as untiring,, as
are evinced by men of business ; zest as fresh and stimulus as exciting
as are manifested by persons in pursuit of pleasure, accompanied with
a solemnity and an earnestness calculated to impress with thoughtful-
ness, and awaken to spiritual concern, and to bring under the power of
the Gospel the busy who throng our exchanges, our offices, and our
trades, or who hold pastoral and agricultural areas, and the leisurely
who seek the excitement of theatres and of balls, of the racecourse or
the regatta.
The great social sins which abound are fitting themes for pulpit dis-
quisitions. The preacher can influence public, sentiment. on these
points. He has peculiar vantage ground for doing this with, effect.
He can choose his own texts, and has great license of all topics that
directly or inferentially flow from the sacred writings. And when,
from strong personal conviction and ardent zeal for the public welfare
he uses his high prerogative to refer to prevailing sins, his words
carry weight, and become the seeds of social reforms. The pulpit has
much in its power, and it must not shrink from its duty to address
people on the vices that sap the foundations of public morals and neu-
tralise so much of religious effort to do good. The social evil, the
immoralities of trade', the vice of drunkenness, the relation of em-
ployer to employed, ought occasionally to be reasoned out in the
pulpit, and Christian truth pressed upon the consciences of men.
Preachers must he in earnest , and let their earnestness be manifest. With
a theme so divine and interests so momentous, he must be in earnest
who isan ambassador of Christ—whp pleads withmento bo reconciled to
God—who counsels, reproves, rebukes, exhorts, that “ the man of God
may be throughly furnished unto all good works.’ This is demanded
by the nature of the work —preaching the Gospel—by the necessities
of men as perishing sinners, and by the object aimed at—to save souls.
“ Now,’’ says the late Angell James, “ this is earnestness in preach-
ing, when it is evident to the hearer that the preacher feels the truth
he discourses —when it is manifest to all that he believes what ho says,
in affirming that his hearers are sinking into perdition, and that he is
labouring to persuade them to forsake their evil courses; when his
sermons are full of close pointed personal addresses, when, in short,
through the whole discourse the preacher is seen moving onward from
the understanding to a closer and closer approximation to the heart
in the conclusion, and the hearer feels at length the hand of the
preacher seizing him with a mysterious and resistless power and hear-
ing him away, almost whether he will or no, to Christ, salvation, and
heaven.”*
The pulpit , to be effective, must be sustained by the godliness and con-
sistency of ministerial life. None can be effective for good in the
* An Earnest Ministry the Want of the Times, p. 100.


Sonll 'Z'' 1 a T? °J Ood - if »« d » not possess and sustain
SC the U S} * f , %¥. by the faith of Christ"
uispiay the spirit of Christ, cultivate charity in sneech and
sustain a consistency in all his ’-Our
th P e erS nSit’’ That 1S the 7 raains ? of all our PoSS
P, ■ P l *’ That can only exist by union to Christ
and c an oniy ad by congt!mt Commu J on wit J Christ An
Ms words 6 ’ 1 AsMiccn r - ? r T by hia dail y life wb at he declares by
h?3l with a sacred .calling, we are surrounded by
fnr “ to bo godly; as believers in Christ, we have all facilities
SL 1 Z S C+Z bCrS i niS^ od f ; are “P“ fed bo example, of
damoo-xV a t h ’ W J are bound to keep up our spiritual tone. More
country in r COnsistencies of ministers in a new
ntry than can well be told. It is a reproach not easily wiped out
Sd wtf 6nCe n ,° readi] y removed - Ib a license to S sinner*
people Ph ™t°- re PlX ’ aS in a new land > makes worldly
in th°e®Ch SS wS ™TIoV , “ k<> “ P ° Wer S ° od
sodofrmmmetfen I’ “telligent, earnest, and consistent preacher,
SSS milhfl i -TS H « “'ey not be brilliant ii
genius, or mighty m intellect; but when to a clear and fervent in.
structmn in the pulpit ho adds the “rhetoric of his life,” in consistent
and d a btnefe P hllau * brop!c efforts, he becomes a father to his people
?o nd s?n be htt r C °^ y ,'-J hG P resence of such a man is a reproof
form a B °* le dlfficulti es; his labours elevate and re-
C™r> InThi fI H ? 18 t lw T. the P rea cher—“ an illuminated
men Hlhvl in « ar !- Sll T g 6 P istles known and read of all
tears he i! w 8 ! ? 5® a®® o * loll and respect of his people ; amidst their
SSant witSTbe d ? an h ° n ? ul ’ able burial sbe leaves a memory
tekfs Vs th th i° d works and alms deeds which he did, and finally
takes his place m the immortal sphere where they who turn many to
righteousness shine as the stars for ever and ever.
in f reat Head of the C burch abundantly bless all His servants
ir- o • 7. a mong us, and raise up others richly endowed with
pSpiT P o?Au°stm S lia arSe hlgh ° ffiCe of ambassadors fo r Christ in the


Extracts from address at the close of the Assembly , Nov. ls£, 1867.
JVe need an Evangelical revival. Tho baptism of the Holy Ghost s is
the reviving of the Church. It makes the ministry of the Word
effectual for the conversion of souls and the edification of the people
of God. An Australian Revival is yet to be; hut that alone can give
a national character to our common Christianity. That alone can
merge into harmony the various elements of whiuh our Church is
composed, and call forth into energy the spiritual experience of the
people. Religion is subject to all the ordinary influences that affect a
people. Our colonial climate, scenery, society, and customs all affect
our religion ; but a Colonial Revival would bring out a type of Chris-
tian faith and life that would meet all our wants and give a peculiar
feature to our colonial piety. Every country has had its religious
epochs and its special Pentecosts. America has been saved by reason
of the special revivals with which it has been favoured. Overrun by
the vast hordes of emigrants from the old world—people who have
been loosed from old associations, and it may he not much under
religious impressions—America would have been sunk by the human
deluge of ungodliness. But the spasmodic revivals of religion, so
unlike the experience of any other country in Christendom, have
been, under Providence, the means of gathering into the fold of
Christ many thousand souls of different origin, training, and habits.
These have awakened a vast amount of life, and have given a phase to
American piety characterised by the energy, the activity, and the
power of developement peculiar to the American people. We want an
Australian Revival—a special season of spiritual awakening, which
will give a new tone and character to our religion. We need it for
tho conversion of many ungodly that are among us. There is a
large number who neglect the means of grace, who live without
personal concern in the great salvation, who, free from re-
straints, go deeper into sin than they would do at home.
For the conversion of the ungodly let us pray and preach. Let this be
a great feature in our ministry. Let us act as ambassadors of Christ,
“ as though God did beseech men by us, let us pray them in Christ’s
stead ; be ye reconciled to God.” Hear what Richard Baxter says of
this “ Methinks as Paul’s spirit was stirred within him when he saw
the Athenians wholly given to idolatry, so it should cast us into one of
the paroxysms to see so many men in the greatest danger of being ever-
lastingly undone. Methinks if by faith we did indeed look upon
them as within a step of hell, it would more effectually untie our
tongue than Croesus’s danger did his son’s. He that will let a sinner
go down to hell for want of speaking to him, doth set less by souls
than did the Redeemer of souls, and less by his neighbour than
common charity will allow him to do by his greatest enemy. O there-
fore, brethren/whomsoever you neglect, neglect not the most miserable!
Whomsoever you pass over, forget not poor souls that are under the
condemnation and curse of the law, and who may look every hour for
the infernal execution, if a speedy change do not prevent it. O call
after the impenitent, and ply this great work of converting souls,
whatever else you leave undone.’’ These are weighty words, fathers
and brethren, and call us to this work—preaching to the unregenerate.


We need the revival of spiritual life among our people. It is at present
of too low and feeble a type. A time of refreshing would give a higher
spiritual life to Christian people. It would raise the tone of piety and
develop in all their liveliness and activity the graces of Christian
character. It would be like a second conversion—and agreat spiritual
enlargement. It would enhance our interest in the means of grace, in
the exercise of prayer, and devout meditation. It would keep us happy
m the renewed sense of Divine forgiveness, and in the consciousness of
the love of God by the indwelling of the Holy Ghost. It would
elevate our views, expand our hopes, and give a fairer character to our
Christian profession. Fathers and brethren, let us aim at this, and
seek to cultivate a higher Christian life among our people. Let us set
Christ before them as the model of their life as well as their Saviour
that by beholding Him they may be changed into the same image from
glory to glory as by the Spirit of the Lord.
“ Like the stained garment, whiten in the sun—
. . Grow pure by being purely shone upon.”
Mevivcd evangelical life will develope evangelistic enterprise. The experience
of a high evangelical li r e is the great school for producing noble
illustrations of Christian character, in the exercise of all the beautiful
and benevolent graces with which God’s Spirit can endow it. It
draws forth the missionary energies of the Church. It has always
done so m proportion to attainment and experience of the grace of God.
I he more intense the evangelical sentiment, so has been the evangelical
spirit. The saved think immediately of the imperilled.’' The slave
who has tasted the air of freedom, longs for his enslaved fellows to be
tree. Ino healed commend the balm that has restored their health
So the eye of a sinner, delivered from the curse, looks with great
compassion on the world lying in the wicked one, and his loosened
tongue tells of redeeming love. The fuller joy experienced in a re-
newal of spiritual life leads to enlarged effort to extend the Gospel.
In the Church's youth, when its views were bright and its love fervent
a missionary spirit breathed through all the brethren. So has it ever
been since Tne evangelical revival of the early part of this century
pressed all our great missionary societies into beino-. Carey and
Morrison, Moffat and Williams, Martyn and Duff all came
torth from the Pentecost of that period. A revived life in the
American Church has sent its missionaries everywhere preaching the
Word. It would do so in Australia, and among ourselves. It would
display in clearer light the great Providence of God in bringing
Anglo-Saxon Christianity to this southern land, that we might be
heralds of the Cross in the Islands of the vast Pacific, and it may be
m the million-peopled cities of China. We have great facilities. We
have the Word of God provided in so many of the tongues of men.
We have the printing-press. We have a mercantile marine that
crosses all seas, and we have missionary ships that can carry mission-
aries of the Cross to their scenes of labour. We have a British llag
that ensures protection and respect to our missionaries all over the
world. We have the means to sustain labourers in the high places of
field. Wo have the promise of the Holy Ghost to bless
the Woid of his Holy Gospel. But we want the revived piety to call
forth the men to be our own Evangelists. “ God be merciful to us and
bless us, and cause His face to shine upon us, that Thy way mav be
known in the earth, Thy saving health among all nations.” Amen.




NEW BOOK BY THE REV. DR. STEEL.
Just Published, post 8vo, cloth. Price 3s. ; by post, 3s. 9d.
THE CHRISTIAN TEACHER IN SUNDAY SCHOOLS.
BY
The REV. DR. STEED,
Author of “Doing Good,” “Dives Made Sublime,” &c.
CONTENTS
THE TEACHER.
THE TEACHER’S COMMISSION.
THE TEACHER’S LIFE.
THE TEACHER’S KNOWLEDGE.
THE TEACHER’S LIBRARY.
THE TEACHER’S COLLEGE.
THE TEACHER’S SABBATH.
THE TEACHER’S CLASS.
THE TEACHER’S ADAPTATION.
THE teacher’s catechizing.
THE TEACHEII’S EVANGELIZING.
THE TEACHER’S VISITING.
THE TEACHER’S PRAYING.
THE TEACHER’S CHOIR.
THE TEACHER’S MEMORARILIA.
THE TEACHER’S MOTIVE.
THE TEACHER’S MODEL.
THE TEACHER’S REWARD.
“ This is a book worthy of all commendation. It is full of sound advice and
♦meouragement; and these are given in a pleasant manner, and well illustrated by
numerous pertinent examples from the lives of the good, and many wise suggestions
from the books of the thoughtful. It should be in the hands of every Sabbath-
school teacher; and, in fact, every church would act wisely if it were to procure a
number of copies for its special use, and whenever a young man or a young woman
engaged in Sabbath-school teaching, a copy pf this work were placed in his or her
hand.”— The Museum and English Journal of Education.
“Wo gladly commend to our fellow-teachers this excellent volume, which we
consider one of the most valuable contributions made for many years to the Sabbath-
school Teacher’s Library.”— Children's Record of the Free Church of Scotland.
Sglmcg:
JOHN L. SHERRIFF, 18 WYNYARD SQUARE.
