

THE HAND.
BY
TOM CRINGLE.
"As is the mind so is the form."
Melbourne:
STILLWELL & KNIGHT, PRINTERS,
78, COLLINS STREET EAST.
1867.




THE HAND.
I.
“ As is the mind so is the form.”
The attributes ascribed to the human
hand by many learned men has been a subject
so little studied by the masses of civilised society
that I propose to give two or three papers on this
instructive and interesting subject; the more
so, as I find that the science of chironomy
has an inexhaustible charm for those to whom
the subject is new; and from personal ex-
perience I know that not one in a thousand
is acquainted with the bare existence of the
science.
What Lavater has done for physiognomy
many learned men have done for chironomy,
and its sister art chiromancy. Let not the
reader smile at the mention of the old
gipsy art of palmistry, which is conveyed in
the latter term, for it is “as old as the
hills,” and has for its first expositor no less a
person than J ob, who says, “In the hand of all
the sons of men God places marks, that all the
sons of men may know their own works”*
Anaxagoras also taught the science (428 8.c.) ;
and the reader has only to visit the splendid
statuary room in our Public Library (which
Victoria has reason to be proud of) to see
that the best artists of ancient Greece adopted
and applied both these truths with undeviating
fidelity. Nowhere do we find the elemental
hand attached to their gods, heroes, statuaries,
rhetoricians, law-givers, or poets. All have
portrayed in their hands and fingers the true
type of their mental excellencies.
Among the foremost in the rank of
chironomists stands Bell (who may be
called the great physiologist of this school),
Dr. Carus, M. D’Arpentigny, M. Desbar-
rolles, and later, Mr. Biehard Beamish,
8.8.5., &c. These stand as the principal ex-
positors of chironomy; whilst MM, D’Arpen-
tigny and Desbarrolles are the great ex-
pounders of the more mystic art of chiromancy,
which they combine with chironomy into
one finished code of deductive reasoning. I
shall have occasion to quote largely from the
foregoing authors, as I merely deal with this
subject with a view of attracting more attention
to it by the general reader, than with any
assumed pretension to teach new facts. It is
a subject which will well repay study, espe-
cially to those engaged in business transactions
and the employment of artistic and manual
labour, as “ by their (hands) shall ye know
them,” which will reveal the quality and bent
of their capacity. With these preliminary
remarks, I will now proceed to give a few of
the most striking particulars relating to the
Hand.
Who amongst hand-shakers has escaped the
infliction of finding within his grasp the cold,
fishy hand, which, when released from, we
furtively wipe away the disagreeable feeling
its contact has produced ? Thus, Dr. Carus
observes—“ While the fingers, by virtue of the
fineness of their touch and the delicacy of
their movements, are the instruments of in-
tellectual life, the palm may be taken as the
evidence of animal life. There the blood accu-
mulates, and there will be found the most un-
equivocal evidence of the undue action of the
vital fluid. Fever, consumption, and the
various inflammatory diseases, are there mani-
fested. While the warm, silky, well-coloured
palm is the sure index of youth, health, and
sensibility; the dry, meagre, hard palm is the
symbol of inertness, insensibility, and rudeness.
It is the palm, also, where peculiar sensations
are felt under the influence of magnetism, and
where the warmest feelings of affection find
their inarticulate expression.” When the
palm, is thick and hard, it indicates a prepon-
derance of the animal instincts ; when thick
and supple, egotism and sensuality. If pro-
portioned to the fingers, but hard and non-
elastic, it is the index of laborious stolidity;
hard but elastic, laborious activity; if soft,
indolence and tranquil enjoyment; flexible, an
appreciation of pleasures derived from the
senses; elastic, activity of the mental faculties;
hollow and firm, mental vigour. The hard
hand may experience a strong feeling of attach-
ment, but exhibits little tenderness ; while the
soft may exhibit tenderness]with only moderate
attachment. Two individuals endowed with
similar intellectual qualities, but differing in
the development of their palms, will produce
* Chaldean Bible Version. XXXVIII. chap., 7th
verse. *


widely different results ; hence the importance
of determining with accuracy the true type
and character of the palm. Of the elementary
hand it forms the chief portion, combined
with fingers short and thick. These are the
world’s “ hewers of wood and drawers of
water.”
The Eingers.—The tips of these are divided
into four classes—spatulous or spread out,
square, oval, and pointed. Some fingers are
seen to be quite smooth, others have enlarged
joints, termed knots; some are flat in section,
others round; some with spread out or spatu-
lous ends, others square, conical, or pointed.
In the smooth fingers, M. D’Arpentigny re-
cognises the “symbols of inspiration, intui-
tion, passion; in the knotty fingers, those
of induction, order, and arrangement.” If
the upper or first joint be thus distinctly
provided with a knot, it is said to be the index
of doubt, independence of thought, and of
self-confidence, with an aptitude for the exact
sciences, and is therefore termed the
philosophical knot. But this term can only
apply where the hand is generally well de-
veloped, as in an ordinary or feeble hand this
knot must be viewed as the index of a mind
prone to indulge in petty distinctions, discon-
tent, unrest, and in that simplest of all in-
tellectual occupations, fault-finding.
The full middle joint marks an appreciation
of physical order, and a desire to adapt the
pai’ts to the whole. It will be obvious, there-
fore, that the mode in which knowledge would
be sought by the smooth and knotty finger
must differ totally. Impulse and intuition
would guide the one ; analysis and induction
the other. Mr. Beamish forcibly illustrates
this theory by observing that the English
hand is generally of the knotty type; and we
find that the inductive philosophy of Bacon
met a ready reception in the English mind,
and that it has well-nigh superseded the
deductive method of Aristotle. The same
writer further says : —“ Had not Kepler pro-
pounded the laws of the universe, and disclosed
the basis of the great principle of gravitation,
would Newton have seized the fact ? And yet
Kepler admitted that the existence of those laws,
to which his name is indelibly attached, was a
guess—the effort of his imagination. With
his soul he grasped the glorious truth; by
intuition he developed it.”
Space will only admit of touching on the
several forms or types of fingers. Thus the
spatulous indicates corporeal agitation, loco-
motion, and manual occupation—a love for the
industrial and mechanical arts ; it also indi-
cates constancy in pursuit and in affection,
admits of no feeling for the higher philoso-
phical and metaphysical sciences, no love for
spiritual poetry, nor for anything connected
with the world of speculation. The square
form of the ends of fingers is the index of
precedent, custom, and routine; but whilst
these characteristics, when carried to excess,
form the agents which starred our troops in
the Crimea, yet the same square type has a
love of the moral, political, and social sciences,
of didactic, analytic, and dramatic poetry, of
grammar, geometry, metre, rhythm, symmetry,
and arrangement —in a word, for art defined.
Whilst we inherit this type from our law-
abiding Norman ancestors we derive the
spatulous form from our quiet-loving Saxon
and industrious Dane.
Beamish illustrates the inherent adhesion to
custom of the square type by instancing the
form of the caps worn by the Norman women
to this day. “They are,” he says, “ precisely
similar to those found traced on the oldest
tombstones, and to those worn by the wife of
William the Conquerer, and the ladies of her
court.”
Widely opposed to the habits of thought and
of feeling represented by the spatulous and
square finger, are those represented by the
conical and pointed fingers.
Labour, for its own sake, regularity and social
order (indexes of the square type), now give place
to insouciance and contemplation, a predisposi-
tion to enthusiasm and personal indepen-
dence. The artist now takes precedence of the
artisan. Sculpture, monumental architecture,
poetry, painting, and song, find in the conical
fingers their votaries—the beautiful and roman-
tic their worshippers. It is no doubt due to the
predonderating Irish element in our govern-
ing councils that Melbourne is indebted to
and distinguished for her princely public
institutions, her Museum, magnificent Public
Library, replete with all the elements of art,
taste, and knowledge, her cathedrals, churches,
hospitals, Parliament-house, colleges, and a
Post-office so rich in its dimensions and bold
architecture as to rank far above St. Martin’s-
le-Grand. Then we have also our botanical
and promenade gardens, parks, and other
places for public recreation and enjoyment,
suitable to a first-class European city. In
these we have speaking evidence of a people
endowed with a fine instinct for the beautiful
in art and architecture. But the unfinished
state of the exterior of many of the buildings
named shows also an impulsiveness which
launches into expenses without reckoning
cost in order to satisfy its love of the beautiful
in these refining adjuncts to a great com-
mercial city. I also ascribe our great number
of holidays to the large proportion of the
Irish element in our population —to
the conical or pointed finger. All our
public buildings show taste and ability;
but at the same time we notice the
absence of the square finger in their
wide-spread isolation and want of arrangement,


which the latter would have secured. The
pointed finger, in its lavish love of art and
architecture, ignored docks for our shipping
and abundance of pure water for our popula-
tion until these primal and paramount neces-
sities became imperative, and forced themselve
into recognition.
Beamish says:—“ The contrast which is pre
sented by the different nations of Europe, a
regards art and its digital index, is as strikinj
as it is unequivocal. In the north, where th
spatulous and square fingers prevail, the artis i
is supplanted by the artisan. In the south
where the smooth and conical fingers abound,
the artisan gives place to the artist. Englanc
and Northern Germany furnish few vocalists
of the first class; they are found only in Italy
and Spain, where song would seem to form
part of the existence of the people. The
same would assuredly be said of Ireland, hac
the circumstances of the country have per-
mitted of its cultivation.” Who can deny
beauty and exquisite pathos to Irish song ?
There are few who will dispute the following
observations from D’Arpentigny, who says
that “ Everywhere the Protestants, as a
people, excel the Homan Catholics, as a
people, in the mechanical arts, and are ex-
celled again by the Homan Catholics, as a
people, in the fine arts, not because they are
Protestants, as some are disposed to think, but
because of their peculiar organisation. In
Italy, France, Spain,-and Ireland, Catholicism,
with its grand religious ceremonies, with its
mysteries, with its poetry, and its art, retains
its hold upon the conical type; while in Eng-
land, North Germany, and Holland, where the
spatulous and square forms abound, with their
restless action and rigorous logic, Protestant-
ism prevails.”
Here is another passage by the same writer
equally striking, where he illustrates the dis-
tinctive tendencies of these different develop-
ments. He calls attention to the fact that in
Germany, where the Protestants and Homan
Catholics are both numerous, and where the
poetic faculty finds its fullest development, “ all
the scripture poets —those who clothed their
ideas in language—who have attained to ex-
cellence were Protestants, as Klopstock, Wie-
land, Korner,Uhland, Herder, Goethe, Schiller,
and Jean Paul Richter ; while ail the musical
poets were Homan Catholics, as Haydn,
Beethoven, Mozart, Weber, and Kreutzer; the
exceptions are Meyerbeer and Mendelssohn,
both of Jewish extraction.”
From the foregoing facts and deductions it
would seem that the impulsiveness and enthu-
siasm represented by the smooth conical fingers
will reject any form of worship which is limited
to a cold intellectual expression, and fully
explains the attachment of the Irish to
the more ceremonial and poetic Eoma
Catholic form of worship. Viewed throug
this light, how futile and destructive has been
the Protestant efforts to win Ireland over to
form of religion totally opposed to its natura
instincts. We witness the same want o
success among the Hindoos, who have the same
type of finger. The only proselytes gained to
the Christian fold are a few of the low caste
poor of the south of India ; the great bulk o
the people hold fast to the mysticism and ex-
travagant idealities of their own creed—
creed which everywhere combines in its dogma
power, magnificence, and awful denunciations
Hence these people reject Christ, inasmuch thal
they cannot understand that the Son of Goc
should have made His advent before men in
such humble guise, showing only a blameless
life, and using only persuasive words. They
would have had Him descend from heaven armed
with coercive power, clothed in blinding magni-
ficence, and to have vibrated the earth to its
centre at the first touch of his sandal!
Count Arivabene, in his work on Italy, gives
it as the result of his experience that, notwith-
standing the popular hatred of their (present?)
priests, it would be a great error to infer that
the Italians might be easily brought to em-
brace Protestantism. “ Under any circum-
stances,” he says, “ the external forms of the
religion of the Eeformation would never
satisfy the vivid imaginations of a southern
race.”
In concluding this portion of my subject it
must not be supposed that the smooth*' and
pointed finger is a necessary index of Eoman
Catholicism, any more than we are to infer
that the square and knotty type is that of Pro-
testantism, as most people are indebted to
their parents and the influences of education
for their particular form of religion, totally
irrespective of their natural predilection. Un-
happily, the arbitrary authority of theologians
is ever seeking to bend all mankind on to one
Procrustean bed of defined forms, in utter
ignorance or disregard of the fact that each
race—each type —tends constantly to develope
its own religious sentiments, its own faith, its
own creed, its own modes of thought, and its
own conceptions of beauty. The awful, bold,
and logical denunciations of Knox and Calvin
could only suit the logical reasoning, indexed
by the square-fingered, realistic mind of Scot-
land and Geneva.
M. D’Arpentigny falls into error, it would
appear, in assuming that each finger on the
same hand has the same termination ; “ when,”
says Mr. Beamish, “in point of fact, nature
is not found to be so uniform. One finger
* The term smooth is to he understood as without
knots.


may be pointed, while another is spatulous or
square, marking the anomalous and even con-
tradictory train of ideas by which the mind is
sometimes influenced.” Thus the more uni-
form the distinctive forms, the more simple and
determinate the character.
11.
In continuation of my last essay on the
Palm and Fingers Inowpresenta few jottingson
the Thumb, which, in its order of dignity and
importance, should have taken precedence of
the fingers, but its high significance as a
member of the hand demands a chapter, as it
were, to itself.
Professor Bell says it is the presence of a
thumb which imparts to the hand of the
higher animals its character of superiority.
It is the higher development and greater
mobility of the human hand that render it so
much more perfect than that of the ape. The
thumb being, then, the characteristic element
of the human hand, the part last developed,
and most strongly typical of its superiority
over that of the lower animals, the perfect
formation of this part of the hand must be
regarded as a sign of the character of the
species being well marked, of a strong, active
individuality, while the reverse obtains when
it is small and rudimentary. The ball (root)
of the thumb is made up of strong muscles, and
in it the motor function of the hand is, as it
were, concentrated. It is the Mans Veneris
of the old chiroscopists ; the expression of la
volonte raisonnee , of decision, perception, and
the logical faculty. Persons with a small
thumb are ruled by the heart, those with a
large by the head.
“ The psychical hand, the most beautiful and
the rarest of all hands, has a thumb well
formed, of moderate size, without knotty pro-
minences, and -its ball beautifully curved. It
belongs to persons led by ideality ; soul is
everything for them ; they look not on the
rougher aspects of the outer world ; they have
a passion for sublime poetry, music, and
the loftier branches of art. In litera-
ture, Milton, Klopstock, and Goethe are
their representatives; they oppose to the
school of Yoltaire and Hume that of
Lamartine and Chateaubriand—the logical to
the ideal. Although this form of hand is
met with among all classes of society, it is
rarely the prevailing one among any people.”
In Europe it is mqst common in Germany; in
Asia it is most common in India, where,
among large classes of castes, it is nearly the
prevailing type ; and for the true reflection
of its typical indexes witness the illogical
folly of its native rulers, who, revelling in
the abortive idea that they could oppose the
mighty arm of England during the ’57
mutiny, turned out their two or three
hundred ragged and dirty tatterdemalions
armed with matchlock and sword, with
perhaps a furtively-obtained six-pounder or
two, and became food for powder when
they did not run away. In the Eenians
we have a race with an allied type of
hand, and although, no doubt, they were
individually of high courage, yet were
they wanting in logical reasoning to see
that the means for attaining their ideal aspira-
tions were miserably short of success. How
different were the motor-handed, square-tipped-
fingered band of Swedish miners, who in 1523,
under Gustavus Yasa, step by step delivered
their country from the Danish yoke ?
To return to our more immediate subject,
the thumb. Mr. Beamish is equally strong on
the thumb as an index of the mind. He says,
“In the monkey it extends no further than the
root of the first finger. Idiots, whose lives are
altogether under the dominion of instinct, have
very small and ill-developed thumbs.”
Shakspeare’s witches exclaim —
“ By the pricking of my thumbs
Something wicked this way comes.”
“In the production of mesmeric sleep-
waking, the influence of the thumb is
considered of more value than any of
the fingers, probably from its proximity to
the median nerve, through which power is
obtained over that portion of the brain allo-
cated to personal identity. The vital fluid,
also, would seem to be more largely absorbed
by the thumb than by the fingers, owing to
the greater expansion of the root in the palm.
No more indubitable sign of the approach of
death can be afforded than in the effort to
cover the thumb with the fingers. Severe
cold produces the same effect. Generally, a
small thumb, although the index of vacillation
and irresolution, is also indicative of an accom-
modating and loving spirit. The large thumb,
on the contrary, is the certain index of a
strong will and little sympathy—in short, of
the heart being in subjection to the head.
Gallileo, Descartes, Newton, Leibnitz, Condil-
lac, Kant, and other profound and original
thinkers, were endowed with large thumbs. It
is certain that Yolfcaire, whose heart was
entirely under the subjection of his will, had
enormous thumbs, the faithful portraits of
which are handed down to us in the beautiful
statue by Houdon at the Theatre Franqais, at
Paris.” In our Waxworks Exhibition, in
Bourke-street, this physical trait has been
omitted in his figure, in order, we must
suppose, to give him the genteel type of
mediocrity!


In speaking of the phalanges of either the
thumb or fingers, the reader is to understand
that the first phalange is the top joint, &c.
Mr. Beamish gives outline tracings of the
hands of two men he had in his employ :
“ They were both born in the same sphere of
life; the one, by force of character, raised
himself to respectability and wealth; the other
remains in his original depression, a labourer
at 2s. 6d. a day, and, because of certain musical
talents, the centre of public-house attraction.”
But it is not only in the development of the
thumb that these hands differ ; they afford an
admirable illustration of the marked difference
which obtains between the developed and the
undeveloped hand.
The superior man had a large, nearly
square, finely developed palm, full, firm, and
clastic, the fingers long and spathulous, with
the second phalange joints marked by the
knots treated of in my last sketch. The thumb
large, with a bold and long characteristic first
phalange, indicative of an iron will to conquer
difliculties ; while the spathulate fingers show
a love of labour for its own sake, and the
knotty joints conferred induction, order, and
arrangement. I shall refer to this instance
again when dealing with the hand in its
united aspect.
On the other, or reverse picture, we have
the two-and-sixpenny man —an elemental
hand in unmistakable type, having a weak and
very short thumb, with palm thick and of
pappy softness, terminated by thick, short
fingers without character or expression, the
hand of the “ hewer of wood and drawer of
water” for the world :
“ In vain, through every changing year,
Did Nature lead him as before ;
A primrose by a river’s brim,
A yellow primrose was to him;
And it was nothing more !”
“ The development of the thumb,” says Mr.
Beamish, “ would seem to modify, to a consider-
able extent, the results deduced from the
fingers. Thus, if the palm be soft —index of
physical indolence —and the first phalange of
the thumb long and well formed, the individual
willlabour, not from the love of labour, but from
a sense of duty.” Again—“ Should spatulous
fingers—indices of action —be joined to a short,
imperfectly formed thumb, the action becomes
uncertain. Much will be attempted, but little
will be accomplished. Journeys will be under-
taken without sufficient object, and thus
become valueless activity because badly di-
rected. Intelligent inventors with spatulous
fingers and philosophic knots, but with short
thumbs, seldom perfect their ideas; the
amount of will (deficient in the thumb) not
being sufficient to fix and control the ever-
changing movements of the spatulous fingers.”
All the learned men who have written on
this interesting subject concur generally as to
the importance of the thumb. Thus M.
D’Arpentigny accepts the first phalange as the
index of the will. He says“ All who have
the first phalange long and strong will exhibit
a powerful and energetic will, a great confi-
dence in self, and an extreme desire to bring
their works to perfection. If this phalange
exceed the second in length and power, the
desire will be for domination, amounting to
tyranny such as was worked out by Francia,
the Dictator of Paraguay. If the first
phalange be of a medium size it no
longer represents domination, but simply
passive resistance the vexatious force oo
inertia. If it be short and feeble, power of
will will be wanting, and the mind, fluctuating
and irresolute, becomes subject to the will of
others. If very short, resistance becomes im-
possible, and prostration is complete. Gaiety
and sadness succeed each other without any
apparent cause. If the first phalange be not
only short but broad also, it indicates both in-
decision and prejudice, more or less intense in
proportion to its breadth. Extreme in its joys,
and above all in its passions, it is the index of
a temper capable of being pushed to the verge
of suicide or assassination. When calm suc-
ceeds to excitement, then the tendency is to-
wards melancholy. This indication, says M.
Desbarrolles “ never fails.”
Second Phalange.—The second phalange is
the index of logical acumen —La clairU du
coup d' ceil. If long and strong, logic and
reason prevail over impulse and will. But
should the first phalange be short and weak,
the individual hesitates to act. His plans may
be excellent, but he dare not carry them into
execution. His reason may suggest the pro-
priety, nay, the necessity, of advancing, but
he lacks the resolution to proceed; and pru-
dence becomes the apology for vacillation:
often an excellent adviser for others, but inca-
pable of directing himself.
If equal in length and strength to the first
phalange, there will then be reason to guide
and will to execute, thereby supplying highly
important elements of success in life, and
forming, in fact, the philosophic thumb. Such
were the thumbs of Dr. Whewell. Should,
however, the whole thumb be more fully de-
veloped than the fingers, the two phalanges
being equal, a desire for domination will be
indicated, but without tyranny ; and should
the whole thumb—the phalanges being equal
—be of ordinary magnitude, it becomes the
index of passive resistance.
Boot.—M. Desbarrolles says“ Here is
centred the index of sensual love; if very thick
and long, of brutal passion. If moderate, and
in harmony with the rest of the hand, it is the


index of a modified sensualism. If feeble and
flat, it marks deficiency in the sensual appetite.
When joined to a strong first phalange (index
of will), moral control is established, and
tenderness takes the place of sensuality. When
the first phalange is in excess, however great
the tenderness, there will be reticence in the de-
monstration.” The same writer says : —“ Many
ecclesiastics of the Roman Catholic church have
the root of the thumb largely developed,
joined with a powerful first phalange; hence
these men, whose lives are consecrated to
celibacy, expend in charity all the energy ol
their tenderness. They sacrifice themselves
for humanity as missionaries, and, if need be,
as martyrs.”
With a large root and a short and feeble
first phalange, notwithstanding that the
second phalange may be thick, strong, and
hard, there is much danger of the triumph of
the sensual instinct. Logic is the only ally;
but in the struggle between passion and
reason, reason has but little chance when
unsupported by the will. M. Desbarrolles
concludes with the following inductive battle-
gage for the truth of this interesting science.
He says:—“lt is an ascertained fact that
debauchees and unfortunate and degraded
females have the root of the thumb largely
developed, and the first two phalanges short
and feeble.”
I will conclude this paper by giving a few
remarks on the
Length of the Ringers.—lt is true that the
form of the fingers indicate certain qualities
of the mind, but if their relative development
be not in accordance with the palm, their
individual characteristics must not be over-
looked. Thus, according to the most learned
author on this subject, M. Desbarrolles, who
says—
“ Short Fingers, when smooth, are apt to
form hasty and unsound judgments,* as though
time did not permit them to examine questions
in detail of which they are, indeed, incapable;
the general aspect suffices them. In society
they will be found to interest themselves little
in the labours of the toilet. Whether your
coat be blue or green, your cravat white or
black, is no matter to them; they scarcely
observe the one or the other, or if they do,
the propriety or impropriety never occurs to
their minds ; neither do thev care for
etiquette. In the business of life they love
not labour, and in the excitement of specula-
tion they seize the whole question at a glance,
sometimes correctly, for they judge by a
sort of inspiration. As artists they prefer to
mass their subjects, being unwilling or in-
capable of carefully working out the details,”
as the spathulous finger would do. Short
fingers and knotty joints exhibit necessarily
the qualities which the knots indicate—order,
calculation, &c.; still the tendency will be
rather towards synthetical than analytical rea-
soning. Its reasoning powers cling to the re-
gular chain of principles or propositions
already established or assumed from which
they draw conclusions—they know that four
and three make seven, because repeated trials
have established the correctness of the fact,
therefore they believe.
Long Fingers are, on the contrary, irresist-
ibly attracted towards detail; they prefer the
minute rather than the grand. M. Desbar-
rolles gives some very striking advice in the
following :—“ Should you ever seek the
patronage of a man endowed with long fingers,
take care that you betray no neglect in dress.
Weigh well your words, watch well your
actions ; for whatever may be the amount of
his intelligence, however kindly he may be
disposed, he cannot resist the susceptibility of
his nature and the force of his rigid instincts.
The scrupulous delicacy of his perceptions is
apt to be offended at things in themselves of
no importance. Such an one, if he be an
orator or a writer, is apt to indulge in orna-
ments, sesqidpedalia verba and minutiae, to the
injury of the argument; and which, by ex-
alting the value of certain parts, lead to a
neglect, even to forgetfulness, of the point of
departure, and of the end to be obtained ; in
a word, they become befogged in details.”
The same writer says : —“ Be on your guard
against one who to long fingers joins the
philosophic knots. He commences by a
detailed investigation of your character, a
knowledge of which he quickly obtains, more
particularly if he possess a thumb with a long
second phalange (logic). I say be on your
guard. None are perfect; and the tendency
of human nature is to divine faults rather than
good qualities.”
Should any of my readers doubt the truth
or correctness of the deductions herein de-
scribed, I can give him a test easy to be solved
by the most obtuse observers. Find a man
with a coarse, ill-made hand, palm long,
broad, thick, and hard ; fingers short, pointed,
and stumpy ; nails short, strong, and hard ;
the thumb short, stumpy, and often turned back.
Such hands symbolise a rough, unfinished
mind—a mind lowly developed, obtuse intelli-
gence, slow resolution, dulness of feelings, no
eye for beauty, as persons thus endowed are
prone to marry women older and uglier than
themselves. They are found especially among
the common people; and combined, as they
often are, with large though coarsely modelled
heads, they represent the material strength of
* Here is a senatorial electoral test worthy of
attention!—T. C.


a nation—its work, its man-power. These
make the show of hands —unguided by the
reasoning large thumb—at the hustings, where
they bawl and shout for the talker , whilst
smiling merit stands with silent pity by ; they
are the mighty unwashed who, in Jack Cade’s
rebellion, hung learning with ink-horn around
its neck, because they could not appreciate its
worth and civilising influence.
111.
My two previous contributions were—the
former on the palm and fingers, the latter on
the thumb, while the present will deal with
the hand as a whole member. Physiologists
with learned justice extol the humanity of the
hand for its distinctive features so separable
from the brute creation; so perfect in its
wondrous utility, and for the mathematical
exactness of its construction. Its chief con-
trast with the paws that are most like it is in the
fingers of these last being so short in propor-
tion to the metacarpal part (without the
fingers and the thumb), or else in their being
altogether so small. The bear’s paw illustrates
the first of these contrasts, and few things can
mark intellectual inferiority more than do
short, convergent, incurved fingers. The ape’s
hand illustrates the second, and mental weak-
ness may always be suspected where, with a very
small hand, the thumb is especially short, weak,
and apish in its general aspect. By similar com-
parisons may be interpreted the horny hardness
of the palm, which we sometimes see indepen-
dent of hard labour or disease, and the exces-
sive brute-like growth of hair and nails before
the period of old age. Many people imagine
that labour will (in one life) enlarge the
hand, and so change its normal character as to
cause it to be classed with another type from
that inherited ; not so, it takes several gene-
rations, all working in a given class of labour
or mental pursuit, to first remove the original
type into the mixed type, and thus on to its
definite end. It is in India that the most con-
vincing proofs of this view are to be obtained,
as owing to the blighting system of caste,
which allots to each individual a specified trade
or calling—thus once a labourer always a
labourer. In the latter class the lowest of the
elemental type of hand is found, while those
castes having occupations requiring mental
power are endowed with hands in accordance,
but in no country in the world is the psychical
or pointed-finger hand so general and widely
distributed. This relates to the Hindoo. Of
the Mussulman population such a severe de-
marcation of the highest and of the lowest type
does not exist, owing to the absence of caste.
The ruling types among them are the artstic,
a transition form from the motor to the sensi-
tive, and vast numbers exhibit a progressive
stage between the psychical and the sensitive.
But all classes, of both sects, have small al*
though well-made thumbs, which mark the
deficiency of the logical and reasoning facul-
ties. This deduction is verified by the fact
that the people of India possess a fine artistic
taste and talent for the grand and beautiful in
architecture, as witness the buildings of -Agra,
Delhi, and Lucknow, yet she has never, in his*
toric times at least, produced any great men.
A few, very few, have possessed that impulsive
bravery which is exhibited in predatory raids ;
yet never have they turned at hay when
hungry, footsore, and spent with long marches,
to beat hack a harassing foe, as did our
countrymen under Moore at Corunna. The
robber race of Tamerlane came from the north
of India (Afghanistan). These, stalwart in
limb, and endowed with the energetic motor
hand, conquered the Hindoo race of the
pointed fingers; but in less than a century the
courage of their shepherd race had departed,
and they sunk into a lethargic gulf of lascivious
pleasures until their effete necks were placed
under the British yoke—the yoke of the
square-tipped finger. The differences of hands,
according to sex or age, are equally significant.
The woman’s hand, independently of the
effects of different occupations, is naturally
smaller, narrower, softer, less hairy, and more
delicate than the man’s, and its fingers more
roundly formed. When these characters are
reversed, they betray the too strong-minded
woman, and the effeminate man. In advancing
years, from childhood onwards, the changes of
the hands are scarcely less significant and
striking than those of the face, and they have
the same meaning. Like the smooth round
forehead, proper to the child, so the small, soft,
delicate, childish hand ; but when it is retained
in manhood, is a sure sign of a childish dis-
position, with no great intellectual gifts, and
no strength of will. And when, before old
age, the hand becomes lean, bony, and dry, it
indicates an absence of sympathy with the
young, and that want of genial warmth of
feeling and fancy, and that predominance of
cold sagacity to which old age is naturally
prone.
Before drawing from the stores of the
great masters of chirognomy I will give a
summary of observations made by M. Got,
the celebrated comic actor of the Theatre
Franjais, as given by M. Desbarrolles, on the
movements of the hand in connexion with the
operation of the mind, and which will be found
very interesting. “ The open hand,” he says,
“ expresses joy, confidence, and abandon. The
closed hand, vexation, doubt, suspicion ; and
when these sentiments are energetically felt,


the fingers are squeezed against the palm,
lie who desires to deceive, instinctively
hides his palm. ‘ I give you my word of
honour,’ exclaims the honest, sincere man, a
the same time presenting to you an ope
hand and an extended arm. ‘ I swear it
so!’ says the liar, as he places his hands
his breast, with the palms downward
The common manner in which in man
countries bargains are made amongst th
peasantry is an interesting testimony to th
value placed on the mediumship of the hanc
Ifo bargain is considered final until hands ar
joined. What hesitation—what feints pn
cede the final act! Now the hand is extended
now drawn back, now elevated, now lowerec
before the solemn blow is struck.” Bargainers
also, in the east will squat on their hams to bai
gain, and with a loose cloth thrown over thei
clasped hands, conduct it by a regular code o
well-understood manipulative pressure signs
whereby, from their high sense of touch anc
feeling, they can'" almost read each other’
thoughts ; ill luck awaits him who, by som
truant pulse—liberated by want of will anc
firmness first gives sign of acceding tc
terms; his rival knows by instinct that hi
opponent has f‘tossed up the sponge;” h
then throws corruscations of fire from his eyes
his whole body quivers with persuasive force
of gesture, modulated to act in contact witl
a tongue unmatched in its oily eloquence anc
volubility; when, as often happens, he of the
stronger will uncovers the hands, casts that o:
the other assentingly aside, rises, and, by mere
force of character, treats the bargain to have
been made on his own terms! And the beaten
man receives it as such.
I will resume my quotation from M. Got,
who says:—
“ He who desires to keep his own counsel
and the exercise of his own will, joins closely
his fingers and turns his palms downwards,
thus concentrating, as it were, the electro-
nervous fluid.
“He who willingly yields his soul and
abandons himself to the power of another,
turns up his palm and extends his fingers, thus
expanding and dissipating the electro-nervous
fluid.
“ Invocation and prayer are offered with
both hands open and the fingers disengaged.
“ Faith, hope, and charity exhibit open
hands, indicating that the human will is
abandoned to the Divine. All acts of the will,
all gestures which express resolve, unite the
fingers. The stronger the expression of the
will, the more exalted the passion, the closer
are the fingers pressed together, the more anger
increases, the more the hand contracts; till
ultimately the clenched fist proclaims the un-
mistakable menace—precursor of the blow.”
He further observes —“ In proportion to the
increase of civilisation, gestures become less
energetic ; as a consequence, there is greater
reserve, greater calmness, exhibited by th
individual. Thus the peasant gesticulates wil
his whole body ; the mechanic with his arms
the man of the world with his hands ; anc
the diplomatist with his fingers only; sometime
even such limited movements are repressec
and are replaced by the eyes alone.”
We will now particularise the characteristic
of the different varieties of hands, commencin
with—
Hard and Soft Hands.—The effect of tem
perament, as shown by the texture of th
palm, in modifying the character, may be i
lustrated by two hands having the same thick
ness, size, and general form, both being of th
spatulous type; the one supple to softness
the other firm to hardness. By virtue o:
the spatulous fingers, both will possess
similar intellectual tendencies; but owing t
the difference in temperament they wil
exhibit very different habits. The sam
love of motion will characterise both
but the mode of gratifying the require
ments of their nature will not be the same in
both. The soft hand will delight in moderate
action in itself, or in witnessing energetic
action in others ; the hard hand in a persona
display of activity and strength, under all cir-
cumstances. The former appreciates the
pleasures of noon; the latter, those of early
dawn. M. Desbarrolles compares the move-
ment of the vital fluid through these hands to
the flowing of a stream—now over a bed of
rock, where not a drop is left behind; now
through marshy land, where, the water being
imbibed, its progress is arrested. In a similar
manner, the vital fluid which traverses the
palm is enabled to pass rapidly through the
firm flesh of the one ; while by the soft and
spongy texture of the other it is retarded in
its course. Hence the greater activity and
energy of the hard hand, and the more
thoughtful, tranquil, and poetical nature of
the soft. Let my readers note the above
theory, and they will not be long in testing and
verifying its entire truth.
Mr. Beamish says:—“ The hard hand, spatu-
lous or otherwise, is, however, always the index
of a love of corporeal action —idle it cannot be.
It finds rest in substituting one labour for
another. The pointed-fingered hand differs
from the spatulous in this, that it desires to
supplement the energy of force with the charm
of grace, and to direct its efforts to less
practical and useful objects.” This peculiar
combination of a hard band with pointed
fingers is, according to M. D’Arpentigny, very
general amongst those who devote themselves
to the cultivation of the horse ; whether they


oe found in the deserts of Arabia, or in the
armies of Europe, the same rude, ostentatious
barbarism seems to characterise the class. The
writer of this paper was four years and a half
in Arabia, and can vouch that the Arabians
are, nearly to a man, hard-handed, and with
pointed fingers. And, although somewhat
foreign to our subject, it may be noted that
they are, phrenologically speaking, singularly
wanting in the mechanical organs. No nation
in the world shows the asserting characteristics
of blood and the idealistic tendency of the
pointed finger as do the Arabs. Next to the
Sanscrit they have the finest and most poetic
language in the world, one from which
we English have largely borrowed. They
greatly favoured literature and the sciences,
especially mathematics, astronomy, and che-
mistry ; to them we owe our ordinary
numerals and arithmetical notation. Some
unknown author of this nation gave us the
world-read Arabian Nights Entertainments ,
which is unparalleled in its vivid pictures
drawn from the imagination. Arabia also
gave birth to Mahomet, who wrote the Koran,
a poetic rhapsody, guided by the loftiest
flights of the imagination. Its style is fluent,
concise, and beautiful, and where the
majesty and attributes of God are described,
sublime and magnificent, and although the
author of this remarkable book was an obscure
man, he has nevertheless succeeded in framing
a code of religion and laws which are adopted
and rigidly observed by one-third the popula-
tion of the globe. No one can deny to
Mahomet the holy merit of rescuing large
nations of the east from a degraded paganism
over to a faith which acknowledged the true
God, however we may dissent from its dogmas,
and quarrel with the paradise held out as a
reward to a poetical and sensual people. In
the Arabs, above all other nations, have been
shown the qualities which are indexed by the
pointed finger, and which have been most fully
verified in their history and literature.
Mr. Beamish gives the character of two
female servants at Cannes in illustration of the
distinction between the hard, knotty, spatulous
hand of industry, and the soft, smooth, full,
and pointed hand of impulse and indolence :
“ These were servants of a friend with whom I
resided at Cannes during the winter of 1862-3
—the one a native of Scotland, the other of
Nice; the one characterised by a love of
order, propriety, simplicity, good sense, and
indefatigable physical activity ; the other by
disorder, neglect, and slothfulness, with a
certain poetic, devotional, and artistic feeling.
While the one sought to discharge her duties
with consistency, uniformity, and scrupulous
attention to order and cleanliness, the other
was hopelessly indifferent to all such con-
siderations and requirements. Her gown
torn, her shoes down at heel, her arms
crossed, she preferred the contemplation of
the moonlight on the water and the enjoy-
ment of a sociable chat with any stray visitors
to her kitchen, to the performance of her
duties, or, if she voluntarily laboured, it was
usually in the preparation of a collar, a flounce,
or a cap to adorn her person on high days and
holidays, into the details of which she could
enter with curious minuteness. The redeeming
qualities—and which retained her in her em-
ployment—were her kindly impulses, and her
general integrity. It is no wonder that
these individuals were never able to
understand each other—the one impulsive,
thoughtless, impatient, honest, unpractical,
useless ; the other prudent, wise, labori-
ous, skilful, and in a high degree practi-
cable — invaluable Who has not seen these
opposite characters in the domestic households
of Australia ? 1 have a near neighbour who
has the one—the Scotch lassie ; the other has
just left the service of her employer.
Large and Small Hands. —Large hands, ac-
cording to M. D’Arpentignv ; more particularly
when hard, are indices of physical force. And
as the Greeks had no conception of beauty
without force, the large hand was held by
them in high estimation, just as a small hand
accords with our idea of a higher psychological
development. Beamish says:—“Ho one is
ignorant that the Greeks, no matter of what
rank, purchased their necessaries, cooked their
own food, and practised a number of manual
occupations which would at the present day
be considered menial, but to which they
applied themselves, not only without repug-
nance, but with pleasure, by virtue of the
spirit of detail which is inherent in a large
hand. Hor was it only during the period
when kings’ sons tended flocks, when princesses
washed linen, and when priests excelled in
the slaughter of animals, and in the prepara-
tion of food, that large hands prevailed in
Greece, but also in the time of Pericles.
Elegance and finish, rather than magnitude
and expansion, are the creations of the large
hand with a moderate palm, and these we
find to have been the characteristics of the
Greek hand. Quite in accordance with this
development, Greece founded only small states,
and erected monuments, which, though unsur-
passed in beauty, were limited in dimensions
and area.”
I would remark, however, that prior to and
during the age of Pericles, Greece stood pre-
eminent above all nations for the wisdom of her
law-givers and the beauty of her people, who
excelled all their contemporaries in manly
courage, self-denial, religious feeling, obedience
to the law, and in their wise care of the body


on which rests the basis of the intellect; they
produced men of god-like mien, full of manly
strength, grace, and beauty, from which they
founded a school of art which we feebles are
in vain trying to imitate. Their wise refine-
ments were unaccompanied by the “ liberty of
the people”—stupid cry of our times —under
which every cheatery, vice, and abuse is
tolerated.
It was not until the Greeks became the
victims of ultra-refinement that they fell from
their high estate among the comity of
surrounding nations. They were the first to
announce the law of education —that it should
consist in nearly equal proportion of the arts
which elevate the mind and the exercises
which strengthen the body. At the present
day the man of intellect looks down on the
man who labours —the man who is building
up the healthy fabric which only can give
out the scintillating spark of intellectual
vigour. Why are our mad-houses crammed ?
Do we hear of them in ancient Greece ?
M. D’Arpentigny offers a familiar illustra-
tion of the tendency of the large hand in the
working tailors of Paris, whose hands are very
large, and who, from the delicacy and minute-
ness of their work, are highly prized by their
masters. He also instances the hand of M.
Redoute, the celebrated flower painter, which
is unusually large, and with which he connects
the exquisite minuteness of his delineations.
To M. Redoute the imaginary descriptions
which the provincial poets draw of his hand
is a source of infinite amusement. Judging
from the beauty of his works of the delicacy
of his hands, they compare his fingers to those
of Aurora scattering roses !
The small hand has qualities which seem
ever to be connected with what is grand and
colossal. The pyramids and the huge temples
of Upper Egypt were constructed by a people
having probably the smallest and most
delicate hands of any bygone nation in the
world who have left footprints of its works
behind. These had hands small and narrow,
spatulous and smooth, such as may be seen in
the contemporaneous sculpture with which
those edifices are adorned, and in the actual
forms which the mummies exhibit. M.
D’Arpentigny instances the hand of M. Pre-
ault, the celebrated Parisian sculptor, as an
example of the capability of a small hand, with
smooth spatulous fingers, to produce works of
grandeur and power. On the other hand, M.
Balzac, he says, presents an example of very
large hands with conical fingers, and he seems
to revel in the most microscopic physiological
details, in a way which has subjected him to
the charge of indelicacy, if not immorality.
I. K. Brunei, the celebrated engineer, had very
large hands, with the palm full, strong, and
firm. His great mechanical aptitude is well
known ; but he had also a delicate power ol
manipulation, so delicate indeed as scarcely to
brush the down from a butterfly’s wing when
taken in his grasp.
Beamish says : —“ It may be supposed that
education and experience would tend to pro-
duce a change in the form of the hand, as it
does in that of the head. This is true to a
limited extent. The joints do sometimes be-
come enlarged, and the first phalanges have a
tendency to become spatulous; but it has
never been observed that knotty fingers become
smooth, or that spatulous and square become
oval or pointed. In the advance from infancy
to manhood, the change will be found not only
in proportion to the general growth of the
body, but in relation to the development of
the mind. The hand of the infant is no more
that of the child, than is that of the adult.
The infant and young child invariably exhibit
the purely impulsive and sensual hand, with
smooth fingers and large palms. About the
first climacteric (seventh year) a change may
be observed.”
Thus we may sum up that the pure spatu-
lous finger is the index of material and practi-
cal thoughts ; that the conical represents art,
poetry, and song ; and the square, formalism,
medium ideas, social interests, and combina-
tions capable of being realised. The partly
square and partly conical is characterised by a
love of absolute truth, for the essence of things
rather than their form. The knots, or deve-
lopment of the joints, show a capacity for cal-
culation, combination, and love of method 5
when large they indicate the analytical, when
small, the synthetical mind. The well-
developed thumb marks the logical and inde-
pendent spirit, the acute reasoner.
To conclude this sketch I will give a short
synopsis of the hands (from Beamish) of cele-
brated men, who are as well known to the
world as is the sun in the heavens.
Dr. Whewell, the son of a poor Lancaster
joiner, possessed a hand of strikingly sym-
metrical aspect, expressive of large vitality and
high intellectual capabilities. Calm and con-
templative, it oflers a marked contrast to that
of Lord Brougham, in the absence of the
knotty restlessness of the joints and the fuller
development of the third phalanges of the
fingers (base joints). The large, strong, and
elastic palm of Whewell marks an active
temperament, with unusual power of detail,
whilst the well-developed thumb is the index
of originality, logical acumen, and strength of
will. The mixed fingers, partly square and
partly oval, and the proportional development
of the knots, mark the desire for all knowledge.
The full development of the root of the first
finger indicates the influence which pride'and


ambition would exercise over the character,
while the roots of the second and third
phalange show a prudent consideration for
physical well-being, and that of the little
finger an endowment of penetration, amount-
ing, possibly, to subtlety.
Lord Brougham has the true philosophic
hand, a well developed and elastic palm, tips
of the fingers partly square and partly conical,
forming, in consequence of the development of
the joint of the first phalange, a sort of oval
spatulous; the thumb large, with the two
phalanges of nearly equal length. In the size
of his palm may be recognised the capacity for
detail, and as possessing a vital energy which
no amount of labour can daunt nor opposition
overcome. Beamish says : —“ Such a hand is
indeed the symbol of a mind capable of
seizing with a vigorous grasp science as well as
literature. We have it here, however, not in
the fulness and freshness of youth, but in the
decadence and recession of age—in the eighty-
third year of its existence (in 1862), and per-
haps after seventy years of energetic activity.”
Isambard Kingdom Brunei. —'Palm firm
and elastic; thumb of great force; fingers
spatulous, and comparatively smooth ; illustra-
ting an artistic development of the labour type
acted on by an impulsive nature, and intuitive
sagacity.
John Martin (the Historical Painter). —
Here we have a symmetrical form of the hand;
the strong elastic palm, the smooth and pointed
fingers, and the great development of the
first phalange—all bespeak intellectual activity,
intuition, independence, genius; while the
cushion-like enlargement of the under surface
of the full-developed thumb and fingers in-
dicate extreme delicacy of touch. Here all
can see the characteristics allotted to the smooth,
pointed fingers—in his case very much pointed —
architecture, poetry, painting, vivid imagination.
Who has not gazed with admiring awe on
Martin’s “ Sadock in Search of the Waters of
Oblivion,” “The Expulsion from Paradise,”
“Joshua Commanding the Sun to Stand
Still,” “ The Destruction of Herculaneum,”
“ The Seven Plagues,” “ The Creation,”
“The Deluge,” “The Fall of Nineveh,”
“ Last Judgment,” and “Belshazzar’s Feast,”
all of which bear speaking testimony to the
characteristics allotted to the smooth, pointed
finger—a love for the wonderful, grand, and
mysterious—indices of inspiration.
Miss Ellen Faucit, whose hand is of unusual
dimensions—almost masculine in its physi-
ognomy.
Mr. Beamish deplores the blindness of
British rulers in not more liberally cultivating
art by founding a larger number of schools of
design in Ireland, where the pointed finger so
largely predominates. He says : —“That not-
withstanding the costly efforts to develop artistic
taste in England, her manufacturers are still
compelled to resort to France for their designs
Mr. Potter, M.P. (one of the largest calieo-
printers in the world) says that upwards of
£50,000 a-year is paid by calico printers alone
to Parisian artists (the same Celtic pointed
fingers) for their designs; that, with the ex-
ception of one, all the artists employed by
Messrs Minton and Co., the celebrated
porcelain manufacturers, are foreigners ; yet
that only five schools of art out of ninety-one
are allocated to Ireland, although from twenty
to twenty-five per cent, of all the masters ap-
pointed to such schools in the United
Kingdom are Irish,” thus plainly showing
that instruction is only needed to elicit the
inborn genius of the people for works of art
and taste. A telling fact confirms this view.
A few philanthropic ladies of Cork wishing to
find employment for poor girls living in a rude
district of the city, engaged the assistance of
well-educated teachers from Scotland to in-
struct them in fancy needlework. Nine months
had only elapsed before the pupils excelled the
teachers, who were sent back.
Professor Craik* says: —“For some ages
Ireland was the chief seat of learning
in Christian Europe, and the most distin-
guished scholars who appeared in other
countries were mostly either Irish by birth
or had received their education in Irish schools.
We are informed by Bede that in his day (the
early part of the eighth century) it was cus-
tomary for his English fellow-countrymen of
all ranks, from the highest to the lowest, to
retire for study and devotion to Ireland.”
I would, however, exclude from the cha-
racter here indicated of the Irish race the
pre-Adamite portion of her population—those
of the full-jowied face, elemental hand, duck-
waddle walk, unteachable intellect, and in-
verted Roman nose. The true Irish aristocracy
of race have the most beautiful psychical
hands in Europe, together with a facial type of
beauty unmatched in the United Kingdom,
and lit up with eyes of dark azure-blue, possess-
ing all the symmetrical curved outline of the
black Spano-Moorish eye, but excelling it in
its mild, dove-like beauty—
“ Recalling oft those eyes sereno,
That face and raven hair,
Sweet pictures of the Magdalene,
O’er old cathedral altars seen,
Wooing our thoughts to prayer.”
* “English Literature,” &c. By George Craik,
L.L.D.


IV.
Addison says:—“Everyone is in some degree
a master of that art which is generally distin-
guished by the name of Physiognomy, and
naturally forms to himself the character or
fortune of a stranger from the features and
lineaments of his face. We are no sooner
presented to anyone we never saw before but
we are immediately struck with the idea of a
proud, a reserved, an affable, or a good-
natured man ; and on our first going into a
company of strangers our benevolence or
aversion, awe or contempt, rises naturally
towards several particular persons before we
have heard them speak a single word, or so
much as know who they are. For my own
part, I am so apt to frame a notion of every
man’s humour or circumstances by his looks,
that I have sometimes employed myself from
Charing Cross to the B.oval Exchange in
drawing the characters of those who have
passed by me. When I see a man with a
sour, rivelled face, I cannot forbear pitying his
wife; and when I meet with an open,
ingenuous countenance I think on the happi-
ness of his wife, his friends, and his relations.
I cannot recollect the author of a famous
saying to a stranger who stood silent in his
company, ‘ Speak, that I may see thee.’
But, with submission, I think we may be better
known by our looks than by our words, and
that a man’s speech is much more readily
disguised than his countenance.”
It is well known that children possess this
art intuitively with strangers—and even
among friends they have their loves and fears,
their attractions and aversions, guided only on
their unreasoned judgments which they arrive
at from the aspects of those around them. To
show that their judgments are unaccompanied
by reason, I may instance the love which
children sometimes bear for a drunken
spendthrift father, who throws away his earn-
ings in dissipation that should go to clothe and
feed his fond, but unreasoning offspring. If
we would learn how ready is our apprehen-
sion of character expressed in shape, we have
only to look at the sketches of Leach and
Cruikshank, and see by what it is, by what
mere dots and lines in place of features, we dis-
cern the mind of each person they represent.
The expressions of the face are the most
perfect and most quickly understood, and there
seems more evidence of design in them than in
those which the instincts of the soul evinces
through other portions of the human frame,
as the clenched hand, the stamping foot, the
tossed up head, the bended knee, the separated
legs (indicative of force) are quite as signifi-
cant, and as naturally symbolical in revealing
the secrets of the mind as any movements of
the features. The wisdom of the Creator has,
no doubt, made the body in some measure the
image of the mind as a useful guide to man-
kind. Sir Thomas Browne says —“ The finger
of God hath left an inscription upon all his
works, not graphical or composed of letters,
but of their several forms, constitutions, parts,
and operations, which, aptly joined together,
do make one word that doth express their
natures.”
We all know that in the diversities to be
observed in each of the sexes there are
certain characteristics of the man that we
naturally term masculine, while other shapes
of the same parts we call feminine, because
they are as characteristic of the woman. The
lower stature, the smaller head, the narrower
shoulders, the rounder throat and limbs, the
smaller features, hands, and feet, the softer
texture of every part, the longer hair, and the
less coloured skin, are the peculiarities of the
feminine form; and they generally correspond
with a more sensitive and feeble constitution,
a predominance of the affections and feelings
over the intellect and the will, a quick percep-
tion with small power of reasoning, a singular
readiness to receive impressions, and to yield
a concentrated attachment. So that when we
see form and mind thus united in the one sex,
so that no reasonable mind doubts the analogy,
we have a fair guide as to what is manly and
what is womanly ; in either form of mind we
may regard what we see in the one as the
symbol of what we cannot see in the other.
Feminine features in a man and masculine
features in a woman always reveal a corre-
sponding misplaced cast of mind. A similar
rule holds for the interpretation of child-like
features in adults: the little features, large head
free from undulations of surface and with
a smooth, round forehead, the thick and
plump short-fingered hand, all exhibit the
imperfectly developed forms, elemental, and as
vet undetermined, which are normal in the
child, and symbolise its elemental and unde-
veloped mind, will in the adult declare a child-
like character. With the above introductory
remarks, I shall now draw our sources of
information on the symbolic of the human
form, nearly wholly from Dr. Carl Gustav
Carus, the great expounder of the revealments
of the mind through the form and action of
the body.
It may appear an ungrateful act to dissent
from the Gamaliel at whose feet we are about
to sit, to be by him enlightened on a science so
interesting as the one in hand, but as Dr.
Carus gives the proportions of the true mean
human form—“a form thoroughly correct and
beautiful”'—yet it is so abstract that it
excludes even those characters of stature and
dimensions which are severally proper to the


sexes, I will omit the measurements of parts
which could only be understood by physio-
logists, and give those which we can safely
criticise to a known numerical result. First,
premising that the module when used as an
abstract term of measure is just less than 7in.;
but as the parts I would compare will admit
of one standard of measure I will assume it to
be 7in. Thus Carus gives the following among
other parts of the human frame :
Modules.
Long diameter of the head .. .. 1
Greatest circumference .. .. .. 3
Length of the flat of the foot .. .. lj
Length of the whole stature .. .. 9j
Thus his medium altitude of human beauty
is sft. 6iin., and the length of the feet
English physiologists, however, give (as pro-
portions of the human form) the foot to be
l-6th the height of the body. But Carus gives,
as above, for the foot lOJin., which is in pro-
portion to 6ft. 6in. height of body. The same
discrepancy exists in some of the statuary in
the Melbourne Library where the Omphale
Hercules has feet only some 13in. long in
lieu of 18in., the measure due to the
height, which cannot be less than 9ft.,
although it, is only given as 6ft. and half an
inch in the catalogue, this mußt only refer to its
packing height, and should be amended. In the
same collection we have Diana, 6ft. sin. high,
with a 13in. foot, equal to that of the giant
Hercules. But the goddess has the true length
(I3in. being l-6th of her height, within a
fraction). I would, en passant, commend to my
readers the foot of the Diana under reference,
as being of a true type, proper to the energetic
woman, it being long, slender, and nervously
sinewy. The figure of Hercules has grave
faults, never given to it in the original from
the Greeks. I allude to the manner in which
the thighs are put on to the pelvis. To return
to Carus; who, in giving the measure of the
head, allows one module only (7in.) as the
“ long diameter,” and three modules, or 21in.,
for the “ greatest circumference,” which every-
one knows is only just within the pale of
mental excellence, the best Scotch type being
23in. in circumferences the long-headed,
whom Napoleon thought so much of.
Of Stature. —The extremes of both largeness
and smallness are always associated with de-
fective mental power. It is the same with the
extremes of size which are measurable in
circumference rather than in length. The
Lamberts and the living skeletons of the
human race are alike persons of poor intellect.
Excess above the mean stature may lead one
to expect a proportionate manliness of charac-
ter ; the falling short of it will often indicate
the feminine mind. Especially this symbolism
of great stature is well exemplified among
women. The cool strong will, energy for self-
service, choleric temperament, dominant in-
tellect, and large grasp of mind, are rarely
found in women without a correspondent
manliness of stature, a strongly built, large-
boned, and sinewy frame. And, in contrast
with these, the majority of little men are so
far effeminate that they are guided by their
feelings more than by their intellects; they
pass in the world as warm-hearted, or hot-
headed, impulsive men. Aristotle says “ their
hearts are very near their brainsthey are
remarkable for self-conceit, devotion to a single
object, or a hasty temper. They are much less
often than men of average height eminent for
intellect or an iron will. But when little men
possess large, well-formed, and well-balanced
heads (phrenologically), the above character,
I think, would not apply, as witness Aristotle.
Alexander, Napoleon, Lord Clarendon, Chil-
lingworth, and many others, were of small
stature, but who had fine heads.
Corpulency and Leanness —have also their
symbolic values. If the former be not too
gross it will generally be found associated with
good humour, and if found with manly power
and acuteness will often be accompanied with
the most pointed wit. Witness Sydney
Smith, Douglas Jerrold, Dumas, Charles Box,
and Mark Lemon, the present chief contri-
butor to the London Punch , were or are all fat
men. The fattest man I know personally is the
wittiest —a solicitor in Bombay.
When women, “ at a certain age,” run into
fat, their intellect turns into a certain barren
leanness, particularly if the mind has not been
previously well endowed and fully occupied ;
otherwise they fall into apathy, and a sort of
quiet submission to the senses, degenerating with
the body, tbe enlargement of which is a measure
of its failing energy. “ If,” says Cams, “in
corpulence the symbol be seen of a certain
dullness, inactivity, slowness, and, in a word,
corporeality, so is there in leanness, as such,
rather the symbol of a certain lightness,
activity, rapidity, and mental power.” But
the leanness must be of the right kind.
For there is an extreme leanness in which,
although it be not from disease, even the
higher organs appear to degenerate and waste;
such as the leanness of want, or of avarice, or
that of starvation, misery, or of the miser.
In the miserable miserly leanness, there is a
repulsive aspect, the eyes are hollow, the skin
dry and deep-wrinkled, the nails and hair
withered. But in the leanness which
accompanies mental activity, its symbolic
difference is seen at a glance, the body slim
and elastic, and the slender limbs all wear the
expression of clear refined perception, and of
quick and apt response; and when ac-
companied with a sensitive, or cerebral con-


stitution, and a psychical or sanguine
temperament, the whole body bears a psychical
expression ; in a word, the one type of lean-
ness indicates talent, or more rarely, genius;
and especially delicacy of feeling, refined
intellectual power, and a mobile but energetic
will. The other tells at best of an ordinary
mind, or of one degraded.
The Head—when it exceeds twenty-one
inches (or three modules) in circumference
will indicate a masculine mind ; a cerebral
plethoric, and choleric constitution ; ar
energetic, psychical, and sometimes melan-
cholic temperament; while a small head wil]
usually indicate a feminine mind, a sensuous,
feeble, and lymphatic temperament. In heads
of similar construction, the larger will mark
the more powerful mind ; and among different
races of men the larger headed are those with
the greatest mental superiority. In a large
head, with a full and high arch of the mid-
region, it is a sure symbol of a mind in which
the feelings predominate over the other
faculties. Such are the heads of fervent men,
who devote themselves with earnest zeal to art
or religion, the men of warm heart and of
deep feeling. If the large head have' its
strength and chief mass in the hinder region,
it marks the character which is distinguished
by work and practical ability. These latter
are the heads which gather and store up the
mental strength of a race or people—they are
not the heads of philosophers, poets, nor of
high mental nor moral power, but they
furnish the rough, elementary material out of
which, in future generations, philosophers
spring. The latter expends mental power
(sometimes too fast, as witness our mad-
houses), the former recuperatively restores the
balance of mental loss. The large forehead (if
well modelled) indicates a capacious, wide,
expanding intellect, capable of not only hold-
ing crowds of ideas, but of apprehending each
of them clearly and distinctly, and of retaining
them in a vice-like memory. The large, high
forehead represents the power of the mind in
following out one and the same train of ideas.
Carus says : —“Napoleon had one of the most
remarkable large foreheads of this kind.” The
large, long head of Britain, so very numerous,
with the forehead and hind head remarkably
elevated, indicate intelligence and practicability,
while the feelings will be subordinate.
Lavater says when.the forehead is flat, with
“ complete perpendicularity from the hair to
the eyebrows, is the sign of a total want of
understanding.” He also says of those which
are bowed with one strong arch overhanging
the face, “they belong to feeble and con-
tracted minds.” A forehead with abrupt
projections approach the brutal in having
them in the region proper to the nobler parts of
the human head. The organs 'indicating ou
sensual appetites are all in the hinder head
Thus, when man prays to God he elevates the
forehead; in all wordly affairs, and for the
gratification of his appetites he elevates the
hind-head.
The Hair—Lavater says red hair characterises
a man singularly good or singularly bad. Long
soft, and light hair, which is more natural tc
women and children, will in a. man betray a
feminine or child-like character ; and dark
coarse hair in a woman will reveal her hard
and too masculine nature, although in a man
it indicates strength and firmness. Brown and
black hair denote an active character, and
blonde is associated with a certain passive*
ness. Lavater could not, I presume, have
meant this latter symbolic inference to apply
to Great Britain. Natural loss of hair in men
often indicates a richly productive power of
mind; whilst its abundance' and persistence
late in life betray poverty and inactivity of
mind. “ Long hair little brain,” says the
Turkish proverb—but as they shave the head
their proverb would rank with “ nothing like
leather,” or the dis-tailed fox crying down that
appendage. I have a hint to offer on loss of hair.
Let each person who has used hair oil, ask him-
self in what spot he is, or was, in the habit of
applying the quantity usually poured into the
hand, and then say whether or no baldness
does not first show itself there. It is the oil
which carbonises the hair, closes the pores of
the skin, and thus prevents it from becoming
oxygenated and re-charged with the electric
fluid. If the oil be left off for a few days the
hair looks sickly, dry-heated, and towy ; then
the scalp throws off dandriffin its first efforts at
self-cure ; but the “ curled darlings” say, oh,
more oil! Thus is (I think) baldness produced
in most cases. Eeader, make a note of this.
The Nose. A well-proportioned nose
should not be less than one-third the length of
the face, the forehead and the space from the
base of the nose to the chin forming the other
third. The varieties are very numerous of
noses out of the pale of good, such as the
little, the snub, flat, retrousse , upturned,
or celestial. The natural types to which
these are allied are the little noses of children
or the flat broad noses of negroes, and it is
consistent with this that in men of civilised
races all such noses indicate defective intel-
lectual power, and do so with a certainty of
symbolism which nothing but excellence in
the form of the head, as in the case of Socrates,
can neutralise. They tell of an unfinished in-
tellectual development, and the lower and
flatter and more snub they are, the more
certainly do they indicate feebleness and
meanness of intellect, and of a mind in which
bad temper more than good judgment will


have sway. A child-like nose on a woman
must needs be accompanied by a well-formed
head and associated with good features so as
to make what is called a pretty woman—
thus made up, such a nose may express
naivete , or perhaps smartness of wit or
dexterous intelligence.
The Snub. —The thicker and larger, in
either sex, indicate a material sensuous
character ; and when its point stares up in
its master’s face, and has a wide and dilated
nostril, it exhibits an open declaration (so far
as a nose can make one) of an empty and in-
flated mind, often accompanied with cruelty.
Women who have the retrousse nose are
often distinguished for pert wit, and a captiva-
ting, digage manner.
Large Noses —In men, are generally good
signs, they add emphasis to the indications of
a well-formed head, but they must not be too
fleshy or too lean. In this type of nose, the
wide and distended nostril is an infallible in-
dication of energy, strength, and lofty pride,
which in the nostril of the snub offers a
spurious imitation. If they are long (but
short of snout-like) they mark, as prolonga-
tions of the forehead, the intelligent, obser-
vant, and productive nature of a refined mind.
The Homan —If arched, high, and strong,
is generally associated with a less developed
forehead and a larger hindhead; it dis-
closes strength of will and energy, rather than
intellectual power ; it also shows the want of
that refinement which is indicated by the
straigliter nose.
The Jewish —or Hawk Nose, commonly sig-
nifies shrewdness in worldly matters ; it adds
force to the narrow, concentrative forehead,
symbolical of singleness of object; and its
usual narrow nostrils wear the unfailing sign
of caution and timidity.
The Greek Straight Nose —Indicates refine-
ment of character, love for the fine arts, belles
lettres, astuteness, craft, and a preference for in-
direct rather than direct action. Lavater
says:—“A slightly bifid nose, having two
well-defined angles at the tip, indicates a mind
skilled in analysis, and with an acute know-
ledge of the world.” Lavater also says : —“ A
nose whose ridge is broad, no matter whether
straight or curved, always announces superior
faculties. I have never been deceived in it;
but this form is very rare.” Again : — “ A small
nostril is the certain sign of a timid spirit.!’
The Thick Fleshy Nose —tells its own tale, and
sometimes highly colours it. With a well-
formed head and lively temperament, it may
shed on the face a Falstaff-glimmer of easy
sensuality and jovial humour ; but what better
than this can be meant by a mass of flesh and
blood heaped on what should be the very
index of intelligence ?
The Lean Sharp Nose—the opposite of the
last type —if it be not due to the withering of
age, or associated with a very well-formed
head, tells only of the shrivelling of all the
freshness of life, of a dry sagacity in place of
intelligence ; of the negation of every fervent
disposition, and#i miserly, selfish adhesion to
the empty s<?-called realities of life.
The Eyes-i-Lavater says—“symbolize the
feelings rather than the intelligence or the will.
Many of their symbols become intelligible by
comparing the human eyes with those of lower
animals. Eyes set too near, or too far apart,
are alike animal in expression and in meaning ;
the former are like those of apes; the latter
like those of oxen, dogs, and horses. A long
opening between the eyelids, showing much
‘ white,’ gives the eye an expression of taste
and sensibility ; -whereas a short high opening
eives a more animal look ; it is usually asso-
ciated with a large eye-ball, and is common to
persons of athletic constitution and choleric
temperament. When the inner angles are
lengthened, acute, and pointed towards the nose,
their possessor is either very judicious or very
cunning. An upper-arched eyelid marks a
good disposition and much delicacy—some-
times also of a character timid, feminine, or
childish.
Colour of Eyes.—lf the iris be pure white
it indicates a pure mind ; dirty, or yellowish
white an opposite symbol; a white that is too
blue, like that of a delicate child, is significant
of an immature mind; one that is blood-shot,
if it does not confess to intemperance or over-
work, suggests plethora and violence of temper.
The following relates to the colour of the
cornea—not the opaque part just described :
Dark-blue. —Delicacy, refinement, effeminacy.
Light-blue, and much more, grey eyes,
indicate the hardy and active. Greenish,
same as grey, vivacity and courage. Hazel,
indicates a character masculine, vigorous, and
profound ; just as genius (properly so called)
is almost always associated with eyes of a
yellowish cast, bordering on hazel.
Eyebrows.—As marking the boundary-line
between the intellectual region of the forehead
and the sensuous region of the eyes and
cheeks, it is a general rule that the higher the
eyebrows rise the more do they symbolize the
encroachment of the sensuous on the
intellectual nature. The lower they are
placed the more is the opposite relation
marked. In persons of warm, open heart,
who are guided by their affections, we generally
see the high arched brow; in profound
thinkers, the lowered rectilinear brow. Those
which are gently arched harmonize with
modesty and simplicity; if straight and
horizontal, manliness and vigour. In the
undulating brow we have evidence of restko3


cnangeable disposition, sudden outbursts of
passion, fluctuations and stormy. If the
brows be thick in quantity and coarse,
they indicate a coarse animal nature. If, how-
ever, their form be good, and their arrangement
orderly, with the hair fine and associated with
large well-formed eye, their abundance adds
strength to whatever they import. Small eye-
brows always indicate defective force of
character, and the more so the higher they are
placed.
The Mouth—That great instrument for occa-
sional breathing, for speech, song, and kissing !
A large mouth is manly, and denotes energy ;
a small one, feminine, and a sign of less power.
In the two lips is repeated the opposition of
the upper and lower halves of the face. In
the upper lip lies the more psychical character;
in the lower, those of the more corporeal
nature. It is, therefore, essential to a noble
face that the upper lip should extend beyond
and govern the lower. In both, the contrast
of the thick, protruded, sensuous lip of the
negro, and of the tense, finely-drawn lips of
the Caucasian race, may indicate the charac-
teristics which belong to those varieties of
form to which they are severally appropriated.
Lavater says:—“Fleshy lips have always a
struggle to maintain with sensuality and in-
dolence.” Among the thinner lips, the best-
marked forms are the large, thin, indrawn lips
of the dry, passionless men of intellect; the
soft and beautifully chiselled, in those of
refined sense and poetic nature ; the rosy,
Cupid-bow-shaped lip of woman (men
seldom have it) ; the tense and strongly
marked, in strong-willed men of prac-
tical ability; the lean and hard-lined, in
the timid and avaricious. Of the upper lip,
the best form is that which is short, and its
connexion with the nose finely modelled. If it
be deeply hollowed in the middle, it tells of
wit and liveliness. A long upper lip, with its
middle swollen or prominent, is generally
found in rough natures. But the expressive
symbols of the mouth are so well-known that
I will go on to :
The Chin—Which is an eminently human fea-
ture, and, by its characters in the several races
of men, and in the animals which follow the
lowest race of men, may be traced ; as the chin
retreats, so is the retreat from the predomi-
nance of the nobler human faculties. This is
especially true in men ; for generally the fuller
chin marks the manly character, the smaller
chin, the feminine. Of the three principal
forms of chins—the retreating, the perpen-
dicular, and the projecting—Lavater says
the first may excite a suspicion of some weak
side; such chins have a negative import; the
second may inspire with confidence,-an dif
deep, are signs of sagacity and reflection ; the
third, if not too pointed, denotes acuteness and
activity of mind. A chin deeply dimpled in
the middle has the same meaning as the
slightly bifid nose. The accumulated flesh and
fat which make the double chin distinguish
the soft, phlegmatic, and Boeotian nature. Of
other forms Lavater says, “ angular chins are
signs of sense, firmness, and benevolence ; flat
chins of coldness and dryness; small ones of
timidity; round and dimpled ones, of good-
ness.”
The Ear.—lhavealways found thatears when
well formed, with their several interior con-
volutions evenly curved, are good indices of
high physical breeding. The extremes of both
largeness and smallness indicate a deflection
towards the lower animal world j the former is,
Lavater says, “ often found in idiots with ill-
shaped heads.” In less than these extremes,
large ears, including all such as are longer than
the nose, are signs of timidity and defect of
mental power, especially when their upper
parts are very large ; they have their natural
types in the large long ears of many timid
animals. Small ears (if not extremely small)
imply mental energy ; their type is in the
carnivora.
The thinning and levelling of the border of
the ear, so that it be not turned over, has
generally a bad import, it is animal-like, and
with an angular upper border, it gives the
character of low sensuality, which the old
masters painted on the ears of Eauns. A
deeply and roundly sculptured ear is a
sign of intellectual capacity, and one that is
largely and broadly hollowed out, often
occurs in men of great plastic talent. Smooth-
ness and want of contrast among the several
windings of the ear imply feebleness of mind.
Ears that stand out belong, generally, to per-
sons in whom the sense of hearing is dominant,
such as the musical, the mysterious, those with
strong memories, and the timid.
Every person of taste knows, instinctively,
how the trunk should accord with the various
types I have detailed, therefore I close this
subject, trusting that my readers will give the
subjects treated of the attention which I think
they deserve.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PKINTEKS, 78, COLIJNS-STEEKT,




