

The
Moto-Reve


Agents.
Victoria:
A. G. HEALING & CO., Melbourne
(Wholesale Distributors only).
New South Wales:
ALICK NcNEIL,
Austral Cycle and Motor Agency,
73 Market Street, Sydney.
South Australia:
W. CORNELL & SON, Adelaide.
West Australia:
NORTLOCK BROS., Queen St., Perth.


THE
Moto-Reve Motor
Cycle
Cycling (constitutes certainly one of the most
interesting modes of locomotion of modern times (if we
except the steam engine), and enables man to travel
at such speed as was never thought of in the time of
our grandfathers, but the bicycle, however wonderful its
convenience, requires a great deal of effort to work it
without fatigue, more especially on long journeys and
in hilly country. On the flat or down hill the bicycle is
the king of the road, but on the up grade it certainly
becomes strenuous. It is owing to this fact that the
Motor has been adapted for Cycles, in order to do away
with physical exertion.
At first they were heavy, clumsy, noisy, and very
hard to manage, but they have gradually been trans-
formed; first Jhe single, and then the twin cylinder
which certainly constitutes the ideal motor for cycles,
, and chief among these the Moto-Reve.
The success which this marvellous little motor has
achieved in exhibitions, in the sporting and competitive
markets of the world, proves effectually that this motor
fills the exact requirements of the public. 1
The 601 b. weight of the Moto-Reve mounted on a
Roadster Bicycle, seems certainly a minimum weight,
which enables one to ,lift and, if need be, to carry it,
making it so handy* that even if stopped by some
accident, the journeyman always be corhpleted by
pedalling if the injury is serious.


Before placing this machine on the market in
Australia we went thoroughly into the matter of re-
liability, and found that never in all our experience had
a machine practically 601bs. weight been as reliable. As
to its power, viz., 2i h.p., it is very high in proportion to
the weight, enabling it to answer all requirements up to
a speed of 40 miles an hour on the level road, as well as
being able to negotiate practically all hills at a fair rate
of speed without difficulty, and with a reasonable surplus
of power. The Moto-Reve is therefore an ideal machine,
and will enable anyone to take runs of 300 miles or
more on fair roads without exertion owing to its com-
plete absence from vibration. The sweetness of its
action is due to the successive motion of the two
cylinders, and to the perfection of the ignition apparatus,
which is by magneto, with distributor.
Owing to the simplicity in handling it is possible to
travel through towns and dense traffic at a moderate
speed and without noise, but in order to give its owner
every satisfaction this little marvel of mechanism must
be understood, and ordinary care and cleanliness must
be adhered to when this engine will respond to all
required of it.
The primary cost of this machine is practically the
only one, as after purchase the cost of running is very
small. A few' quarts of petrol and a little oil is all that
is required for a long journey. There!ore the Moto-
Reve must become the ideal motor for all lovers of travel,
whether on business or pleasure bent.
MOTO-REVE—Showing cog wheel side.
The characteristics of the Moto-Reve, outside of its
lightness and elegance, are the double cylinder and the
magneto. Acting successsfully upon the crank shaft
the two pistons produce a regular pace without knocks
and without noise of explosion, therefore the vibration
so tiring and so hurtful in single cylinder motors is
completely done away with.
The Magneto situated in front of the cylinders
and operated by a series of cog wheels covered by a cap,
supplies regular sparking, and requires no charging nor
special care. Outside of road accidents, which alone
The IViOTO-REVe.


could spoil same, it fears nothing, and never necessitates
regulation. The adjustment is fixed so that the spark
will take place at the plug 3/32 sec. before the end of
the compression, which experience has found the correct
thing. It is, however, possible to advance or retard the
spark to right or left by moving the bronze disc placed
at the left of the magneto. By retarding it will give the
engine an easier start, but the pace will be slower,
whereas a slight advance will increase its speed.
The two ebonite distributors situated on the right of
magneto, conduct the high tension current to the two
sparking plugs, to which they are connected by an
insulated wire. These two ebonite distributors must be
examined from time to time, cleaned, oil and grease
taken away, and it is good to make sure that the steel
brush contained in each is free and working well.
The sparking plugs must be cleaned and the points
of the triangle set 1/64" away from the edges.
After being cleaned with petrol they must be screwed up
tightly, and, in case of oxidisation, they must be changed.
The inlet valves, situated under the intake pipes, require
nothing else but cleanliness and inspection occasionally,
but care must be exercised when taking these to pieces
that the valves are seating properly, and are surrounded
by the springs, failing which they might become dis-
placed and fall on the piston, causing serious injury.
The exhaust valves must open f" maximum before the
end of the explosion, and it would be as well to try these
occasionally with the object of ascertaining whether they
open the full distance, viz., f", as otherwise it would
cause overheating and consequently, loss of power.
We will see later on how, thanks to the adjustable
tappets which open the exhaust valve, any deviation can
be adjusted in a few moments. The exhaust chambers
and pipe might occasionally require cleaning, but this is
a simple matter and requires no comment.
ENGINE—Pulley Side.
The two cylinders, having a bore each of 2f" supply
2i h.p., and are placed V shape on the crank case - ,
forming a complete whole. The engine is fixed upon
the frame of the bicycle by three clips, and is joined on
The MOTO-REVE.


to the tank by two unions connecting petrol and oil tubes;
by unscrewing these the motor naturally comes out of
the frame enabling examination in detail. Removing
the tank, which is fixed by two clips, gives easy access
to all parts of the engine.
CARBURETTER.
The carburetter is placed between the two cylinders
away from the cold, and can be supplied with either hot
or cold air by reversing the admission air hole. There
is another air hole at the top which can be regulated, and
a float pin which rises on arrival of the petrol, which
enters at the lower part of the carburetter through two
small sprays, which might get clogged by impurities, it
is therefore very important never to put petrol into the
tank unless it has passed through a cloth or strainer.
In case of the sprays which admit the petrol becoming
blocked by dirt, remove and clean with a fine thread,
taking care not to enlarge the holes. In order to do
this remove the carburetter and the two little screws
marked “A” “B” which enables them to be taken out
by gently tapping the carburetter.
The admission of gas is controlled by a lever on
the left of handle bar, by pulling the lever inwards the
gas is admitted which increases the pace, and by revers-
ing it is closed. Another lever is placed below this and
lifts the exhaust valve. The transmission of power is
conducted by a leather belt from the engine to the back
wheel, as this belt is flexible it passes over a jockey
pulley which enables the rider to tighten it at will, doing
away with slipping.
The tank is fixed upon the horizontal bar of the
bicycle by two clips and holds one gallon, sufficient for
over 100 miles. It is supplied with a glass level showing
the amount of petrol in the tank, it is also fitted with an
oil pump which can be worked whilst riding.
The above short description is naturally not sufficient
to enable anyone to understand this engine thoroughly;
The MOTO-REVE.


it requires some experience, and, as all motors are
subject to some little troubles and irregularities of
action, we will now study the causes of stoppage and
insufficiency of power, which are usually brought about
by lack of knowledge by the rider.
In order to study the working of the motor lift the
back wheel off the ground by placing on the stand, then
proceed as follows: —
(1) Tighten the belt, which must be loosened
when not in use.
(2) Open the petrol cock.
(3) Put a few drops of kerosene or petrol into
the cylinders by the two compression taps placed
above them, and close again.
(4) Press the two knobs on top of the inlet
valves.
(5) Press lightly on the carburetter pin, which
should then lift and float.
(6) Place controlling lever half way on the
handle bar.
(7) Sit on the saddle, hold up exhaust valve
lifter and pedal sharply.
If the machine is hard to turn the oil has become
thick in the cylinder and a little extra kerosene will
remedy this. It could also happen if there is too much
oil in the engine or if the oil is too thick.
(8) Release the lever sharply while pedalling
and the motor should then operate.
(9) To stop the engine lift the compression
lever again.
The study of a motor working on a stand must be
made with moderation and quickness, m order not to
hurt various parts, as having no draught of air and
travelling at a high speed, it would be apt to overheat
the engine, and it is better to experiment several times
for a short period than to allow the engine to run for a
longer one.
It is necessary to study the various parts as
follows:
(a) The admission lever on the handle bar will
move to and fro and will either work the engine at full
speed or gradually slacken until the motor is fully stopped.
It it does not answer well it is badly regulated and
therefore the following matters must be seen to.
( b ) The Carburetter —The action can vary
according to the quality of the Petrol used, the heat of
the day, the altitude, etc., and if the motor be going at
full speed it is necessary to give it all the air you can by
opening the little valve on top of the carburetter. If to
do this you are obliged to close this little air valve it
denotes that the quantity of petrol supplying the carbur-
etter is insufficient, probably one of the sprays is choked.
Do not forget to clean from time to time the wire gauze
admitting the air.
(c) If the Engine will not start it is necessary to
inspect the sparking by taking the wires off the plugs
and bringing the ends close to the magneto pole. By
pedalling the machine it should then spark at the end of
The MOTO-REVE.


each wire, otherwise the magneto must be out of order.
If the sparking is intermittent inspect (l) the ebonite
distributors (2) the sparking plugs and (3) the wires.
To Inspect the Distributors —Take off
the wire connections, unscrew carefully the distributors
and see that they are not split, if they are greasy, clean
them, and make sure that the contact pin and spring
work freely. Screw in again with the hand and not
with a spanner.
To Inspect the Sparking Plugs —Unscrew
same and see that the porcelain is not split and that all
parts are tight. Clean the inside with a brush and a
little petrol to remove the oil and carbon. Verify the
state of the points and see that they are not melted or
too far from the edge. Screw them tight and replace
the wires in position. A spare plug should always be
carried. It is also necessary to make sure that the wires
are not broken but properly insulated.
To study the sparking of each cylinder separately,
remove the wire from fore distributor, which supplies
the spark to one cylinder, and any omissions of the
explosions could be detected. Replace the connection
and study the back cylinder the reverse way. If every-
thing is in order, piston rings free, petrol flowing properly
and the plugs sparking, if then the engine will not work
correctly, the timing of the motor with the magneto is
defective, that is that the spark does not take place at
the proper time and to regulate this you must proceed as
follows: —
Take out the steel ring situated on the left of the
magneto (held by two little screws) which covers the
platinum points; introduce a fine wire through the
compression tap of the back cylinder, turn the motor
forward and find the time of compression (second time
of the motor) which corresponds with the rise of the
pistons and the closing of the exhaust valve. Reaching
the end of the compression, which is the highest point of
the piston, make a mark on the wire which you have
inserted. Turn the motor backwards so that the piston
drops 2 m.m., about 3/32". It is at this moment that
the platinum points must open in their lower position.
For the front cylinder the same condition is obtained,
but in the top position of the points ; when these positions
are obtained the timing is quite correct. If such is not
the case, and to modify the time of sparking, unscrew
the little aluminium cap covering the cog wheels and
take out the double pinion (third from the front), which
has been specially made for the timing of the motor.
Replace it to get points in position as explained above.
The eccentric pinions must always be replaced exactly
as before, otherwise they will break (mesh these by dots
specially marked on them). All the pinions must revolve
in a bath of solidified oil. The little greaser for the axle
on the magneto must be filled from time to time but
only sparsely.
Exhaust Valves —These are likely to become
dirty with oil, therefore they must be cleaned from time
to time. To do this unscrew the tubes which join the
tank to the engine and push the tank aside, then remove
The MOTO-REVE.


the carburetter and undo with a special key the bolts
fastening the admission pipes. Take out the inlet valves,
you will then reach the exhaust valves, these are
operated by the double cam, which lifts alternately one
of the valve tappets. In a motor properly regulated the
exhaust valve must lift 15 m.m. before the end of the
compression stroke, which can be easily checked by
inserting a wire into the compression tap. When the
motor is out of time a difficulty is produced in the
escapement of the gas; less force is generated and it
must then be regulated by the tappets. To do this
unscrew the bolt, lift the tappets to the required height
and tighten again. The admission valves, which are
automatic, must open li m.m.; these are marked —the
front one point and the back two points. If the springs
of inlet or exhaust valves have lost their tension they
must be taken out and stretched.
To take the Magneto to pieces— This
is a delicate operation and must be done only at the last
extremity, and only when no spark can be obtained.
Proceed as follows :
(1) Take out the two ebonite distributors
situated at the left.
(2) Remove the four screws fixing the con-
denser, lift out same and be careful not to allow the
carbon and metal contacts to fall out.
(3) Take off the greaser on the axle to the left
and the four screws which hold that side. You will
then be able to reach the platinum points which you
can examine and clean with a soft brush and a
little petrol.
(4) To remove reel, take off the aluminium
cover on the right, loosen bolts which hold eccentric
pinion, remove the latter taking care not to lose the
little key.
(5) Slip out the reel by the left and put
immediately a piece of iron accross the magnets,
ascertain that the reel is intact, brush lightly, clean
the sides of the points. Make sure that the dis-
tributor of the high tension, situated to the left
between the two circles of ebonite, is in good order
and that nothing has touched or rubbed against it.
Replace the reel in position.
If the motor has been securely fastened before
operations by placing something between the engine and
the transmission pulley, it will be sufficient to replace
the eccentric pinions exactly as they were before, other-
wise it will be neccessary to proceed in timing the
magneto as explained previously. In replacing the
various pieces of the magneto be careful to tighten all
screws and bolts.
Lubrication —A regular oiling frequently but
not too freely is indispensable. Half a pump every
three or four miles when the motor is new is sufficient,
later on oil less frequently, and one injection of oil before
starting a heavy climb will be found useful. The oil
used is of great 'importance, it must be half fluid and not
too black, thinner in Winter than in Summer. It is
The MOTO-REVE.


necessary from time to time to let the burnt and impure
oil out by the tap below the crank case. Inject at
once three full pumps of fresh oil. The jockey axle
must be greased with solidified oil by filling the cavity
behind. Do not forget to oil the bicycle now and again.
To Start the Motor —Proceed exactly as
when on the stand, not forgetting to assist as soon as it
responds. Carefully avoid the racing of the engine,
which is caused by the belt not being sufficiently tight
or by the bad quality of the belt. The racing of the
engine generally happens at the start when the belt can
be tightened; when climbing a steep hill diminish the
supply of gas if engine is racing as this overheats same,
and will often cause the seizing of the cylinders. To
slacken speed the gas must be reduced by pushing the
lever outwards. As a general rule it is better to face a
hill at full speed and slacken by raising the exhaust
lifter slightly; by lifting it right against the handle of the
bicycle you stop the motor.
Upkeep of Engine —From time to time,
but especially after a long journey, it is necessary to
proceed to the cleaning of your motor, which can be
easily done with a brush and kerosene without removing
anything but the belt. It would be advisable in doing
so to see that all bolts and screws are well tightened and
that no parts are missing. The bicycle requires oil and
the jockey pulley and the magneto axles greasing, by
doing so you will avoid disagreeable noises and wear and
tear of machine, which thus attended to will give better
results in the way of lengthy life, to say nothing of
obviating the repulsive look of a motor covered with mud
and oil.
Spare Parts —-Outside of the tools supplied in
the bag, it is advisable when taking a long journey to
take a few spare parts and tools, a pair of flat pinches, a
universal screwdriver, a file and a bell punch. All these
are useful tools.
As to spare parts we advise the following : —Two
sparking plugs ; two insulated wires ; a belt; two ebon-
ite distributors ; a screw for the pulley ; some hooks and
perhaps also an exhaust inlet valve, but the latter are not
absolutely necessary.
CONCLUSION —(SPECIAL NOTICE).
These ideal motors are only supplied after each has
been tested on the road and properly regulated, and being
adjusted exactly to the proper point. It is not fair to
work them too hard during the first few days after pur-
chase, in order to allow all parts to work smoothly. We
therefore recommend riders not to run their motors full
speed, nor to travel great distances while new. It is also
necessary to lubricate the motor freely (half a pump
every two or three miles), after running 100 miles or so
the motor will be set and will give best results, doing
any work in reason. But we still recommend regular
lubrication, even if not so copious as before, and to make
sure that the pump is acting properly.
Brown, Prior & Co., Printers, 165, 167. 171 Queen Street, Melbourne.
The MOTO-REVE.


1 Crank Case, valve side
2 Crank Case, pulley side
3 Bush, pulley side
4 Bush, valve side
5 Stud Bolts, for attaching to frame
6 Stud Bolts, for attaching cylinder
7 Nipple, for oil connection
8 Leather Piece
9 Screw for No. 8
10 Moto-Reve Name Plate
11 Screw, holding No. 10
12 Bush, for cam shaft
13 Tappett Bush, front
14 Tappett Bush, rear
15 Drain Tap Handle
16 Spring, for No. 15
17 Washer, for No. 15
18 Screw, for No. 15
19 Large Spanner
20 Small Spanner
21 Aluminium Case, covering cogs
22 Lubricator, for No. 21
23 Fly Wheel, pulley side
24 Fly Wheel, dist. side
25 Half-Shaft, pulley side
26 Nut, for No. 25
27 Half-Shaft, dist. side
28 Nut, for No. 27
29 Pulley Wheel
30 Cup. for jockey pulley lever
31 Plate, with shafts for cogs
32 Ball Valve, for No. 31
33 Crank Shaft, attaching fly wheels
34 Nut, for No. 33
35 Cam Shaft Bearing, cog side
36 Valve Tappett, complete
36A Adjustable Cap, for No. 36
37 Double Cam Shaft
38 Nut, for No. 37
39 Large Cog, engaging ½-speed wheel
40 Cog, for cam shaft
41 Cog, attaching to magneto spindle
42 Cog, engaging No. 43.
43 Cog. attaching to No. 42
44 Cog, engag. No. 39 in magneto line
45 Eccentric Cog, second from magneto
45a Large Cog. attached to No. 45
46 Cog, attaching to half shaft
47 Bolt, holding No. 35 in place
48 Nut, for No. 47
49 Bolt, holding crank case together
50 Nut, for No. 49
51 Screw, atta. carburetter to intake pipe
52 Screw, for jockey pulley arm
53 Magneto transmission box
54 Cap, for No. 53
55 Back Cylinder
56 Front Cylinder
57 Compression Cock
58 Compression Cock
59 Stud Bolts, for attaching 55 to frame
60 Exhaust Lifter Fork
61 Complete Sparking Plug
62 Nut, holding wire for No. 61
63 Small Nut, holding porcelain
64 Porcelain
65 Large Nut, holding No. 64
66 Body of No. 61
67 Washer, for No. 66
68 Intake Pipes, complete
69 Inlet Valve Agitator
70 Lockrings, for intake pipes
71 Intake Pipe, only
72 Intake Pipe Union, hold'g carburetter
73 Piston
74 Piston Ring
75 Gudgeon Pin
76 G. Pin, set screw
77 Split Pin, for No. 76
78 Front Piston Rod
79 Back Piston Rod
80 Bush, for Nos. 78 and 79
81 Exhaust Valve Guide
82 Exhaust Valve Stem
83 Exhaust Valve Spring
84 Seat, for No. 83
85 Cotter, for No. 84
86 Inlet Valve Seat
87 Inlet Valve Stem
88 Inlet Valve Spring
89 Seat, for No. 88
90 Cotter, for No. 89
91 Cap. for petrol tank
92 Studs, holding tank to frame
93 Top Screw, holding gauge glass
94 Gauge Glass
94A Clip, holding glass to tank
95 Screw, for petrol pipe
96 Complete Wire, for throttle
97 Loops, for insulated wire
98 Screw, for oil pipe
99 Pump Plunger, complete
100 Screw, holding No. 99
101 Cap, for oil tank
102 Petrol or Oil Pipe
103 Union, for No. 102
104 Nut, fixing magneto to base
105 Nuts, fixing cylinder to crank case
106 Nuts, for No. 59
107 Screw, for No. 49
108 Screw
109 Screw, for No. 21
110 Screw, for No. 54
111 Screw
112 Screw
113 Screw, holding No. 52
114 Screw
115 Washers, for No. 45
116 Screw, for holding No. 31
117 Key, for inlet valve
118 Washer
119 Washer
120 Small Screw, holding spray
120A Large Screw, holding spray
121 Carburetter Body
122 Gauge
123 Gauge Frame
124 Carburetter Top
125 Throttle Wheel
126 Throttle, with nut
127 Top, for float chamber
128 Loose Ring, for No. 127
129 Inlet tickler
130 Nut, for No. 133
131 Gauge, for extra air
132 Lever, for extra air
133 Supply Pipe Connection
134 Cap, for No. 133
135 Float
136 Washer, for No. 136
137 Nut, for No. 139
138 Screw, for No. 132
139 Petrol Supply Valve
140 Screw, for Nos. 42 and 45.
141 Screw, for holding spray
142 Screw’, holding No. 125
143 Pin. holding No. 137
144 Exhaust Pipe, only
145 Union Nut, for No. 144
146 Clip
147 Magnet
148 Base, for magneto poles
149 Studs, holding magneto
150 Retaining Studs
151 Screws, holding Nos. 148 to 152
152 Magneto Pole, front
152A Magneto Pole, back
153 Black Ring
154 Ring, round commutator
155 Screw, for No. 154
156 Plat Screw, for rocker
157 Plat Screw, fixed
157A Nut, for No. 157
158 Stop Screw
259 Flat Spring, with screw.
160 Rocker Arm
161 Screw, for No. 160
162 Base, for No. 156
163 Distributor Discs
154 Distributor Brush, complete
165 Large Brush
166 Small Brush
167 Wire Terminal End
168 Condenser, complete
169 Screw, holding No. 168
170 Nut. for No. 172
171 Greaser
172 Fibre Ring
173 Cover, for No. 174
174 Cover, for Commutator
175 Bush, for No. 174
176 Spindle, for No. 174
177 Distributor Case
178 Spindle, for No. 177
179 Brush, for No. 177
180 Fibre Bush
181 Screw, for brush
182 Brush Holder
182A Screw, for No. 182
183 Thumb Screw
184 Screw
185 Screw
186 Nut
187 Washer
188 Screw
189 Screw
190 Screw
191 Screw
192 Pulley, jockey
192A Nut, for No. 192
193 Spindle, for No. 192
194 Top of No. 209
195 Greaser
196 Spring, for No. 195
196A Screws, for No. 196
197 Union, for tank
198 Nut, for No. 197
199 Nut, for No. 95
200 Lever


The Moto-Reve
Against ALL Competitors
Wins the Following Prizes;—
Rsliabi ity Trials held at Lyons, France
Three Teams of three Motor Cycles each.
The MOTO-REYE gains Ist, 2nd and 3rd prizes.
(beating motors of all power.)
Reliability Trials Reid at Nice, under the auspices of the Automobile
Club of France, tRe Moto-Reve won the following Prizes—
Speed Competition ... ... ... ... ’ Ist and 2nd prizes
Mountain Climbing ... ... ... ... Ist and 2nd prizes
Endurance Competition ... ... ... ... Ist and 2nd prizes
The Special Medals given for the LIGHTEST and
MOST PERFECT TWIN CYLINDER MOTOR. . .
were awarded -
Ist—GOLD MEDALS ) To the
2nd—GOLD MEDALS ) MOTO-REVE
The Special Medal given by the Touring Club of France, for
the most perfect Motor-Cycle for public use, was awarded to the
MOTO-REVE. " .
Reliability and Regularity Trials of the Motor-Cycle Union of
Eastern Switzerland —171 Kilometers.
(Twin Cylinders, from 2 to 6 h.p.)
Ist and 2nd Prizes to the MOTO-REVE.
The Jury complimented the MOTO-REYE upon the excep-
tional regularity of running and the small consumption of Benzine,
viz., 6} pints for 171 kilometers (117 miles.)
