





THE
COLONIES OF AUSTRALIA:
THEIR FORMATION, PROGRESS, AND PRESENT STATE;
THE DISCOVERY OF THE
GOLD FIELDS,
WITH
THE LATEST INTELLIGENCE FROM THE DIGGINGS;
ADVICE TO EMIGRANTS,
&c. &c.
BY JOHN FAIRFAX, ESQ.,
JOINT-PROPRIETOR AND JOINT-EDITOR OF THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD,
LONDON:
EFFINGHAM WILSON, COLONIAL PUBLISHER,
11, ROYAL EXCHANGE.
Price One Shilling.




LONDON:
REED AND PARDON, PRINTERS,
PATERNOSTER ROW.




The substance of this pamphlet was recently given as a
Lecture at the Music Hall, Leamington, at the request of
the Committee of the Literary and Scientific Institution;
and a large portion was inserted in the local journal of that
beautiful and rising town. The Committee were pleased
to express their approbation of the amount of information
contained in the Lecture, and suggested that its publication
in a more permanent shape might be instrumental, to a
larger extent, of diffusing correct impressions respecting the
past, present, and future, of the colonies of Australia. In
compliance with this view, but in a somewhat different
character, and with intelligence to a later date, it is now
presented to the public.
London, July 31 st, 1852.




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
PAGE
Importance of correct information at the present juncture—Disco-
very of the continent of Australia—Captain Cook—Size,
latitude, and longitude—Convicts first sent in 1788 —The abori-
ginal inhabitants—Mr. Surveyor Kennedy—Jackey-Jackey—
Early working of the convict system—Emigrants introduced
and capitalists encouraged—ln 1840, an Order in Council issued,
declaring New South Wales no longer a place to which convicts
should he sent—lmmediate improvement and rapid rise of all
the interests—Lord Grey defeated—Van Diemen’s Land—Swan
River—South Australia—Burra mines—Port Phillip—Victoria
—Religion and politics of New South Wales—Education-
Colonial grievances—Remonstrance and Petition—The commer-
cial and pastoral advancement, statistics, &c.—Wool, tallow,
cotton —Wines 1
CHAPTER 11.
Prosperous state of the colony—lntimation of the existence of gold,
by the Rev. W. B. Clarke to Sir R. J. Murchison—California—
Mr. Hargrave’s discovery—Mr. Stutehbury’s confirmation—
Effects upon the labour market—Proclamation by the Governor
—Gold licences and regulations—Austin’s lump—Wentworth’s
estate—Caution of the press—Largo quantities of gold arrive in
Sydney—Visit of Sydney merchants to the mines—Statements


PAGE
from the Bathurst Free Press —The 1061 h. piece—Large arrival
of persons from the neighbouring colonies—Gold at Ballarat
and Mount Alexander, in the colony of Victoria—lncrease in
quantity—Opinions of Mr. Hargrave, Mr. Hardy, and Mr.
Clarke—New prospects for the colonies—" Where gold is found
—Probable results 25
CHAPTEE 111.
Advice to Emigrants—The industrious and sober—The idle and
dissipated—Capital of two kinds, money and labour—The
people who should go—The people who should stay at home—
The saddler’s hoy—Well-educated young men without trade
or profession . .46
CHAPTEE IV.
Latest intelligence from the Gold Fields 50


CHAPTER I.
There never was a moment when correct and truthful
information respecting the colonies of Australia was more
necessary and important than at the present juncture. My
observations, both in London and the provinces, since my
arrival in this country, have every day confirmed that opinion.
Almost innumerable applications have been made to me, and
in each case I have given such advice as my long colonial
life and experience enable me to impart, without favour to
the colony, or affection to the party desirous of emigrating.
I cannot, I dare not, deceive the anxious inquirer. The
tearing of one’s-self away from the land of one’s birth; the
snapping asunder of ties rendered sacred by nature’s purest
and loveliest aspirations, are of too momentous a character
to be treated lightly. In carrying out these opinions, an
impression, I understand, is gone abroad that I discourage
emigration. I think it necessary, therefore, in the outset to
contradict such an impression. I am too well acquainted
with the wants and wishes of the colonists to attempt to dam
up the stream of population which has set in to the coasts
of the finest, and, as I think and believe, the most healthy
portion of the globe. But I am desirous of encouraging
only such people as in my conscience I think will be suc-
cessful/ whether they prosecute their own profession or trade,
or proceed at once to the gold-fields.
Australia is the largest island in the world. It was first
discovered by the Dutch, in the seventeenth century; but
it was not recognized, and scarcely known, by the British


Government, until the following century, when Captain Cook
visited its shores, and explored a short distance only into
its interior. The name of this distinguished navigator is
rendered almost immortal in the colony; but the lip only
speaks his praise. With shame be it spoken, no public
monument attests the gratitude of its inhabitants, and no
successful effort has ever been attempted to blot out from
Australia’s escutcheon the disgrace of such neglect. Yet
there is one significant memorial of his greatness. On the
southern side of the bay at Botany there is a well of water,
and hard by there lives a labouring man. It is his wont,
when strangers pass his cottage, to invite them to drink of
the well which Cook opened up, and where he and his crew
quenched their thirst, and filled up their empty water-casks.
The ceremony is simple, but striking. You must imitate
him, and, with hare head and reverent manner, you drink
the brimful tumbler at the margin of the well, exclaiming,
“To the memory of the immortal Captain Cook !”
The size of the island, being 2500 miles from east to west,
and 2000 from north to south, has induced historians to call
it a continent, rather than an island; and when it is con-
sidered that this large mass of land is nearly the size of
Europe, the more important designation cannot he thought
inappropriate. The situation of the continent is between
latitude 10° and 39° S., and longitude 113° to 153° E. It
was sixty-four years, on the 26th of last January, when the
first colony was founded, and when, by beating of drum and
the firing of cannon, the continent was taken possession of
in the name of his Majesty Xing George the Third.
Like the first North American colonies, the colony of
New South Wales was founded by British criminals. Unfit
to live at home, a distant prison-house was provided; but in
this step the Government of the day omitted an important
duty. All the machinery for coercion and punishment was
there, —the soldier, the scourge, the bayonet, and the
sword; but the minister of peace, he who could explain
and open up the privileges and blessings of the gospel,—


who could help the degraded and miserable convict when
the stings of an awakened conscience should lead him to
exclaim, “ What must I do to he saved ? ” and who could
present the balm of Gilead and its great Physician,—he,
alas! was absent; and not until several years had passed
away was this terrible omission rectified. “ There goes the
foundation of a mighty empire ! ” said Lord Sydney, as the
first vessels left the shores of Albion. How prophetic, and
how true !
When the first ships arrived, the aboriginal inhabitants
were numerous; but their number has greatly diminished,
so that, at the present time, they are variously estimated at
from 20,000 to 30,000, including the tribes on the several
coasts, and in the interior. These sable sons of our com-
mon parent are, in the neighbourhoods of civilization and
cultivation, for the most part an harmless and inoffensive
people; but in the distant Bush, where their life is of a
more savage and brutal kind, they greatly annoy the flock-
masters, by driving off cattle and sheep. These depreda-
tions often lead to bloodshed; and, of course, the weapons
of the white man being more deadly and destructive than
the waddy and the boomerang of the black, the latter fall
the victims of their own perfidy and ingratitude. I say
ingratitude, because these robberies generally follow acts of
kindness on the part of shepherds and stock-keepers. Can-
nibalism, as far as I have been able to ascertain, has only
been known to exist on the northern coast, in the neigh-
bourhood extending from Curtis’s Island, Weymouth Bay,
and Melville Island, as far as Cape York. On no part of
this particular coast has any effort to colonize been made.
It was at Rockingham Bay, in 1840, that Mr, Surveyor
Kennedy lost his life, by a spear thrown at him by one of
these savages. This enterprising and respectable gentle-
man had been appointed by the Government to survey the
land on the coast, with a staff of ten or twelve men, and it
was whilst thus employed that his life was sacrificed. A
native of a more civilized tribe was his servant, and he was


described as attending poor Kennedy during the two or
three days in which he lingered, with the fondness and
affection of a brother. So much was the kindness of this
black man, whose name was Jackey-Jackey, appreciated by
the Colonial Legislative Council, that they voted him a
pension of £2O a year for life. In passing, I may mention
that the aborigines are a peculiar race. They resemble
not the Hottentot or the Malay, nor have they the fine
manly features of the Tahitian or the Samoan. Specula-
tion as to their origin is not to be trusted. Unlike other
heathen races, they have no idea of a supreme Being. On
this point, I have been careful to examine them on every
convenient opportunity. Their only notion of a spiritual
being is that of some dreadful thing which they call “ Deble-
Debleand when fear takes possession of their minds,
caused especially by thunder and lightning, they imme-
diately become terrified and alarmed lest the evil spirit
should come and take them away. They have no idea of
worshipping this evil spirit, but they have some most inde-
finite notion that after death they will become animals of
another shape or kind.
The original convict colony of New South Wales, or, as it
was called thirty or forty years ago, the penal settlement of
Botany Bay, was only limited by the extent of the territory;
but when the idea of establishing other colonies was enter-
tained, it became necessary to define the limits of this, the
oldest settlement. Its northern limit on the eastern coast
was Wide Bay, about 050 miles from Sydney. Cape Nor-
thumberland, on the southern coast, 800 or 900 miles from
Sydney, was the point of land dividing New South Wales
from South Australia; and imaginary lines were drawn
from these two points into the interior, as shown on the
chart. Some twenty years after the foundation of the
convict colony, the Government were perplexed on account
of the complex character of the inhabitants. A great
number of the original convicts had become free, and by
good behaviour had received grants of land, and were


variously employing themselves in agricultural or com-
mercial pursuits. The work-people of these masters were
assigned servants. The stain of convictism thus attached
itself both to the employer and the employed; and although
the cat-o’-nine-tails was freely used on the hacks of the
latter, a feeling of distrust, envy, and jealousy, and often
robbery and murder, was a consequence of this unnatural
state of society. To obviate this, and to throw amongst
the population a class of persons, who, by the healthy tone
of their morals, should be doubly beneficial, the Home
Government determined to offer inducements to capitalists
and labouring men, as well as mechanics and artisans, to
emigrate to the colony. The inducements were a free
passage for poor people, and in the case of the rich, a free
grant of land, equal in value to the amount of money they
were possessed of on landing, calculated at the rate of five
shillings per acre. This system continued, with more or
less advantage to the emigrant, until about the year 1834,
when the land was sold by public auction, at or above an
upset price of twelve shillings per acre, which raised a fund
at once for purposes purely emigrational. In 1841 the
upset price was raised to twenty shillings an acre.
In a few years the system of convictism was found to be
not only burdensome but detrimental to the progress of
morality and religion ; and the excellence of free emigrant
labour, contrasted with the forced labour of the lash, induced
the belief that the colony could never rise from its degraded
and immoral condition until it should cease altogether from
being a place to which transported felons should be sent.
Representations of these facts, followed by petitions from
all classes, were made to both Houses of Parliament, and to
the king in council. Subsequently, a committee of the
House of Commons was appointed to investigate the state
of the colony. Fortunately, several colonists were in Eng-
land at this time, who were able to furnish ample informa-
tion, and the result was a recommendation by the committee,
that transportation to this colony should immediately cease.


The king, with the advice of the Privy Council, complied
with this recommendation, and early in the year 1840 the
colony lost its penal character.
From this period the place assumed a new and invigorated
aspect. Men of fortune, and respectable mechanics, made
their way to this land of freedom, —the increase in the
population was prodigious,—new sources of industry were
opened up, —the pastoral interests were amazingly augmented,
—the hidden wealth, above and below the soil, became ap-
parent, —and with the devotion of Britons, embracing the
hardy sons of England, the brawny arms of Scotland, and
the wild vigour of Ireland, all difficulties were overcome, and
there stood out before the older nations of the earth a new
empire, destined not only to become one of the brightest
jewels in Queen Victoria’s crown, but, as late events have
shown, to be the first spot in her vast dominions whence
shall proceed the diadem which ere long shall adorn her
brow. Long live England’s Queen ! Long live Australia’s
Queen! —the Queen of the South as well as of the West!
The loyalty and affection of our continent shall vie with the
love of your small island; and in the progress of events,
when His Eoyal Highness the Prince of Wales shall be a
post-captain, or an admiral, he may command the gallant
hark, which shall safely convey our beloved Sovereign to
the sunny climes of Australia, there to test our wealth and
greatness, —there, with her own queenly hand, to rock a
golden cradle, and there to receive the homage and respect
of the distant antipodeans.
It will scarcely he believed that the late Colonial Minister,
Earl Grey, for the last four or five years, has menaced us
by threatening again to renew the old convict system. But
the united voice of all the Australian colonies, together with
Van Diemen’s Land and New Zealand, has been heard. A
league of the whole, under the title of the “ Australasian
League,” was formed, and the prayer of half a million of
people was granted, the Queen (God bless her!) declaring, by
an order of council, that England’s felons shall not be again


the plague, the curse, of New South Wales. But our sister,
the Paradise of the South, —I mean Van Diemen’s Land, —is
still subject to the dreadful yoke. Convictism has reduced
her to a state bordering upon bankruptcy. Her social
position, as regards her felon population, is infamous.
The one half of the crimes which are there perpetrated
could not be mentioned. England should attempt the
reform of her criminals; hut hitherto no method of ex-
patriation has succeeded. To group together 25,000 or
30,000 men, steeped in crime, and where “ evil communi-
cations” do indeed “ corrupt good manners,” is not the way to
promote their reformation. Apart, the criminal may repent;
together, the thing is next to impossible. And look at the
expense. TOO per annum for each convict, from the time of
his conviction and deportation, to the period of his becom-
ing free, is a moderate calculation. In this sum of course
I include all the instruments of coercion, as military, police,
&c. But I must not pursue a subject which maybe thought
irrelevant to the matter in hand.
I shall now, in the most brief manner possible, touch upon
the other three colonies. On the western point of the con-
tinent, in the year 1829, a settlement of free emigrants was
formed on the hanks of the river Swan. lam not sure if
the large grants of land there were free or purchased, hut my
impression is, that the Government made a free grant of
several millions of acres, subject to certain conditions as to
cultivation and improvement, to Col. Peel, and a number of
other gentlemen. Several blunders were made in the early
part of this undertaking, and many of the first settlers retired
from it in disgust. There was very little agricultural land,
and its pasturage was so bare and limited, that hut few sheep,
comparatively, could be supported. It had other disadvan-
tages, —as its great distance from the other colonies, minerals
being very scarce, &c.; so that, for want of available exports,
this settlement, under a fine climate, has not thriven, al-
though from time to time numerous expedients have been
adopted, in the hope of insuring success.


About three years ago, the Swan River settlers petitioned
the Home Government that convicts might be sent to them.
They imagined that a large commissariat and military
expenditure would be caused by the Swan becoming a
penal settlement. In this, I think, they will be disap-
pointed. However, the last accounts of the state of this
colony were favourable. A surgeon in the royal navy, who
had come out in charge of a convict ship, and who after-
wards came on to Sydney, informed me that the colony was
progressing favourably, and that the population was now
about 10,000.
The next colony in the order of time was founded in
1835, by a public company, called the South Australian
Company. It is distant 000 miles from the Swan, on the
southern coast, and was formed on what is known as the
Wakefield theory of colonization. The company sold land
in London, at 20s. per acre, and with the revenue thus
raised, they dispatched a great number of ships; but the
whole scheme, like the New Zealand Company’s affairs, was
soon after involved in difficulty. The gambling, commenced
in London, was carried on in Adelaide; and the land, both
in towns and in the interior, having obtained a fictitious and
ruinous value, nearly the whole colony, from the government
to the poorest settler, was plunged into a state of insolvency.
If I should be asked, Why was this colony, in the year 1840,
necessarily ruined ? I reply by asking another question. If
agricultural and pastoral land can be obtained at its full value
—five shillings per acre, in the Canadas, and at the Cape, why
should land 16,000 miles from London be worth, in London,
twenty shillings per acre? Providentially, South Australia
had, at this trying and perplexing period of her history,
Colonel Gawler as Lieut.-Governor. He had the confidence
of the Home Government; and although the colony had
been founded altogether independent of imperial funds, the
British Government honoured his drafts to an amount of
nearly £280,000; and thus not only saved the colony,
but established it upon a firmer and more enduring
foundation.


It was very soon after the time just specified, that copper
mines were discovered. There are upwards of fifty mining
companies, which were formed in Adelaide, for working
mines situate in different parts of the province; hut the
false and exaggerated accounts given to the world of the
prospects of most of them, the failure of the workings in
general, and the glaring frauds committed by scheming
scrip-sellers and brokers, upon “new chums” and others,
have generated a want of confidence in any mine hut the
Burra-Burra. It was in 1845 that this latter company was
formed in South Australia. A special survey of 20,000
acres was resolved upon, and a junction effected between
two parties, formed respectively of the principal men of
Adelaide, sometimes called the “ nobs,” and of the trades-
men and other less nobby individuals in Adelaide, more
commonly designated “the snobs.” The money having
been paid, and the survey effected, it was a matter altogether
uncertain whether the northern half was more valuable than
the other end, now known as the Princess Royal Mine.
Indeed, the magnificent out-croppings in the hills of the
Princess Royal led many to consider that end as the pre-
ferable portion. Some of the shareholders were desirous
that no division should take place between the nobs and the
snobs; but the amalgamation was generally disliked, and
the difference was quickly disposed of by the toss-up of a
half-penny—the toss being won by the snobs, who chose
the Burra end, much, no doubt, to the present regret of
the Princess Royal shareholders, whose £SO scrip is not sale-
able now at £l2. The shares of the Burra Company were
divided into 2464 shares of £5 each, thus raising a capital
of £12,220. The history of this mine is most remarkable,
and its profits most extraordinary. In 1846, the company
raised 7200 tons of ore; and in the following year nearly
double that quantity, paying the first and second dividends
of fifty shillings each upon the £5 shares. The raisings of
the year 1848,amounted to £13,533 tons. The third divi-
dend of £5 a share was paid on the 18th of August, 1847; a


fourth dividend of £lO a share was paid on the Ist of
December; and a fifth dividend of £lO a share was paid
on the Ist of March, 1818. At this time the prices of
shares in the market had advanced from £IOO to £150;
but on the Ist of the following September, the directors
having issued a most glittering report, and promised a
dividend of £lO on the first day of every third month, the
prices of shares ranged from £2OO to £2lO for cash, and at
more extravagant rates upon credit. But the latter end of
this year, and the beginning of 1849, proved a severe trial
both for the mine and for those who had speculated in
shares. Not only did the copper market continue to fall,
but the miners struck for wages, and the mining operations
were suspended from November till February. Shares fell
to £llO. But towards the end of 1849, and during the year
1850, the copper market regained its former standard, the
ore became richer than ever, shares gradually rose to £2OO
each, and the quarterly dividends of £lO each were regularly
paid. The total quantity of ore raised during the five
years, was 54,428 tons. The whole of the transactions of
the company, from its formation to the 29th September,
1849, embracing four years and a half, were, in the year
1850, finally balanced, and the profits during that period
were found to amount to £229,535, of which £221,760 were
divided among the shareholders in twelve dividends, the
twelfth dividend of £lO having been paid on the Ist Sep-
tember, 1850. The ore raised during this period was
37,736 tons, at a cost of £309,825 3s. 6 d., or £8 4s. 3d. per
ton, and produced in the province, free of freight and
charges, £536,486 13s. 4 d., or £l4 4s. id. per ton, leaving a
profit of £226,661 6s. 10d., or £0 os. Id. per ton. The year
1851 was not so successful. In the months of March,
April, and May, the work of mining was greatly retarded by
the difficulty of keeping the water under; and in the follow-
ing months a still greater difficulty arose, from the departure
of nearly all the miners for the gold-fields. Although this
is only a temporary obstacle, as a few the old hands have


returned, and new ones are being sent out, the shares fell
lower than ever, and the market price could not be quoted at
more than £SO each. My own opinion is, that at this moment
they are really worth £IOO. The population of South
Australia is, according to the last census, about 70,000.
Adelaide, the capital, numbers 13,000 to 14,000 persons.
Port Phillip, lying between and adjoining South Australia
and New South Wales, was first occupied, in 1836, by some
large stock-masters who came over Bass’s Straits from Van
Diemen’s Land, and commenced depasturing sheep and
cattle on the beautiful grass-lands which were then dis-
covered. As these lands formed a portion of New South
Wales, the then governor, Sir Richard Burke, despatched
the surveyor-general to survey the large blocks of land in
those districts. He reported, that it was a land flowing with
milk and honey, and named it “Australia Felix.” Very
soon afterwards the country was opened up —townships were
formed—Melbourne, the capital, was commenced—and in
1839, Mr. Latrobe was appointed the superintendent.
This territory continued under the government of New
South Wales until 1850, when, by Act of Council, the Queen
declared it to be for the future a distinct and separate
colony, under the name of “ Victoria.” The population is
between 60,000 and 70,000, and the city of Melbourne is a
well-built, regular town, numbering about 25,000 persons.
The interests and resources of the two colonies of New
South Wales and Victoria are similar. Until the discovery
of gold fields in both, their chief exports were wool and
tallow. As I shall have occasion to mention Victoria again,
I shall return to New South Wales. But before doing so,
I may remark, that Van Diemen’s Land, or Tasmania, is an
island 700 miles from Sydney; and thatythe three islands of
New Zealand are 1200 miles distant.
I shall now draw the attention of the reader to the reli-
gion, politics, commerce, agriculture, and statistics of New
South Wales. The inhabitants of that distant country have
carried with them the religion of their fatherland. The
B


same precious truths of the ever-hlessed Bible cheer the
heart of the Christian in both hemispheres. Your psalms
and songs of praise, in happy, merry England, are our “ songs
in the house of our pilgrimage.” Your altars are our altars;
your God is our God. We carry with us the institutions of
Great Britain. We love her people; w y e venerate and
respect her laws; under her government, the most perfect
of any in the world, we live; and long may the flag of Eng-
land wave over our shores—protecting us from the demo-
cracy within, and from the enemies without, of our highly-
favoured and beautiful colonies. According to the Church
Act of the colony of New South Wales, all sections of the
Christian religion are equal—all may be assisted in free
grants of land, and in contributions towards building
churches and chapels, as well as in obtaining government
salaries for their ministers. The churches which receive
State support are the English, the Scotch, the Wesleyan,
and the Romish. The respective amounts paid for
the year 1850, were as follows: —The diocese of Sydney,
£13,015 17s. Ad. ; the diocese of Newcastle, £4028 7s. 10 d.;
the* Presbyterian Church, £3378 Is. Id. ; the Wesleyan
Church,£Bso; and the Roman Catholic Church, £8159 05.9 d .;
in all about £30,000. The Congregational and Baptist
churches are equally entitled to support and assistance from
the public purse, but, acting on their avowed principles of
voluntaryism, they build their places of worship and sup-
port their ministers without drawing upon the public revenue.
The Episcopal establishment is under great obligations to
those venerable societies, the Christian Knowledge Society,
and the Society for Propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts.
There is annually expended, for the purposes of Education,
about £17,000; this sum is divided according to the census,
partly amongst the Denominational Schools, and partly to
Paternal Board of Education.
The politics of New South Wales take their form and
* The Free Church of Scotland has not hitherto applied for government
funds.


fashion very much from the mother country; but the old
names of parties, Whig and Tory, Liberal and Conservative,
&c., can scarcely he applied. Of course people do retain a
great predilection for the respective political creeds in which
at home they were educated. But when a man becomes a
colonist, and settles down with his family and all his interests
around him, he very soon becomes alive to the grievances
under which, with his fellow colonists, he groans. The
politics, therefore, of the colony may be summed pp in this
sentence —a struggle wuth the colonial minister in parti-
cular, and the Houses of Parliament in general, for the
extension of that freedom and those political rights and
privileges which are enjoyed by our fellows on this side the
globe. And as surely as it is an Englishman’s privilege to
grumble, so certainly will the colonists of New South Wales
continue to grumble, until the management of her own
affairs, and the disposal of her own funds, are placed in the
hands of the people’s representatives, in the same manner as
has been granted to the colonists of both the Canadas.
That I may not be misunderstood, and that the impression
may not go forth that we are a disaffected, disloyal, or chartist
people, I shall give the solemn protest passed by the late
Legislative Council, forming a part of a Petition to the Queen
and both Houses of Parliament. It is as follows;
“We, the Legislative Council of New South Wales, do hereby solemnly
protest, insist, and declare as follows :
Ist. Grievance—“ That the Imperial Parliament has not, nor of right
ought to have, any power to tax the people of this Colony, or to ap-
propriate any of the moneys levied by authority of the Colonial Legis-
lature ; —that this power can only be lawfully exercised by the
Colonial Legislature;—and that the Imperial Parliament has so-
lemnly disclaimed this power by the 18 Geo. 111, cap. 12, sec. 1,
which Act remains unrepealed.
2nd. Grievance—“ That the revenue arising from the public lands, de-
rived as it is mainly from the value imparted to them by the labour
and capital of the people of this Colony, is as much their property
as the ordinary revenue, and ought therefore to be subject only to the
like control and appropriation.
b 2


3rd. Grievance—“ That the customs, and all other departments, should
be subject to the direct supervision and control of the Colonial
Legislature ; which should have the appropriation of the gross reve-
nues of the Colony, from whatever source arising; and, as a necessary
incident to this authority, the regulation of the salaries of all Colo-
nial Officers.
4th Grievance—“ That offices of trust and emolument should bo con-
ferred only on the settled inhabitants, the office of Governor alone
excepted; that this officer should be appointed and paid by the
Crown ; and that the whole patronage of the Colony should be vested
in him and the Executive Council, unfettered by Instructions from
the Minister for the Colonies.
sth Grievance—“ That plenary powers of Legislation should be con-
ferred upon and exercised by the Colonial Legislature for the time
being; and that no Bills should be reserved for the signification of
Her Majesty’s pleasure, unless they affect the prerogatives of the
Crown, or the general interests of the Empire.
“ Solemnly protesting against these wrongs, and insisting upon these
our undoubted rights, we leave the redress of the former, and the asser-
tion of the latter, to the people whom we represent, and the legislature
which shall follow us.”
And I ask a British public, Is there in these five points
anything required which ought not to be granted to a free
and enlightened people ? It was the levying of taxes upon
the American colonists that first brought about disaffection,
and led to the loss of that splendid portion of the globe.
How eloquently did the immortal Burke struggle with the
Government of that day, when he declared—
“My hold of the colonies is in the close affection which grows from
common homes, from kindred blood, from similar privileges and equal
protection. These are ties which, though light as air, are as strong as
links of iron. Let the colonies always keep the idea of their civil rights
associated with your government; they will cling and grapple to you;
and no force under heaven will be of power to tear them from their
allegiance. But let it be once understood that your government may be
one thing, and their privileges another; that these two things may exist
without any mutual relation; the cement is gone, the cohesion is loosened,
and everything hastens to decay and dissolution. As long as you have
the wisdom to keep the sovereign authority of this country as the sanc-
tuary of liberty, the sacred temple consecrated to our common faith,
wherever the chosen race and sons of England worship freedom, they


will turn their faces towards you. The more they multiply, the more
friends you will have; the more ardently they love liberty, the more
perfect will be their obedience. Slavery they can have anywhere: it is
a weed that grows in every soil; they may have it from Spain, they may
have it from Prussia; hut until you become lost to all feeling of your
true interest and your national dignity, freedom they can have from none
hut you. This is the commodity of price of which you have the monopoly.
This is the true act of navigation which hinds to you the commerce of
the colonics, and through them secures to you the wealth of the world.
Deny them this participation of freedom, and you break that sole bond
which originally made and must still preserve the unity of the empire.
Do not entertain so weak an imagination as that your register and your
bonds, your affidavits and your sufferances, your cockets and your clear-
ances, are what form the great securities of your commerce. Do not
dream that your letters of office and instructions, and your suspending
clauses, are the things that hold together the great contexture of this
mysterious whole. These things do not make your government: dead
instruments, passive tools, as they are; it is the spirit of the English
community that gives all their life and efficacy to them. It is the spirit
of the English constitution which, infused through the mighty mass,
pervades, feeds, unites, invigorates, vivifies every part of the empire, even
down to the minutest member. Is it not the same virtue which does
everything for us here, in England? Do you imagine then that it is the
land-tax which raises your revenue ? that it is the annual vote in the
Committee of Supply which gives you your army ? or that it is the
Mutiny Bill which inspires it with bravery and discipline ? No! surely
no! It is the love of the people, it is their attachment to their govern-
ment, from the sense of the deep stake they have in such a glorious insti-
tution, which gives you your army and your navy, and infuses into both
that liberal obedience, without which your army would be a bad rabble,
and your navy nothing hut rotten timber.”
To save time, I shall treat of the commercial and pas-
toral interests, and also the statistics of the Colony, at
once, and as briefly as possible. The commerce of the
Colony is generally with Great Britain. The value of our
dealings with the mother country will he better understood
when I say, that of manufactured goods we import, for
every man, woman, and child, in the Colony of New South
Wales, in net value, £7 'per head; and we export, for every
man, woman, and child in the Colony, in net value, of our
staple articles, to the amount of £8 10s. per head. Thus


Imports.
Exports.
1814
....£ 931,300
.....€1,128,100
1847
1,982,000
.... 1,870,000
1850
2,078,300.. ..
2,399,600
showing the balance of trade to be in our favour to an
amount equal to 30s. per head of each inhabitant. This,
of course, includes our trade with the East Indies and China,
Manilla, Singapore, Java, and other islands of the Indian
Archipelago, with most of which trade is earned on to a
greater or less amount, especially in the articles of tea,
sugar, coffee, cigars, &c. The value of the imports and
exports will be more clearly perceived when I mention
three distinct periods, showing their increase ;
The imports of last year exceeded those of the previous
year by £284,900, or nearly 16 per cent.; while the exports
show an increase in the same period of £508,300, or nearly
27 per cent. The export of wool in 1841 was 12,000 bales;
its value, £517,537. In 1851, it was 48,000 hales, value
'£1,014,241. The export of tallow in 1843 was valued at
£9039; in 1850, its value was £300,721. Besides these
two staple exports, we have others, viz.; sperm, black, and
cocoa-nut oil, grain, live stock to the neighbouring colonies,
salt meat, preserved meats, hides, leather, bones, horns,
timber, mimosa bark, &c., &c.
Cotton is grown in the Moreton Bay District; and, from
the favourable opinion expressed by the Manchester manu-
facturers, there can be little doubt but that, with a large
increase of labour, it will become a most important feature
in Australian productions. Mr. Barbour says; —
“ The two samples of cotton with which you have favoured me with
an examination, are really of very beautiful and superior quality, their
present value being about 19 d. a lb. At no time have I seen a more
desirable cotton of the class than these two samples, and I wish we
could obtain an abundant supply of such cotton, —the mere inspection of
which having afforded me much pleasure.”
Our pastoral interests are considerable. We have in


New South Wales: of horses, 112,000 ; of horned cattle,
1,300,159 ; of pigs, 52,371 ; of sheep, 8,000,000. -Wheat
is not grown in sufficient quantities for the wants of the
population, but is imported from Van Diemen’s Land.
The number of mills for grinding and dressing grain in
the two colonies of New South Wales and Victoria, in
1850, were : driven by steam, 86 ; by water, 45 ; by wind,
29; by horse, 22. The number of manufactories of both
colonies, in the year 1850, was as follows: distilleries, 2;
breweries, 33; sugar refining, 2; soap and candle, 20;
tobacco and snuff, 14; woollen cloth, 7; hat, 5; rope, 6;
tanneries, &c., 74; salting and preserving meat establish-
ments, 15 ; potteries for coarse ware, 5 ; gas-works, 1; iron
and brass foundries, 20. In the colony of New South
Wales alone, during the year 1850, there were made: of
cloth and tweeds,, 190,791 yards; of blankets, 326 pairs.
In the fourteen tobacco manufactories, in the same year,
3833 cwt. was made; of refined sugar, there was manu-
factured 51,000 cwt.; and of soap, 31,826 cwt.
The wines of the colony of New South Wales are similar
to the light wines of France. Last year, more than 1300
acres of land were planted with the grape-vine; and there
was made, of wine, 115,706 gallons; and of brandy, 2244
gallons. Without dwelling upon this branch of colonial
industry, I will only mention, that it is looked forward
to as an additional, and an increasing, item of export. The
wines are equal in flavour and quality to the Rhenish ; and
when they become appreciated in England, we hope to
extend their introduction here, and obtain a share of that
patronage for the colony which is now so largely given to
foreign vineyards. The total receipts of the two colonies,
in the shape of revenue, for the year 1850, was £033,711
14s. 10d., and the expenditure was £567,165 os. 3 d. The
last census of New South Wales was taken on the Ist of
March, 1851, and showed a population of nearly 200,000;
being an increase of 33,000 on the census of 1846. Sydney,
the capital city of this colony, contains a population of
23


60,000. The four colonies, viz. New South Wales, Vic-
toria, South Australia, the Swan, together with the neigh-
bouring colonies of Van Diemen’s Land and New Zealand,
constituting the group of Australasian settlements, had
in March last a permanent population of nearly half-a-
million. The worth of money may be estimated when
I mention that mortgages bear an interest of from 7 to
10 per cent.; and that the two Colonial Banks, the Aus-
tralasian Steam Navigation Company,' the Gas Company,
and the Marine Assurance Companies, have, for several years
past, paid an annual dividend of ten (10) per cent. The
discounts at all the banks were: bills having 100 days to
run, 6 per cent.; four months, 8 per cent.; and for six
months and over, 9 per cent.


CHAPTER II.
It may be thought that I have occupied too much space
in dry detail respecting the colonies; but I may explain
that my object has been to present them as they existed
before the discovery of the gold was made. Prosperity of
the best kind was manifested long before the precious metal
was known to be hidden beneath the soil. British laws,
and manners, and customs, combined with British industry
and energy, had formed these infant nations. Fortune was
no fickle goddess. She poured from her horn of plenty
a bounteous store into the laps of struggling and honest
people. What more could be desired ? The capitalist had
high rates of interest, the landlord high rents, and the
industrious working-man more than remunerative wages.
In England, our wool had nearly driven the German staple
from your market; and our tallow was greatly interfering
with the Ilussian exports to your shores. All our inte-
rests were flourishing and advancing; we were happy and
contented.
Now, however, a new era in the history of the colonies
has begun. Old Time, whose freaks in steam, and locomo-
tives and electric wires have astonished the western world,
has crossed to the eastern hemisphere. There his pranks
have been more playful and exciting. The glittering ore—
buried probably for millions of years in the mountain side,
in the depths of hills, underneath water-courses, by the
margin of pebbled brooks and deep gullies—has been thrown
up, and thousands after thousands of men have gone up
to thirst and dig for gold.
For several years—before the actual discovery of the


gold —an old man, named Macgregor, supposed to be living
in the Bathurst or Wellington districts, was in the habit of
coming to Sydney once a year with small pieces of gold,
which he sold to a jeweller; but the secret place of his
treasure he never divulged. As early as 1841, the Rev. AV.
B. Clarke, the eminent geologist of Australia, brought gold
from the basin of the river now supplying it. This gold
was exhibited to members of the government and of the
legislature, and to numbers of persons in the colony. The
late Mr. Francis Forbes, a very scientific man, after con-
sultation with Mr. Clarke, appealed to the public concern-
ing the “ Production of Goldand a series of papers on
the subject were published in the Sydney Morning Herald
in the year 1845. Even as far back as 1830, Count Strze-
lecki, who travelled over the colonies in almost every direc-
tion, gave it as, his opinion—founded upon the peculiar
geological structure —that gold did exist. In later years
it was spoken of openly; and inquiries conducted on
scientific principles, and backed by occasional additional
proofs, were made. It was declared that gold existed in
abundance in our “ schists and quartzites.” Still no one
believed the statements. The thing was too improbable;
and the government, as well as the public, disregarded and
treated with mockery the scientific opinions which from
time to time were expressed. The same unbelief existed
in England, although that illustrious geologist, Sir R. J.
Murchison, declared his suspicion, that Australia offered,
in some respects, a parallel to the Ural; and although, in
1849, he spoke to the government of England upon the
subject of gold in Australia, dll the encouragement he
received was in being told not to let them (the colonies)
have too much of a good thing. Nay, in an article by the
Rev. AV. B. Clarke, published in the Sydney Herald on the
28th of September, 1847, the geological formation of the
colony of New South AA r ales is investigated, and mention
distinctly made of the existence of gold. Mr. Clarke at
the same time communicated with Sir R. J. Murchison, who


published a letter in the Philosophical Magazine, and gave
his advice that “ a person well acquainted with the washing
of mineral sands he sent to Australia, speculating on the
probability of auriferous alluvia being abundant,” and sug-
gesting “ that such ivill be found at the base of the western
flanks of the Dividing Ranges.”
In 1819, the whole world was astonished by the discovery
of gold in California. Thousands of persons left the colo-
nies of Australia; and the fact of gold being at our own
doors was allowed to slumber. However, on the 2nd of
May, 1851, the following paragraph appeared in the
Sydney Morning Herald :
“ The Gold Discovery.—lt is no longer any secret that gold has
been found in the earth in several places in the western country. The
fact was first established on the 12th February, 1851, by Mr. E. H.
Hargrave, a resident of Brisbane Water, who returned from California
a few months since. While in California, Mr. Hargrave felt persuaded
that, from the similarity of the geological formation, there must be gold
in several districts of this colony, and when he returned here his expect-
ations wore realized. What the value of the discovery may be it is
impossible to say. Three men, who worked for three days with very
imperfect machinery, realized £2 4s. Bd. each per diem; whether they
will continue to do so remains to be seen. The subject was brought
under the consideration of the Government, who admitted Mr. Hargrave’s
claim for some consideration for the discovery, but of course could make
no definite promise until the value of the gold-field was ascertained.
Mr. Stutchbury, the Geological Surveyor, is- now in the district, and
Mr. Hargrave has proceeded there to communicate with him, and in a
few weeks we may expect definite information. At present all that is
known is that there is gold over a considerable district; whether it is in
sufficient quantities to pay for the trouble of obtaining it remains to be
ascertained. Should it be found in large quantities a strict system of
licensing diggers will be immediately necessary.”
Whatever, therefore, scientific men ihay have suggested or
predicted, it is quite clear that the merit of making substan-
tially known to the world the discovery, belongs to Mr.
Hargrave. I have the pleasure of knowing Mr. Hargrave
personally, and was in communication with him for several


weeks before the above paragraph appeared ; nay, with two
or three others, to whom the secret was’ confided, I was
anxious that the astounding news should not go forth to the
public until it should be confirmed by positive, by ocular
proof. Mr. Stutchbury’s report fully confirmed the statements
made by Mr. Hargrave; and the government immediately
rewarded the latter gentleman by a present of £SOO, and
appointed him a Commissioner of Crown Lands, with a salary
of £350 per annum, making him at the same time a magis-
trate of the territory. The position thus obtained by Mr.
Hargraves was not only due on account of his extraordinary
perseverance and success, but was one for which he was
fitted by his intelligence and education. lam free to con-
fess that the excitement, and the feverish ambition .mani-
fested, by the working classes especially, caused considerable
apprehension that employers of labour would have to sus-
pend their operations. Many buildings in the course o;
erection were stopped ; and the master tradesmen who had
entered upon large contracts were obliged either to carry on
their work whilst the cost of material and labour had nearly
doubled, or fall back upon the sympathy of the proprietor
for an extension of time, on the ground that, if compelled to
complete their contracts, the Insolvent Court must become
their asylum.
The mania for emigrating to the Gold-fields of California,
which at one time threatened to decimate our population,
and which naturally filled sober-minded colonists with an
anxiety bordering on alarm, had often occupied our most
serious consideration; but that mania, compared with the
one with which we were now menaced, by the discovery of
gold within our own territory, was as nothing. Emigration
to California was necessarily a work of time, requiring fore-
thought and preparation, and in most cases needing the
courage and enthusiasm which can sacrifice present com-
forts, and risk imminent dangers, for the sake of a remote
and at the best a doubtful good. The scene of adventure
lay in a land of strangers, a land swarming with ferocious


barbarians, and frequently ravaged by deadly pestilence.
Ere it could be'reached, the ocean had to be crossed, a
round sum of money to be raised, property sold, establish-
ments broken up, domestic ties rent asunder, and the whole •
habits of life suddenly and violently wrenched. These con-
siderations served as a wholesome check upon the rage for
gold, and induced multitudes to stay at home who would
otherwise have rushed headlong into the glittering snare.
But the El Dorado which had sprung up, and which was
everywhere and with everybody the all-absorbing topic of
discourse, w r as attended with none of these difficulties. It
was in the bosom of our own country. It was on the very
skirts of our settled districts. It was within two days’ ride
of our metropolis.
“ What a curse this gold mania is! ” “ How many of
your men have left ? ” “ What rate of advance in wages
have your men demanded ? ” “We shall all be ruined ! ”
these, and many similar remarks, formed the basis of the
half-conversation, half-grumbling expressions on ’Change—
as though a pestilence had been sent into our midst, as
though a blighting mildew had swept over the land. For-
getting that every event is under the direction of an over-
ruling Providence, and that the discovery of gold in the
colony has been deferred till now, and has now occurred in
order to the effecting of some great step in the amelioration
of the human race, or at least of those countries with which
we are connected by blood and language. The first de-
pressing influences soon passed away, and men of all classes
began to think, in sober earnestness, how they, individually,
could profit by the golden era. Every post brought fresh
confirmation of the success of the diggers, and the Governor,
with praiseworthy promptness, issued a proclamation, on
behalf of Her Majesty, publicly notifying and declaring,
that all persons who should take from any lands within the
territory of New South Wales, any gold, metal, or ore con-
taining gold, without having been duly authorized and per-
mitted to do so by the Government, should be prosecuted,


both civilly and criminally. This was soon followed by the
publication of the Gold Regulations, which provided that
every person wdrking at the mines, should pay a monthly
license fee of thirty shillings.
In the end of May and the beginning of June, the fever
increased. A storekeeper from Bathurst arrived in Sydney
with a lump of gold, with small quartz attached, which
weighed nine ounces. This was shown to great numbers of
persons, and caused great sensation. Mr. Wentworth’s
estate was said to be a rich gold field, and a company was
ultimately formed to work it. Where gold was discovered
on private.property, the license fee was divided between the
proprietor and the Government. Some of the diggers were
fortunate, obtaining their ounce, and more, per day; while
others were less successful, and really earned no more than
could be got by their ordinary employment. One party of
four was said to have taken out thirty ounces in one
day, and one man had within three weeks accumulated gold
worth TI6OO. At this juncture several cautionary articles
appeared in the newspapers, their object being rather to
guide and control, than to inflame the public mind. A
few brief extracts will show the motives under which the
conductors of the public press acted. On the 23rd of May,
the Sydney Morning Herald said:—
“We believe it is not the intention of the Government to do more
than raise by license fees a moderate income, the greater portion of
which will probably be expended in organizing a police, providing for
the safety of life and property in the gold country and on the roads,
where, without a very active and extended police force, great outrages
may be expected. It is stated that large quantities of gold are now in
Bathurst waiting for safe conveyance to Sydney. An extra mail from
Bathurst to Orange (the nearest post town to the diggings) has been
ordered, and we hope the Government will endeavour to have a mail to
Bathurst every day, instead of alternate days, as at present. We need
hardly say that the greatest excitement prevails among all classes in
Sydney, and many persons are going to dig for gold who are wholly un-
fit for such work; men who would hesitate to walk the length of
George-street in a shower of rain, are going at the beginning of winter,


to a district where the climate is almost English, and where they -will
not ho able to get shelter, in even the humblest hut. What can he the
result of such reckless conduct hut that which has happened in California
—ruin, misery, disease, death. Rumours of the most extravagant cha-
racter are circulated in Sydney with an activity which shows that their
originators are most anxious to add to the already prevailing excitement;
and we would advise our readers to receive with caution any reports
that they do not see confirmed in the public press. The news from the
mining districts is too important, is too anxiously looked after, to per-
mit the suppression of any authenticated facts, even if there existed a
desire on the part of the conductors of the press to do so. On the other
hand, it must bo remembered, that during the last few days there has
been the most intense speculation going on in Sydney; every article of
ordinary consumption is advancing in price, and is being greedily sought
after, with the hope that exorbitant rates may be obtained before further
supplies can be procured, and every man who has purchased a ton of
flour, or a bag of sugar, with the intention of holding on for a further
increase of prices, has a direct, obvious, and stimulating interest in giving
currency to any reports however absurd.”
On the following day, May 21th, the same journal had
the following article :
“ Amongst the many delusions which, in the present unsettled state
of the public mind, under the influence of the gold mania, are likely to
prevail throughout our community, the most natural and the most dan-
gerous is the supposition that the profits of the diggings will be confined
to the diggers, or at any rate most largely shared by them; and that,
consequently, if a man expects to reap any good portion of the golden
harvest, he must leave his home, and start for the mines, and buckle to
in good earnest. This supposition is natural, because, under the excite-
ment caused by a discovery so sudden, so unlooked-for, and so astonish-
ing, and heightened by the wonderful stories which are every day getting
into circulation, men, unfitted for calm reflection, become the children of
impulse,—the first impulse being to go where gold is to be had at once,
and for the trouble of picking it up. But that the supposition is a
dangerous one, and ought therefore to be discountenanced as much as
possible by all reasonable men, a moment’s consideration will show.
If all were to go a gold hunting, the colony would be ruined outright,
and that in a very short time. Our flocks and herds would be abandoned;
our agricultural operations and our manufactures would be brought to a
stand; our warehouses and shops would be closed; our very ships would
be deserted, and left to rot in the harbour. What could gold do for us
then ? We should have neither food to cat nor raiment to wear. We


should be consumed by famine and stricken by pestilence. We should
perish beneath our glistering heaps of useless treasure. But the delusion,
though so natural and so full of peril to the whole population, is nothing
ut a delusion, and a great one. To share, and to share largely, in the
golden spoil, it is not necessary that a man should go to the mines. Ho
may stay quietly at homo, and pursue the ordinary avocations of his
life, and yet he enriched by the produce which costs his more hardy
and adventurous neighbours so much of toil, privation, and suffering.
And there can he no doubt that more fortunes will be made by those
who stay than by those who go —always supposing that the numbers
who stay are sufficient to provide for the necessities of those who go; in
other words, that the delusion wo speak of does not spread so widely as
to entail the calamities we have described. The gold seekers must have
meat and drink, clothing and implements ; and in proportion as they are
successful in the search, they will of course be the better able to purchase
largely and to pay dearly. The money they will thus bo compelled
■to lay out will circulate through the colony, and benefit all classes of the
inhabitants, especially those classes which are most directly employed in
the production of necessaries. Whilst the diggers are extracting treasure
from the earth, the farmer who grows wheat for them, the grazier who
supplies them with beef and mutton, the grocer who sends them tea and
sugar, the tailor who makes their clothes, the blacksmith who hammers
their picks—in short, all who are employed in producing, manufacturing,
importing, or exchanging the commodities with which the diggers can-
not dispense, or the comforts and luxuries in which success will induce
them to indulge—will reap in the shape of largo profits the benefits
which the others reap in the shape of hard-earned gold.
Farmers particularly, on whose industry we depend for the staff of
life, will do well to reflect on the immense profits they can hardly fail to
realize by resolutely sticking to their farms. The demand for bread will
not only go on amid all the excitement and confusion of the times, but
will assuredly be greatly increased. Besides the ordinary increase of our
existing population, it is quite certain that we shall soon be visited by
thousands from without—from the neighbouring colonies, and from the
mother country. Let the farmer take a comprehensive view of the effect
which this rapid increase in the number of mouths must have upon his
own interests. Let him compare the number of bushels of wheat he can
grow, and the price ho is sure of obtaining for it, and the clear profit
which every bushel will add to his income, with the number of ounces of
gold which he could reasonably calculate on procuring at the diggings,
and the net surplus that would remain after his heavy expenditure in
necessaries, and as the reward of his toils and miseries, and perhaps of a
constitution ruined for life—and there can be no doubt as to the side on
which the balance will lie. He will find that, taking all things into


consideration, chance against chance, probability against probability,
wheat is more profitable than gold—the cultivation of his farm a better
speculation than slavery at the diggings.”
In June, a party composed of four highly respectable
persons, viz., Mr. Alexander Campbell, Mr. Campbell
Brown, Mr. Hindson, and Mr. H. Ferris, determined to see
the Elephant for themselves, and accordingly proceeded to
the auriferous regions. Several well written papers were
published on the return of these gentlemen. One of these
articles concluded thus
“ Within a small compass of about a mile were nearly six hundred men
at work, digging and washing with an untiring industry at once indica-
tive of success, whilst the steep banks wore lined with every species of
gunya, tent, &c., as a protection against the inclemency of the climate;
the frosty nights of which we can abundantly vouch for. As our object
was to collect facts, we at once set about it, and gathering information
from the captains of the various parties, wo soon arrived at the conclusion
that so far as these diggings were concerned, there had been no exaggera-
tion. Many parties we found were earning two to four pounds and
upwards; some, one pound or two pounds; and a few one pound down-
wards to utter disappointment; whilst nearly £2O per day was ■ the
reported result of one or two of the most fortunate. The greatest success
appeared to be at and in the vicinity of the holes of two or three parties
formed of settlers and their sons. One man, a labourer, had near this
spot procured about three hundred pounds’ value the day previous to our
arrival, the largest piece in which weighed nearly four pounds troy.
This result must be considered of the highest importance, especially when
we bear in mind the primitive construction of the cradles and other im-
plements employed; indeed, in our observations down the creek, we
did not see a single cradle washed out (generally the result of about thirty
buckets of earth and stones) without some gold in it, though in many
cases the quantity was certainly very small. Many parties washing with tin
dishes only, on the margin of the water, obtained a fair result in small
gold. The greatest quietness and cordiality appeared to prevail amongst
all the adventurers; and our inquiries were readily and good-naturedly
responded to, although it might occasion a temporary stoppage to their
gold-hunting; however, a natural indisposition to disclose the extent of
their winnings, prevented us from ascertaining anything beyond an ex-
planation, as given above, to their average yield. How long the cordi-
ality which now prevails may continue is very problematical, as the
pursuit of gold has ever been an apple of discord; and even thus early we


have heard of the assertion of might as the title to a “ hole.” There is
now plenty of room for some thousands in those portions of the creek now
partially occupied, but sooner or later new arrivals must come in contact
with the early diggers j so that the quicker the boundaries and tenure of
the allotment of each party are decided, the better. It would bo absurd to
endeavour to prevent digging, under any proclamations of the rights of
Royalty; but if proper measures are speedily taken for licensing diggers,
with the concomitant regulations, the discovery of gold may be made a
fresh source of great wealth, without the destruction of any present enter-
prise, or prejudice to the morality of the colony. As to what may be the
extent of the gold-field we do not pretend to estimate; but the various
creeks adjoining that now worked, show similar indications, and we have
heard of parties operating with success many miles from the present head-
quarters. Though the result of the labours of the diggers has been so
generally satisfactory, and in several instances so remarkably successful,
there does not appear much desire on the part of the pastoral population
to abandon their easy life for the laborious and uncertain speculation of
gold-finding;—from our inquiries we are enabled to state that the accounts
which have reached Sydney, as to numbers of shepherds having left their
flocks, are almost wholly unfounded. Since our return to Bathurst, the
town has been greatly excited by the appearance of three of the fortunate
parties, of whom we have made mention, with gold to the amount of about
£IOOO. About 100 people are now daily proceeding to the diggings, but
every day the numbers are augmenting.
“ We have only to add, in conclusion of the foregoing report, that, of
about five huildred individuals whom we have met with en route for the
diggings, between Bathurst and this, not one tithe of them are equipped
for prosecuting their intended pursuits, and many of them must in- #
evitably perish from want and exposure, unless relieved by the
generosity of others. We have bought about £BOO of gold at sixty-four
shillings, but there is a little quartz in it, —one piece cost £150.”
Another party of four, all intimate friends of my own,
also went to the diggings. One of them, Mr. G. A. Lloyd,
furnished the Herald with a most graphic description of the
trip, up and down. If space permitted, I would gladly insert
the whole; but I must be contented with two sketches, the first
detailing their privations, and the other a most candid and
truthful description of the mines and miners.
“ We passed a couple of Sydney jewellers and their party, on their
way to town, having worked at the mines five days, and earned two
shillings and sixpence; their outfit had cost them upwards of £2OO, and


they had sold it for £SO. One of these gentlemen told me before leaving
Sydney, that he would certainly give it three months’ trial, good or bad.
At half-past two, we arrived at a sheep station, where we again changed
horses, and partook of the hutkeeper’s hospitality in the shape of damper
and tea; wo were now within ten miles of the Summerhill Creek; as
time was pressing, we hurried off, and were congratulating each other
on the possibility of reaching our destination in good time, when lo!
a smash! and the body of the carriage sought refuge on the axle tree ;
we were out in a moment, and our friend the captain announced the
pleasing fact, within five miles of the diggings, and raining fast, that
‘ the main chains were gone on the larboard side,’ —and sure enough the
springs had given way in every leaf: this was sufficient to try the
patience of Job, but Rotton, the coach proprietor, was not at all dis-
concerted, —he laughed at us for pulling such long faces, and while we
were arguing the most scientific mode of repairing the damage, he had
cut down a sapling sufficiently strong to bear the weight of the carriage,
and running it along where the springs ought to be, he lashed it up, and
conveyed us safely to the end of our journey; I must not, however,
convey the reader there so abruptly, but bring him gradually up the last
hill. On the right there is a valley stretching far away,—with a pre-
cipitous mountain on the other side; you cannot see into the bed of that
valley, but, from the smoke that is ascending in various places, you
become assured that it is the ‘ valley of the diggings.’ As you round
the hill two or three huts present themselves to view, and passing them,
you are politely asked ‘ what you will take for your cradle,’ and
* whether you have sold your pick.’ A few yards more, and we drove
into the centre of a multitude of tents, and stopping before one, we were
received with three cheers from loyal British hearts. The anxiety
depicted on each countenance at this particular moment, combined with
the circumstances in which we were then placed, would have been a
noble subject for a picture, and given plenty of ground for an artist to
work upon;—but where were we all this time ? Certainly in a most
pitiable plight: the grand object for which we left Sydney had been
gained—we were ‘at the diggings.’ Yea! on the very spot: standing
on a mountain of gold:—but it was a mountain of cold too, and we had
no homo—no inn—and no friend, that we were aware of, to shelter us
from the dripping rain—what could be done? go to a tent, and adopting
the beggar’s petition, exclaim—
Pity the sorrows of some poor young men,
Whose wearied limbs have brought them to your tent ?
No, that would not do! Pride raised its voice against that—what then ?
darkness surrounds us; the night looks anything but inviting—where shall
c 2


we go ?—While cogitating thus, our young mercantile friend had met with
a good Samaritan, who offered for our acceptance the best at his disposal;
and as anything was superior to the position in which we then stood,
we cordially accepted his offer, and followed him to his abode. If you
take a stick about ten feet long, and raise it five feet from the ground,
and then throw a tablecloth over it, you will have a very fair representa-
tion of our residence; but beggars must not be choosers, and so we
resolved to adopt Mark Taplcy’s motto, and ‘be as jolly as possible
under all circumstances.’ A fire was burning before the tent, the wind
howled wildly around us, and the rain gave notice of continuance. Our
host and his brethren (for there were five of them) set to work to pro-
cure some tea, and endeavoured to cook a few mutton chops, but with
the fire below warming one side, while the rain above cooled the other,
I leave you to judge what kind of a meal they proved. The cooking
over, and the tea boiled, the next difficulty was, that wo had neither plate,
dish, teacup, or knife and fork,- so we made plates out of slices of
damper, used our penknives to cut with, and our fingers as forks, and
drank tea out of a pannikin, in the most primitive style imaginable.
Supper at an end, w r e thought it advisable to make our bed, so that we
could turn in when we felt disposed; but alas, alas ! wo had nothing to
make it with—neither mattress, blanket, sheet, counterpane, nor pillow,
and our kind landlords had only a blanket each, so that they could not help
us; all we could find was a few yards of Osnaburg, and as there was no
other course open, we determined to spread it upon the ground, and lie as
the pigs do, close together, in the hope that we should keep each other
warm. This point arranged, I took a stroll down amongst the tents;
the weather was clearing up, and the numerous fires burned more
brightly. I could not draw upon my imagination for anything to illus-
trate the appearance, but the encampment of a large army—hundreds of
fires,were shooting forth their sparks into the air, from the fronts of as
many tents—guns were firing in all directions, and men were hallooing
from one part of the camp to another.
“ Having seen all I could, I trotted off in search of my companions, but
a very serious difficulty here arose. I did not know the tent, nor even
the name of the proprietor, and as one tent was a facsimile of the other, it
was like looking for a needle in a bottle of hay. I made progress,
however, to the position where I suspected it was, and after putting my
head into about a dozen other habitations, and singing out ‘ Who’s here?’
I received at last a response from one of our party; they had all turned
in, and left me the outside berth, and none of the Osnaburg.
What could I do? I had been in many a trouble in the course of my
life, but never in one equal to this. I had nothing to lie upon, nothing
to cover me* and nothing for a pillow, and yet I felt that I might be
worse off, for it was possible to be ‘ without afrie'id’—~ so I laid down,


for the first time since my birth, upon the cold earth, with my boots for
a pillow, and nought between me and the canopy of heaven, but a few
yards of calico. I endured this for about three hours, when finding one
of my friends ns ill at ease as myself, we resolved to get up and
endeavour to spend the rest of the night at the fire; we boiled a pot
of tea, and sought the relief of a few winks on a log by the fire-side,
but in vain. We were, however, first up amongst the diggers, and this
was some consolation. At daylight, human beings were discovered in
all directions, trying to revive their fires, and by sunrise the busy throng
were all alive, like an ants’ nest. But let us look around and see what
kind of a place it is. We are standing on a hill covered with tents,
surrounded on three sides by the creek; it is a very small hill compared
with those around it. On the other side of the creek rises an immense
mountain, where five or six hundred aborigines are encamped; they had
been on this side, but one of their number died, and they came to the
very complimentary conclusion, that ‘ Dehil-Debil sit down there,’
and took their departure from such unholy company. They are assem-
bled in such numbers, because they expect to be attacked by another
tribe. Ahd now a grand cooking commences, and several sheep are in
the frying-pan, to appease the hunger of the hundreds who are about to
go forth to labour. The mutton is remarkably fine, and procured at
butchers’ shops or tents all down the creek, at fourpence per pound.
But let us see about getting dressed before breakfast. Why does not
that man clean my boots ? for the best of all reasons, he has neither
blacking nor brushes. John! bring me a razor and towel, and some
combs and brushes; but neither the one nor the other were there. We
had plenty of water and plenty of soap, so for want of better accommo-
dation we had an apology for a wash, and used our pocket handkerchief
as a towel.
“ Breakfast over, we crawled out of the tent, and stood upon our feet,
and presented, after the night’s repose, very much the appearance of
‘ walking lamp-posts.’ But now for a journey down the creek. To
obtain more extensive information, wo resolved to separate, and spread
ourselves over its length and breadth, and compare notes in the evening,
by which means we should arrive at a pretty correct calculation as to its
actual working. The sides of the hill as you descend are very peculiar,
being formed of coarse slate standing up out of the earth on its edges,
and offering to the feet a most disagreeable road. The waters in the
creek take their rise at the Connoblas, a range of mountains about 4000
feet high, and run down through Summcrhill and Lewis Ponds Creeks
to the Macquarie, a distance of about fifty or sixty miles, and from
inquiries wo made, there is no doubt that gold is to be found from one
end to the other; the present occupied portion extends over about ten
miles, two miles of which is on private land. The creek has the appear


ance of having been the bed of a considerable river, which is now left
dry, with the exception of a small stream running down the centre;
this bed is composed of stones, slate, rock, and clay, and a large number
of swamp oak trees have risen from out of it and spread their branches
over it; in some places it is sixty yards wide, and at the junction of the
Summerhill and Lewis ponds it is much more; the dry parts of the
creek are the portions now being worked, and the elbows, where an
eddy has been formed, are the most profitable. Very considerable
quantities of gold have been dug out of the roots of the trees, and a
miner considers himself fortunate if there happens to be a good thump-
ing tree in his allotment. It has been found, by experience, that the
straight lines of the creek are not worth working at present, although
there is gold in almost every bucketful of earth takfen from them; but
it will require very nicely constructed machinery to make it render a
good return for the labour expended. It has also been found that the
top soil, for a few feet down, is not productive; but as soon as the clay
and slate rock are reached, the cradle begins to yield. But here we are
at the junction of the central and most profitable diggings. The scene
here was worth all the journey to witness: it is the widest part of the
river, and forms a large open space, every portion of which is engaged,
and the men working away like grave-diggers—not an idle hand was
to be seen there. The sides of the mountain are studded with tents,
every one of which is either a store or a butcher’s shop. We thought
of our favourite poet, Pollok, where he says:—
Gold many hunted, sweat and bled for gold ;
Wak’d all the night, and labour’d all the day.
And what was this allurement, dost thou ask ?
A dust dug from the bowels of the earth,
Which, being cast into the fire, came out
A shining thing that fools admired, and called
A god.’
So true it is that men will sacrifice home, health, comfort, friends, yea,
and sometimes their very souls, to gain this glittering bauble. But to
proceed. The miners were working mostly in parties of four: —one dug
the earth, and shovelled it into a bucket; a second carried the bucket to
the cradle, which was fixed at the water’s edge; a third rocked the
cradle; and a fourth dipped the water from the creek and poured it
into the frame of the cradle. I witnessed the emptying of a great
number of cradles, after about fifty to one hundred buckets of earth had
been passed through, and examined the produce. I also conversed with
a considerable number of the men, and after comparing notes with my
friends, who had travelled over various other parts of the creek, we


found the following instances of success. The first was that of a man
named Jamieson, who, with three other men, came across from Carcoar.
On Saturday -week last, they made in one day £74, of which 10 ounces
was earned by the cradle, and the rest by the pick. His partners had
quarrelled and left him, and on the morning after we arrived, he went
out before breakfast (not to work) and picked up a nugget (as it is called
on the creek) weighing 13 i ounces, for which I gave £4O within an
hour after he had found it; this man smoked his pipe for the rest of the
day. Two men named Gorringe and Snowden, with a third, all from
Goulburn, obtained as much in one week as Mr. Meyers offered them
£340 for. Four men at Mr. Tolano’s, in my presence, weighed out a
fortnight’s work, for which he paid them £2O. Six men from Bathurst
• had been working four weeks, and received £IBO ns the produce of their
earnings, and were still getting on well; these men showed me a tree,
out of the stump of which had been taken by the miners round it,
upwards of £3OO. Four men had worked five days, and got 9 ounces,
and being unsuccessful on the Saturday, gave it up, and left the dig-
gings. Three men yesterday obtained six ounces, and last week they
sold their work for £7 15s. 4 d. An overseer of a sheep station, with his
wife and two boys, sold off everything and came over; they worked
four days in vain, and were going back the next week ruined; but on
the fifth and sixth days they turned up 21 ounces, and had resolved now
to stop through the winter, having earned sufficient to find them
in food. A blacksmith and four labourers had been working fourteen
days, and had then in possession 26 ounces. John Burton’s party of
three men had been working ten days, and sold Tolano 20 oz. 6 dwts.
Three men from Wilberforce made yesterday 6 ounces by their cradle.
Mr. Gideon Lang’s party of five had been working ten days, and
obtained in value considerably over £IOO. I could give a great many
more cases, but it is unnecessary to multiply them: of these there can
be no doubt, because I had it from their own lips, and in most instances
handled the gold. A man named M'Kenzie had been working with
three others a fortnight, and made £BO j he showed me two specimens,
dug out of the roots of a tree, weighing 17f and 4; ounces, but much
impregnated with quartz, for which I offered him £45, and it was
refused. All this is very bright and encouraging, and could such
success be insured, I should not bo surprised to find all our men off to the
mines. But there is a dark side to the picture as well as a bright one.
The whole of the fortunate men, with only one or two exceptions, were
men of iron nerves and hard constitutions, born and bred in the bush,
and quite accustomed to such a state of existence. To them, privation
is pleasure, and labour delight. They are at work before sunrise, and
continue till dark, and nothing daunts their zeal, or damps their energy,
while our town-bred men are weak in comparison with these giants, and


have not the heart to pursue their work when unsuccessful, nor consti-
tutions strong enough to stand the sufferings they must endure.”
The only other extract I shall make is from The Bathurst
Free Press, a newspaper published in the immediate vicinity
of the mines, and the statements in which, if not strictly
correct, would have been contradicted.
“Several valuable samples of the precious metal were purchased
yesterday. The following purchases have been effected hy Mr. Austin:
Murray’s party, consisting of five men, four of them teetotalers, who had
been at work ten days, received £165 for the proceeds of their labour.
The metal consisted of pieces weighing 3 ozs. downwards. Fitzpatrick’s
party, £lB4 10s., had been a fortnight at work, their earnings averaging
£4O a man. This parcel consisted of lumps weighing 11, 9, and 8 ozs.
and downwards, there being very little dust among it. M‘Groggor’s
party of five, were five days at work and did not clear their expenses,
but made up for their lost time in the following five days, their com-
bined earnings amounting to £65, or £l3 per man. Taking the ten
days into account, the daily earnings of this party are £1 6s. This gold
consisted principally of pieces weighing from 3 to 7 ozs., the remainder
being small particles and dust. Besides the above, he has purchased
many small quantities, from 1 to 4 ozs., in which the average earnings
are considerably lower than those given above. Mr. Dunsford is the
next most extensive purchaser to Mr. Austin. Upon his list we perceive
, the following names, quantities, and amounts :—Turbin, 6 ozs. 3 dwts.,
£lB 155.; Goldsby, 6 ozs. 4 dwts. 2 grs., £lB 125.; John Meloy, 16 ozs.
13 dwts. 13 grs., £5O; John Barnett,4s ozs.4 dwts. 14 grs., £138135. 9 d.;
Maher, 21 ozs. 2 dwts. 7 grs., £63 6s. 9 d.; Williams, 18 oz. 14 dwts.4'grs.,
£56 2s. 6 d. ■ The last party, consisting of six men, had been seven days at
work. Besides these purchases, there was a long list of smaller ones, of
from an ounce to 2 and 7 ozs., showing, as in the former case, much
smaller averages. Stepping into Mr. Burnside’s store yesterday, we
learn that he had just paid £45 15s. for a parcel of 17 oz. 5 dwts., which
had boon got by three men, of whom Martin Carney, the timber mer-
chant, was one. Since the 3 lb. lump, the largest piece which has been
brought to town is a beautiful specimen by Mr. Forbes, weighing 13 ozs.,
which he bought from Lament’s party for £36. This specimen has been
purchased by Mr. Kennedy, of the Union Bank of Australia, to bo for-
warded along with others to the London Directors of that establishment,
as a sample of Australian produce. This piece was brought out of the
earth at the point of a pick, of which it now bears the impression. A
story is told, and appears to be pretty well authenticated, of a stranger
walking down to the diggings two or three days ago, with a wallet over


his shoulder, apparently containing some heavy substance in a small
compass. Having procured the use of weights and scales, he coolly
drew a massive lump of gold out of his sack, and placed it in one of the
scales, putting a 7 lb. weight in the other : upon lifting the scales up the
weight kicked the beam. This piece, it is said, was found at the Ophir
diggings, but a distance of several miles back from the Creek. The
motions of the lucky man who, at one stroke, had made a snug little
fortune, were closely watched, but he eluded the vigilance of his spies
by leading them upon a wrong scent.”
These are sufficient to show what was the interest excited
up to the end of June; but it was not to close here. Several
new gold-fields were discovered, the most prolific being the
Turon. Here it was that Dr. Kerr’s black shepherd ob-
served a bright-yellow speck in a lump of quartz, of which
he broke off a portion with his tomahawk. He had no
sooner done so, than the rich prize was uncovered, and he
started off for his master, who saddled his horse and
hastened to the spot. The doctor obtained assistance, and
carried away three blocks of quartz weighing about two
hundred weight. The largest of the blocks was about a
foot in diameter, and weighed seventy-five pounds gross;
out of this block sixty pounds of net gold were taken, in
pieces of five and six pounds each. The pure gold, when
separated from the white quartz, was weighed at the Bathurst
Bank, and was found to contain one hundred and six pounds.
It was sold to Messrs. Thacker and Daniel, Sydney mer-
chants, for £4240. Altogether, and unbroken, it was the
largest piece of gold ever discovered in any part of the
world.
The success of gold-mining in the Bathurst and Wellington
districts, induced the offer of large sums of money in the
shape of rewards, for the discovery of gold in other parts.
This was especially the case in the colony of Victoria, and
the search was crowned with success there also. In the
month of September, gold was found at Ballarat, near
Geelong; and almost the same day it was found in Mount
Alexander, fifty miles from Melbourne. The excitement
here was much greater than at Sydney, owing principally to


the smallness of the population, and the easy distance of
both the diggings from the two chief townships. From the
neighbouring colonies of South Australia, Yan Diemen’s
Land, and New Zealand, emigration set in to Sydney and
Melbourne. It was not unusual for hundreds of persons to
arrive in a day, and on one occasion, the wind being south-
erly, no less than 1000 persons were added to our population.
The same thing occurred at Melbourne and Geelong. Nay,
towards the end of last year, several vessels arrived from
California, freighted with Americans and some returned
colonists; they of course proceeded to the Turon, Ophir, or
the Arraluen, and were eminently fortunate. At this time,
it was calculated that at least 30,000 men were spread
over the large extent of country, in both colonies, where the
gold discovery had been made. The dilemma into which
masters and mistresses had been thrown may be judged of,
when I mention a few facts. The Lieutenant-Governor of
Victoria was deserted by all his servants, and had actually
to chop wood to light the fire before his morning meal could
he prepared. The son of the Chief Justice was obliged to
turn shoe-black, and perform other menial offices, for the
same reason, viz., the absence of servants ; merchants and
tradesmen had to be their own porters and draymen; and
ladies their own cooks and housemaids. Here the inquiry
may be made, Did the female servants proceed to the gold-
fields ? The reply is briefly this. There is always a
scarcity of female servants, as may be conceived, when I
mention that the ordinary wages are from TlB to £25 per
annum. And when fathers and brothers, and affianced
husbands, were getting rich at the mines, how could it be
expected that young women, in such altered and improved
circumstances, should continue to labour for their bread!
The silk and shawl merchant can now boast of the costly
gowns, and visites, and polkas, which his own wife would
not wear, but which the precious dust or nugget has pur-
chased for Lavinia, or Lucretia, or Maria—formerly his
cook, or kitchen girl.


I could enumerate instances of well-authenticated success,
which would take a volume to narrate. But I think enough
has been said to show the origin and the progress of the
gold-fields. The question is sometimes, and very properly,
asked, Will the mines soon be worked out ? What of the
future ? Mr. Hargrave, the discoverer of the gold, Mr.
Hardy, the Chief Gold Commissioner, and the Eev. Mr.
Clarke, the Australian Geologist, shall reply. The first
gentleman, in his report to the government, says: “ That
for 140 miles along the hanks of the Turon Eiver, gold is
found in abundance.” Mr. Hardy in his official report says:
“ In the whole course of the Turon River, the production of gold appears
to he as regular as wheat in a sown field. In short, from the top of the
hank, across the whole bed of the river (from 50 to 100 yards wide),
and for the whole nine miles that I have examined of it, the result is
as absolutely to be depended on as weekly wages, and 5000 workers
would be nothing in that space.” He also adds, “ I do not think that
there is a spot on any part of the Turon on which an industrious and
careful man may not earn 10s. per day; while the great majority of
such men may earn from 15s. to £1 each per day. I know a large
number of men who earn £2 each per day; and there is equally profitable
digging-ground on this river, now unoccupied, for several thousands.
In fact I can at present see no limit to the number of persons that
may be employed; for I have ascertained, by personal observation, that
the numerous creeks, many of them ton or fifteen miles long, that fall into
the Turon, produce gold at the rate of about 10s. to each man per day.
Three men in that locality have, in this and the three preceding days,
obtained 10 lbs. weight of gold (about £400), in pieces not exceeding
1 oz. in weight. The average earnings of the 200 men who took out
licenses on these creeks are not less than £1 a day each." The above
report from Commissioner Hardy is fully confirmed by Mr. Stuchbury,
the colonial geologist, who states that “ there is scarcely a gully or creek
which, upon careful examination, does not produce gold.”
Mr. Clarke’s official report, after that gentleman had been
out in entirely new districts, on many portions of which the
foot of the white man had never before trodden, is a docu-
ment of great interest, full of scientific information, and
holding out the assurance that the discoveries of gold hereto


fore found, would be eclipsed by those which were to come.
Mr. Geo. A. Lloyd, the writer of the “ Weekly Gold Circular,”
for the Sydney Morning Herald, a gentleman who has paid
great attention to the subject, and is in a position to receive
the best and earliest information, says, in his letter of
March 20th, “ New diggings are starting up in every direc-
tion, and it is impossible to say where gold will not be
found. It has been found at Reed’s Creek, a tributary of
the Owens; at Yalwell Creek, near the Shoalhaven River; at
Yass, at Albury. The Carcoar and Belubula gold-field is
said to be very rich; and gold has been offered for sale in
Sydney from the Hanging Rocks. A man, the other day,
was strolling on the side of a range near Meroo Creek, look-
ing for his horse, when he kicked up with the toe of his
boot a^ nugget, weighing 25 ounces, worth more than £75.”
In a letter, under date April 4th, received lately from
Sydney, from my partner, Mr. Kemp, he says, “ 20,000
ounces of gold are waiting to come from Melbourne to
Sydney.” The calculation of the first year’s working of the
mines opened up at the time I left, in March, was a clear
yield of gold of the value of £3,000,000. The number of
places being worked was 38.
The manner of finding the gold may be dismissed in a
few words. It is found in dust and small scales amongst
sand and earth; it is mixed with decayed vegetable matter
in the bottoms of brooks, ravines, and gulleys; in nuggets and
quartz on the tops and in the interior of mountains, and the
gentle slopes of hills; ,in currents of water, and deeply im-
bedded in creeks and rivers. It is in the iron-stone rock,
where it yields twenty-five per cent. At the Wentworth
diggings it was discovered that a bridge had actually been
made of this rock. Little did the builder then imagine that
he was striking a golden arch.
The probable future of the colonies causes speculations
as to the consequence of the discovery upon the mother
country, and, in connexion with California, its effect upon
the civilized world. By some persons apprehensions of


fearful consequences are entertained; by others, whose
high-pressure notions are beyond the power of steam, results
of the utmost magnitude and greatest earthly blessedness
are dreamed of. Looking calmly upon the Old Country, and
then casting a fond regard to the new nations which are
springing up under the fostering influence of British man-
ners, British laws, and British Christianity; remembering
that but yesterday, in your money market, “ the first quota-
tions of Consols for money was 100| to and that they left
off at 100£ to f for money, and 100| to f for the account;”
seeing the gladdening influence of trade and commerce
everywhere; and the peace and prosperity which prevails on
both sides the Atlantic, as well as on those shores where the
Pacific rolls her quiet billows; and reflecting, too, upon
Him who hath said, “ Surely there is a vein for the silver,
and a place for gold where they fine it. As for the earth,
out of it cometh bread; the stones of it are the place of
sapphires, and it hath dust of gold,”—l say, looldng calmly
on all these considerations, I have no fears for the future.
The treasures of the earth have been opened up under the
special providence of God himself. At the moment when
your Crystal Palace was thrown open to the admiring gaze
of all Europe, a far distant colony was presenting her
claims for distinction and fame. The May of 1851, on
both sides the globe, is indeed a memorable era. Never
may the children of Britain, on those distant-shores, be a
disgrace to the parent State; but may the honour, the virtue,
the dignity of moral character, and, above all, the pure
religion of the Bible, be transplanted and cultivated on
their soil, —not as the tender plant, to wither and die in a
day, but as the noble oak whose roots deepen, widen, and
strengthen by the adversity and storms of time.


CHAPTER III.
A few remarks to the intending emigrant, and I have
done.
To the young man of industrious and sober habits, and
of moral character, whose anxiety is to pursue a course of
honest perseverance—unappalled by difficulty and danger—
I say go. To the idle, the dissipated, the drunken—he who
is reckless alike of his own peace and the sorrow he causes
to others—l say stay; for if you go to a warm climate and
persevere in your present habits, you will he an outcast —
you will die miserably, neglected by man, and perhaps
unpitied by God. The two great wants of the colonies are
capital and labour. For these, employment on a large scale
is constantly being presented. There are mines of wealth
only waiting investments, and requiring men to work them.
The Railroad Company have advertised for two hundred
men, and in a recent letter from the President of that Com-
pany, lie informs me that the contractor contemplates giving
up the contract, in consequence of being unable to obtain
men. The Bathurst Copper Mining Company, in the
Herald of April 17th, advertise for one hundred men. In
the southern district, a new copper mine has been dis-
covered ; the ore has been transmitted to England for
smelting, and it has been pronounced equal in the yield to
the Burra-Burra. This also is at a stand. The Fitzroy
Iron ‘Mining Company is in a similar position. It is
situate at Mittagong, on the great southern road, within
seventy miles of Sydney, and extends over a surface of
about twelve acres. It is doubtless of volcanic formation,


as three distinct mounds, or craters, appear, and the lava
(iron ore), instead of the general pumice stone, flows from
each mound of a depth of from six to ten feet. The yield
of this mine is remarkable: when smelted, the ore produces
steel of a most superior character. I have in my possession
specimens of the ore in its original state, and of the metal
in its manufactured state. These facts are enough to show
that capital and labour are required.
My advice, however, I may be permitted to tender to two
or three classes. To masters or workmen who are doing
well in England, I suggest the old motto, “ Let well alone.”
But if you are struggling with difficulties, which appear
unconquerable, wind up your affairs and try the colonies.
There we are not so thick upon the ground; and with the
primest beef at twopence, and mutton at three-halfpence,
you cannot, you need not starve. Not that I would hold
out the expectation of success without exertion-—of fortune
without the appliances of industry—or of the quiet repose
of old age without thrift and care in early and middle life.
The “ Battle of Life” must be fought lustily and bravely on
both sides the world. And moral worth is as valuable and
as highly prized there as here. ; The openings for the agri-
cultural labourer, and the master or journeyman tradesman,
are astonishing. I will only mention one instance. It was
told me by the Rev. Mr. Mackenzie, a fellow passenger from
Sydney to England, and, I am sure, is only a specimen of
the increase in the price of all kinds of handicraft. He
says, “ Happening to .break part of the harness of one of
the horses I was driving, I desired my servant to carry the
broken part to a saddler’s shop, in order to get it mended.
I accompanied the man. We travelled from shop to shop,
till we had visited three or four of them, before we found a
man in any of them; all the men having gone to the dig-
gings, the shops were left under the'charge of their wives or
daughters. At last we reached a saddler’s shop, in which I
saw a little boy of nine or ten years of age, who said he
thought he could mend the broken harness; and he did so


in a few minutes. I stood looking at him while at work,
and when he had finished I asked him what was to pay,
expecting that he would say, ‘ One shilling.’ His reply,
however, was ‘ Half-a-crown, sir, if you please.’ I said,
‘ That is a very high charge, my little boy, for the few
stitches it only cost you.’ ‘ But, sir,’ said this pocket
edition of human nature, ‘you must consider that all the
men have gone to the diggings, and that ice, who stay at
home to do the work of the public, must charge accord-
ingly.’ The logic was conclusive; my mouth was stopped,
and my purse was opened. I paid the 2s. G d., and went
away convinced that those who stay at home and stick to
their trades will largely participate in the profits of the
gold-digger. In January last I was paying 30s. a week, or
at the rate of £7B a-year, with hoard, to a bullock-driver,
whom I could have hired last year at about £3O a-year.
When this man’s time with me expired, he was offered £3
a-week, or at the rate of £ISG a-year, with hoard, for
driving bullocks between Melbourne and Mount Alexander.
I know a journeyman carpenter,, who was at the same time
offered £4 a week, with board and constant employment,
which he refused —then went to the diggings.”
In England there is a large class of young men who are
well educated, but are not brought up to any business pur-
suits. Many of this class make their way to the colonies.
They bring letters of introduction to respectable and
wealthy people—often to the Governor—and imagine their
fortunes are made. Poor fellows! Any well-instructed
colonist can see with half an eye that they are unfit for
hard work, and therefore necessarily unfit for the colony.
Often, persons such as these are returned home to their
parents, like unsaleable bales of merchandise; and, too
frequently, alas! they remain to disgrace their name, to
ruin their character, and to debauch their lives. “ England
is a nation of shopkeepers,” said Napoleon. Be it so,
rather than it should be composed of men unfit and dis-
qualified to obey the mandate, “ That man should eat his


bread by the sweat of bis brow.” “ Ships, colonies, com-
merce,” is our motto; but that motto is a foul blot upon
our young empire, unless it be sanctioned and upheld by
enterprise, earnestness, and unconquerable zeal. The
above remarks respecting educated young men without
trade or profession, do not apply in all cases. Ardour,
intelligence, and industry, will do anything for a man who
is left to his own resources; and I have known cases
where such a person has overcolne almost innumerable
difficulties. There is another and a large class, dividing
itself into sempstresses and general female servants. To
such I would briefly say —In Australia you are wanted;
and if you land virtuous and respectable, you may soon
settle down the wives of honest and intelligent men.


CHAPTER IV.
The latest intelligence from Sydney and Melbourne is
to the 17th of April. From the newspapers up to that
date, we learn the progress which is making in the gold-
fields, and also the state of trade in regard to the staple
articles of export.
The Governor-General, in company with his daughter,
the Honourable Mrs. Keith Stewart, the Colonial Secretary,
and private Secretary, had started on a tour of inspection to
the southern mines, and afterwards intended to visit the
Turon and other western diggings.
The last escort had brought in from Mount Alexander,
12,873 ounces; and from Ballarat, 925 ounces of gold.
The Sydney Morning Herald correspondent at the former
place, says:—
“ To give anything like an accurate guess at the daily amount of gold
raised would be absolutely impossible, for it is so variable that the
return of one day is no guide whatever to that of another. Besides
this, fully two-thirds of the diggers are unable to wash as they would do
if there were plenty of water in the creek. Many of these are now
employed at dry digging, or nuggeting as it is called here, in holes
already sunk, saving perhaps a little of the choicest earth, which they
bring home with them to wash in a tin dish, and setting aside the likely
looking stuff for the time when the cradle can be brought into operation.
These are just making enough to clear themselves, with perhaps a trifle
to spare, looking forward to the rainy season to pay them. Others
again are prospecting, or sinking holes in the various gullies which give
a promise of gold; many of them have been eminently successful, and
many localities have been discovered which will turn out a very large
amount of gold when water shall be more plentiful. Thus all are in
good heart, knowing well that with the first fall of rain a rich harvest


awaits them. Even as it is now, every man may obtain a good day’s
wages if he choose to stick hard to work, with of course the chance of
falling upon a pocket if he should be in luck. Thus it is that the
amount of gold procured still continues so large.”
From the Tuena Creek, the intelligence was of a most
encouraging character. The Bathurst paper mentions that,
although fewer in number, the diggers were certainly more
prosperous than at any previous time, and a larger amount
of licenses had been obtained than in any previous month.
“ In every case where common industry was exercised, good wages
were obtained by the Tuena diggers, but large earnings were by no
means uncommon. Many parties were making two to four ounces of
.gold per day. Mr. Lee’s party had been making sometimes three and
frequently four ounces per day on Sheep Station Point, and others were
equally successful. Since Tuena had been made a Police station, matters
had proceeded much more peaceably than was formerly the case. Al-
though not suppressed, sly grog-selling was conducted in a more stealthy
manner, and public decency a little more respected. Mr. Fox, chief
constable of Carcoar, accompanied by one or two of his subordinates,
visited the place a short time ago, and squared accounts with a few of
the illicit tapsters.”
The following extracts will show the state of things in
other districts; and the Regulations for the gold diggers,
which follow, are the latest which were issued:—
“ The Wentworth Gold Fields.—A short time ago, Mr. Stutch-
bury, the Government Geologist, paid a visit to the ‘ Wentworth Gold
Fields,’ and in consequence of the observations made by him, with
reference to the probable richness of that portion of Mr. Wentworth’s
estate which adjoins the land belonging to the Wentworth Gold
Company, Mr. Daniel was induced to prospect it, and the result is highly
encouraging. There can be no doubt of the existence of other rich
digging grounds—perhaps equally rich with those already proved and
appropriated. The specimens obtained by working with a cradle are
precisely similar in character to the gold produced by the Company’s
ground. The small grains show, by their flattened state and rounded
outline, that they are found in their original place of deposit. The
promulgation of the above intelligence has created a little excitement
amongst the residents of Frederick’s Valley, numbers of whom have
made applications to Mr. Daniel for permission to work the ground upon
D 9


the halves; but, until instructions upon the subject have been received
from Mr. Wentworth, no licenses will he issued. As a proof that gold
is not necessarily the root of evil, I may mention that since its discovery
in this neighbourhood, a decided improvement is observable in the
circumstances of the small settling class. They evidently possess in
greater abundance than formerly, both the necessaries and comforts of
life, and it is with pleasure I state it, that their moral condition also is
improved. A strong disposition is beginning to manifest itself to expend
their savings in the purchase of small farms as homesteads, several 40
and 50 acre patches having latterly been bought by lucky gold diggers.
This is a sign of the times which cannot be misinterpreted.”
“ Long Ceeek.—A respectable individual, who has spent a consider-
able portion of his time since the gold discovery about the Louisa and
Meroo Creeks, and their tributaries, thus speaks of the diggings at Long
Creek, one of the ‘ feeders ’ of the Meroo:— ‘ There are 500 to 600 people
digging hereabouts, at the very least, within a comparatively small com-
pass, all doin g well. The least unfortunate amongst us, if at all industrious,
can make his £1 per day, and many are earning a great deal more. Ido
not mean to assert for a single moment, that there are not unlucky men
amongst us, nor that claims are not sometimes opened which prove unre-
munerative. Plenty of men arrive here, try their luck for a day or two,
and if unsuccessful, fly off elsewhere. We have also a few schemers and
loungers amongst us, who have a constitutional antipathy to hard work,
and live I can’t say how. Sly grog-selling is an easy way of making
money, and one very much preferred to digging, by the scheming arid
reprobate class. But to the industrious, persevering, honest workman,
who prefers trusting to his own strong arms to trickery or scheming
for a maintenance, there is a certain prospect of success. Near where
I am working there are some splendid claims. My own party have
been making 6,7, and 8 ounces of gold a day for some time —sometimes
certainly less. I have just sold my share of gold, obtained since we last
divided for £93. We have to cart our stuff a short distance to water.
Out of one load we have just procured 3 ounces, and this is by no means
unusual with us. A claim is reckoned a very poor one here which does
not turn out 2 ounces to each party. Some men who have no other
means of conveying the earth to the creek, carry it in hags on their
backs; but this is a very toilsome and unprofitable process. Working
singly in this manner, they earn from Itoi an ounce daily. As ours
are all bank claims, we possess a great advantage over the Turon diggers,
the floods doing us good instead of harm. There are no bed-claims
here, they won’t pay for working. A few of the diggers tried, but
as none of them did any good, the attempt has not been renewed. In
some cases a great depth of earth, what is usually termed “-top stuff,”
has to be thrown off before you reach the gold. In our present claim,


we did not get a pennyworth until we had sunk fourteen feet, and came
upon the deposit, after which we frequently procured ss. worth of gold
in a single tin-dish of earth. Not far distant from this is a place which
goes by the name of Spicer’s Creek, upon which there are a good many
now at work and doing well. I was the first discoverer of gold in that
quarter, and was in solitary possession of the secret for five weeks,
during which, myself digging, and my wife rocking the cradle, we made
£263. Our secresy was finally invaded, the length of our stay having
created a suspicion that we must be doing a first-rate stroke, and in a
couple of days some two hundred diggers were down upon us, tearing
up the earth in all directions. Grog-shops are not only numerous but
numberless at Long Creek, and a rare business some of them are doing.
They carry on their traffic unmolested, and are seldom troubled by that
patriotic and disinterested class of officials yclept ‘ blue-bottles.’ I will
conclude by expressing my opinion that the diggings hereabouts will
continue profitable for a long time. There are lots of country of the
same character as our present digging-grounds yet untouched.”
LATEST REGULATIONS.
All persons digging or searching for alluvial gold, to take out a
license, the license fee being at the rate of £1 10s. o d. per month. All
gold procured without due authority is liable to seizure, in whose posses-
sion soever it be. Persons applying for license, required to prove they
are not absent from hired service. Claims to work unoccupied ground
to be marked out on the following scale :
1. Fifteen feet frontage to either side of a river or main creek.
2. Twenty feet of the bed of a tributary to a river or main creek,
extending across its whole breadth.
3. Sixty feet of the bed of a ravine or water course.
4. Twenty feet square of table land or river flats.
These claims to be secured to parties only as they may continue to
hold licenses for the same, except in case of flood or accident. Licenses
liable to be cancelled on conviction of the holders of selling spirits, or of
any disorderly and riotous conduct. Persons found working alluvial
gold on public or private lands, without a license, to pay a double license
fee. Disputes as to claims to be settled by the Commissioners. Licenses
to dig on lands alienated from the Crown, to be issued only to the pro-
prietors, or persons authorized by the proprietors, in writing to apply for
the same. The fee for such licenses to be 15s. per month. Licenses for
draining ponds and water-holes, for the purpose of obtaining alluvial gold,
to be obtainable on paying as many license fees as shall be proportioned
to the area of the water-hole —calculating twenty-five feet square for


every license. Reservoirs and dams for the purpose of washing gold, to be
constructed on the permission of the Commissioners. Owners of claims
employing labourers and paying license fees for them, allowed to transfer
such licenses to other labourers. All persons searching for matrix gold,
by working auriferous quartz veins, to pay a royalty of ten per cent, on all
gold obtained, to an officer appointed by the Government. The party
working the vein to come under a bond in the sum of £IOOO to pay such
royalty j the Government officer to reside on the land, and to have access
to the buildings and premises and to all books and accounts connected
with the production of gold. All buildings, and machinery, erected on
the land to be considered as additional security to the Government. The
claim to consist of half a mile, and in the course of the vein, with a
quarter of a mile on each side of the vein reserved for building purposes,
&c. The right to cut timber and to use water on the land to he granted.
The claim to be forfeited by neglecting to pay the prescribed royalty;
by not employing twenty persons or machinery, calculating one horse
power to seven men, within six months after the application for the
claim has been accepted; or by ceasing to employ that number subse-
quently j by the employment of unlicensed persons to work alluvial gold
on the claim, or violating in any way the terms of the bond. The
duration of the claims to be three years, to he extended further under
instructions from Her Majesty’s government, if the conditions of the
bond have all been fulfilled. No portion of land, previously occu-
pied and claimed for alluvial gold, will bo open for selection for
matrix gold while it continues to be worked for the former. The
royalty for working auriferous quartz on private lands to be five
per cent. Persons occupying portions of the gold-field for trading
purposes, to pay a license fee of £1 10s. o d. per month.
That the fullest and most satisfactory proofs may be
afforded to the public of the state of the colonies, we con-
clude by quoting the latest official circulars.
SYDNEY GOLD CIRCULARS.
“ The water of the Turon has not yet gone down sufficiently to admit of
the bed-claims being worked. Some of the diggers are employed in
washing the river-drift, which is now nearly exhausted. Good dry dig-
gings have been discovered opposite to the end of a range called Ration
Hill, where a great number of holes are being sunk, and some of the
parties look forward to considerable success, the richest of these claims
has been known to yield 10 ounces per day. Sheep Station Point is
nearly deserted, and tents are daily disappearing from the Upper Wallaby,


the diggers leaving by scores for Dirt Hole Creek, Tamberoora, and
Meroo, where fresh claims are being opened with every prospect of re-
muneration.
“ About thirty-five miles from Goulburn, a mine has been discovered at
Marooralong, on a farm belonging to Mr. D. H. Thorne. The gold was
found at the depth of twelve feet, and continued to increase as they went
lower down. About eight men are engaged, and making from 3to 4
ounces per week: and it is stated that in one panful of earth, they found
a torquoise and a ruby.
“ Near the head of Tamberoora, a number of deep shafts have been sunk
with satisfactory results: the water is, however, scarce, and dams for its
reservation are being constructed at great expense, to prevent the neces-
sity which now exists of carting the soil to the various water-holes for
the purpose of washing. A man from this district yesterday received
£lB9 on the sale of his gold, as his share of three weeks’ labour.
“ A rich gold-field appears to exist on General Sewart’s estate, about
four miles from Bathurst, which will no doubt be worked to advantage
as soon as labour becomes more plentiful. A man named Lawrence Byrnes,
with his mate, worked ten hours, and got 14 dwts. of gold, in value about
two guineas; but because they could not find it in ounces, they left the
spot, stating themselves not satisfied with such a poor return for their
labour. This fact expresses, more significantly than a volume of words,
the value of our mines. About 500 people are working on Long Creek,
a tributary of the Meroo; they are all comparatively in a small compass,
and the principal portion of them are doing well; the least fortunate, if
at all industrious, can earn 20s. per day, and the majority much more.
One party has been making from 6 oz. to 8 oz. per day, although the
soil has to be carted a considerable distance to be washed. It is not at
all unusual to find 3 ounces of gold in one cart-load of soil, and a claim
here is reckoned very poor if it will not yield two ounces per day to a
party. At Tuena, the diggers are not so numerous as they were, but
their success appears greater; good wages are obtained with common
industry, and large earnings (say from 2 to 4 ounces per day) are by no
means rare.
“ The Braidwood mines still continue to yield their glittering treasure,
without any apparent diminution. The old digging localities are not yet
exhausted; and new discoveries are occasionally made. 380 licenses have
been taken out this month on Major’s Creek. His Excellency the Gover-
nor, during his visit to this district, purchased a quartz nugget, about 8
ounces, and another sample at Inverlochy, for the purpose of adding them
to his cabinet specimens of Australian gold.
“ Parties are allowed to work here for one month without paying any
license fee to the proprietor.


“ We have been favoured by a highly respectable house in town with
a sight of half an ounce of gold, from a new mine which is just opened
out at Blakeness Creek, about 14 miles from Yass. It is evidently very
pure, and of a different description to either the Turon, Ophir, or Braid-
wood. The character of the ground is quartz, granite, slate, and sand,
with every appearance of having at some time been in a state of fusion.
Experienced men who have visited this mine think very favourably of
it. A number of persons with cradles are at work, and we hope next
week to be able to report more fully on the subject.
“ Up to the 6th of this month, 160 licenses had been taken out for the
Peel Diggings. The largest quantity obtained by one party has been
4 ounces per day. Ren wick’s party of three are still making 1J ounce per
day. The labour is not very heavy, as the precious metal is found prin-
cipally in the river drift, and in holes and crevices of the rock, from which
it is extracted with trowels and such like tools.
“The escort brought in this week from Braid wood, 534 oz.; Bell’s
Creek, 135 oz.; Araluen, 303 oz.; Goulbum, 81 oz.j Sofala, 1197 oz.;
Airsford, 918 oz.; Tambaroora, 458 oz.; Bathurst, 291 oz.; Ophir, 110
oz. And the mails from Bathurst, 127 oz.; Sofala, 484 oz.; Mudgee, 37
oz.; Goulburn 92 oz.; Braidwood, 241 oz.; Yass, 18 oz.; and Tamworth,
40 oz. In all, by escort and mails, 5065 oz., in value about £16,461.
“ Letters are in town from the Rev. Mr. Clarke, who reports favourably
of a large tract of country over which he has travelled.
“The price has varied through the week from 635. to 645., at which it
was very firm yesterday; but large quantities are expected from Mel-
bourne during next week, which may reduce the price again.
“At Victoria the quantity coming in is still large; the escort brought
down last week 13,808 ounces.
“ It is with sincere pleasure we announce that five of the gang who
robbed the Nelson have been captured, and there is every reason to hope
that they will all be taken: we trust that no expense will be spared, and
no stone left unturned, to bring these scoundrels to justice—it is the most
barefaced robbery that has been committed since we lost our convict
character, and as it is a matter that affects, directly or indirectly, every
individual in the community, we hope our friends in Melbourne will see
the propriety of not resting satisfied until every man concerned in this
piracy has been secured. It was well remarked by a writer on the subject,
that ‘ the success which attended them would prove eminently suggestive
to other vagabonds, who would rather live by plunder, than work for an
honest livelihood.’ We would add, with still greater force, if possible,
LET THE CONSEQUENCES be also as suggestive. One of the Insurance
Companies at Melbourne has resolved not to take the risk of gold lying
on board the vessels while in the port of Victoria.


“April 13 — Ann, for India ....
oz.
500
„ Tamar, for London
6339
„ 15— St. Vincent, for London .
1452
8291
Which, at 65s. per ounce, gives . £26,945
15 0
Add previous export . . . 1,208,380
15 7
Total exported to this date . . £1,235,326
10 7
“ The overland escort from Mount Alexander to Adelaide had reached
there safely, under the command of Mr. Commissioner Tolmer, in fourteen
days, conveying upwards of 5 cwt. of gold;—about £50,000 worth of gold
had been deposited in the assay office under the provisions of the Bullion
Act, and the Bank of Australasia were still refusing to take ingots and
issue their notes upon them. An attempt had been made by the Collector
of Customs to claim an import duty of 5 per cent, on the gold brought
down by the Queen of Sheba, but it was supposed the Governor would
not sanction it.
“ The export since our last has been—
“ Exchange on London—drafts against gold, 8 per cent discount.
“ Freight, i per cent.
“GEORGE A. LLOYD.
“474, George Street, April VUh.”
“ Since my last circular the banks hare made some extensive purchases,
mostly, it is understood, through private agents, the rates given being
645. to 645. 6 d. My sales to-day amounted to £2873 13s. Gd., the prices
obtained averaging 645. The temper of the market seems to have been
slightly affected by the late advices from England, assigning a trifling
inferiority to Turon gold. This circumstance has naturally created some
distrust among buyers ; and there is an evident reluctance on the part of
old speculators to follow advanced rates. Notwithstanding this prices
have gone up, with a prospect of a further advance. At Melbourne also
a great improvement in price has boon sustained, the Waratah, which
vessel arrived there on the Bth, having conveyed to that market several
extensive purchasers. The last escorts from Mount Alexander and
Ballarat, brought 13,808 ounces. My letters, by this morning’s mail,
report the apprehension of several persons suspected of having been con-
cerned in the Nelson piracy.
“By advices from Adelaide, dated March 30,1 learn that the deposits
at the new Assay Office up to the 27th of that month, amounted to
£76,742 is., and that the ingot system appeared to be working satis-


WOOL.
».
a.
s.
d.
Superior clips
.
i
3 to
1
4
Fair to good
.
i
U
1
2i
Low to middling
.
i
0
1
1
factorily. The latest accounts from Van Diemen’s Land contain inform-
ation of a new discovery at Pittwater, which really bids fair to give im-
portant results; several small nuggets, the size of shot and peas, having
been found in the first washings.
“ A rumour was current in town yesterday, that A monster block of
gold, 4 CWT., had been excavated from the quartz ridge of the Louisa.
From inquiries which I have made, I learn that the company which is
there bringing machinery to operate on the quartz, have broken out
some largo lumps, supposed to be fully the weight given, which are very
richly impregnated with the precious metal.
“ The quantity of gold from our own diggings by public conveyance dur-
ing tho week was about 5000 ounces. At the Turon some dry rich diggings
are now in full work, and new discoveries have been made. Several
beautiful nuggets of pure gold have reached Sydney, which were ob-
tained at Circus Point, below Curtis’s lower store, from ground hitherto
neglected.
“JOHN GODFREY COHEN,
Auctioneer.
“490, George-street, April 17.”
SYDNEY PRODUCE CIRCULAR.
“The quantity of wool offered at last sale was very small, and realized
tolerably good prices, quite equal to last week’s quotations.
“Tallow, of which there was a considerable quantity, met with a
ready sale, at, for beef, £25 12s. 6 d. ; mutton, £27. A large number of
hides fetched at from Is. 6 d. to Bs. each. Sheepskins about as last
quoted.
“Freights to London-Wool 5 ands P er cent-
( washed, id. and 5 per cent.
Hides, 20s. to 255. per ton.
Tallow, 355. per ton, and ss. per cent.
Oil, £3 per tun.
Gold, i per cent.
Exchange on London.—Bank Drafts, GJ per cent, discount.
Private Bills, (with produce hypothecated,) 8 per cent, discount.
PRICES CURRENT.


s.
d.
5.
d.
Grease
0
5i
to
0
8
Locks, pieces, broken wool,
&o .
0
6
1
0
Handwashed and scoured ,
•
0
11
1
6
TALLOW.
Beef ....
£26
0
0
to £0
0
0
Mutton ....
27
0
0
0
0
0
Station tallow
22
0
0
24
0
0
Hides, each
0
5
0
0
7
6
Sheepskins, per pound
0
0
3J
0
0
6i
GOLD.
Dust and nuggets, per ounce, £3 4s.
“THOMAS S. MORT.
“ Circular Quay, Sydney, April 17, 1852.”
MELBOURNE GOLD CIRCULAR.
“ The market in the early part of the week was firm, and sales were
made at higher rates than quoted in my last. There was less animation,
however, in the middle of the week, and towards the latter end the
price gave way, and it was purchased on Friday at from £2 19s. 3 d. to
£2 19s. 6 d.\ on Saturday, however, the market was firmer, and the
holders seemed unwilling to realize at those rates. The large amount of
capital which has been thrown into the metropolitan city has given an
immense impetus to trade, which was never so brisk before; and this
prosperity will not he confined to the colony. The increase in the supply
of the precious metal, and the consequent advance in the money price of
real property, and every article of consumption in Britain, will not only
give increased facilities to trade, but will improve the condition of the
vast majority of the people; the exceptions being capitalists, whose
money is out at interest, and holders, and persons upon fixed incomes.
It is pretty generally understood that the distress in Great Britain
during the period between 1818 and 1830 was chiefly owing to the great
falling off in bullion consequent upon the War of Independence in the
South American provinces; and in the last year of which we can find
any record of the quantity imported into Britain, we find it had fallen
to £195,571. It is thus stated by Porter for 1836:—Mexico, £70,210;
Boliva, £17,051; Chili, £78,515; Peru, £29,795. T0ta1—£195,571.
The gold shipped from Victoria already amounts to £1,359,834.
“ The gold from the diggings is still good, the Bendigo appearing to


be the best part at the present moment. I have, however, had several
lots lately from the Picaninny Creek, from Ballarat, and from the M'lou
Creek, which it is said will be a very prolific place for diggers. I pur-
chased a parcel of gold this week which came from Mount Macedon ; it
was evidently from the surface, and very dark in colour. I had one
parcel from the Pyrenees of similar quality, and have little doubt both
places will yield.
“ The money market continues still in a very unsatisfactory condition j
the banks are now generally declining to advance upon gold, and this
circumstance has visibly affected the market. As an instance of the state
of the exchange between this place and England, I may mention that I
had a bill of the great Rothschild’s in my hands this week, and I could
not get a better offer for it than 25 per cent, discount.
“ The escort brought this week, from Mount Alexander, 12,055 ounces ;
from Ballarat, 129 ounces.
“THOMAS M'COMBIE, Gold Broker,
Collins-street.
“ April 3rd."
London; Effinghgra Wilson, Printer, 11, Royal Exchange.


August 2, 1852.
A LIST OF NEW PUBLICATIONS
ON
THE COLONIES OF
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND,
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE, AND NATAL,
PUBLISHED AND SOLD BY
EFFINGHAM WILSON,
COMMERCIAL & COLONIAL BOOKSELLER & PUBLISHER,
11, ROYAL EXCHANGE, LONDON.
AUSTRALIA.
THE COLONIES OF AUSTRALIA: their Formation,
Progress, and Present State; the Discovery of the Gold Fields, with
the Latest Intelligence from the Diggings ; Advice to Emigrants ; &c.,
&c. By John Fairfax, Esq., Joint-Proprietor and Joint-Editor of the
Sydney Morning Herald. Price Is.
A COMPLETE GAZETTEER of the AUSTRALIAN
COLONIES. Containing a Map of every County; An Account of all
the Rivers and Bays, with Height of all the Mountains, and Number
of Population, and other Statistics; Correct Views of Sydney and other
Towns ; A List of every Estate and Squatter’s Station, with the Pro-
prietor’s Name ; and full Information concerning every important Spot
where Gold has recently been discovered.
By IVm. Henry Wells, Surveyor, Sydney.
Just imported, in 1 vol. Bvo., with 25 Maps and Views, price 21*., or
225. post free.
“ A complete Geographical Dictionary and Directory of New South Wales and its dependen-
cies, and will be found of immense utility to all engaged in commercial transactions, or who
contemplate emigrating to that land of promise." —Morning Advertiser.
NATAL, Cape of Good Hope, a Grazing, Agricultural, and
Cotton-Growing Country: comprising Descriptions of this well-endowed
Colony, from the year 1675 to the Present Time, by Government Officials
and Travellers; with a Vocabulary of the Zulu Language, a Map of the
Colony and Engravings. By J. S. Christopher, of Natal. Price 4*.
bound, with Views and Coloured Map.
THE EMIGRANT’S GUIDE to the CAPE OF GOOD
HOPE. With a Map of the Colony. New and improved Editions,
price Is., or 18 Queen’s heads, per post. By J. C. Byrne, Esq., Author
of “ Twelve Years’ Wanderings in the British Colonies.”
AUSTRALIA AND HER TREASURES.
“ Whose mountains, pregnant by the beam
Of the warm sun, with diamonds teem;
Whose rivulets are like rich brides,
Lovely, with gold beneath their tides.”
Paradise and the Peri,
By Nuooet. Third Edition. Price Is.
CORRESPONDENCE RELATIVE TO THE RECENT
DISCOVERY OF GOLD IN AUSTRALIA. Presented to both
Houses of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty, Feb. 3rd, 1862.
Price 6 d.


WHAT SHOULD THE GOVERNMENT DO FOR
AUSTRALIA ? By Joseph Robert Morrison, Esq. Third Edition.
Price Is.
AUSTRALASIA. By R. Montgomery Martin, Esq.
Containing the History, Extent, Condition, andßesources of New South
Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Western Australia. With Maps
of each of the Colonies, in one vol. cloth. Price 14s.
AUSTRALIA AND EMIGRATION. The Present State
of the Colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Western
Australia, and New Zealand. With Plates. By 11. Melville, Esq.
Cloth, price 55. ; free per post.
THE THREE COLONIES OF AUSTRALIA, with nu-
merous Illustrations. By S. Sidney, Esq., Author of “ Bush Life in
Australia,” late Editor of “ Sidney’s Emigrant’s Journal,” &c., &c.
Price 6s.
CHAMBERS’ EMIGRANT’S MANUAL FOR Aus-
tralia. Price Is. ; per post, Is. 6 d.
EARP’S GOLD COLONIES OF AUSTRALIA. With
Map. Price Is.; per post, Is. 6 d.
MURRAY’S AUSTRALIAN GOLD DIGGINGS; where
they are, and how to get at them, &c.; with letters from settlers and
diggers, telling how to work them. Price Is. ; per post, Is. 6 d.
MOSSMAN’S GOLD REGIONS OF AUSTRALIA.
Second Edition, with Coloured Map. Price Is.; per post, Is. 6d.
MACKENZIE’S TEN YEARS IN AUSTRALIA. New
Edition, with Coloured Map. Price Is.; per post, Is. 6 d.
MACKENZIE’S GOLD-DIGGER; or, A Visit to the
Gold Fields of Australia, bringing down the information to the 10th of
March. Price Is.; per post, Is. 6 d.
EMIGRANT’S GUIDE TO AUSTRALIA, with a New
Map of the Gold Fields. By Jno. Capper, late Editor of the “ Emi-
grant’s Journal.” Price Is.; per post, Is. 6 d.
AUSTRALIA, VAN DIEMEN’S LAND, AND NEW
Zealand: their History and Present State, &c. Price 6 d. ; per post, 10 d.
RAMBLES AND OBSERVATIONS IN NEW SOUTH
WALES, with Sketches of Men and Manners, Notice of the Aborigines,
Glimpses of Scenery, and some Hints to Emigrants. By Jos. Phipps
Townsend. Price Bs. 6 d.
11 One of the best books on New South Wales that has appeared."— Spectator,
SETTLERS AND CONVICTS; or, Recollections of Six-
teen Years’ Labour in the Backwoods of Australia. By an Emigrant
Mechanic. Price 3s.
NOTES AND SKETCHES OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
By Mr. Meredith. Price 2s. 6 d. ; per post, 3s.
THE EMIGRANT’S GUIDE TO AGRICULTURE
and GRAZING in New South Wales. Price 2s.
SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE LATE DISCOVERIES
of GOLD in Australia, with Notes of a Visit to the Gold Districts.
By Capt. Erskine, R.N. Price 2s. 6 d.


BUSH LIFE IN AUSTRALIA, during a Residence of
Eight Years in the Interior. By H. W. Haygartii, Esq. Price 2s. 6 d.
THE NEW COLONY OF VICTORIA, or PORT
PHILLIP, together with some Account nf the other Australian Colo-
nies ; also a Chapter on the recent Discoveries of Gold. By 3. F. L.
Foster, Esq., late Member of the Legislature. Price Is. ; per post,
Is. 6 d,
PORT PHILLIP IN 1849, with a Map. By J. B. Clutter-
buck, M.D., nine years resident in the Colony. Price 3s. j per post,
3 s, Gd,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND ITS MINES, with an
Historical Sketch of the Colony, large Map, &c. By Francis Dutton.
Price 155.; free per post.
WORKING-MAN’S HANDBOOK TO SOUTH AUS-
TRALIA. By G. B. 'Wilkinson, Esq., with Map. Price Is. 6 d. ; per
post, 2s.
EMIGRATION: WHERE TO GO, AND WHO
SHOULD GO. NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA (as Emi-
gration Fields) in contrast with the United States and Canada. Canter-
bury and the Diggings. By Charles Hursthouse, Juu. Dedicated
to Mrs. Chisholm. Price Is. ; per post, Is. 6 d.
NEW ZEALAND.
NEW ZEALAND SKETCHES IN PEN AND PENCIL.
By H. Tyrone Power. Post Byo., with numerous Illustrations. Price
125.; free per post.
NEW ZEALAND. By R. Montgomery Martin, Esq.
Containing its History, Extent, Condition, and Resources, with Maps,
&c. Bound in cloth. Price 7s. 6 d.
THE HANDBOOK FOR NEW ZEALAND, consisting of
the most recent Information, compiled for the Use of Intending Colo-
nists. By a late Magistrate of the Colony. Price 65., free by post.
THE SIX COLONIES OF NEW ZEALAND. By Wil-
liam Fox. Price 35.; or, with large Map, 4s. 6 d.
HANDBOOK FOR INTENDING EMIGRANTS to the
Southern Settlements of New Zealand. By G. P. Earp. Third Edi-
tion. Price 2s. 6 d. ; per post, 3s.
HURSTHOUSE’S NEW ZEALAND, with an Account of
New Zealand, and an Article on the Canterbury Settlement. Third
Edition. Price Is.; per post, Is. 6d.
HURSTHOUSE’S LECTURES ON NEW ZEALAND,
with Letters from Settlers in the Colony, and other Information. Price Is.
CHAMBERS’ EMIGRANT’S MANUAL FOR NEW
ZEALAND. Price Is.; per post, Is. 6 d,
NOTES ON NEW ZEALAND, being Extracts of Letters
from Settlers in the Colony, &c. Nos. 2,3, 4,6, 6, 2 d. each; or, Nos.
1 to 6, in paper cover, Is.
THE EMIGRANT’S GUIDE TO NEW ZEALAND. By
a late Resident. With Map. Price 6d.
EMIGRATION CIRCULAR FOR NEW ZEALAND, with
two Maps, 1862. Price 2d.; per post, id.


CANTERBURY PAPERS.—lnformation concerning the
Principles, Objects, Plans, and Proceedings of the Founders of the
Settlement of Canterbury in New Zealand. Nos. Ito 10, at 6 d, each.
No. 11, containing Views in the Settlement, price Is. 6 d.
A RAISED MODEL OF BANKS’ PENINSULA, (Can-
terbury Settlement, New Zealand,) on a scale of five miles to an inch,
in neat glass case. Price 7s. 6 d.
THE CANTERBURY SETTLEMENT, New Zealand. A
Field for Emigration. By John Knowles. Price 6 d.; per post, B d.
TARANAKI, OR NEW PLYMOUTH, the Garden of New
Zealand, tested by its Religious, Social, and Natural Advantages.
Price 3 d.-, per post, B d.
COLONIZATION CIRCULAR. Second Edition, June,
1852. Price 3 d. ; per post sd,
AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND GAZETTE:
published every other Saturday. Stamped, price 6 d.
CAPPER’S COLONIAL CALENDAR. A Comprehensive
Summary of the Colonial Possessions of Great Britain, &c. Price 25.;
per post, 2s. 6 d.
EMIGRATION MAP OF THE WORLD; showing the
British Possessions, Steam Routes to Australia, &c. Price, sheet, Is. ;
folded in case, Is. 6 d. ; mounted in cloth case, 2s.
AUSTRALIA, by Areowsmith, in 2 sheets, coloured. Price
10s.; mounted in case, 16s.
AUSTRALIA, hy Johnson, in 1 sheet, coloured. Price 3s;
mounted in case, 6s. 6 d.
AUSTRALIA. Published by the Society for the Diffusion
of Useful Knowledge. In one sheet, coloured, price 9d. ; mounted in
case, Is. 6 d.
SOUTH-EAST AUSTRALIA, in one sheet; embracing the
Colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia. Price,
coloured, in sheet, 75.; mounted in case, 10s.
NEW SOUTH WALES. Sir Thomas Mitchell’s Trigono-
metrical Survey. Published in Sydney. Three sheets, coloured. Price
10s. 6d.; mounted in case, 16s.
SAUNDERS’ OFFICIAL GOLD MAP OF NEW
SOUTH WALES, compiled from Official Documents, afforded by Mr.
Haegeates. On one sheet, coloured. Price Is. 6d.; folded in case,
25.; mounted in case, 13s.
AUSTRALIA FELIX, or VICTORIA. A Map of the
surveyed country in the Melbourne and Geelong Districts. .Published
by T. Ham, Melbourne. Scale, of an inch to a mile, in-two sheets,
coloured. Price 21s. ; mounted in case, 28s.
AUSTRALIA FELIX. Map of the Colony of Victoria,
published by T. Ham, Melbourne. Coloured, in one sheet, price, 12s. 6d.
mounted in case, 15s.
The best Map of the Gold District of Port Phillip.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, hy J. Areowsmith; with the situa-
tion of the Mines, &c. One sheet coloured. Price 75.; mounted in
case, 10s.
Works Published by Effingham Wilson.


