

S iwAx/cew p^ms
THE KANAKA
LABOUR TRAFFIC
Queensland’s Defence
Dr. John Q. Raton’s Reply
Correspondence with Colonial Office
Rejoinder to Premier of Queensland
COPIES MAY BE HAD FROM
A. K. LANQRIDQE
“ Aniwa,” Southend, Essex




The Kanaka Labour Traffic
Pamphlets, by Mr. Hume Black, Special Agent to the
Queensland Government m London , and by Rev. A. C. Smith,
Convener of the Queensland Presbyterian Foreign Mission
Committee , being now sent to ministers, to editors of news-
papers, and to other public men, with accompanying letters by
Sir James F. Garrick, Agent-General of Queensland in London ,
and being, by their arrangements, distributed to people entering
my Mission meetings in Britain, defending this Traffic, and
condemning me for my opposition and my public Protest
against its being re-opened in 1892, after it had been closed, for
its kidnapping, murders, and atrocities, at the end of 1890, I
now deem the following reply absolutely necessary.
As, in Queensland, vessels were licensed to recruit Natives
on the Islands up to the end of 1890, and were returning with
their cargoes of Islanders far into 1891, the Traffic was really
stopped only about six or seven months ; and, as a large fleet
of vessels were engaged in it up to the end of 1890, most of
them from Queensland, the stopping of the Traffic for a few
months, when they had about 10,000 Kanakas on their Sugar
Plantations, could not, as they argue, have ruined their Sugar
Industry. I feel it an honour to be so maligned, by such
interested parties, for my opposition to a Traffic, all along its
sad history steeped in human suffering and atrocities ; and
which, notwithstanding its defenders, I hope to be able to lead
every Christian to regard as a disgrace to humanity, especially
to Britain, and her colonies of Queensland and' Fiji, seeing she
has done so much to free the slaves and the oppressed in other
lands.
The Queensland Pamphlets.
At page 11 of his pamphlet, the Rev. A. C. Smith says, “ I
visited Mackay in September, 1891, and spent an entire month
in the district, visited the plantations, and held intercourse with
the ‘ boys,’ the Polynesian inspectors,” etc. “ The planters


received me most courteously, and answered every inquiry I
made,” etc. Founding on this month’s holiday-visiting of the
plantations, courteously received by the planters, seeing all he
saw in the most favourable circumstances, and resting his know-
ledge of the Traffic on information got from ‘ boys,’ agents,
and planters, all supported by the Traffic, ignoring or blind to
all its evils, he becomes its public champion. But, as he states,
in page 7, it is with him as with all its defenders ; while repudi-
ating commercial ideas, the money gain to Queensland is
their prompting motive. He says, “If Polynesian Labour in
Queensland ceases from 20,000 to 30,000, white labourers will
be thrown out of employment, and a great industry, amounting
to about ruined.” It is the old story; by
this trade we have our wealth; great is our Diana; we will
hound down all who oppose it, or expose its evils, and its great
money profits will carry us through triumphantly. Hence Mr.
Hume Black quotes Mr. Smith as his chief witness in its
defence ; and Sir James F. Garrick writes letters, enclosing
their pamphlets, to prejudice all against me.
But it seems strange to me that, though Mr. Smith is the
convener of the Foreign Mission Committee of the Queensland
Presbyterian Church, yet that Committee has no Foreign
Missionary, none beyond their own Colony; and, as a Com-
mittee, they raise money in support of no Foreign Mission that
I ever heard of. Their own Missionary, even to the Kanakas
in Queensland, has been largely supported by the students in
Victoria and by other Colonies. Yet the Committee meets, and
in grave consultation prepares this pamphlet, and raises or gets
money “ to circulate it as widely as possible in the Colonies
and in the Home Countries.” Surely they show a far deeper
interest in the defence of this Traffic, so closely allied to
Slavery, and which is so rapidly depopulating our islands in
the South Seas, than in sending the Gospel to them. Further,
they bring no argument in its support which was not used by
the Churches and by defenders of Slavery in its worst days in
America; and there, even now, the Presbyterian Church in the
South is divided into two sections by it alone, though Slavery
in the United States has ceased, adored be the Lord ! But the
spirit which led to Abraham Lincoln’s and Garfield’s murders
prompts their opposition to me; yet, if they continue this
Traffic a few years longer, it must cease, for the Islands will be
depopulated by it. Hence we are now informed that “ Sir


Thomas Mcllwraith has lately intimated that, as the supply of
Melanesians becomes exhausted, Queensland will look to New
Guinea for her labourers.” To the ordinary reader this announce-
ment has little significance ; but “ to those who know the facts
it is a declaration that the Queensland Government are prepared
to sanction the sacrifice of many hundreds of lives.” —See Mr.
Basil Thomson's letter , Leeds Mercury , 18th May, 1894.
They admit that “ the Kanaka Labour Traffic for New
Caledonia, a French colony; Fiji, an English colony ; the
Sandwich Islands, an Independent state; some parts of South
America, and even Queensland, ten years and more ago, was
conducted without supervision, often with great cruelty, and
sometimes accompanied by atrocities; but now, as far as
Queensland is concerned, all this has been put an end to years
ago ; ” and they declare that “ Dr. Baton's allegations in most
cases are practically unsupported” —Mr. Hume Black says
this; and Mr. Smith and he try to prove it by their witnesses.
Let us look at them :
Their Array of Witnesses.
His Excellency, Sir Henry Norman, Queensland.
Admiral Lord Charles Scott, Australia,
Sir Samuel Griffiths (late Premier), Queensland.
Sir James Garrick, Agent-General, Queensland.
Dr. H. Dalrymple, M.L.A., Queensland.
Mr. Caulfield, Polynesian Inspector, Queensland.
Dr. Saumarez Smith, Lord Primate, Australia.
Dr. Webber, Brisbane, Queensland.
Mr. Kinnaird Rose, Queensland.
Miss Flora Shaw, Special Correspondent, Times.
Mrs. Donaldson, Queensland.
Rev. A. C. Smith, Queensland.
„ A. A. Maclaren, Queensland.
„ J, McL. Mclntyre, Queensland.
~ J. L. Kimpe, Queensland.
„ J. E. Clayton, Queensland.
„ C. F. Johnson, Queensland.
„ Mr. Eustice, Queensland.
„ Mr. Brown, Queensland.
„ W. Morris, Queensland.
Mrs. Balfour, Queensland.
Mrs. J. G. Jackson, Queensland.


Now first of all, whatever this formidable array of witnesses
have seen of the Traffic in Queensland, they have only seen it at
its best end ; not one of them has lived on the Islands, or seen its
conduct and working there and at sea, except Lord C. Scott, yet
seemingly they believe all they hear in its praise by collectors,
agents, and employers; while Mr. Smith says, they treat our
complaints in exposing its evils with “inextinguishable laughter.”
Rev. Mr. Johnston says, “ It is better for the ‘boys ’ to be in
Queensland than on the Islands; they are more teachable, more
tractable, and more trustworthy in many ways.” Mrs. Donald-
son adds, “ I believe the ‘ boys ’ are easier to win, and the
Mission work is more successful here than on the Islands.”
Others write in the same way; and though they have never
seen the work on the Islands, yet they all know better about it
than I do, after 36 years either on the Islands, or absent, ex-
clusively working for them, as now. False assertions, any-
thing will do in support of this Traffic, so long as they can get
Kanakas by it, for at least three years to slave for them at 46.
per day, doing work for which they would have to pay white
labourers from five to eight shillings.
When the Traffic was about to be re-opened in Queensland,
my Protest against it, as authorised and commended by a
minute of the Victorian Presbyterian Church, was the only one
published. Time-serving Churches and Ministers in Queens-
land did not or durst not open their mouths against it. Mr.
Smith astonished all by becoming its champion ; but ray reply
to his defence the Queensland newspapers returned to me,
saying, “ You cannot be heard again in our pages, henceforth
they are closed to you ; ” while they were publishing much in
praise of re-opening the Traffic, and in opposition to me.
Though the above witnesses are quoted in its defence, the
so-called defence, in many cases, is only a passing reference;
while what they say in condemnation of it is withheld. For
instance, Bishop Selwyn says of the returned Kanaka
(i Guardian , 4th May, 1892), “He is a much-abused person, and
in many cases justly. Very often he has learned all the evil
and none of the good of civilization. In many cases, he returns
a confirmed blackguard, knowing enough of English to swear
withal, a bully, and the prime mover in mischief and outrage.”
Mr. Smith, though backed by so many eminent supporters,
complains that the. Assembly of the Federated Presbyterian
Churches of Australia and Tasmania, when last met in South


Australia, and the newspapers of that Colony, ignored and
published nothing of his pleading in defence of the Kanaka
Labour Traffic. On his New Zealand visit, they pursued
the same course. I answer: they knew too well the charac-
ter of this shocking Traffic to be able to act otherwise. Even
Sir Samuel Griffiths, who re-opened this Traffic, gave a
scathing condemnation of it for its kidnapping, crimes, and
murders, in 1885. Mr, Kinnaird Rose was a Member of
the Royal Commission, and helped to prove, by the wit-
nesses examined, its kidnapping and murders in 1885, and
he was one of those who signed the Commission’s Report.
Yet, with his time-serving patrons, he also praises the Traffic,
though virtually conducted under what are practically the
very same regulations, agents, and bonds under which such
crimes were committed a few years ago, as proved in the
Supreme Court of Queensland, and also by the Report of the
Royal Commission. They make much of the New Regulations
in preventing crime. The chief change in them is, as they all
admit, that the Agent on board the Labour Vessels wears a
stripe on his arm and a badge on his hat, and has full charge of
the recruiting .” But the Agents have always been represented
as having full charge of the recruitings, and were put on board
and paid to prevent any abuses in the Regulations ; and if they
did not, or could not, prevent such crimes, their presence there
was a sham to deceive the world, like very much else in this
sad Traffic. If so inclined, a man who wears a badge may be as
guilty of any crime as if he had it not, where there is and can
be no supervision, viz., on the Islands.
Dr. Saumarez Smith, another of their so-called witnesses, in
replying to a letter of mine -said: “ Against re-opening the
Polynesian Labour Traffic, your testimony and your Protest
deserve all possible consideration. I may inform you that I
was perfectly surprised to see that any remarks of mine were
quoted in the English House of Commons. I have only made
two public utterances on the subject, and these were of a mild
and tentative character. One when I was up at Cairns,
acknowledging an address of welcome. I had reason to refer
to the remarks of a previous speaker, and expressed my
opinion that under proper restrictions and good regulations,
the Kanakas might be well treated, and then it might be
good for them as well as for the white workers. The other
occasion was an interview with a reporter in Brisbane, on my


return southward, when I told him that the Kanakas at
Hambledon seemed happy and were given schooling
lam not in favour of the trade, if such enormities as you
refer to in your pamphlet are repeated, and found to be
inseparable from legitimate dealing with the Islanders.
If Kanakas are unjustly treated in the plantations, I am
ready to protest as strongly as any against that species of
slavery. I assure you that any atrocities which accompany
the Labour Traffic will meet with as strong reprehension
from myself as from you.”
Bishop Montgomery, Dr. Harden, and Professor Drummond
had each a flying trip in a steamboat round the Islands, only
once. The first two have not visited Queensland, and the
last had a hurried visit to parts of it; yet, from a few words of
passing conversation with “ boys ” and others, mere hearsay ,
Messrs. Garrick, Black, and Smith class these geutlemen among
the supporters of this Traffic, and as writing in its defence. Pro-
fessor Drummond says, “ One day a vessel arrives off the Island;
it« boats are filled with armed men, and steer for the shore.
These armed men are the traders, who have come to engage
labour. It also lands a Government agent, whose duty it is
to see that matters are arranged humanely and on fair terms.
This boat is followed by another, carrying a further bodyguard
armed to the teeth, and covering the first boat with their rifles
at a short distance. The Kanaka is easily persuaded to
engage to accompany the trader for a term of years, when a
few sticks of tobacco, a gun, or some other toy is put into his
hands as a present. When a few days after the vessel leaves
the Island, it carries the flower of the population away with it.
There are happily a good many Islands on which the unwearied
work of the Missionary has borne fruit, but there are many
others on which this is not the case. For an unarmed man
to land would be certain death. What I have told is a matter
of information, not of opinion Like Dr. Saumarez Smith,
Professor Drummond only approves of it if it can be conducted
without crime; and as this has been proved to be, and still is
impossible, I claim both as against, and not for the Traffic.
Rev. Joseph Copeland, for many years a Missionary on the
New Hebrides, and who had seen much of the Kanaka Traffic
on the Islands and in Queensland, writes under date ißth June,
1893 : “ I applied to Mr. Brooks, M.L.C., Queensland, asking
him to get the Government to send copies of the New Kanaka


Their Array of Witnesses. g
Labour Regulations to each of our Missionaries, so that if
there were abuses they might point them out. He applied, and
wrote back that ‘ the Secretary had declined to give copies to our
Missionaries, as they might use them against Queensland.’ I
was also to get for the Missionaries copies of the Report of the
last Royal Commission on the Traffic, but, of course, that
also was not supplied. Deeds of darkness need the darkness !
I have read Dr. Montgomery’s article in the New Review for
May. It is a superficial and misleading statement. Guess my
surprise when I learned from the Rev. Messrs. Annand and
Gillan, New Hebrides Missionaries, who were fellow passengers
with Bishop Montgomery from Efate to Fiji and thence to
Sidney, that, notwithstanding such a fine opportunity, the
Bishop never once mentioned the subject to them! Does this
look like openness to conviction, or a desire to know the ques-
tion thoroughly ? His information is all second-hand on the
Islands and in Fiji and no doubt he got just the sort of answers
people knew he wanted. That one Kanaka in Fiji ‘ had got a
lamp costing 90s.’ to any one looking under the surface shows
the ignorance and gullibility of Natives off their own Islands.
He is strong on the point that they go ‘ willingly ’; yet he
says of a Class for Confirmation, ‘ they went to a recruiting-
boat with no intention of going, when suddenly one thought
he would go, and they all followed.’ Is that going like rational
creatures ? When he says that eighty out of a population of
500 on Merlava were absent, we know what the Island would
suffer with all these adult breadwinners gone; leaving the old,
the women, and the children. As to the reasons for going, a
taste for tea, tinned meats, clothing, etc., a Native, by staying
at home and selling his produce, could get all these things.”
Bishop Barry writes to the Guardian, 20th April, 1892, in
reference to what he calls “ the unhappy revival by Queens-
land of the Kanaka Labour Traffic from the Islands.” “It is
true,” he says, “ that the Premier of the Queensland Govern-
ment promises, and I have no doubt with the utmost sincerity,
that the most stringent Regulations shall be laid down to pre-
vent all violence, fraud, and injustice to the Natives, both in
the Islands themselves and on the Queensland plantations.
But all who have the slightest knowledge of the past history
and the necessary conditions of the Labour Traffic, will agree
with the veteran missionary, the Rev. J. G. Paton, in the sad
conviction that Regulations, however carefully devised, are but


too likely to be ineffective, and in the deep regret that the
Traffic which—almost by universal consent, was given up as
practically an inhuman Traffic —almost a Slave Trade, should
be resumed.”
On the 14th May, 1894, the Leeds Mercury , in an able
leader referring to the letter of Sir James Garrick, Agent-General
of Queensland, which he sent its editor, along with the pam-
phlets of Messrs. Black and Smith, for publication, as he had
printed a considerable portion of my appeal to Lord Ripon,
says, “ Bishop Selwyn is quoted, in the pamphlet put forth by
the Queensland Government, as if he had practically given his
blessing on the Traffic. He certainly did not advocate its
abolition, but in the letter he wrote on the subject to the
Guardian in 1892, which we think is condensed with more
ingenuity than genuineness in Mr. Black’s pamphlet, he advo-
cated reforms, and notably the making of the Traffic entirely a
Government affair, some of which do not appear to have been
adopted. Unquestionably it is a Traffic offering so many
temptations to the unscrupulous, that it ought, as he main-
tained, to be conducted, if at all , in such a manner as not to
afford gain to those working it.” I cannot see how Bishop
Selwyn, or any Christian, could support a Traffic in which
his predecessor in office, the sainted Bishop Patteson, was
murdered in revenge for its collectors going on shore in white
surplices, pretending to be the clergymen of the Bishop, sent
by him to take them off to get presents he had brought from
Australia for them ; by which they decoyed many Islanders on
board who were thus kidnapped and taken away by them.
This also caused the death of noble Commodore Goodenough
and two of his men. Surely these Bishops have read the severe
condemnation of this Traffic by Bishop Patteson to his Synod
in Auckland, New Zealand, just before his life was lost by it.
Is it possible that any Bishop or Minister of Religion who
knows the blood-stained history of this Traffic can support it ?
Witnesses against the Traffic.
In 1892 the unanimous resolution of our New Hebrides
Mission Synod, met on the Islands, and composed of fourteen
Ministers of the Gospel and Medical Missionaries, all living on
the Islands, and seeing the true character of the Traffic since
re-opened under the new regulations, was, “ First —That it is
impossible to carry on the Trade without abuses ; Second —


That as presents are given to the recruits, or to their friends
when they are engaged, the Natives look upon the transaction
as a trade in human beings.” This testimony should have
great weight with all thinking and Christian people. The
London Missionary Society and their Missionaries on the
Islands ; the Free Church of Scotland ; the Federal Assembly
of the Presbyterian Churches of Australia and Tasmania ; Dr
Brown representing the Wesleyan Mission; Dr. Codrington
of the Melanesian Mission (Church of England); Robert
Louis Stevenson, the eminent writer, now living on the Islands
at Samoa; the Anti-Slavery Society, and many others have
written in condemnation of it, and plead for its suppression.
Commodores Wilson and Goodenough both severely exposed
its cruel practices in their Official Reports. Vice-Admiral
Erskine in the Times , 21st May, 1892, says:—“Three years’
experience in command of the Australian Station impressed
on me that, under the most stringent Regulations, wrongs and
abuses occurred in connection with the Labour Traffic, which
invariably led to bloodshed and accompanying complications
ano reprisals. Ihe most carefully devised Regulations for the
conduct of the Labour I raffic will not prevent wrongs and evils
from being committed.” He sailed in the Islands, received re-
ports from all H.M. cruisers under his command, and saw and
heard of the Traffic for three years ; yet they say he had not good
opportunities of seeing and judging of its true character; but they
who have never been on the Islands, and only know it from hear-
say, profess to know it perfectly so as to defend it against all
opposers. They say Dr. Paton has been absent a few years from
the Islands and cannot know it now, while they know it as a
perfect and just Traffic ; yet' they have never seen the Islands
at all ! lam in constant communication with the Missionaries
while on furlough pleading the cause of the Mission, and raising
means for its support and extension; I know it too well from
its commencement, and have gained only loss and abuse
by exposing its crimes.
Captain Davis, of H.M. Ship Royalist , agrees with thes6
Commodores; and Sir Arthur Gordon says, June 7th, 1892,
in the Titties : “ I fear it must be confessed that the danger,
and even the probability of abuses is enormous.” And above
all, H.M. High Commissioner for the Western Pacific, Sir J.
B. Thurston, of Fiji, also condemns this Traffic, and from inti-
mate f present knowledge of it, his testimony is worth more than


that of all the Griffiths, Blacks, Smiths, and Garricks in Queens-
land, combined with their host of self-interested helpers.
Mr. Hume Black’s Animus.
He says : “ Mr. Baton is practically unsupported in most of
his allegations. It is many years since he visited the scene of
his former labours in Melanesia, and he has not paid a flying
visit to the sugar plantations during the last decade.” Now,
it is just a little over four years since I last left the Islands;
and not four since I was in Queensland, and there saw and got
all information regarding the Kanakas and the sugar planta-
tions.
Again at page she says; “At Aneityum, in the New Hebri-
des, there were 12,000 Natives twenty-five years ago; there are
Missionaries there; and the population now is 2,000.” As far
back as history goes, forty years ago, on Aneityum there were
only about 3,500 natives. Twenty-five years ago, there were not
2,000 ; and now there are not 1,000; and this Traffic and the
diseases introduced by it and by Traders have been the chief
causes of the depopulation of this Island and of our whole
group.
Depopulation of the Islands.
Besides the great drain of the most healthy young men and
women by this Traffic from the Islands, there is great mortality
existing among them on the plantations in Queensland. From
1887 to 1891, an average of 477 or 55 per 1,000 died annually.
In 1892, the deaths fell to 315, or 36 per 1,000, as given
in their mortality statistics. But the following is not ancient
history: “ Even under the new regulations and perfected
treatment, according to the new Registrar-General of Queens-
land, the mortality was in 1892 of Chinese 10-14, of Polynesians
42-74, and of other alien races 21-26 per 1,000.” In Queens-
land, the most healthy young Kanakas die at the rate of four
to one compared with Chinese, and of two to one compared
with other aliens.
Dr. Gunn, of Fotuna, says that about the beginning of Feb-
ruary last year (1893), a labour vessel from Queensland landed
on Fotuna a Fotuna young woman with a half-caste child
suffering from dysentery. The epidemic spread through-
out the Island; 132 natives and 2 of his own children died
by it. Nearly all the children and strong young men, left on


the Island, died. That vessel sailed to Tanna and recruited
24 Tannese, and in a few days 7 of them died of dysentery.
Their corpses were buried on Efate, which introduced the
disease there. Many natives and the Missionary’s wife died of
it. The vessel landed a man on Erromanga, suffering from it,
where 46 died. Mr. Robertson, the Missionary there, wisely,
managed to quarantine the infected district, and probably
saved the lives of hundreds.
When, irrespective of consequences on the Islands, such
vessels take away every healthy young person they can get hold
of by purchase and deception, and when, by landing disease on
two Islands, one vessel sweeps into eternity 170 of the healthiest
young persons—if we had the statistics of the number who
died on Efate, and on the other Islands visited by it, also how
many of the new recruits died like the 7 from Tanna, put into
the infected vessel, what an appalling aspect of this cruel and
inhuman Traffic it would present! Its defenders, as far as
possible, ignore such events. Is it any wonder the Islands are
being rapidly depopulated, and the dark races melting away
before the whites ? Can any man expect God’s blessing to
rest on the Queensland Sugar Plantations, wrought by a Traffic
so steeped in human suffering, and causing the death of so
many thousands —a Traffic steeped in deception, or in ignorance
of its true character and doings notv and from its beginnings
from the lowest to the highest of its employers and advocates ?
Sir Samuel Griffiths first proposed to renew it for five years,
then extended it to ten years, and now to fifteen. I fear
retributive justice has a dreadful reckoning in store for Queens-
land and the defenders of this shocking Traffic, who, by winking
at and condoning its crimes, make them their own. Its many
thousands, so done to death, cry to Heaven for vengeance.
Queensland Condones Atrocities.
At page 12, Rev. A. C. Smith says, “ In 1885, the sitting of
the Royal Commission, the sentence passed on the Hopeful
prisoners, and the Amendment Act abolishing the Labour
Traffic after 1890, worked wonders. They told favourably on
the recruiting vessels, ship captains, and Government agents,
checking and restraining abuses.” Sir Samuel Griffiths says,
“No serious complaints of kidnapping have been made since
then. The abuses of former days have long since come to an
end,” etc. They condemn me for going back on the case of the


Hopeful and the past history of this Traffic, and then use it
when they think it will serve their own ends. But, like nearly
all else in this Traffic, what deception is implied in his state-
ment ! Surely any person not blinded by the money gains of
this trade might see that the results of the Royal Commission,
the treatment of the sentence of the Supreme Court, and of the
Hopeful prisoners, were all calculated rather to increase than
diminish crimes in this sad Traffic, so far as Queensland was
concerned. All, thus proved to have been kidnapped in eight
voyages by the six vessels in one year, under Queensland’s
strictest regulations and agents, were passed into Queensland
by her agents and recruiters, as voluntary and legally recruited
labourers. But soon after, when the Government paid a large
sum of money for the loss of their labour to the planters who had
bought them, and sent a large number of them back to
their Islands, and the murderers of the Hopeful were sentenced
to be executed for the many lives they had taken, some
6,000 persons in Queensland were found to get up, sign, and
present a Petitmi , pleading for their sentence to be changed
to imprisonment for life, which was granted on this their plea
to Sir Samuel Griffiths :— “ These atrocities have been common
in this Traffic , and it is hard to make these men the first to
suffer for themP He replied, I have never heard of such
a voyage of murderous atrocities. At East Cape, New
Guinea Natives took trade from a boat; the white men followed;
38 Natives were shot.” He then told of “ nine Natives having
been shot, two drowned, two women struck with tomahawks,
and other 15 having been kidnapped, all different from the
crimes for which the men of the Hopeful had been condemned; ”
.and he added, “ It would have been the right thing, if every
one of them had been hung to the yard arm.” Yet their
petition was granted, and they were kept in prison. But
further, to show how the money gain, crimes, and slave spirit
of this Traffic had biased and benumbed the minds and best
feelings of many in Queensland, at the next election for Parlia-
ment, a test question to each candidate was, “ Would you vote
for the pardon .of the murderers of the Hopeful In prison ? ”
And when Parliament in Queens-
land to sign and present pleading that they should
be pardoned and set at which was done ; and the
Government had to interfere to prevent the murderers being
feasted as National Heroes ! The Traffic, notwithstanding of


all this, was resumed by Sir Samuel Griffiths ; for which he is
praised, and it is defended; but I am abused for my protest
against it, by Sir James F. Garrick, Hume Black, Mr. Smith,
agents, planters, and all whose consciences are elastic enough to
ignore or conceal its true character and crimes, and help them in
its defence, if Queensland may only make money by it. Surely,
instead of checking abuses and crimes, as Mr. Smith says, all
this sympathy with such criminals and crimes, in this Traffic,
was calculated to lead its employers, and all in their ships-'
companies, collectors, Government Agents, and Captains to
believe that they might commit any crimes, and murder as
many as they liked on the Islands and at sea, and, if found out
by any of them informing of the others, and sentenced to
punishment, it would not be carried out, since they had the
Governor, the Government, and at least 80,000 in Queensland
ever ready, to defend them, and condone murder and any other
crime they were guilty of, if they could only get and supply
cheap Kanaka labour for the sugar plantations in that Colony.
I pity the Colony whose would-be leading men, and the
Church whose Foreign Mission Committee and Convener are
so lost to all Scriptural sense of justice, in doing to others as
they would wish others to do to them. The receiver may be
as bad, and even worse than the thief; and if there were no
planters employing cheap Kanaka labour in Queensland and
elsewhere, there would be no crimes and murders in this
Traffic, on the Islands, at sea, and on the plantations, as
recorded even by Mr. Smith, and almost praised, since good
arose from them. See page 30.
Mr. Basil Thomson, in the Leeds Mercury , 18th May,
1894, says:—“lt is impossible not to feel sympathy with
Dr. Baton, left alone as he is to plead a lost cause even by his
fellow-Churchmen, who, if we may believe the Rev. Alex C.
Smith, can find nothing better for him but ‘inextinguishable
laughter ’ that proceeds from hearing something supremely
ridiculous. But for those glib apologists of the system, who
are so easily disposed to cover Dr. Baton with ridicule, it
might be profitable to note that the Authorities themselves do
not claim to have found salvation more than nine years. They
may ignore, but they cannot deny that, until the year 1885,
horrible barbarities were practised with their knowledge, and
without any serious attempt being made to suppress them;
that till 1892, the system of regulations and supervision still


permitted grave abuses. They only claim that after passing
the regulations of 1892, no such abuses can occur. ... If
there is to be ‘inextinguishable laughter/ should it not be found
issuing from the mouths of those who, knowing the lives of
the Natives in their own villages and on the sugar plantations,
and the nature in those who have been civilised, to hear
Mr. A. Smith, and the Bishops of Tasmania and Brisbane,
defending the system on the ground of its civilising influence ?
The informants of these gentlemen seem to have withheld the
knowledge that the first change made in the lives of these
men, who have generally a stricter system of marital relation-
ship than ours, is the wholesale practice of polyandry, a
custom which is not yet generally recognised as a civilising
influence.” °
. Bu b while admitting that life on the plantations has demora-
lised the Natives of the New Hebrides, and that the withdrawal
of the able bodied men is, as Lord Stanmore points out, sapping
the communal life of the villages; Mr. B. Thomson says, “ I
regard the harm as beyond redemption,” etc. In regard to the
signing of the monster petition, praying for the release of the
Hopeful prisoners, he adds, “ I asked several respectable signa-
tories in Cooktown why they signed the petition.” “ Well, what-
ever they did was no worse than others have done without being
punished,” was their reply, etc. “I never met a Northern
Queenslander who expressed disapprobation of the crime, or
who refused to sign the petition when asked to do so. They
were lavish with their sympathy, but it was all for the criminals.
In view of the atrocities which the Queensland Government
have allowed to go unpunished in the past, every one has a
right to distrust their vigilance for the future. If we cannot
agree with Dr. Baton, let us at least abstain from sneering at
him for erring on the side of humanity; for I recognise in
him, and those who think with him, the only efficient safeguard
that the Queensland Government will be impelled by the
dread of publicity, to insist on the observance of the Regula-
tions, which it neglected to enforce until constrained thereto by
the weight of a public opinion more healthy than that of the
Colony it governs.” The writer of the above is the son of the
late Dr. Thomson, Archbishop of York. He has had several
years’ experience in the Colonial service, and particularly in
the Islands under our jurisdiction in the South Pacific
etc., etc. ’


Queensland Instructs the Kanakas.
Except in two small classes of Kanakas, taught by a Miss
Young and a Mrs. Robinson, for which they deserved praise,
I could hear of no Christian or Mission work in Queensland
among the Kanakas, or among the Aborigines ; unless it were
one unpaid converted South Sea Islander, who, from love to Jesus
and pity for them, was living among them as a Missionary when
I visited Queensland and many of its sugar-cane planta-
tions, and spent nearly four months there pleading the cause
of the Kanakas by lecturing almost daily, and three or four
times on Sabbaths in nearly all its public towns, trying to
organise and arrange for Mission work being conducted among
them on the plantation centres. I got the planters, through
two or three Christian men among them, to promise 2s. 6d.
per annum per Kanaka in their employment, in support of
such Mission work; but, before I left the Colony, they informed
me that they had resolved only to give is. per head for such
work per annum; and as it was some time before we could get
Missionaries, they finally said even to pay the one shilling was
left optional to all! Miss Young, having applied to all
Christians for help to support a Missionary, pled with me to
try and get her one suitable for the work. I found in Sydney,
and recommended Rev. Mr. Johnston, a Baptist, who was
engaged, and is yet there in the work. After this, Mr. Smith
and his Committee and Church were led to engage their one
Missionary, now among the Kanakas there, who has been
largely supported by the Victorian Presbyterian students
and by other Colonies. They, as a Church, have no other
Missionary or Mission I ever heard of; and it was only after
my pleading they got the one; but this fact they all ignore.
They have always said that, as a Church, they cannot raiser
money for our New Hebrides or any Foreign Mission. Yet
their Committee resolved to get money “to distribute their
pamphlet in defence and praise of this Traffic as widely as
possible in the Colonies and Home Countries.” It is not
surprising, again I repeat, though painful, to find time-serving
men and Churches, as in South America in its Slavery’s worst
days, and with the same arguments, defending this Kanaka
Traffic so very closely allied to Slavery. They must sail with
the tide, or suffer loss and persecution by opposing it as I have
done.
We are thankful for any religious instruction they get. But


remember, it is by imperfect pigeon English in Queensland they
are taught. Mr. Smith boasts of the results. “ Mrs. Donald-
son has had sixty-six Kanakas, by her teaching, baptised in
thirteen months.” They have built a School for them; and
he says, out of their hard-wrought-for wage of fourpence per day,
“she got from them to help in carrying on the work,” and’
at page 29, he prints a letter from a Kanaka boy, who says, “ Me
get ; em twenty-four boys baptised.” Now, in our experience, to
understand and permanently profit by the teaching of the
Gospel, they must be taught in their own languages. The
testimony of Rev. A. Macdonald, of Santo, to the Victorian
Assembly, is “I do not think that the visits of Kanakas to
Queensland do them any good.” Such also is the testimony of
Rev. Joseph Copeland, late of Fotuna, and of most of our
Missionaries. One says in a letter dated September 25th,
1893, “ It is one thing for a man to be a Christian among Chris-
tians, and another for him to stand alone among his Heathen
brethren. Our Malekulans have, in many cases, been baptized
in Queensland, and noted there as converts. Coming here,
they have, in almost every instance , gone back to heathenism.
At page 27, Mr. Smith states that Mr. Landells says, “ Those
who may have been looked on as exemplary in Queensland
turn out to be perfect devils on reaching home.” In
my experience, three Kanakas excepted, and in the experience
of nearly all our Missionaries, this statement is too true. Yet
Mr. Smith adds, “ I deny this out and out; ” though he has
never been on the Islands, and knows nothing whatever about
them there. And though they work regularly on their own
Islands by cultivating the land to produce the food they and
theirs depend upon for their support, and are as Heathen indus-
trious, and from youth taught to plant and work sugar cane
on their own Islands for their support, Mr. Smith in ignorance
says, ‘ In Queensland they exchange a life of waste, for one of
thrift, a life of degrading drunkenness for one of sobriety.”
Yet elsewhere he adds, “ One planter assured me that as many
as twenty-five Kanakas would be carried into his plantation on
Sunday afternoons, bleeding and wounded through drink in
Queensland, but all that (fighting) is at an end now,” etc.
“A missionary must live on the Islands and speak their
language to have a real influence among them. Native
Malekulans will give whatever answer will oblige you, for all
Heathens lie ; and even traders in the New Hebrides are, with


few exceptions, liars. In regard to the accusation, lately made
against our Mission, for having firearms, drink, etc., for trade
(by a Government Labour Vessel agent, who has since com-
mitted suicide), without further enquiry Sir Samuel Griffiths at
once sent it to the Sydney Presbyterian newspapers; but he
has sent to it no Missionary’s accusation against the Kanaka
Labour Traffickers. The Editor, when challenged by a
Missionary, declared it did not at all apply to the New
Hebrides. Yet, as Colonial Secretary, Earl Ripon gives it
to the world in a British Blue Book. And this false state-
ment has not been withdrawn, though proved to be absolutely
false.” The Trade is steeped in deception all along.
Recent Kidnapping.
About three years ago, Mr. Landells, of Malo, reported a
vessel kidnapping a chiefs wife and daughter at his station,
which, on investigation, Sir Samuel Griffiths proved to be as
reported ; but condoned it by the excuse of the kidnappers
that “it was an elopement.” Though no clearer case of kid-
napping could take place, yet the Rev. A. C. Smith says, “ such
reports only cause irrepressible laughter in Queensland.”
Would he have so laughed if his wife and child had been thus
taken away by such godless men ? Not likely ! Nor would
Lord Normanby, Sir Samuel, Mr. Black or any of their witnesses
or planters, laugh at and praise the men who would so get hold
of, and take away any of their children, wives, and young peo-
ple, to work for and enrich a few greedy “ money grubs ” in
any country, and every Briton worthy of the name would
stamp out by force such a Traffic, enslaving their nearest and
dearest, even for three years; and the world would help and
praise us for it. But if a chief on the Islands shoots a labour
collector, in defence of himself and his people, or a husband
and father in defence of his wife and children shoots any con-
nected with a labour vessel, an English and French man-of-war
unite, and if they cannot get hold of the murderer, they shell
and burn villages, destroy canoes, fruit trees, etc., for doing what
Commodore Goodenough pled “ they should not be punished
for, as they, in self-defence, only did what we would do if we
were in their circumstances.” I ask again : Can any wonder at
the Islands being depopulated and the dark races melting away
before the whites ?
Another evidence of Mr. Smith’s unreasonableness is seen


when he says regarding the case reported and proved to be true,
as given by Mr. Landells, “ Anyone can see at a glance that
this case was impossible, as the Regulations do not allow of
taking a child or separating a woman from her husband.” With
equal logical correctness Mr. Smith might say, “ The laws of
Britain forbid dishonesty and murder, hence dishonesty and
murder cannot exist in Britain.” But in defiance of laws, police,
and punishments, such deeds do occur. Much more likely,
such crimes will be practised, when beyond all police and laws.
The case is proved without a doubt, except in Mr. Smith’s mind,
which is blind to every evil in this Traffic as far as Queensland
is concerned. One can only pity the Church which has such a.
gullible Convener and Mission Committee.
The testimony of Naval Officers, from their limited knowledge
of this Traffic and its deceiving conduct, may not always truly
represent it. After Dr. Murray and his bloodthirsty crew had
murdered very many on board his vessel, and thrown their
dead and wounded alike overboard, the ship and the ship’s-
log were examined by the boarding officers of one of H.M.
vessels, and he “ palavered them into giving him a certificate
of all right on board ; ” and they entered his Kanakas as volunteer
free labourers through the Government agents in Fiji. Several
similar cases have occurred.
The Regulations forbid paying for recruits with firearms, and
yet where they hope not to be discovered they are so purchased.
In the South Australian Register of August 10th, 1890, Rev,
James Lyall, on his return from deputation work on the Islands,
reported, that when he visited the Rev. Mr. Briton’s station on
that tour, one of Bishop Selwyn’s clergymen informed him
that he had just complained to Captain Davis, of H.M.S.
Royalist, that a vessel well known in those seas and carrying the
English flag, had purchased five boys or girls for five rifles.
Captain Davis compelled the Slaver to remain, till he investi-
gated and proved the case to be correct. He confiscated the
five rifles, set the five young people at liberty on shore, and
fined the officer and purser each.
Another Regulation Broken.
On the 22nd April, 1892, the Rev. Wm. and Mrs. Watt, of
Tanna, reported that the Tara labour vessel from Queensland
landed six Natives returned, near to Rev. Mr. Grey’s station. Two
of them, a man and his wife, belonging to the other side of


the Island, were compelled to land among strangers, or be
taken back for another three years’ labour on the Queensland
plantations. They landed and as the Para was beginning to
sail away, the Missionary heard a shot, ran in the direction, and
found the man shot dead, and his wife and property confiscated
by his murderers. The Missionary tried to get, and next to
purchase, his body to bury it; but they carried it twenty miles
inland and feasted on it among his people’s enemies. Yet the
agent or captain of that ship was under the sham bond of
to land that man and his wife on his own Island and
among his own people. There is perhaps no Regulation more
broken, or generally causing more deaths than this one ; but I
never heard of the fine being imposed. It serves to blind out-
siders, as a safeguard on the statute-book in Queensland; like
the other regulations, when broken, a ready excuse is found and
a condonation of every violation.
On the 10th May, 1892, Rev. T. W. Leggatt, Malekula,
reports that “ Aoba traders complain that the Helena , Queens-
land Labour Ship, bought sixty-four Kanaka boys and girls at
that island for sixty-four boxes of tobacco ; yet the regulations
forbid recruits being purchased on the Islands.”
On the 25th November, 1893, Rev. Fred. J. Paton, Male-
kula, says ; “An old man who can hardly walk put his hand
on my shoulder and wept, for his son had just recruited, and
the old father and mother will probably be dead before he
returns, if ever he returns. Yesterday a Malekula man enticed
seven women to recruit with him, because his sister had been
taken away by a former vessel, and there had been no
reply to my complaint about her case. The vessel properly
refused to take them. But, for attempting to leave, the hus-
band of one of them half killed his wife; and yesterday the
husbands of the seven others were hunting them with clubs and
poisoned arrows. The wives will be thrashed, and the school
is almost suspended pro tern. Our Native Teacher saved blood-
shed.”
Again, this Missionary writes: “On the 27th May, 1893, See page 3 s
a ship took away a woman illegally. I have reported the
case with date, place, and names to H.M.H. Com-
missioner. Put yourselves in the place of these Natives;
charter a vessel in Queensland, and let her crew of
criminals loose among your wives and sisters, and see
what will happen ! Do they get good in Queensland ? The


whole Traffic on the Islands is a lie, simply the devil’s work,
as we who live there see it. As there is a living God above,
the day of recompense will come.” The ships are chartered
by or belong to the planters, who provide the captain and crew,
and the barter to purchase or give presents for recruits which
is regarded as the purchase money. The Government puts the
Agent on board in charge of recruiting ; but Agent and all on
board know that if they get no recruits they will be discharged
on their return, and others who will get them, no matter how,
will be put in their places, and receive their handsome salaries.
The trade is, by all connected with it, steeped in deception,
falsehood, and temptation. It is reported that in Noumea,
the French put the Kanakas up to auction, and knock them
down to the highest bidder. The “ head money,” given for them
in Queensland as passage money, or for their three
years’ labour, is, as I see it, exactly the same thing under a
cloak of deception. If the French sell them by auction, and
the English dispose of them differently, virtually they are Slaves
to each party for the term of engagement or sale. The evils
are the same under all possible Regulations.
How can Britain, while her own Colonies use such labour,
oppose the Kanakas being taken to South America as
slaves for their mines ?
A ship was reported to have taken 600, e.g., from Gilbert
Islands, and another, with 350 or more, went down, and they
were all drowned off the coast. The captain who took them was
left sick at the last port of call, and he only survived. Yet in
the end of last year, the American papers stated and con-
demned his getting two vessels prepared to go to the Islands,
and by deception get all possible away for the mines. The popu-
lation of the New Hebrides has by a similar Traffic and its evils
been reduced from over 150,000 to from 80,000 to 100,000.
And how long can such a limited population stand the con-
stant drain of its young men and women by English, German,
French, American, and labour recruiting or slave ships from other
lands! Yet, if England allows this Traffic to give cheap
labour to her Colonies, why not all other nations, whose subjects
want it ? Hence, for the greed of planters in Queensland and
others, the Islands are being depopulated. Bolster up this
sugar industry, as its friends in Queensland may, it cannot
prosper and have the Divine blessing. The cruel oppression
and bloodshed in this Kanaka Traffic cries to Heaven for


revenge. “Vengeance is mine ; I will repay, saith the Lord.”
How can any Christian engage in it ?
On the 16th December, 1893, Dr. Gunn, of Fotuna, now
in Britain on furlough, writes : “It was thought that under
the New Regulations there would be no abuses. This is a
mistake. The very first vessel from Queensland, after their
new code came into force, broke some of the regulations by
landing natives of Tanna on Erromanga, about forty miles
from their own Island and people. Another case, two
natives of Malekula were landed at a Mission station about
twelve miles from their own land. Had the Missionary not
protected them, they would have been enslaved or killed.
They had to pay a passing steamer to take them home. The
captain said the weather was unsuitable to take them home ;
a sufficient excuse in Queensland, to free him from his
bond for breaking this regulation in all cases.”
The Regulations Dodged.
Dr. Gunn continues : —“ Natives can only be recruited from
their own Island. A Fotuna native was a servant to a trader
on Aneityum • but as the lad’s name was not on his book, in
defiance of the trader, the labour vessel took him away. In
this case two regulations were broken. Again, recruiting was
in Queensland forbidden on Tongoa, at the request of the
chiefs ; but the recruiters advised some natives of Tongoa to
go to Awosa, a small adjoining Island, from which they took
them away (that prohibition, in defiance of the Tongoa chiefs,
Queensland has withdrawn lately). As from to in
money or goods is given to the Natives recruited or to their
friends, in their opinion the boys are paid for as ordinary
articles of commerce.”
The Islands Depopulated.
The desertion of wives, and in many cases children, by
their husbands, has a demoralising effect upon the Natives,
and is an important factor in depopulating the Islands, and
comparatively few of the Natives who go to Queensland return.
Ihe mortality in that Colony is high. In my experience only
one in five return; and of them some, unfit for work,
die soon after. Others find their wives, children, and planta-
tions taken by another man; and in anger leave by the first
recruiting vessel. One Missionary says, “ Another ten years of


the Traffic will do for the New Hebrides ; ” another says, “In
thirty years there will be no Natives there left to recruit.”
Recruiting as a Christian Agency.
The Missionary of Fotuna writes“ It is a fact that a
large proportion of those who return now have been baptised
i i Queensland, and return to Heathenism; so that the
Islands are very little benefited by them; and even those
who do not relapse have such a meagre knowledge of
Christianity, they don’t benefit their neighbours, which is no
wonder, seeing they are taught in broken English imperfectly
understood. The only instances of baptised returned Queens-
land Kanakas benefiting the neighbours were,—one on Arabrim
assisting Dr. Lamb, and another on Tanna, who made worship
in broken English, but in appearance and practice he was a
Heathen. With these exceptions, the Christian teaching in
Queensland has not assisted to spread the Gospel on the New
Hebrides. The recruiting agents generally try to obtain
recruits from the Mission Stations. Had it not been for this,
Fotuna might have been a Christian Island. Before I went
to it, a number of young men under training by’Mr. Copeland,
my predecessor, were so taken away and hardly any of them
returned. Mr. Michelsen, of Tongoa, had a similar experience,
and ioo young men were taken from Erromangan schools in
one year. In many villages now there is scarcely a young
man left. Of 11 natives of Fotuna taken to Fiji, 6 are dead, and
only one was returned, who was unfit for work.” Such from
personal observation is Dr. Gunn’s testimony. Many Chris-
tian Natives are taken to Queensland from our New Hebrides
Islands, but they say nothing of them as Christians. How is
this ?
A Powerful Queensland Witness.
Under date, 3rd March, 1894, a widely-read newspaper, the
Queenslattd Guardian , says in a leading article ;—“ Dr. Paton’s
charges are called ‘ mis-statements,’ and they say £ it is unsuffer-
able that such charges should be made to the Imperial
authority against Queensland’s fair fame.’ True; only the un-
sufferability is with the masses of Queensland being compelled
by existing laws to endure a Traffic that will not stand the light
of day, and which requires so much subterfuge to keep it alive.
Dr. Paton asserts that the Kanakas are purchased by articles


of trade taken on board every recruiting vessel, and on ist
December, 1893, the Mail said, ‘To say the Islanders are
obtained by barter is true,’ and in Wednesday’s issue the barter
is dropped, and recruiting is characterised as ‘ a commercial
transaction.’ We appreciate the admission, being quite aware
that the nefarious and immoral traffic, aided and abetted as it is
by the law, is ‘ a commercial transaction ’ with all the gain on
the planter’s side. Does the Mail believe that the public in
Queensland or elsewhere can be gulled into believing that the
recruiting vessels carry trade for philanthropic purposes, for the
honour of soothing the lacerated feelings of the Islanders, when
their ‘ boys ’ leave them for Queensland ? The trade is carried
for trade purposes only. These vessels have from to
worth of miscellaneous wares on board every voyage.
The money is lying idle, and interest must come from some-
where, and the advantages to the captain and crew, as em-
ployes of the planters, returning with a full complement,
covers it all easily. Admiral Erskine is condemned, as the
Mail says, ‘ We hold his position did not give him an oppor-
tunity of gleaning facts for himself; ’ yet he cruised much in the
Southern Seas with the Traffic seen by him. There are Govern-
ment Agents, and the less that is said about them the better.
Disclosures showed lately that recruiting had been carried on,
the Agent not being present. According to Mr. Caulfield, a
stay-at-home official, whose only acquaintance with the Traffic
is second-hand from the Government Agents, ‘it is not true ; ’
though thousands of ‘ boys ’ may have been got in this way. The
thing goes on all right if not found out. Who at the Islands is
to tell the Agent what is his duty, or to see that he does it ?
The filling up of returns can be done any time before he
reaches port; and no one, not even Mr. Caulfield, is the wiser.
The other parts of his duty admit of an elasticity to suit his
humours. The only true meaning of the Maids explanation,
‘ You buy him me ? ’ is ‘ What price will you give for me
bodily ? ’ ‘ How many pieces of tobacco, pipes, tomahawks will
you give my friends for me?’ And if the present offered
does not satisfy the friends, more knives, tobacco, etc., are
handed over, when the black man’s body is purchased or
bartered for the white man’s trumpery wares, and, in the
language of the Sugar Planters and Queenland Legislature, the
victim blossoms into a recruit ‘in full knowledge and under-
standing of the contract he has entered into.’ Who dare


stand up in the face of such damning facts and say that the
recruiting system is not, as Dr. Paton represents it, ‘ a veiled
system of slavery ’ ? We go further in this matter, as we are in
possession of information to show that at certain Islands where
recruiting is carried on, an understanding exists between the
recruiter and the Chief of the Island, the latter undertaking for
certain wares to provide so many recruits for the ensuing
voyage ! Where, then, is the honesty of the recruiting system ?
It does not exist. Conceived in corruption, the Traffic has
been, and inevitably must be, carried on in the same manner, at
the mouth of a loaded gun to safeguard the white man. The
mission in which Dr. Paton is engaged deserves every support;
and, in giving him ours, we are not in any sense enemies of the
Sugar Industry, except so far as the class of labour is con-
cerned. Results have conclusively proved that the profits from
sugar are enormous, and by scotching the planters’ greed of
gain, can adequately pay for white labour. The tale told by
the Mackay Central Mills has settled that question.”
Another leader in the same paper, on the 7th March, 1894,
says : “ It is a strange and forcible commentary on the attitude
so persistently taken up by the planters on behalf of imported
Labour, that none of them have visited the Islands personally , or
witnessed recruiting as it is. What they know is from hearsay
only; and second-hand information from their employes, the
master and crew of their vessels, is the full extent of their know-
ledge ; and in law hearsay evidence ceases to be reliable, and
cannot be accepted. The master and recruiter have it in their
power to tell them tales, fairy tales if they choose, and to judge
from the vehement attitude assumed by Mr. Angus Gibson,
Messrs. Young, Mr. A. P. Barton, Messrs. Cran, and other
clamant advocates of Kanaka Labour, whose impelling motive
in upholding the system is personal interest—their conception
of the Traffic is that it is perfectly harmless, a kindness to the
Heathen Islanders. This aspect may be palatable to strangers
at a distance, but we prefer to consider the Traffic in its naked-
ness, in its baldness and barrenness, bringing prominently to the
foreground the cupidity of the planter as exemplified in the
shipment of trade. We take this view to show how the law in
Queensland, at the initial steps of the planters’ scheme of barter,
blinks at, and then aids and abets him in giving completion to it.
We are convinced that the people of Queensland do not fully
grasp the enormity of this ‘ trading.’ It is carried on in covert


defiance of all the laws that regulate the importation of Poly-
nesians, and is backed by the power of money, and the influence
thereby commanded both in Parliament and out of it. When a
vessel leaves for recruiting, stores are examined with punctilious
exactitude, and so long as it does not ship firearms and liquor,
he can carry a full cargo of gewgaws as “ trade,” yet the law on
this point is as explicit as noon-day, lacking only enforcement.
The Act for the prevention and punishment of criminal out
rages upon Natives of the Islands in the Pacific Ocean (an
Imperial measure generally cited as the Kidnapping Act of
1892) runs as follows :
‘ Section 9. If a British subject commits any of the following
offences, that is to say—Clause 1. Decoys a native of any of
the aforesaid Islands for the purpose of importing or removing
such native into any Island or place other than that in which
he was at the time of the commission of such offence ; or
carries away, confines or detains any such native for the pur-
pose aforesaid without his consent, proof of which shall lie on
the party accused. . . .
‘ Clause 5. . . Ships, lades, receives, or puts on board, or con-
tracts the shipping, lading or putting on board of any vessel,
money, goods, or other articles with the intent that they shall
be employed, or knowing that they shall be employed, in the
commission of any of the above offences enumerated, he shall
for each offence be guilty of felony, and shall be liable to the
highest punishment other than capital punishment.’
“ If words have any meaning, can the import of these quoted
be misunderstood ? Can they by any equivocations be made
to mean the reverse ? They cannot. Why then is the planter
allowed, and tacitly aided by the representatives of the law to
set the law at defiance? If these words mean anything,
they mean that the Imperial authorities mean not only to
suppress barter on the Islands, but the shipment of goods
svhich may be so used. The planters and their supporters say
they are gift-offerings to the natives —‘ a commercial tran-
saction in recruiting.’ ”
A False System of Recruiting.
Mr. R. S. McKay, writing from Brisbane, Queensland, under
date October 18, 1893, to the Daily News , says, this Traffic
can never be conducted satisfactorily under the control of a


Colonial Government. The interests of interested parties make
it at all times difficult to make legislation what it ought to be.
The Sugar Works Guarantee Bill, which binds the State for
security for fifteen years for repayment for advances, has made
recruiting unusually brisk. Islands closed against it because
of the excessive depopulation of the males have been thrown
open again; and several vessels have sailed with all speed to
Santa Cruz and Tongoa Islands —the prohibited areas. When
the question of Polynesian labour was about eighteen months
ago under discussion, except among the planters it was freely
characterised as slavery , blackbirding, etc. Since Sir Samuel
Griffiths promised absolute honesty in recruiting, despite the
voluminous Regulations which dog the Traffic at every step,
just where a bit of laxity is apparent, it is availed of openly
under the eyes of the Government Agent, the enforcer of the
law. The vessels are the property of the planters, who man
each vessel, —the Government Agent alone being paid for by
the State. Stores are carefully supervised, but the vessel carries
a cargo called trade ; two boats go on shore armed with rifles
and revolvers, and giving presents for recruits is a standing rule in
the trade practised by French, German, Fijian, English, etc., and
all except the British include firearms and fire-water. Certainly
it partakes of barter , bribery , and decoy. It is the white man’s
wares versus the black man’s body. It is openly done with the
support and protection of the law in the person of the Agent,
who would use his weapon if he saw interference with the re-
cruiter. If the honour of the Empire is to be maintained the
mother country should proclaim a Protectorate over these
Islands in the South Seas. In view of the extension of the
industry and increased importation of Islanders, the British
Public, who cherish civilisation and human brotherhood as
something worth striving for, should say if the Australian
Colonists, who otherwise bear a good name, are to be stigmatised
as upholders of a nefarious system of Slavery.
[The full details of this accusation of Mr. McKay’s are
printed on pages 45-48 of the Appendix.]
Argument of an Eye-Witness
Under date July 15, 1893, the Rev. Joseph Copeland, for
many years a missionary on the New Hebrides, now retired in
Sydney, and who has seen and knows the Traffic well all along.


says, and his statement I endorse, 11 Apart from abuses , I would
oppose the Kanaka Labour Traffic for the following reasons —
“(1.) The Regulations seem perfect on paper to those who
do not see below the surface. Here laws are broken, and what
will men not do for greed of gain on the Islands ? Queensland,
for good reasons, abolished the Traffic in 1885. These reasons
were official, and given in the Times report of Mr. Smith’s motion
in the House of Commons. No change in Queensland or the
Islands has taken place since 1885 ; what was right in 1885 was
right in 1892. Yet to serve Queensland’s interests only was the
Traffic re-opened. The sugar interest had to be saved, and
principle and right went to the wall.
“ (2.) Why should recruiting be allowed on the New Hebrides,
Solomon, and other groups, and be prohibited in New Guinea,
Fiji, etc. ? What is good for the one is good for the other.
And note, the man who moved for the renewal of the Traffic
was he who inserted the prohibitory clause in the New Guinea
constitution. What cannot be allowed on British territory
should not be allowed on unannexed groups. ,
“ (3.) This Traffic upsets native society. I marvel that Dr.
Montgomery did not see the force of his own statement in the
New Review for May, page 551, that on Marlava Island out of
.a total population of 500, eighty were absent as recruits, and
these eighty from the ages of sixteen to forty were a large
percentage of the workers of the Island. What are the old, the
sick, the mothers and the children depending on them to do in
their absence ? It is also a blow to the natural increase of the
population, and leads to disease from want, and dire confusion.
Relationships for Queensland’s gain are thrown to the winds.
The whole Trade is wretched selfishness, and such injustice will
bring in some form its own penalty.
“ (4.) I hold that interpretation and proper contracts are an
impossibility. The natives have no equivalents to half of the
terms for money, work, kinds of food, etc. I suppose you have
seen the Argus' representative’s article re trip of the Helena , in
which he shows how men are got; and then on the return trip
are taught like a parrot to answer certain questions, which show
the kind of engagements a Christian Colony makes with savages.
Interpretation is a blind.
“ (5.) Sir J. B. Thurston, of Fiji, whose knowledge of this
Traffic far outweighs that of all others in Queensland, shows
that the Kanaka’s knowledge of English is infinitesimal. They


may just have English enough to know about their food and
work; but, as for teaching them the Gospel, it is well nigh use-
less. The argument for recruiting them so as to Christianise
them will not hold water. What is the use of teaching them
spiritually that they are somebodies, but as to their bodies they
are wanted simply for work? They have no stake in the soil.
They are not brothers, and that they know and feel acutely.
The proportion of men to women is about ten to one. Can
this conduce to morality, in people with their strong animal
propensity ?
“ (6.) The Traffic impoverishes the Kanakas. They take
back no new industries, and on landing they find themselves
poor men. Food is their native wealth, and as all sorts of their
cultivated food, yams, taro, bananas, sugar cane, sweet potatoes,
etc., have run out in their absence of over three years, often
nearer four, they feel that they must be beholden to their
friends for these things. They have neither pigs nor fowls.
Their huts, canoes, and fences are all rotten, and if they remain
they must begin life anew. This they are reluctant to do, as they
cannot have much return for nearly twelve months, ajid, rather
than try to make up leeway, off they go again by the first chance.
The money and goods they bring back are no compensation
for want of food and shelter. What is two shillings per week
compared with their loss ? and a small present or payment to
this one and that one soon empties their chests and purses on
their return.
“(7.) The high rate of mortality in Queensland, were there
nothing else, should prohibit this Traffic. According to the
most recent statistics —in 1887,. 520 died in Queensland; in
1888, 482 ; in 1889, 489 ; in 1890, 417 ; in 1891, 483 ; in 1892,
315 died.” (Thus, may I add, under their boasted kind treat-
ment, with new Regulations and bonds which prevent any evils
in this Traffic, in six years in Queensland , where Mr. Smith
says, ‘ if aught, the planters err in being too kind to them,’ 2,706
died, and these the young healthy men and women from 16
to 40 years of age. From 1887 to 1891 the average mortality
among the Kanakas in Queensland was 477, or 55 per thousand
per annum. Even the mortality of 1892 —315 —would soon
depopulate the Islands.) “ Would any honourable man have his
work done by labour so got ? Dr. Montgomery and Rev. A. C.
Smith and all its supporters just got the answers they wanted.”
(What could Mr. Smith expect, for one month seeking his in-


formation from planters, agents, and dependents of the Traffic at
Bundaberg, its stronghold ?) “ Had they gone incognito, like
detectives, they might have known and seen something of its
true conduct and character. Even the Argus reporter was
known all over ; and like wise men, planters and inspectors and
collectors prepared for the expected inspection. The testimony
of the New Hebrides Mission Synod, of Dr. Brown represent-
ing the Wesleyan Mission, of Dr. Coddrington of the Melanesian
Mission, of H. M. High Commissioner in the Western Pacific,
Sir John B. Thurston, all men who have nothing to gain by the
Traffic, or by opposing it as they have done, is unanimous,
while Mr. Smith would be bold indeed to go against the policy
of his Colony.”
Money in the Bank.
Mr. Smith speaks of money in the bank to the credit of
Kanakas appears a large sum to the credit of 3,400
Kanakas, but at 4d. per day it is only one year’s wage for that
number of Kanakas. We would like to know how much money
is in the Queensland Banks, to the credit of Kanakas worked
to death on their sugar plantations, since, to secure that they
would be paid any wages at all, they had to be paid to the
Government. Formerly, thousands were wrought to death,
buried like dogs, and others got to occupy their places. As
Commodore Wilson in his official report put it : It was virtually
a premium put upon working them to death within the term of
their engagement; “ their wages, due at death, went to profit
and loss ; the planter had all the profit and the poor Islander
all the loss.” He characterises this Traffic as Slavery, as many
others who know its true character have done. Queensland’s
hand has been forced in every Act to prevent evils in this Traffic.
Oh that it could be entirely suppressed !
Closing Words.
Mr. Smith says he is “ deeply grieved that such attacks have
been made on the Church and Colony. They have wounded to
the core the hearts of multitudes of Christian men and women,
as implying that there are no right-thinking, right feeling
Christians left among Churches, planters, and people. Why
cannot they let us alone to prosecute our work among the poor
blacks as we best may, with God’s help, in striving to benefit
in time and eternity one of the most interesting of the dark-


skinned races on earth.” Every criminal would like to bury
the past record, and to be left alone to do as he wishes for the
future ; but punishment follows, in the interests of humanity,
till crime is given up. While, therefore, Queensland continues
this cruel Traffic, constantly causing such suffering, misery, and
death to thousands of this “ most interesting dark-skinned race ; ”
and while he and his Church defend it, with all its crimes, death,
and murders so ignored ; and while God spares me—as a duty to
Him and Humanity, I will protest against it and its evils; and
I hope they will have increased opposition from all God-fearing
people, till, ashamed of it, and to escape Divine retribution, they
are led to give it up. No doubt its wrongs, deceptions, and
dead cry to Heaven for vengeance, which will come if it is not
given up, though it is defended by the Church and Govern-
ment in Queensland. Gilded as the Traffic now is, to supply
cheap labour to the Queensland and other Sugar Plantations,
God’s blight must rest on the plantations wrought by it, and on
all who condone its shocking characteristics.
I hope no influence will ever lead Britain to adopt Lord
Charles Scott’s proposal to form a Central Depot to which the
Kanakas would be collected by godless and inhuman collectors,
and shipped off by a Government Agent, thus making it
Legalised Slavery , by which its evils and cruel oppression of the
poor defenceless Islanders would be increased a hundredfold,
no matter how and by whom supervised. The inter-island
Traffic has always been the scene of its worst crimes.
As British subjects and British money have, at great toil and
loss of life, given all the Christianity and civilisation to the New
Hebrides which they possess ; as they complete the chain
of islands from Tasmania to New Guinea and Queensland
round our Australian coast; as Australia’s Federal Council has
offered to bear all the expenses of their annexation ; and as the
Chiefs and Natives of every Island, and the Missionaries and
British subjects on the group all plead for British Annexa-
tion } surely it is Britain’s clear duty to annex the New Hebrides
and unannexed Islands, where, as elsewhere, she would
suppress the Kanaka Labour Traffic, and the Islands would
become gardens of coffee-producing and tropical wealth to her
Australasian Colonies. But, except as Convict Settlements,
which Australasia will never allow, they can be of no value to
any other nation, because of their great distance from all
except Australia. Even New Caledonia is a constant source of


great expense to France, with no advaatage except as a Convict
Establishment. Had it been in England’s hands, it would have
been one of the richest of all the Australasian Colonies. But, as
now situated, the New Hebrides are the free hunting-grounds
of all the Kanaka labour collectors and slavers in the South and
Western Pacific.
It has been contended, in the Press, that Northern Queens-
land seeks to be separated into an independent, self-governing
Colony, to be free to use Kanaka labour to any extent available.
If granted, I hope Britain will guard against it being a Slave
Colony in disguise, if not openly.
In conclusion, I defy Sir James Garrick, Messrs. Black, Smith,
and all their supporting witnesses, to prove the untruthfulness
of any charge I have made against this Traffic, though they
have the planters and Queensland Government money at their
back, while alone I have had to meet all my expenses con-
nected with this agitation, and solely in the interests of
Humanity ; as a duty, in faithfulness to my God and beloved
Christian Islanders, in their defenceless and down-trodden con-
dition ; for whose salvation I have suffered and laboured for six-
and-thirty years.
I now leave Great Britain, her Colonies, and all others
interested to form their own judgment regarding my exposure
of the conduct of this Labour Traffic ever since 1885 ; fresh
illustrations of whose abuses, ever since its renewal in 1892,
are rapidly accumulating from many quarters. And I plead
for the assistance of all lovers of men, mercy, and justice
in seeking by every legitimate means to secure its complete
suppression ; and the complete suppression of one of its worst
factors—trading with the Islanders in opium, intoxicating drinks,
and firearms, by traders of all nations, as they are rapidly ruin-
ing and depopulating the Islands. Britain at least should be
led to suppress this Traffic, so steeped even now in deception,
crime, and loss of life, so far, at least, as her own vessels, trading
with her own Colonies, are implicated in it. And my last word is
this — The complete suppression of the Kanaka Traffic is the only
possible cure of its evils. God bring this conviction home to the
conscience of Britain and of Queensland !


APPENDIX A.
Dr. RATON’S MEMORANDUM TO LORD RIPON;
Drawn up by Request after an Interview at the
Colonial Office on 23RD Nov., 1893.
Tathe Most Honourable the Marquis of Ripofi, K.G. ,
H.M. Secretary of State for the Colonies .
My Lord Marquis,—
On the 23rd ultimo your Lordship was good enough to
grant me an interview, to place before you my views, and those of
my colleagues labouring in the New Hebrides, on the subject of the
Kanaka Labour Traffic between those Islands and Queensland.
At the interview there were present with your Lordship, Mr.
Sydney Buxton, M.P., Under Secretary of State for the Colonies ;
and the following Members of Parliament kindly accompanied me,
viz. ; —Mr. Samuel Smith, Sir Mark J. Stewart, Bart., Sir John
Kennaway, Bart.
I would take this first opportunity of expressing to your Lordship
and to Mr. Sydney Buxton, my sincere gratitude for the opportunity
thus afforded me of advocating the cause of the natives of our
Islands, in regard to a Traffic that all admit is rapidly depopulating the
group.
But your Lordship was good enough to request at the close of the
interview that I would draw up, and place before you in writing, a
Memorandum fully setting forth what I consider to be the present
aspect of the Traffic — omitting all reference to the Traffic as conducted
previously to 1885, when it was proved before the Supreme Court
and the Royal Commission to be a system of fraud, kidnapping, and
murder.
A.—PRELIMINARY.
(1.) I will endeavour to keep within the scope indicated in your
Lordship’s request; but I must ask to be allowed, as an essential to
a right understanding of the case, to refer to a fact often lost sight of
—viz., that, except fora few months in 1891, the Traffic has never
been stopped. The revelations of frightful atrocities, through the
Royal Commission of 1885, caused a resolution to be passed con-
demning the Traffic and ordering that after a lapse of five years it
should be totally abolished, i.e. at the end of 1890. But labour
vessels with licenses to recruit were allowed to leave Queensland
up to the close of 1890, and kept returning with their loads of
recruits until far into 1891 ; and as 1892 dawned Sir Samuel Griffiths
revived the Traffic “ for a further term of ten years.” So that the
only outcome of the Royal Commission, horrible as were the revela-


tions brought to light, was a resolution, the effect of which was to
throw dust in the eyes of the British Nation, and under cover of
41 Revised Regulations,” a traffic admittedly immoral and fraudulent
was revived immediately after its lease of existence, by the unani-
mous consent of the nation, had expired ; and more, so strong was
the slave interest in Queensland that the very murderers whose
bloodthirsty deeds the Supreme Court and the Commission revealed
were reprieved, after a brief imprisonment, and at the instance of
80 000 memorialists, for the reason that “ these atrocities had
been common and it was hard to make these men the first victims.”
(2.) I would only add :
(a) That the very same vessels and captains are largely engaged
in the Traffic now, that were engaged in it up to the time of its con-
demnation in 1885 and until its temporary cessation in 1891 ;
(b) that stringent regulations existed previously to 1885 under
which the horrors alluded to were perpetrated, showing that they
failed utterly in practice ; and
(. c ) that the very recruiting vessels, proved by the Commission to
have been most guilty, had on their kidnapping trips been visited
by Men of War, and got a clean bill, as fulfilling all the regulations.
I beg your Lordship to bear the foregoing facts in mind in con-
sidering what I now wish to place before you, necessarily at some
length, and I plead for a patient hearing.
B.—FIRST MAIN CONTENTION.
I hold, and almost every man thoroughly acquainted with the
Traffic from long residence in the recruiting grounds holds, that
THE REGULATIONS ARE IMPRACTICABLE.
Let me quote a few opinions of Her Majesty’s officers, and others
who thoroughly know the Traffic by experience, and whose words
must, therefore, carry weight;—
(a) Vice-Admiral Erskine, writing to the Ti?nes , 25th May, 1892,
says : —“ Three years’ experience, in command of the Australian
Station, impressed upon me that, under the most stringent regulations,
wrongs and abuses occurred in connection with the Labour Traffic
which invariably led to bloodshed and accompanying complications
and reprisals; ” and, he adds, “the most carefully devised regula-
tions for the conduct of the Labour Traffic will not prevent wrongs
and evils from being committed.”
(d) Captain Davis, of H.M.S. Royalist , agrees with this view;
and
(c) Sir Arthur Gordon says:—“l fear it must be confessed
that the danger and .even the probability of abuse is enormous; ”
adding, in regard to the recruiting that, while Governor of Fiji, “ not-
withstanding all our vigilance and all our exertions, illegal things
were done which escaped our knowledge altogether; while, as a rule,
those things with which we did become acquainted were only made


known to us too late for redress or punishment to be possible.” —Letter
to Times , June 7th, 1892.
(d) Sir John B. Thurston, H.M. High Commissioner for the
Western Pacific, agrees with Sir A. Gordon, and adds: —“I am of
opinion that if the Regulations, which I have carefully perused, are
properly enforced, the number of labourers recruited will be wholly
inadequate to meet the demand for them. If, on the other hand, the
supply should even approximately meet the demand, I believe that
the Regulations will have been in a large measure ignored.”—Blue
Book, C. 7,000, April, 1893, p. 24 and 25.
( e ) This is the opinion also, many times repeated, of the Mission
Synod of the New Hebrides, as likewise of the Agents of the London
Missionary Society in the Western Pacific—than whom none are
better acquainted with the Traffic at the recruiting grounds.
(f) The London Missionary Society at home endorse the same
opinion, in their letter to Sir Samuel Griffiths, saying :—“ Its know-
ledge of the conditions of life in the Pacific convinces the Board that
no Regulations, however honestly and skilfully framed, will avail to
prevent gross abuse and wrong.”
( g) The Anti-Slavery Society follow with the same declaration;
and also Mr. Robert Louis Stevenson and many others; but I for-
bear to quote further and similar opinions.
May I now refer to one or two of the Regulations to show the
impracticability of working them ?
(1.) Regulation n requires that “ every return passenger is duly
landed, along with his property, not only on his own island, but at
his own village or district; and on no account must any islander be
landed at any island, village, or district, other than the one from
which he came originally, unless he expressly wishes it; in which
case a full explanation of the circumstances must be entered in the
log.”
Now it is well known that the islands are isolated, difficult to
navigate, subject to sudden hurricanes, deficient in harbour accommo-
dation ; and that the recruiting is done along the shore, as oppor-
tunities of calm or a lee shore present themselves. I entreat your
Lordship to consider the unlikelihood, nay the impossibility, that the
same conditions will be experienced at the various places on the
return of these recruits after three years’ service. Suppose a lee
shore, from which a recruit was taken, is on his return subject to
the full fury of a gale, how can he be landed “at his own village or
district”? Or, suppose that, spite of a high sea, the expert recruit
by swimming (as all the islanders can) could reach the boat to recruit
to Queensland, on his return he must be duly landed “along with
his property ” —an impossibility, even under the same conditions of
sea in which he was taken away. The smallest experience will cause
any one to see how easily the condition, “ unless he expressly wishes
it,” may be made a way out of the difficulty. The poor returned
Kanaka is forced to decide (“ to expressly wish ”) either —


{x) To be landed at some place other than his own village or
district; or
(y) At some adjacent island ; or
( z) To return to Queensland for a further term of service.
If he elects the first alternative, he will certainly lose “his pro-
perty ”by theft or violence, and probably his life also. It the second
(he will not agree to the second condition unless the adjacent island
is Christianised —because otherwise it would be certain death to do
so) he becomes a charge and a burden on the Christian natives, until
they can send him home. And it he is shut up to the last condition,
the captain of the labour vessel has secured an easy and profitable
recruit.
Let me give proofs of the foregoing :
First, I give a recent (1891) detailed example ot murder ant. can-
nibalism—the result of landing returned labourers, though 011 their
own island, at their wrong district, —in the following statement by
Mr. Watt, the missionary on Tanna, who writes under date 22nd
April, 1892, saying:—
“ Last year the Para labour vessel brought back and landed six
returned labourers from Queensland. One man and his wife of the
party belonged to the other side of the island, but for some reason
or other was landed at Weasese. Some people there professed to be
their friends, to which the man assented. The Para had lefr, the
people scattered to their villages, and Mr. Grey had resumed his
house building, when a shot was heard, d anna lads informed Mr.
Grey’s Aniwans that a plot had been laid to kill the man and keep
his wife and property. Mr. Grey and his two Aniwans now went
in the direction of the shot. A Tanna man tried to prevent them,
but they had not gone far when, pointing down the brae, an Aniwan
said, ‘He is there.’ A few yards below, stripped of all except his
shirt, against the root of a tree the man lay dead. Tearing open the
shirt Mr. Grey examined the body, and found a large hole by which
the bullet or charge had entered his left breast ; his right hand was
over the wound. Mr. Grey went on to the village and saw Kapskene
and Tuman —the latter was the murderer. They persisted in saying
they were the dead man’s friends, and that he was killed by other
people. Mr. Grey begged the body to bury it, but could not get it.
He then offered them two large axes for it, but no! Soon after this
man was landed he was coolly murdered, and his wife and property
confiscated. The wife has since fled and reached her own land
with her sad story. The dead man s body was carried tWSnty miles
and given to his enemies, who cooked part of it and threw the rest
into the sea.” _
Secondly —with regard to landing islanders on islands other than
their own —I take an example from the latest Blue Book, C. 7000
(page 39). The report of Government Agent Cecil of the ship May,
concerning the lauding of eight men belonging to the Island of Tanna
on the Island of Erromanga, contains the following :


“The particulars concerning the landing of these Tanna men on
Erromanga are as follows ;
“ As the weather appeared to be fine the master decided to fry to
get to Tanna to land those people if possible. The boys were called
aft, and the master explained to the boys that he was going to
Tanna to try to land them, and if they could not be landed that they
would have to go back to Queensland , as the weather was so bad that
it might be several days before a latiding could be made.
“ He explained to them very carefully that the ship would be in
great danger in trying to land them, and that they would be in great
danger in trying to land.
“ This conversation took place about 9.30 a.m. About 12.30 p.m.,
when the master and myself came back from the Missionary’s house,
we found that the boys had made up their minds to land at
Erromanga.”
The subsequent circumstance, i.e., the landing at a Christian
island, such as Erromanga now is, is merely an accident of the
case. The report shows positively that circumstances do and must
occur, where the regulations cannot be carried out. The Immigra-
tion Agent’s Report (p. 38) with regard to the above case is suspi-
ciously ambiguous when he states that the men were landed
“ apparently at their own request .”
11 these things are done on islands where Missionaries are placed,
what may not be done, I urge, on the islands as yet unreached by
ours and other Missions ? And so I say that Regulation 11 is imprac-
ticable.
(2,) Again, with regard to Regulation 12, as to the recruiting of
women. The Government Agent is ordered “to take special care to
satisfy himself that a woman desiring to recruit is accompanied by
her actual husband.”
How can the Agent satisfy himself? I assert, from an intimate
knowledge of the intricacies of the native marriage contracts, that
it is absolutely impossible. I could give scores of examples. I
quote one only—the very latest case reported.
My son, the Rev. F. J. Paton, now a missionary on 'the Malekula
(Mallicolo), writes in a letter dated 24th September, 1893, as
follows:
authorities 6 " °.n Saturday, 27th May, 1893, Queensland Recruiting Ship
admit this
Lochiel , Government Agent Mr. George Hammond, landed boats
to be a case five miles north-west of Pangkuma Mission Station, on Malekula.
recruiting- Recruited a man Mcnb Fcibur; also, contrary to Regulations, a
under the woman who was not his wife, named by two names according to
hulons CgU " native customs— Resin Vanue or Reverin Bue. Her husband,
Seeslip Rochor , had not given his consent, and he and her brother Borang
opposite, asked me to report the case. I have sent a complaint to Fiji to Sir
John B. Thurston, but there has not been an opportunity of an
answer yet.”
(3.) I would call attention here to the “Additional Instructions to


Government Agents,” given on page 15 of the latest Blue Book
(C. 7,000) whereby it is required of the Government Agent that,
“for the purpose of ascertaining the age of islanders, he is ‘to
measure each male islander offering for engagement, round the
breast, after expiration,” and “if the measurement so taken is less
than thirty-two inches the Islander must be rejected, unless there
are special reasons for believing him to be over sixteen years of
This instruction was issued on August 4th, 1892. But on Novem-
ber 15th, 1892, an order was issued rescinding this new regulation
which had in three brief months only been found “ unworkable
an ambiguous phrase which presumably means that the biggest men
had been for the most part recruited, and a lower standard must be
adopted to get recruits. Another instance of the ease with which
regulations may be altered if found a to successful
recruiting, showing that to depend on Regulations is a farce and a
mockery. . . .
(4) But beyond all others, perhaps, Regulation No. 14 is the most
obviously impracticable. By it the Government Agent is to see,
“ that each islander recruited fully understands the nature ot the
agreement he is to enter into as to rate of payment and especially of
duration of service.” , . ,
(a) I call your Lordship’s attention to the too-much-overlooked
fact, that there are certainly twenty, and probably twenty-thi’ee or
more, distinct languages on the New Hebrides. No interpreter on
earth knows a quarter of these languages. By what means, then,
does the Agent see that the recruit “fully understands the nature ot
the Agreement ” ? This question was put to the then Under Secretary
for the Colonies (Baron H. de Worms), by Mr. Samuel Smith, on the
18th of May, 1892 ; and even the Baron’s diplomatic reply is sufficient
to prove that the Regulation is unworkable. Baron de Worms
said: — . .
“lam aware that there is a great diversity of languages in the
Islands, and considerable difficulty has in past been experienced
as regards interpretation ; but this difficulty is diminishing , in con-
sequence of the large number of labourers who have now been
returned to their homes from Queensland, and other places, and who
are able to explain to their fellows the nature of the agreement they
were entering into.”
(b) Here then is an admission that Government Agents depend upon
returned labourers to interpret the conditions of Queensland life.
How can they check the accuracy of the statements given by the
returned labourer to the uninitiated islanders ? If a return has an
object in getting quit of his fellow he may tell him what lies he likes
(heathen natives as a rule are inveterate liars) j and this is admitted
in the British House of Commons to be the sole and only means
possible in seeing that Regulation 14 is enforced. I assert that this
Regulation is absolutely not worth the paper it is written upon.


(c) Take the following examples To an adequate comprehension
of an engagement a Kanaka must understand four things—the work,
the rations, the time, and the wages. How is the nature of the work
to be explained on the Islands? No plantation there will give an
idea of a sugar farm, with its division of labour, its tools, its horses,
its machinery, its steam power, etc. As to rations, rice, biscuits, tea,
beef, etc., are not in an island dietary. The words “ ounce,”
“pound,” “hundredweight,” “ yard,” “web,” “mile,” etc., etc., have
no island equivalents. As to time, their terms are few and vague.
The moon, the ripening of the yams, the blossoming of the reeds,
etc., rudely measure the lapse of time. As a rule the Kanakas count
by “ fives.” As to money —an essential part of an engagement—
they have none. They buy “in kind.” What idea can a native form
of a shilling or a pound? It is a name without a meaning.
(d) As showing that engagements are not understood, I quote
from the A7gus representative, who last year (1892) accompanied
the labour vessel Helena to the Solomon Islands, that he might
depict the Traffic as it is conducted. In Letter VII. he says:—
“ We had now sixteen recruits, and I found for the first time that
they had a certain amount of English to learn by rote before they
reached Queensland. Perhaps this was not absolutely necessary,
but it was evidently regarded as highly desirable. In this matter,
too, it was thought that the sooner they learned their lessons all the
better would it be in the end. So when the time came on Sunday
for distributing their weekly supply of tobacco and pipes, they were
put through their facings. Mr. Ussher (Government Agent) stood
at the gangway they had to pass and called them one by one
by name. The recruiter stood by with the tobacco and pipes
under his charge. The “ Returns ” were supplied without comment,
but when Na Loot, our first recruit, presented himself in answer to
his name, Mr. Ussher asked him, ‘ Where iyou go work ? ’ Na Loot
smiled helplessly, but the recruiter came to his aid with the word
4 Bundaberg.’ Na Loot took his cue and blundered through
‘ Bundaberg.’ ‘How long you go work?’ was the next question,
‘Three years,’ said the recruiter, and Na Loot repeated the answer
parrot-like. ‘ How much you get one year?’ - Mr. Ussher inquired.
‘ Six pounds,’ said the recruiter sotto voce , and the recruiter said
‘Sixy Pounee.’ ‘Where you work along?’ ‘Soogar cane,’ an-
swered Na Loot, echoing the recruiter to the best of his ability, and
then he had his tobacco and pipe. All the recruits were coached in
the same way, and were told that when they failed to answer cor-
rectly they would fail to get their tobacco.”
I cannot leave the regulations without calling your Lordship's
attention to the “ Extract from Government Agents’ Log,” Appendix
A, page 47. Blue Book C. 7,000, where the Government Agent
appeals that “ it is an i7tjury to the trade to send back boys who if
they live to be landed have to be carried on shore.”
Obviously this sort of thing tends to retard recruiting by showing


the unpleasant side of the traffic to the islanders. And the agent
adds that since there is no hospital or means of separating sick
returns on board the labour ships, these poor wretches “ when too
weak to come on deck endanger the health of the other boys by
easing themselves in their bunks !”
I beg your Lordship to note that I am quoting from the Govern-
ment Blue Book the words of the Government Agent, and I plead
with you for humanity’s sake to pity these poor human beings thus
treated as chattels for trade by British officials on British ships be-
longing to a British Colony.
C—SECOND MAIN CONTENTION.
I assert further that the Traffic is unprincipled , and, as such, is
unworthy of an enlightened and Christian Colony; and I submit a
summary of the grounds for that conviction :
(1.) Though the Islanders of the New Hebrides have no settled
Government, there are communal obligations which are entirely
annulled by the removal of the able-bodied islander from his home.
Sir Arthur Gordon refers .to this matter in his humane letter to the
Times of June 7th, 1892.
The complications that arise from this cause in tribal life are end-
less and disastrous.
(2.) The Islands are, by the Traffic, deprived of their best man-
hood, causing rapid depopulation, while the strength and protection
of husbands and fathers are withdrawn.
(3.) The death rate of the picked healthy men whose ages vary
Irom sixteen to forty on the plantations is a perpetual condemna-
tion of the Traffic. In 1891 the average over Queensland was sixty
per thousand.
(4) Further, depopulation of the Islands is caused by the intro-
duction of foreign disease through the labour vessels. Dr. William
Gunn, of Edinburgh, a Medical Missionary on Fotuna, reports in
April 1893: “ That one-fourth of the population of Fotuna, mostly
the young, were destroyed by dysentery, which was brought by a
labour vessel from Queensland'landing a returned Fotunese woman
with a half-caste child suffering from this malignant and fatal
disease, not endemic to the Island.” The vessels are under no rule
in this respect, and they can do as they please, w.th disastrous re-
sults.
(5.) Immorality is fostered on the Islands by the withdrawal of
the husbands, (very few women go to Queensland); constant feuds
and bloodshedding arise from this source.
(6.) Immorality is equally fostered on the Queensland plantations
by the presence of perhaps not more than one woman to every
twenty native healthy men; and many of these poor women are
done to death, and die in the Queensland hospitals,
(7.) So liable are the regulations to abuse, that, even in Queens-
and, where all is said to be fair and righteous, both in the treat-


ment of the Kanakas and the faithful discharge of the obligations for
their return at the end of their period, a case has recently seen he
light to which I refer your Lordship. The scandal is connected
with the Islanders’ Immigration Department, whereby it is proved that
r system of middlemen has been established, who, for large pre-
miums, by lying and bribes, induce the time-expired Islanders to
extend their time in the Colony-the outlay for bribes being a far
more profitable investment to the planters than paying the passage
Soneyof a returning labourer, and the head money of a new re-
cruit Your Lordship will no doubt have details of the case, and I
ask how can such a system as this Labour Traffic, with all its possi-
bilities of money making, fail to produce dishonest men i
b /of The absence of a civilised Government at the recruiting
grounds, and the isolated position of the Islands ; the ignorance, nay
childish simplicity of the natives, in regard to anything outside their
Island home ; the system of making presents to his relatives on
securing a recruit (a system which has come to be recognised by
the natives as “payment” or exchange for the recruit), all these
things lead to abuse of the regulations and to certain evil.
J \ nis caid that the testimony of a native is not received in a
case of abuse ; and, even if it were, he could not explain his griev-
ance if he wished, except to his Missionary, since no one else out-
side his own people (and certainly no white person having jurisdic-
tion) would understand his language ; and 1 maintain that the most
cruelly-wicked argument is that of deducing evidence of non-abuse
from the silence of natives on the subject; for I have seen them
cruellv treated in Queensland, and, through fear, give the opposite
answer to their employer’s question in English that they gave to
me when asked in their own native language
Go ) Even when a case is reported by the Missionary it is ignored,
unless specific dates, names of ship, captain, agent and all parties
concerned are given-a condition frequently impossib e, and always
dangerous to the Missionary-since in his loneliness he is more or
less dependent for friendly assistance conveyance of mails, etc.,
upon any passing ship ; and, should he report the recruiters for
abuse of the regulations, he is boycotted, and prejudice stirred up
aeahit him in the minds of the natives, leading to difficulty and
danger and threatened death. I have myself been saved by friendly
natives, who would not be prejudiced against me, from the personal
attacks of godless traffickers, captain, and agents.
Till I call attention to one instance of abuse, reported, on my
behalf in Mr. Langridge’s letter to the Daily News oi August 19th,
md October 15th, 1892. There the fact of attempted kidnapping is
clet?y estabfiSed. It happened in 1890. The labour collectors
admit the giving of presents as payment “of the price of the
woman but the Agent-General of the Queensland Government,
after making much of the fact that the report was delayed, dis-
uses it with the bare statement that “ inquiry has been made and


there is no foundation for the charge.” Such a reply is tantamount
to accusing the Missionary (Mr. Landels) who reported the case, of
deliberately concocting a fraudulent “case,” and backing it up with
lying.
(ua.) I refer again to the system of giving presents, and quote a
case which was investigated and punished by Captain Davis, of
H.M.S. Royalist , as showing that these so-called “ presents ” are
nothing less in native eyes than the price for purchasing human
beings.
In IS9O, Rev. Mr. Britton, one of Bishop Selwyn’s Missionaries,
i eported that a vessel well known in these seas, and carrying the
British flag, was recruiting at Pentecost, and had taken five little
boys, for whom they gave sniders to their friends. Mr. Britton
challenged these tiansactions as a violation of two labour regulations
t.e.,' recruiting boys under age, and supplying firearms to the
natives. Mr. Britton reported the case to Captain Davis of the
Royalist, who, on investigation, found the charge proved, fined the
officer and purser £\o each, confiscated the muskets, and liberated
the boys, landing them on their own shore. A further case is re-
ported by the Rev. Mr. Leggatt, in a letter dated May 10th, 1892,
and published in the Argus, Melbourne, of June 22nd, 1892 as
follows : “ On one of the last trips of the Helena at Aoba, a case
of tobacco was given for every recruit obtained. Sixty-four were
so got there, and on an average each case contained seventy pounds
of tobacco, and, of course, no work was done for the local traders
for months after that.”
(12.) I venture to submit that no laws in any civilised country in
the world have so entirely to be dependent for their fulfilment on
the integrity of a Government officer of subordinate and second-
rate rank, and with absolutely no supervision whatever. It is, and
ever will be, in all reported cases of abuse, the word of the Govern-
ment officer against the word of the Missionary—and the word of
the former always has the preference, because usually some white
“witness” will back it up, whereas the Missionary has nothing but
native evidence which is not taken; so that it is absolutely hopeless
tor him to prove the cases of abuse since his witnesses are not
accepted.
( I 3 ) Iti Queensland, the Kanakas have no rights of citizenship.
They are not free to take employment other than on the plantations
They are collected, selected, and retained by the planter and are, to
all intents and purposes, absolutely his bondmen for three years.
1 heir treatment depends upon the kindness or otherwise of their
planter, master, or overseers, just as much as it did in the old
days of slavery—except that a Government Inspector occasionally
visits the plantation ; and the time of his visit doubtless being well
known, nothing is awry to his eyes.
(14.) The best authorities agree that Papuans are incapable of
continued exertion such as is required on the plantations. The work


amongst sugar cane swamps in the tropics is very unhealthy, leading
to consumption and the high death rate I have already referred to.
(15.) White labourers are paid highly for work that endangers
life • but, with regard to the poor Kanakas, life is reckoned cheaply,
and'they are considered sufficiently well paid by fourpence a day
with rations, for work that would otherwise cost from five shillings to
eight shillings a day—the profit going to the planter.
(16.) I have abstained from putting forward, in a far more pain-
ful light than that indicated by the Bishop of Tasmania on p__ 19 of
Blue Book C. 7,000 (clause C, paragraph 2) the disastrous effect ot
the Traffic on our Christian Mission.
(16a.) In this connection, however, I would place on record our
deliberate judgment that after thirty-six years self-sacrificing labour
to elevate these savage peoples, during which seven British Mis-
sionaries have been martyred on our own islands, and some
/250,c00 of British money has been spent; it is but just that we
should receive protection from Britain in our labours.
(i) As a duty to us as British men and women.
(ii) As a duty to civilisation, and . .
(iii) I think I may add, as the only method of showing gratitude
for the preservation of hundreds of British lives from what, had
these islands been left alone, would have been a hoirible fate through
cannibalism. .... , . , , .
(17.) I merely indicate, therefore, a few of the difficulties brought
upon our Missionaries in their self-denying work by this selfish and
unholy traffic in human beings. _ n
(a) In placing a premium on “mission boys as recruits on
account of their training to habits of industry, honesty, and harm-
lessness —our best catechumens are thus decoyed away.
(b) In offering opportunities for clandestine engagements and
escape on the. part of disappointed or evil-disposed native men and
women —leading to endless complications, and often to bloodshed-
ding on the islands. , c ~
(c) In the upheaval of family relations, through withdrawal ot the
healthiest and stoutest men, leaving the old men unable to support
themselves and a burden on the Missionary's slender resources, the
children to his care, and the wives to form immoral relations on their
husband’s departure.
(d) In the feelings of revenge towards white men, on account ot
the non-return of time-expired labourers, leading to such attacks and
reprisals as that reported as having taken place on Malhcolo—
p, 44, Blue Book, C. 7,000.
(,) In the prejudice created against the Missionary through the
action of his professing Christian fellow-countrymen, and the danger
to life and property amidst naked savages resulting as one Mis-
sionary graphically states, “from the black whirlpool of humans
passion that every labour ship leaves behind when it lifts its anchoi
and sails from a haven in these seas.


D. SANTA CRUZ AND TONGOA.
Special Circumstances and Allegations.
(-1 1 now f a l l your Lordship’s special and serious attention to the
notice issued by Sir S. Griffiths, on July nth, 1892, prohibiting
recruiting on the Santa Cruz Islands and the Island of Tongoa-ffi
order to point out that the prohibition has just been withdrawn for
no apparent reason.
I ask your Lordship to ascertain why— since it was signed as a
solemn assurance to the Chiefs of Tongoa (at their own earnest
thffir°island r ? ag ° ’ that n ° further recri >ding should take place
™ s . last ™ atte , r . \ s r . ef erred to in a letter signed “R. S.
McKay, Brisbane, which is published in the Daily News of
November 28th, 1893. as follows:- 7
The Polynesian Labour Traffic.—A False System of
Recruiting.
Sir,— Again the question of employing Polynesian labourers
on Queensland plantations has come to the front, consequent on the
passing of a Government measure-the Sugar Works Guarantee Bill
—which binds the State as security for fifteen years for repayment
of advances. The impetus given to the sugar industry by this adroit
piece o legislation is stupendous, as it is a virtual assurance that,
the State having an interest in the industry, there will be uninter-
rupted utilisation of South Sea Island labourers for at least the
penod of the guarantee—fifteen years. Recruiting is unusually
brisk, and as now sugar-crushing mills are being erected in many
parts of the colony, an augumentation to the present supply of cheap
labour to handle the cane on newly-cultivated areas has become a
pressing necessity. Islands previously closed against recruiting
because of excessive depopulation of males have again been thrown
open, and, though the Bill has not yet been received from the Upper
House, or endorsed by his Excellency the Governor, several vessels
prohibited SP '° San ' a CrUZ and Ton * oa Islands - the
When the question of employing Polynesian labour in this colony
was under discussion about eighteen months ago, opinion generally
except among the planters in Queensland, was in £
traffic was freely characterised as “slavery,” “ blackbirding ” etc
On solemn protestations by the then Premier, Sir S. Griffiths that
recruiting would be honestly conducted, under vigilant supervision
ex pe ne nced official, who would accompany each vessel so
that the abuses of the past could not be repeated, opposition was
waived and the sugar planter carried the day. Among other cores-
pondents to your columns at that time was one “ Marion Disney ”
who, in describing the recruiting system, implied that the “ boys ” fas
the islanders are called), “are induced to go on the big ship, and


once there, they are bound for the plantations.” Probably that lady
is correct as to recruiting elsewhere than in Queensland. From
several years’ residence in the heart of the sugar industry, as well
as from special scrutiny of every phase of the trade since Sir S.
Griffiths promised absolute honesty in recruiting, I must conclude
that system is not “ half smart enough,” as Jonathan would say, for
the planters. They have a system that is a revelation, the more so
that, despite the voluminous regulations that dog the traffic at
alijiost every step, just where one bit of laxity is apparent, it is
availed of openly under the eyes and with the cognisance of the
Government Agent, the enforcer of the law. It is not generally
known that the vessels engaged in this traffic are the property
of the planters, who man each vessel, the Government agent
alone being paid by the State. Before sailing on a recruiting
cruise, stores—food and clothing —for the round voyage, which
must not exceed six months, are taken on board. These stores
are carefully supervised by the Resident Polynesian Inspector
at each port of embarkation. But the vessel carries a great deal
more over which there is no supervision, nor in the loading of
which is there let or hindrance. A cargo of miscellaneous wares
—called “ trade ” —representing in value or ;£6oo, forms the
most important part of the equipment of every recruiting ves-
sel, and without which the business might be abandoned. These
wares consist of knives, tobacco, pipes, tomahawks, needles, look-
ing-glasses, long and short handled axes, Jew’s harps, earthenware
armlets and bracelets, felt hats, gaudy-coloured handkerchiefs,
strings of bright-hued beads, etc. Arrived at an island, the anchor
is generally lowered when two or three miles from the coast. When
the natives desire to recruit, or rather the “trade’’boat to come
ashore, they invariably show themselves on the beach or light a
fire. The boatswain on the voyage to the islands becomes the
“ recruiter ” when there, and he is the direct medium on behalf ot
the planters in securing “recruits.” Operations are commenced by
lowering two boats—the. recruiter’s containing one white man and
two Kanakas, the Government agent’s manned by two white men
and three Kanakas. Each man is armed with a Winchester or
Snider, the agent and recruiter carrying a revolver. In the first-
named boat is the “ trade ” chest, containing a variety of the articles
mentioned. These are gifts from the planters to the friends of
recruits, and at first sight this seems a considerate move to assuage
their grief at parting. The friends may choose goods to the value
of from £1 to Giving presents in this way is "a standing
rule of the trade,” practised by the French, German, Fijian, etc.;
all, except the British, including fire-arms and fire-water. As he
ilears the shore with the Government agent about four boat s
lengths behind him, he (the recruiter) turns his boat stern on to
the beach, but does not land. His oarsmen are ready to pull off at
a moment’s notice, and have their weapons ready in case of


sudden attack from the natives. As the natives gather round, the
recruiter asks them in pigeon-English if they wish to " volunteer ”
for Queensland. When one steps forward, he is immediately fol-
lowed by his friends for their present. Now the “trade’’ chest
comes into requisition. The scene is exciting as they are handling
the different wares, but midst it all, if the presents do not satisfy
them, they will not allow their boy to leave the island. What
follows ? Almost within grasp is the recruit to be lost for the sake
of a few more sticks of tobacco, another tomahawk, or string of
beads ? No, says the planter, who has provided accordingly ; and
the beads, tomahawk, and tobacco are given ; the friends are satis-
fied and consent; then, and not till then, the “recruit” recruits.
This is what the Government of Queensland and the planters up-
hold as honest recruiting ! Physical kidnapping, strictly speaking,
it is not ? But certainly it partakes of barter, bribery, or decoying.
It is the white man’s wares versus the black man’s body.
The strange point is that no Queensland Act or regulation has
been framed to deal with this feature of the traffic, and every vessel
carries its supply of “ trade ” with as much regularity as it carries
food and water. It is openly done, evidently with the support and
protection of the law in the person of the agent, who would use his
weapon if he saw interference with the recruiter. The Pacific
Islanders’ Protection Act—better known as the Kidnapping Act of
1872 (an Imperial measure) has the following: Section 9, Clause
I. —“If a British subject decoys a native of any of the aforesaid
islands for the purpose of importing or removing such native into
any island or place other than that in which he was at the time of
the commission of such offence, etc., he shall be guilty of felony,
and on conviction to the highest punishment other than capital
punishment.”
Again, Section 9, Clause 5. —“ If any British subject ships, lades,
receives, or puts on board, or contracts for the shipping, lading,
receiving, or putting on board of any vessel money, goods, or other
articles with the intent that they should be employed, or knowing
they will be employed, in the commission of any of the offences
above enumerated, he shall be guilty of felony,” etc. Does that Act
not apply to this traffic ? If it does, why is it not enforced ? There
is a fleet in the South Pacific Ocean, and why they have not seen
that this evasive method of recruiting long ere this might fittingly
be inquired into ? Polynesian labour is the mainstay of the Queens-
land sugar industry, as “ trading ”is the mainstay of successful
recruiting. This traffic never can be conducted satisfactorily under
the control of a Colonial Government; the interests of interested
parties render it at all times difficult to make legislation what it
ought to be. If the honour of the Empire is to be maintained, the
Mother Country has a clear duty to perform—to proclaim a protec-
torate over these islands in the Southern Seas; and, if agreeable
to allow transport of the natives to the mainland, to do so by means


of specially appointed representatives of high integrity, wholly
beyond the influence of the planters.
In view of the extension of the industry and increased importa-
tion of islanders mentioned in the early part of my letter, I leave
it to you and to the British public who cherish civilisation and
human brotherhood as something worth striving after, to say if the
Australian colonists, who otherwise bear a good reputation, are to
be stigmatised as upholders of a nefarious system of muffled
slavery. I enclose my card. —I am, etc., R. S. McKay.
Brisbane , October 18 th.
I beg to call your Lordship’s special attention to this letter for
further enquiry:—
(a) With regard to the withdrawal of the prohibition above re-
ferred to.
(, h ) With regard to the fact that the planters, or private parties,
own the recruiting ships and engage the captain and crew.
( c ) With regard to the positive and detailed statement made by
Mr. McKay as to the extra cargo of “trade”—knives, axes, beads,
etc., etc., for decoying the natives, which is carried by every ship-
contrary to the regulations.
(3.) I entreat your Lordship, for the honour of the British nation, to
take the whole details of this latest letter into consideration, together
with those of “ Marion Disney ” in the Daily News of August 16th
and October 13th, 1892, which latter, though denied, have never been
categorically dealt with.
E— CONCLUSION.
I, In conclusion let me point out how frequently Sir James
Garrick and others, in replying to accusations against the Traffic,
have assured the public that, so long as Sir Samuel Griffiths was
Premier of Queensland, there was no room to doubt that all abuses
would be carefully enquired into and the regulations duly enforced.
I have I trust pointed out the impossibility of enforcing the regula-
tions; but I would add that, almost immediately after the last
declaration of the Queensland Agent General to the above effect,
Sir S. Griffiths resigned the Premiership and is no longer officially
responsible. But I must refer to two incidents in regard to this traffic
in the public life of Sir S. Griffiths that closely touch upon the
issues at stake :
{a). He declares that I never reported to him the cases of abuse
of women that I saw evidenced in a Queensland Hospital, in company
with two ladies and the Presbyterian Minister of the place, for-
getting that, at his own invitation, I waited upon him officially, and
detailed verbally all that we had seen ; as also I commented upon
it publicly in my lectures and addresses throughout the Colonies.
{b) With regard to the unproved accusations, page 58, Blue
Book C. 7,000, wickedly and maliciously made against our Mission-
aries by Government Agent Rannie (who, be it noted, shot himself


immediately on landing in Australia), accusations that are a tissue of
lies from beginning to end and wrongly allowed to appear in a
Government Blue Book, as being irrelevant to the subject (Poly-
nesian Labour Traffic) treated in that book and entirely unproven,
I am credibly informed that Sir Samuel Griffiths gave these charges
to the world immediately on receiving them and without any attempt
at inquiry or probation.
I would beg to be allowed also to add, with regard to these
charges, that when they were challenged lately, the editor of a
Sydney paper ( The Presbyterian) declared without contradiction
that the story does not refer to the New Hebrides Mission at all 1
It is easy to show in a few words why these stories circulate.
Traders on the islands are, as a rule, bad men. They settle down,
sell muskets, powder, etc. In time every native who wishes gets
firearms and ammunition ; he then ceases to bring cocoanuts to the
trader. The presence and work iof the Missionary stops fighting,
and the traders’ business ceases. He at once blames the Missionary.
If he were not there the natives would fight, and that means more
ammunition, etc.
“ The fact is,” writes my Missionary son this month, “the law
which says English traders shall not sell muskets is almost a dead
letter and very little disguise about it.”
2. I do not refer to the Bishop of Tasmania’s letter, favouring the
Traffic, except to say in one word that the Bishop judges by hear-
say evidence obtained on a flying visit, whereas my colleagues and
I, the Naval Officers, the High Commissioner, and the Missionary
Societies, whose opinion I have quoted under Main Contention B,
pages 35 and 36, judge from long residence on the Islands and from
an intimate (and painful) daily acquaintance with the Traffic as it
came before us at our posts of duty. No evidence but this is of
any practical value in settling the matter.
3. I dare not trespass further on your Lordship’s time, though I
fain would linger to fill in the details of facts that prove every state-
ment I have made in this letter. But I do solemnly assure your
Lordship, without bias or prejudice against planters, agents, or
crews, that the system of securing Polynesian Labour for the Queens-
land plantations is a relic of the by-gone and barbarous past, a
veiled system of slavery, robbed to some extent of its bloodshed and
murder, but carried on by deceit and allurement, by bribes and
plausibility, through the agency of trained native decoys —under
cover of armed boats’ crews, captains, and government agents, in
regions far from the vigilant eye of the law (save for the occasional
visit, hailed with joy by missionaries and natives, of one of Her
Majesty’s ships with their officers, men of honour, of kindly
heart and noble bearing, who so impartially seek to administer
justice and uphold the proud honour of the Queen and Nation) I
repeat that, while humanity is at a very low ebb in the South Sea
Labour Collectors, and while deeds can be perpetrated on speechless


natives , whose dark bodies alone are desired for the energy that
can be forced out of them to fill the coffers of white men, while
the planters own labour ships and hire captains and crews, and while
a handsome premium is given all round for Kanaka recruits, the
Traffic is bound to be a curse and a degradation to all engaged in
it —a disgrace to the Colony that legalises it and a blot on the fair
name of Britain.
4. I entreat your Lordship to hear the heart-felt plea of an old
man, burdened with the evils that are heaped upon his defenceless
people just as they are emerging from the long black midnight of
gross heathenism and cannibalism. Oh that my beloved Country
would rise and stamp out this foul system—that the land of Wilber-
force and Clarkson, that the Britain whose blood and treasure has
been freely sacrificed to enable her to assume the proud honour of
a nation that never owns a slave—a nation that prefers death to
bondage —that my own loved homeland would add to its roll of
glorious triumphs this — that her children must not and shall not
disgrace her name by playing with a deadly system that has in the
past and must in the future lead to abuse, bloodshed, and God-dis-
honouring cruelty, little short of that accursed thing called slavery.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord Marquis,
Your most obedient humble Servant,
( Signed ) JOHN G. BATON, D.D.
2, Park Quadrant, Glasgozv.
December, 1893.
LORD RIPON’S REPLY.
Downing Street,
Sir, — 13//* January, 1894.
I am directed by the Marquis of Ripon to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter received in this Department on the 16th
ultimo, respecting the Queensland Labour Traffic, and I am to state
that his Lordship has read the letter with much interest, and
desires to express his thanks for the very full statement of your
views which it contains.
As regards the general position of Her Majesty’s Government in
relation to this matter, I am to draw your attention to the letter from
this Department of the 7th of October, 1892, to the British and
Foreign Anti-Slavery Society printed at page nine of C. 7000 of
1892. You will gather from that letter that, as was explained to
you at your interview with Lord Ripon and Mr. Buxton, the practical
question, so far as this Department is concerned, is whether serious
cases have occurred of infringements of the new Queensland regula-
tions of 1892, and whether offences against the Pacific Islanders
Protection Acts have been committed by Queensland vessels licensed
since that date.


It is evidently premature to attempt to make out a case of such a
kind, as your letter does not allege a single instance of kidnapping,
violence, or other criminal offence since the recruiting was re-estab-
lished on a different and, it is hoped, a more humane basis. Indeed,
you only quote one alleged instance of the infringement of the new
Queensland regulations; namely, the case of the recruitment of a
woman at Malekula without her husband. The attention of the
Colonial Government will be drawn to this case, but it is obvious,
from the difficulties arising out of the intricacies of the native
marriage contracts, to which you yourself refer, that that was a case
in which a mistake might easily have been hona fide made.
There appears therefore to be no sufficient reason for concluding
that abuses still prevail to such an extent as to make it expedient
or desirable that Her Majesty’s Government should take the extreme
step of suppressing all recruiting by British ships. Lord Ripon remarks
that you do not mention any case drawn from your own experience,
and that the opinions that you yourself offer, and those which you
quote, differ materially from the recorded opinions of other authori-
ties on the subject, such as those of the late Bishop of Melanesia, of
the Bishop of Tasmania, of the Bishop of Brisbane, of the Con-
vener of the Queensland Presbyterian Mission ; as well as of the
Governor of Queensland, from whom frequent and detailed reports
are received.
I am to add that the intention of the Queensland Government to
permit the resumption of recruiting from Tongoa and the Santa Cruz
Islands was reported to Lord Ripon, and that some weeks ago a
despatch was addressed to Sir H. Norman enquiring what reason
had operated to cause the change.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
{Signed) JOHN BRAMSTON.
The Reverend J. G. Paton.


APPENDIX B.
DR. RATON'S REJOINDER
TO
The Premier of Queensland’s Reply to the
Memorandum to Lord Ripon.
{See pages 34 50.)
After this pamphlet was printed, and about to be circulated,
the Brisbane Courier reached me, on 13th July, 1894, con-
taining the Hon. H. M. Nelson’s reply to my Memorandum ,
which Lord Ripon had forwarded to His Excellency the
Governor of the Colony. Almost every statement in the
Premier’s letter has been already met, and categorically
answered, in the pages of this pamphlet ; and it is vain to re-
cover all the ground by repeating my argument in a detailed
reply to him. But, in respect to his high office, and the
official character of his published letter in reply, I give here
and now the barest outline of my rejoinder, which it would
require many pages to unfold fully.
1. “ Inaccuracies .” —The Premier accuses me of a “tendency
to inaccuracy.” But his way of proving that is disingenuous
in the extreme. I alleged, at the renewal of the Traffic, that
the same vessels and captains were “ largely ” engaged in it, as
had been before. His answer is that that is not “ now ” the
case, writing under date 16th May, 1894. It might be the
fact two years ago, and not the fact now . Further, on this
whole question of accuracy, I place the word and testimony of
Missionaries, living on the spot, against either the interested
testimony of Agents and Captains and Traders, or the merely
official verdict of Government Departments, whose members
know nothing of the facts except through such interested wit-
nesses, as against the complaints and allegations of the Mission-
aries. And I believe the average sense of mankind will agree
with me in the preference, and homologate it.
2. “ New Regulations —The Premier’s main contention is
that the New Regulations, and the “ strictness of enforcement ”
of these create entirely “ new conditions ” ; and that the “ new


class of men ” employed should make the “ abuses ” practically
impossible. This is exactly the plea by which the Traffic
was originally defended —“ the Regulations ! the Regulations !’’
It was loudly proclaimed that abuses could never happen, till
one fine day the Courts of Law took the matter up, and proved
everything to the hilt. NB. I admit, and have always argued,
that all that can be done by these Regulations has been done,
and is satisfactory, on paper. My plea is that, in the absence
of a Protectorate, or responsible British Government, at the
recruiting ground, no Regulations that Britain or Queensland
can possibly make will ever prevent its being a thinly-veiled
form of slavery. Every one that knows the facts at the other
end, viz., among the Islands, must in the long run be forced to
this conviction.
3. “ Specific Cases ” and “ Facts.”- — (a) As to the returned
Kanaka, murdered on Tanna in 1891, after being landed not
among his own people by the Para , the Premier wrongs me
by alleging inaccuracy in “ presenting ” information. I gave
the full statement as sent by the Missionary to me, in which
there was no reference to “freeing the Agent from blame.”
It is no answer to say that the man “ desired ” to be landed
there. The Captain “ would not take him to his owmside of
the Island ”; and the poor fellow chose to risk death in being
landed among enemies, rather than the only other alternative-
going back to Queensland plantations. He died; and died,
because the Regulation was broken—that is fact.
(p) Again, as to the eight Tanna men landed by the May
on Erromanga, of whom the Agent certifies officially that they
were “ landed there of their own free will,” —and regarding the
Agent’s conduct Sir S. Griffith, having “ examined ” the usual
papers, expresses “ full satisfaction,” —all this does not blind any
of us to the fact that here was another breach of the Regula-
tions, however officials may try to cloak it over or explain it.
The men should have been landed at their own island; and
we know not, from the Kanakas themselves, under what fears
or for what reasons, they gave their own “ free ” consent to be
landed elsewhere, rather than be carried back to Queens-
land.
(c) The case of the “ Woman improperly recruited,” regard-
ing whom the Missionary and Chief complained, and about
which complaint the Premier himself admits that the Govern-
ment were “ satisfied,” is most misleadingly presented in Mr.


Nelson’s letter. The woman is spoken of as “ following the
man on board ”as if she had volunteered. On the other hand,
the fact is she was taken up, along with her child, by the boat
of the labour vessel and carried on board, without the know-
ledge even of the agent. Then it is said “ she was allowed to
recruit.” But, as matter of fact, the Missionary and her own
husband the Chief had to demand her return, and threaten
to report the case, and only succeeded, after much arguing and
wrangling, in securing the release of the woman and her child.
The agent Hammond, responsible for all these breaches, has
been, the Premier admits, since dismissed “on another
charge,” and has “ left the Colony.” Here again, cloak it how
they may, there was a double breach of their own New
Regulations, and that under one of their chosen agents; and
only the presence and perseverance and threats of the Mis-
sionary on the very spot, prevented all this being condoned
and entered as free-will recruiting, which, under “investiga-
tion,” would have been declared “ satisfactory ” to the Govern-
ment, the Civil Service Board, and all concerned. The case,
on their own admission, vindicates my whole contention.
(d) With reference to the charge of bringing and spreading deadly
“ Dysentery,” per the Empreza , of course the Government have
“ investigated ” as usual, have read and heard certain “ official ”
statements, and declare that the charge is “ groundless.” They
left Queensland in “ good health ”; neither woman nor child
were “ suffering from dysentery,” etc. But what says Dr. Gunn,
who was on the Island, who saw the cases, who suffered in his
own family, and whose word is as good as that of Agents and
Captains ? He adheres to his testimony. He can prove it.
Why did not the Government examine him, and know all the
facts, before coming to a decision ? This is of a piece with
the way they treat all testimony from our Missionaries. It is
treated as nothing, unless a case be lodged in Court, and
they leave their work and go up and prove the facts, and, as it
were, carry through the prosecution !
(e) The Premier says : “ Dr. Paton complains that the
Department takes the liberty of asking names and dates.” The
best way to meet a statement like this is, in brief and simple
language, to say that it is not true. I challenge the Premier
to prove it. I have always insisted>upon obtaining names and
dates ; and I have never forwarded, either to Government or
H.M. High Commissioner, or published a single allegation, by


word or by pen, without specifying name and date, and every
other particular possible ; certainly, always sufficient to identify
parties, and claim investigation of charges. Of course
every fair-minded man will see, and must admit, that from the
very circumstances of this hateful Traffic, the difficulty of get-
ting full, reliable, and minute evidence is one of the horrors of
the whole situation. Deeds are done, and are known to be
done, worthy only of blackest slavery, especially at the recruiting
grounds, and no proof, such as legal courts would demand,
may be within the reach of the Missionary.
(/) The Premier denies that the “ gifts ” or “ presents ” or
“Trade,” used in connection with collecting the Kanakas, can
be regarded as the “ price ” paid for the boys. He quotes a
case, where “as much as in gold were given to
recruits in one ship”; and leaves the reader to infer that the
money was equivalent to a wage or free gift to the Kanaka him-
self, or a present that he could take with him, or do what he
liked with. As matter of actual fact, the “present” or “Trade”
may be given to the Boy, or to his friends, or to the Chief
—but, in every case, and by the understanding of all
engaged in it, that is received by the Chief, or by the Boy’s
friends, as his price. There is not a Missionary, not a Trader
even, not a Kanaka, not a Middleman, or Chief, but knows
that to be a fact, and treats it accordingly. The Premier’s
own case, reported by Mr. Leggatt, regarding the Helena ,
leaving such large “ presents ” of tobacco, that the natives were
independent of work ” for local traders for some months, proves
this to a demonstration. Did the Helena give these presents
for mere loving-kindness, or for what were they given ? For
the Boys got on board. And not given to the Boys themselves,
observe, at least not ultimately, but to their friends and chiefs,
etc., for the Boys, and regarded by every native there as price,
in answer to their tell-tale question, “ How much you buy him
me I ” which is their pigeon English for “ How much will you pay
for me ? ”
(g) The Premier accuses me of “ a palpable blunder ” regard-
ing the Agent, who “ wickedly and maliciously accused” the Mis-
sionaries of trading in drink, firearms, etc. The blunder is this
—the Agent Rannie, who made this accusation, did not, as was
publicly reported in our British newspapers, since “commit
suicide ”; but another had died of gunshot, “ suggesting
suicide.” My answer is that the Public Press of this country,


and a reply given in Parliament, warranted my statement
that the accuser of my brethren and the suicide were one and
the same person. As that was not the fact, I now retort and ask,
—Who was guilty of the “ palpable blunder ” of printing Agent
Rannie’s malicious lies in a Government Blue Book ? And
why have they not been officially cancelled and withdrawn,
and the writer of them dismissed from H.M. service ? There
is here a very grievous and palpable “ blunder,” which the
Premier of Queensland seems not to be ashamed of, despite
his words about “the great work of the Missionaries.”
4. The whole Reply of the Premier is vitiated by his prejudice
against me, which he expresses thus : “The groundless assump-
tion that any form of indentured labour for a term of years must
be of the essence of slavery.” No ! I never made such a foolish
assumption. Its utter folly should have saved me from the
insinuation of such a thing —knowing, as I do, and approving
of many forms of indentured labour, in my own and other
countries, that are compatible with freedom and independence.
Not “ any form,” but this specific form I call slavery; this
Kanaka form, in which the Islander is not engaging on free and
equal terms, and in mutual understanding of all that is at stake,
but is being practically bought and paid for ; and cannot, from
the very nature of the case, “ understand ” the bargain and all
its bearings. That I hold to be “ the essence of slavery,” and
the Premier, if himself so treated, would know the difference
betwixt free labour and the Kanaka traffic.
Finally, let the Premier and all concerned disabuse their
minds of the somewhat small and unworthy idea that the
Missionaries are actuated by “natural jealousy at the intro-
duction of other influences which interfere with their paternal
authority over those whom they regard as their people.” Not
so, noble sirs ! they are not our people; they are the sons and
daughters of God; and we claim that they be treated in the
Heavenly Father’s name as brethren, not as chattels, or beasts
of burden, or articles of barter, or slaves. And many of them
are not indeed our people but the redeemed men and women
of Jesus Christ, by the Gospel we have brought to them, who
have a claim upon our protection and our defence of their
rights, sealed in the blood of the Cross, and which no power on
earth shall ever make us ashamed or afraid to vindicate.
Queensland may go on “ black-birding,” till these Islands have
been “ depopulated,” as will speedily be the case ; but our duty


must and shall be discharged, which is to denounce the judg-
ment of God on all such unholy traffic in human beings, and to
appeal to Britons and to Christians to abolish and to suppress
it, while yet there is time.
DR. PATON’S CLOSING REPLY TO LORD
RIPON.
My Lord Marquis,—
With reference to my memorandum of December last,
drawn up at your request and setting forth the evils of the Kanaka
Labour Traffic between Queensland and the New Hebrides, and to
your Lordship’s reply of the 13th of January last, I have the honour
to enclose for the information of Her Majesty’s Government copies
of a pamphlet which I have felt bound to circulate in reply to the
misleading and false statements that are being distributed in this
country by the Queensland Authorities in favour of the Traffic and
condemnatory of me for my opposition thereto.
In the pamphlet I have fully met your Lordship’s reference to
recorded opinions in opposition to my views. I have also shown,
as 1 venture to think I did very amply in my memorandum of
December, not only that abuses have occurred under the New
Regulations, but also, that from its very nature as a trade in the
bodies of men and women, the Traffic cannot be conducted without
abuses, deception, sorrow, and cruel wrongs to family relations and
island communes.
Your Lordship says that it is premature to make out a case of
abuse, and that there is no reason for concluding that abuses pre-
vail. I confess that such statements in the face of my memo-
randum are utterly at variance with my conception of the meaning
of abuse and entirely contrary to facts—unless, indeed, I am to
understand that H.M. Government regard anything short of such
murders and horrible brutality and lawlessness as occurred on the
Hopeful and other vessels as the only form of abuse which they can
regard as serious enough for Imperial interference.
Surely my pleading is by no means premature while such gross
abuses of the Regulations as those pointed out in Mr. McKay’s letter
to the Daily News of the 3rd November, 1893, with regard to extra
cargo, etc., remain unchallenged. And I would remind your Lordship
of the wholesale slaughter by disease imported by a labour vessel
which occurred on Fotuna, and other islands, so late as February^
1 893—immediately after the Traffic was revived. These two cases
were mentioned in my memorandum, and must have escaped atten-
tion in Mr. Bramston’s reply. But besides these, there are other
cases of abuse, serious and categorical, which are mentioned both
in my memorandum and in the pamphlet now sent, all proving as
Bishop Selwyn lately admitted at the Colonial Institute—that the


Traffic offers opportunities for abuse which Regulations, however
stringent and carefully devised, cannot possibly guard against
among these islands.
I call your Lordship’s serious attention also to Mr. Basil Thom-
son’s clear views and warning words as regards the Traffic in his
letter to the Leeds Mercury of the 18th May, 1894.
Having thus tried to perform a solemn duty to my God and
humanity and our oppressed defenceless islanders, I leave your
Lordship, the British Nation and Colonies, and the world to judge
between my opponents and myself, believing as I firmly do that
every Christian, and all who love justice between man and man,
will agree that a Traffic so closely allied to Slavery, and causing
such suffering and loss of life, is a dark blot on our British and
Colonial honour, which should not for a single day longer be
allowed to exist.
As one of Her Majesty’s most devoted subjects and zealous for
Britain’s honour and God’s glory,
I remain,
Yours respectfully,
2, Park Quadrant , Glasgow. JOHN G. PATON, D.U.
lifth July , 1894.
P.S. —Since the foregoing was written, I am, with sincere thanks
to your Lordship, in receipt of an Official Copy of the Reply by the
Hon. H. M. Nelson, Premier of Queensland, to my Memorandum
of December last. Having carefully weighed afresh all the argu-
ments and excuses therein advanced, I have added to this pamphlet,
by way of Rejoinder to the Premier (see Appendix B, page 52), final
reasons for still insisting that my charges and allegations against
the Traffic have not been answered and are not rebutted, and that,
from the very circumstances in which the Labour Collecting is carried
on the New Regulations cannot, anymore than the Old Regulations,
prevent these outrages and abuses which demand and which justify
its total suppression. I respectfully commend this Appendix to
your Lordship's serious consideration.—J. G. P.
1508 00247830 8


f -r>
SC/
HAZELL, WATSON, AND VINEY, LD.,
PRINTERS,
LONDON AND AYLESBURY.




From an official document just received from the Colonial
Office, London, I give the following, to prove that the case com-
plained of by my son, of a violation of the Kanaka Labour Regu-
lations on the 27th of May, 1893, has been investigated and found
correct by the authorities in Queensland, showing that even since
1893 this sad traffic is not so free from violations as the Queens-
land Officials try to make out.
“ Chief Secretary’s Office, Brisbane,
“ April a6th, 1894.
“ Sm,—ln further reference to the letter of the High Commis-
sioner ol the Western Pacific, dated 28th September, 1893, enclosing
an extract from a letter addressed to him by the Rev. F. J. Baton,
respecting an irregularity alleged to have taken place in the recruiting
of native labourers at Malecula on the Queensland schooner * Lochiel,'
1 have now the honour to inform your Excellency that inquiry has
been made into the matter, with the result that the Government are
satisfied that the woman referred to in Mr. Baton’s letter was illegally
recruited.
“ The Government Agent in this case is the Mr. Hammond, of
the ‘ Lochiel,’ who was recently dealt with on another charge and
dismissed from the public service, etc., etc., etc.
“ I have the honour to be
“ His Excellency, (Signed) “ Horace Tozer.
“Sir Henry W. Norman, G.C.8.,
“ etc., etc., etc,, Governor."
Time and events will prove that I correctly understand and
represent the character of this traffic.
JOHN G. PATON, D.D.
2, Park Quadrant, Glasgow,
17 th July, 1894.


