

THE
Death of Captain Cook ;
A GRAND
SERIOUS-PANTOMIMIC-BALLET,
IN THREE PARTS.
As now E XHIBITING in PARIS with uncommon Applause
WITH
The original FRENCH Music, New Scenery, Machinery,
and other Decorations.
AS PERFORMED AT THE
THEATRE-ROYAL,
COVENT-GARDEN.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND.
M,DCC,LXXXIX.


CHARACTERS.
Terreeoboo, KingoftheMand. Mr.Br.«RTO».
~ - , Mr. Bvr P .
j*areea, / j^ overs of Emat. jyf r> Delpini.
Captain Cook, - Mr.C.«™»-
His Lieutenant, - Mr. EyATT.
Lieutenant of Marines,
Prieft, - - Mr.DARLrv.
oftkKmgh MifsFßANcts.
Englifh Soldiers and Sailors.
1 {landers of the King’s Party.
I {landers of Koah s Party.
Women and Girls of the Ifland.
SCE.NE. The IJland of O-Why-e tn the South
Sea .


The Death of Captain Cook.
PART I.
SCENE I.
A View in the Island of O-Why-e.
Some Islanders Huts from Distance to Distance.
E M A 1 enters from her hut in fearch of
flowers, of which (he is making a garland, and
in this employment goes off.
Pareea enters from his hut, holding in his hand
fome ftrings of variegated fhells, which he car-
ries towards Emai’s hut.
Koah enters brifkly, and feizes Pareea by the
arm—An altercation feems to take place, and
preparation for battle enfue.
Ema'i re-enters, and endeavours to reconcile
them, by declaring (he will (at proper time)
chufe one of them for her hufband, and retires
to her hut.
The rivals are joyful, each flattering himfelf
to have the preference—They agree to come a-
gain to Emai’s hut to know who (he will chufe,
and go off.
Emai


Emai comes out defirous to know what is be-
come of her lovers —not feeing them re-enters
her hut.
The lovers enter, each from his hut, with a
large beautiful Ihell they go foftly towards
Emat’s but, flop, and make three jumps before
the door, then retire quickly, and flop at a cer-
tain diftance.
A troop of young girls enter from the top,
and finilingly obfer.ve the rivals.
Emai enters from her hut, walks gravely up to,
and places herfelf between the rivals —they both
kneel, and fit down on their heels, and offer each
his fhell.
Emai looking tenderly on Pareea, receives his
Ihell, and giving a look of fcorn on Koah, flies
rapidly into her hut Koah throws away his
Ihell with anger and difappointment, and goes off.
Pareea, in tranfport, attempts to follow Emai,
but is prevented by the girls, who draw him a-
'little diftance from the hut, from whence Emai
xuihes out, and flies (laughing) towards the
country. Pareea purfues her with joy, and the
young girls all follow, making figns of fatis-
faction.
SCENE II.
An internal View in the Island.
Etna!, with joyful apprehenfion, flies acrofs,
ami foon after Fareca and the girkj as in the laft
fCvIlC*
SCEN E


SCENE III.
Another View, with the Marriage Altar in the
Centre.
Koah enters, fallen and much grieved at the
preference given to his rival j hears muiic anu,
rejoicing for the wedding, and retires with pre-
cipitation, meditating revenge.
A troop of female natives, preceded by four
iflanders, come down two and two, dancing,
and range thetnfelves ©n one fide. Two other
iflanders enter, the one playing the nofe flute,
the other the long tabor.
Enter Emai, wtrried by four men, attended by
young girls, and Pareea, carried by four men, and
attended by an old Prieft, who, Handing behind
the altar, ftretches out his arms towards hea-
ven, and jumps three times— The feveral at-
tendants clufter round Emai’ and Pareea, and
gently fet them down-—They Hand at the fide
of the altar, and take each a green garland from
it, which they keep in their hands, during the
ceremony. The company fit down on their
heels, holding their heads in their hands, their
elbows refling on their knees, and enjoy in fi-
lence the amufements the dancers give.^
The Priefl comes forward, places himfelf be-
tween Pareea and Emai’, and offers them a little
white flick, of which they each take an extre-
mity, and fignify their acceptation of each other
by breaking it.
Koah enters with an axe and dagger, defying
his rival to combat by menacing geftures.
P areea


Pareea fetches his arms, fiercely giving the
like menaces, and they begin the combat, where-
in Koah is overcome.—The conqueror takes his
dagger to kill him, but F.ma'i holds his arm, and
tells Koah to retire, who goes away in a rige.
During the fight, and after it is finiftied, the
•fky is darkened by degrees—Lightning flalhes—
Thunder rolls, and the diftant found of cannon
is heard—The natives, in great confirmation,
look to the lea fhore, and run off, with their arms
lifted up towards Heaven.
END 0 PART I.
VA R T


PART II.
SCENE,
The Sea Shore on the Island .
TT H E Iflanders who went to the fea-fide, re*
turn precipitately by the fame way, with marks
of fear and amazement.
A fhip then appears with Englifh Colours.
Captain Cook (in uniform) on the forecaflle with
a fpying-glafs, with which he feems difcovering
the country. He then takes a white flag in his
hand, which he waves repeatedly towards the
fhore.
Enter the King, accompanied by the warriors
armed ; he holds in his hand a green branch,
which he waves oppoflte the fhip. His warriors
range themfelves about him.
The military mufic of the Englifh is at firffc
heard at a diftance, afterwards nearer j then a
detachment of marines appear marching two and
two, with their Lieutenant, and the flag ; then
the mufrc : after which, Captain Cook comes on,
followed by a party of failors armed. Having
marched a-breaft the King, Captain Cook waves
the white flag he holds in his hand: the King
riles, and waves his green branch.
B The


The King orders his warriors to ground their
arms 5 Captain Cook does the fame ; they ad-
vance and embrace, the King joining his nofe to
the Captain’s, as is euftomary among the If-
landers.
The Captain orders four failors, who carry two
trunks with various articles, to come forward.
All the I danders exprefs their joy at the con-
tents ; the Captain prefents the King with a
medal, and a bunch or plume of red feathers;
gives axes to the warriors, and nails, knives, &c.
to the other inhabitants.
All the Iflanders go off, (except the King)
teftifying their extreme joy at the poffeflion of
their prefents.
The females arrive, and rtllh on the chefts of
prefents. The King comes forward, and orders
them to retire.
They fornrt a femi-cirde i Captain Cook diftri-
hutes different prefents of glafs collars, knives,
feathers, and a looking-glafs, which affords them
much wonder and pieafirre ; and particularly,
gives a looking-glafs, and a glafs or bead collar,
t 6 Emai.
The I danders come back, bringing prefents of
bread, fruit, cocoa-nuts, &c. which they offer to
the Captain ; part of which he accepts, and they
give the remainder to the failors and foldiers.
The King takes a piece of red and white fluff,
which he puts round the Captain, giving the
ftrongeft marks offfiendfhip and regard.
The King on one fide feats himfelf with the
Captain. The Iflanders and Englifh mix pro-
Kufcuoufly together, and range themfelves on
each


each fide., to partake of the kieva, or feaft, whidi
is to be given.
The King gives a fignal, at-which eight male
and eight female dancers appear' in attitude be-
fore him, and dance according to the manners of
their country;
Which being ftnifhed, the King rifes, and
gives his hand to the Captain, who invites the
King and his attendants to fee the ftiip, which is
contented to ; the young girls accompany them,
making the tendered: geftures to the failprs and
foldiers.
The warriors who remain behind, take up
their arms, and exprefs an apprehenfion and in-
quietude at feeing their Prince in the power of
ftrangers.
The mufic of the ftiip is heard at a diftance.
The Captain appears on the deck, holding the
King by the hand, who fhews much fatisfa&ion.
The warriors enter, overjoyed to fee their fo-
vereign fo entertained, make figirs to the Englrfh
they will foon come back, and go all off the op-
pofite fide without order. The King and Cap-
tain retire from the decks, and give place to the
young girls and failors, wjro eat and drink fa-
miliarly together.
Several canoes appear with Ifianders, carrying
different fruits from the ill ore to the fhip ; the
men forcing the oars at the invitation of the
girls and failors who call to them; when near
the vefi'd, the natives ffiew the fruits and fowls
they bring, and difappsar imperceptibly.
The failors, foldiers, and girls of the ifland,
B 2 returning


returning from the fhip, march , along hand in
hand, giving mutual teftimony of regard.
The King and Captain follow, and the officers
and foldiers finifli die march. The canoes are
feen returning, after which Koah appears alone,
with fenous afpecl, meditating revenge j per-
ceiving Emai coming, he retires.
Lmai enter a, with a looking-glafs in one
hand, and a glafs collar in the other, admiring
heifelf in the glafs. Pareea follows, and looks
over her ffioulder ; Hie perceives his face in the
glafs, and is ftruck with wonder an.d amazement,
until fhe coierves the catife ; he invites her to fit,
and adjufts the flowers in her hair, while flie re-
turns his tendernefs.
At the fame time Koah appears in the back
ground, with four warriors, his friends. He in-
forms them, and demands their affiftance in the
vengeance he meditates, which they promife.
He makes them hide themfelves in different
places to be ready at the flrft fignai, and lays
himfcflf in ambufeade—But Pareea entering,
perceives him, and runs towards him. Korah
gives the fignai, and his four comrades enter ,
and feize Pareea in fpight of his refiftance.
Koahfeizes EmaY, and attempts to force her oft':
She refills, but at laft faints away.
Captain Cook appears : incenled at the violence
offered to EmaY, he orders Koah to releafe her,
who refufes to obey, and threatens to flab her
infeandy; but t!:c Captain feizes his arm, and
lays hold of EimaY. Koah, in a rage, attacks the
Captain with his axe ; the Captain makes EmaY
quickly pais his left fide, draws his fv/ord, parries
ofV


off the ftrokes of his adverfary, and difarms him,
who falls at the Captain’s feet. The four war-
riors re-enter , and attacks the Captain, till Pa-
reea returns with afjtftance. The four warriors
and Koah fly—Pareea proftrates himfelf at the
Captain’s feet ; Ema'i alfo embraces his knees,
and kifles his hands; the Captain raifes them,
and puts Emai' into the arms of her hufband,
recommending the greateft care and circura-
fpeclion to them.
The King enters hajlily , Emai' and Pareea re-
late to him the great fervice the Captain has done
them ; they again fall at his feet, and give every
llgn of the moft lively gratitude.
An IJlander hajlily enters, to announce to the
King, that Koah, at the head of a confiderable
party, were advancing to attack him. The Cap-
tain tells the King he has nothing to fear, and
that he will proteft him from his enemies. The
Captain gives a fignal, and the Marines entering ,
join him , taking their way toward the Ihip, after
the Captain has agaip repeated his promife to
the King of aflifting him, and goes off - . The
King orders his warriors to prepare for battle,
and follows.
Koah, at the head of feveral warriors, and a
troop of lavages from a neighbouring ifiand,
come foftly to reconnoitre. He perceives the
enemy approach, and retires to be ready at the
hr ft opportunity offering.
The King, at the head of his army, enters
from one fide, while the Captain and his marines,
“nter from the other ; they mingle and march
together.


together, then divide, and each go off taking a
different poft.
Koah and his friends march in purfuit of the
King and his party, who return inftantly to face
their enemies. They look menacing at one ano-
ther, and the battle begins, in which Koah, and
his party, are victorious," and prepare themfelves
to purfue the others; but they are prevented by
the appearance of the Captain and his people,
at fight of whom they fly, and are purfued by the
Errglilh.
The King, with fome of his people, come
back, and prepare themfelves tQ go to the affift-
ance of the Englifb.
The Englifh return in triumph, having Koah
and another Ifiander prifoners.
The natives teilify their joy at the victory of
the Englifh ; the King compliments the Cap-
tain, who delivers the prifoners oyer to him, and
marches off with his people toward the veffel.
The King orders his warriors ta take the two
prifoners away, and have theiyi ready when re ■
quired : they obey.
At a fignal from the King, the wives of the
natives bring, wood,, of which they make two fu-
neral piles ; after which, two men ereft a flake
in the middle of the ftage. Koah and his com-
panion fbound) brought to the place of execu-
tion; the .women preparing fire for the piles,
the prifoners fnatch the brands out of their
hands, as meaning to light them themfelves,
itil 1 defying their enemies. The men fit down
in a circle" round the prifoners, and the women
make a double circle behind the men; fhewing
much


much fatisfaffion at the approaching torments
which are all prepared; and the moment the pri-
foners are going to be fattened to the ttake, Cap-
tain Cook appears on the deck of his vefiel, and
fhews the utmoft abhorrence at their proceedings;
then retires, and orders two cannon to be fired,
which are heard, and they fufpend the execution.
Captain enters, and procures the liberty of the pri-
foners, who are thereupon unbound; one prof-
trates himfelf before the Captain in a grateful
manner, but Koah cafts a menacing look upon ail,
and fullcnly walks away.
The men I Ganders retire, and the King impor-
tunes the Captain to make choice of any of the
women, but he refills all the entreaties of him
and the women themfelves, who thereupon retire.
Koah appears behind with a poinard in his hand,,
but retires; his defign is fufpefted by Pareea and
Ema'i, who run to, and advife the Captain to be
upon his guard againft him.
Four bailors are purfued by Koah’s party, who
are followed by a detachment of marines. Ihe
King and Pareea go to affembk their friends, lea-
ving the Captain behind, who draws to defend
himfelf againft Koah and his party, who attack,
him; he retires fighting with them, but Icon re-
turns without his hat, ftill fighting, and making
his enemies give way, fome of whom proftratc
themfelves before him, and receive his pardon;
but Koah, at this moment, treacheroufly Heals
behind the Captain, and with the poinard (he
wrefted from the king’s hand in the preceding
encounter) ftabshim in the back, and flies. The
Captain (though mortally wounded) fires his pa-
rol


tol at Koah and kills him,, then reels and falls a-
gainft a tree. One of Koah’s party takes advan-
tage of this fituation, and ftabs him in the fide,
and this is repeated by each warrior with a favage
eagernefs, fnatching the dagger from each other*
and fhouting and exulting in his fall.
The Marines give a victorious Ihout. The
warriors run off with Koah’s dead body. Ma-
rines enter with the King’s party, wh© all fhew
violent marks of grief and defpair at the breath-
lefs body ofthe Captain; they raife, examine and
prepare to bear him off, when the curtain drops.
END OF PART I I.
PART


PART III.
SCENE,
A MORAI, or Burying Place.
Mountain behind.
F IJNERAL march heard—The marines enter
with arms reverfed, preceded by two drums, co-
vered with black crape ; they march round the
ground, and depofxt the body of their Captain in
the middle. When they are ranged, two failors
enter (conducted by an officer ot marines) car-
rying a pole, having the following infcription on
a board. (( To the Memory of Captain James
Cock, 14 tb February, 1779” which is placed
on the centre of the tomb, the Wanders being
fpe&ators of the ceremony. The detachment
fire three times upon the depofition of the body,
they file off, and range in a iernicircle at the top.
Diftant thunder—the iky darkened—from the
mountain ifibcs a thick fmoke, after which the
flames appear ; and iaftly, the Lava, which runs
down the mountain. The natives prodigioufly
alarmed, exprefs their apprehenfions, and run off.
C Pareea


Pareea and Emai enter, overwhelmed with
grief, and walk (lowly and filently to the tomb,
which they, for fome moments, contemplate
with coni'ummate forrow. They lift up their
hands and eyes towards Heaven, and fet them-
felves down on both fides of the tomb, weeping
the fate of their generous departed friend.
Four lilanders (carrying long perches, to
which fculptured figures' of human Heads are
fattened, one above another, declining gradually
in iize, as a reverfed pyramid) enter, make a
tour round, and fix their perches at each corner
of the tomb, and then retire back.
Two natives, with each a long tabor, enter
before the I (landers, who all, men and women,
come on with each a green bough, and march
down ; three others carrying bananas, cocoa-
nuts, and a roafted hog. The march is clofed
by the King, Prieft, and Mourner. They form
a femicircley the two extremities of which arc
filled up by the women, the Prieft in the middle,
who raifes his hands towards Heaven, and falls
on his knees, at which fignal the Ittanders, two
and two, go and place their green branches
round the Morai. The Prieft gives another fig-
nal, and they all fall on their knees, covering
their eyes with both hands. The bearers of the
bananas, cocoa-nuts, and hog, place them-
felves behind the prieft, who conduds them
to the entrance of the tomb, where their prefents
are depofited, and they return to their places.
The Prieft'gives a fignal, and a ftroke is given
with a little ftick on' the tabors ; they all raife
their hands towards Heaven, three feveral times,
railing


railing and defcending. The Mourner beats the
earth with his ftaff, at which they fquat down,
holding each other by the hand, and dance in
the manner of their country; near the end of
which, the Englifh falute with their arms, ac-
companied by the ordinance of the veflel.
the ew D.
