

THE Govermant Agpicultural
Training Farm
Sometimes called the DREADNOUGHT FARM
Scheyville
near
Pitt Town
Here
MEN
are
made


The
GOVERNMENT AGRICULTURAL
TRAINING FARM,
At Schcyville, near Pitt Town,
New South Wales.
Sometimes called
The “Dreadnought” Farm.
A DESCRIPTIVE
» ACCOUNT. *
By W. F. SCHEY,
DIRECTOR OF LABOUR, N.S.W.


The Government Agricultural Training Farm at Scheyville, near Pitt Town, N.S.W.
HE training of city lads to be useful to farmers
>'y> Wiis commenced five years ago, and has been
v W vel 7 successful, the only regrettable feature
being that many more lads have not taken
’4 advantage of the facilities offered. The
demand for their services has been very
Uv' great—often ten times greater than could
T be supplied—and they have from the very
commencement been able to command much
better wages than they could have earned
in any city employment.
The Government Agricultural Training Farm, at which these
lads are trained, is situated near Pitt Town, 35 miles from
Sydney, and about 5 miles from either Mulgrave or Windsor
stations, on the llichmond railway line. There are four trains
each way daily, so that proximity to Sydney and facility for
travelling both render continual inspection possible and easy
a matter of great importance with such an establishment.
Commencing in quite a humble way with a small dormitory
to accommodate twelve lads, and carried on as an adjunct to
the Casual Labour Larin, the work has grown and expanded
until now the whole 2,150 acres comprised in the farm is
used exclusively for the training of lads for farming life.
Up to the end of 1910 accommodation was provided for
only twenty-four lads at a time, or at a pinch, thirty ; but
during the later months of that year the trustees of the
“ Dreadnought ” Lund entered into an agreement with the
Government to bring out British lads between the ages of
10 and 19, of good character and physique, at a rate of about
twenty every fortnight, and to pay the Government £d for
each of such lads sent to the training farm j so provision was
at once made for the increased number expected. The first
“Dreadnought” lads —twelve in number—arrived on 21st
April, and were followed by twenty-seven others on 15th
June. On the understanding that this supply would be kept
up, the men previously employed on the farm were gradually


GROUP OF FORTY-FOUR STUDENTS AT END OF DINING-ROOM (DIRECTOR IN CENTRE, MANAGER AT HIS RIGHT HAND,
THREE OVERSEERS AT RIGHT AND LEFT) TAKEN SEPTEMBER, 1911.


withdrawn, and it is intended that hence-
forward all operations will be carried on
entirely by the students under their various
instructors, and with, of course, the necessary
cooks, stewards, itc., lo provide for their
wants. Present accommodation is ample for
100 students to be always in residence, thus
allowing us to turn out approximately 500 per
year ; ami if these could be regularly received
at the rate of ten each week, i'leal conditions
with regard to them would exist.
At time of writing, however, there is still
some doubt as to whether this can be done.
There would seem to be some difficulty in
England in procuring the required number of
lads who can meet our stipulations ; and, so
far, less than one-half of the number agreed
upon has been sent out. There is so great
and urgent a demand for our native youths
in all sorts of occupations that coin) aratively
few go to the farm ; and unless the present
supply can be augmented, labourers will have
to be re-introduced to enable the farm to get
through its work, Representations have been
made in the proper quarters, however, and it
THE FARM LABOURERS’ COTTAGE.


STUDENTS' DORMITORIES, READING-ROOM &c.


is hoped that much larger numbers of British
lads will be available in the near future.
* The lads are well housed and well fed. Two
large and lofty dormitories, each 103 feet long
by 35 feet wide, exceptionally well ventilated,
and nicely warmed in winter, furnish the sleep-
ing quarters. A newly stutiVd mattress and
clean blankets are given to every student on
admission, and clean white sheets anti pillow-
slips tire put on every bed once a week. At
each end of each of these buildings is an
annexe, containing a dozen plug basins with
water laid on over each, and half a dozen
cubicles, each provided with a shower-bath and
tub. Dressing mirrors are hung all round.
There is also a Foreman's room at each end
of each dormitory', and a 10-foot wide verandah
all along both back and front. Close by', but
some ISO feet apart, are two buildings, each
35 feet by 15 feet, one used as a reading and
writing room, with a large case full of selected
novels, and furnished with daily newspapers
and many magazines, both English and Colonial.
Here conversation is restricted to a low tone of
voice • and pens, ink, ifec., are provided for those
PART OF COW YARD SHOWING SILO TO HOLD 150 TONS OF ENSILAGE.


STUDENTS MAKING HAY.


who wish to write. In the other, there are
two “ bobs ” tables, one at each end, and four
small round marble-topped tables, with Aus-
trian chairs, for playing cliess, draughts,
dominoes, and cards, all of whicli are provided
free. Each of these buildings has a wide
fireplace, in which a comfortable fire of logs
is lighted on every chilly evening.
Another large building is divided into dining-
rooms and kitchen, with cooks’ bedrooms, &c.,
at the rear. The dining-room is furnished with
white pine tables and forms, and the service is
all of white enamelled steel, with plated spoons
and forks, and all the usual appurtenances.
The students’ foremen, of whom there are four,
have a table at the upper end of the room and
preserve order during meals. The dining-room
is also used as a church on Sundays, and from
time to time for concerts and lectures, having
a dais and a grand piano for such purposes.
A large laundry—fitted with rows of tubs, two
large coppers, a large washing machine, two
wringers, and a large mangle—box room,
stewards’ rooms, and a range of sanitary con-
veniences, complete the list of domestic
AN INTERIOR VIEW OF A DORMITORY.


DAIRY AND OLD SILO-STUDENTS GETTING FEED FOR COWS.


buildings, which are intended to accommodate
100 students at a time and are amply sufficient
for the purpose.
For outdoor amusements there are cricket,
quoits, and football—both Rugby and Associa-
tion are played—and rifle shooting with minia-
ture rifles on a snug little range is given to all
students during one afternoon in each week,
the ammunition being provided by the mili-
tary authorities, free of charge. A large
dam, several acres in extent, is used for a
•swimming-bath, for which its location and
characteristics admirably fit it.
The Farm consists of 2,150 acres, of which
about 215 are under cultivation at the present
time. On this is grown wheat, oats, maize,
various sorghums, potatoes, turnips, pumpkins,
mi lons, rape, barley, a little lucerne, and some
broom millet; also small lots of other crops
from time to time. Seventy other acres that
have previously been cultivated have recently
been turned to grass, and another 200 acres
have been cleared and are at present grass
land. Clearing is going on continuously, and
fresh land is being prepared for the plough,
BOYS LEARNING TO PLOUGH AND SOW.


STUDENTS LEARNING TO SHEAR SHEEP


a-iid in all the operations incidental to this work, parties of
students are daily employed.
The Farm is intersected by several main roads, and is
divided into paddocks of convenient sizes by some 28 miles of
fencing, all kept in excellent condition. There are twenty-
live dams altogether, nearly all of which are of large size,
good depth, and substantial finish. The largest is estimated
to contain over 3,000,000 gallons when full, but the majority
are of 000,000 to 700,000 gallons capacity. There are two
silos, one of the tubular pattern, and one excavated in the
side of a hill, each of which holds 150 tons of ensilage when
full. Other structures comprise the Farm Manager’s residence ;
a small Post Office known as Scheyville—at which there is a
daily mail inwards and outwards; petty officers’ quarters, con-
sisting of a comfortable sitting-room and nine bedrooms ; a
killing yard; butcher’s shop; workshops for blacksmith, wheel-
wiight, saddler, and tinsmith; a couple of stores; and a few
small buildings used for minor purposes.
’To deal adequately with such an establishment requires a
fair amount of agricultural machinery, and an excellent plant
is now upon the Farm. This includes a mower, reaper and
hinder, threshing machine, wheat drill, corn harvester, horse-
rake, various seed sowers and cultivators, and a number of
single, double, and triple ploughs, harrows, rollers, drc. A
large two-storied barn, a stable of twenty stalls, with harness
room at one end, a substantial hay shed to hold 100 tons of
hay, and a long- cart shed, with smaller implement sheds in
convenient places, are also provided. A horse-gear and a
9 h.p. oil engine provide portable power for the chaff-cutters,
ensilage cutters, Arc., and there is also a Cyclone mill for
grinding corn, Arc., for feeding stock. Near to one of the
entrances to the Farm is a 3-ton weighbridge, and weighing
machines are installed in store and barn as required.
One of the reasons why this is so valuable a farm for training
purposes consists in the fact that it comprises more sections
and carries on more industries, than probably any farm in
New South Wales, excepting only the great Hawkesbury
Agricultural College, which is only 11 miles away, the Principal
and Professors of which from time to time very kindly assist
the Training Farm management with their advice, and now
and then with more tangible proofs of their interest. These
sections I will now enumerate and briefly describe.
1. The Dairy.
One of the principal things which most employers require
our students to know is how to milk, and so I put the dairy
first. Cautiously begun some years ago it has, like the Farm
generally, expanded considerably, and now deals with 350
horned cattle of various ages. From sixty to eighty of these
come into the milking yard daily, and each student must


THE POULTRY PENS.


spend at least two days of each week in the dairy section.
The dairy, built partly in an excavation in the side of a hill,
is cool in even the hottest weather. Its walls are double
timber, tilled in with sawdust, and are 20 feet high before
the roof begins to slope. It is floored with concrete, and is
CLEANING UP THE DAIRY.
litted with one of the latest Alpha-Daisy separators, with
milk tanks, Ac., all complete, a GO- and a 40-lb. Cherry Con-
cussion churn, a circular butter-worker, Babcock tester, marble
slabs, weights and scales, and all the utensils required for an
up-to-date dairy. There is also a small chilling room in one
cornei’, in which a couple of blocks of ice per week keep the
temperature of the cream down all through the summer.
Near to the dairy is the milking yard, roughly paved with
stone, with twelve bails with cemented Hours, and all necessary
appliances. Leading out of this is the cow-yard, with forty
feeding stalls, all roofed over; and next to this is a paddock
with a convenient dam of water, into which the cows are
turned after feeding. Near by are the silos, with a small
tramway running round the feeding yard, so that the feed can
be put into the mangers from outside the enclosure very
quickly and easily before the cows are penned.
The revenue at present is not large. Abundant reason for
this is found in the fact that the lads in learning do much
detriment to the cows, notwithstanding the efforts and assist-
ance of the expert dairyman in charge of this section. And
this is inseparable from any milking instruction, and of course
the damage is constant, as one set of learners follows another
all through the year. Last year the herd also provided some
12 tons of beef, which was consumed on the Farm, of a value
of L 278 135., reckoned at 2^ ! d. per lb.


THE VEGETABLE GARDEN.


W//A iHy
3. The Piggery.
Closely connected with the dairy is the piggery, in which
we have generally from 80 to 100 pigs of various ages. A
range of separate pig-sties, and a inoie modern range under a
lofty single roof, afford accommodation for these, with several
small paddocks, each having a bush-house shelter, mud baths,
FEEDING THE PIGS.
ike. False Hours of timber keep the animals from the concrete
floor proper, and movable wind-screens help to shelter them in
winter, An. abundance of clean, soft water for every purpose,
a store-room, a boiler-house, where three large coppers boil all
the food served to the pigs ; and a man's room, where the pig
man has his residence, complete the appurtenances of this
section. Altogether 629 pigs were dealt with during the year,
and added 4 nearly £4OO to the revenue of the establishment.
As more land is brought under cultivation, and more feed
material grown, every possible addition will be made to this
section of the Farm.
3. The Sheep Section
is small, and is maintained principally to assist the meat
supply. We have at present 450 sheep,' nearly all cross-bred
Shropshire® and Merinos, which seem to suit this particular
class of country better than most other breeds. ’ G 66 were dealt
with during the, year, 180 of which were killed for food, of an
estimated value of very nearly €72 (2.1 d. per lb.). The wool
from this little Hock sold well, and skins also added to the
revenue of the year.
4. The Poultry Section
is comparatively new, but is expected to develop into an
important portion of the Farm in the near future, the arrange
ments now being very complete. There are eleven enclosed pens,
each measuring 20 feet by 100 feet. Each has a house at the top
end, and a bush-covered shelter in the middle ; and fig trees are
planted in each, both for shade and for fruit. Adjoining the
pens is a small cottage, one half of which is the poultryman’s
residence, and the other portion a store and incubator room.
Two incubators are installed, one for fifty eggs and one for 150


There are brooders and foster-mothers, and a small mill for
cutting green bone. On 30tb June there were 211 birds, all
White Leghorns, with the exception of about a dozen Silver
Wyandotte hens, used for setting purposes. The pens are
beautifully situated, and the immediate neighbouihood is con-
sidered a very suitable one for poultry farming.
5. The Farm Section
has already been alluded to, and it is only necessary to add that
a full line of double and single drays, two spring carts, two
sulkies, a, double buggy of the tray pattern, and a country express
coach to seat twelve persons, are all in use almost daily. To
draw these we have thirty-four horses, all good sorts, and nearly
LEARNING TO PLOUGH.


all bj-ed on the. Farm from pedigree stock. All these vehicles,
with the exception of one sulky and the passenger coach, were
huilt and finished complete upon the Farm.
6. The Orchard.
A new orchard of 18 acres has been cleared, and after thorough
preparation, is now nearly all planted with fruit-trees, mainly
oranges, although some lemons, plums, peaches, apricots, and
apples are also found in the lower portion. This is well situated
on the side of a gentle hill, and slopes away in three directions.
On the brow of the hill is a three-roomed cottage, in which the
Orchardist lives and keeps his tools, \c. During next year a
stable, cart house, and commodious packing shed will probably be
erected, and very likely some provision made to give the young-
trees a little water should the summer prove a dry one, as some
people anticipate. It will, of course, be several years before any
revenue will be obtained from this section, but any fruit that is
meantime obtained from this and the remnants of the old orchard
will be made into jam for consumption on the establishment. At
time of writing, a very good crop of green peas, grown between
the lines of trees, is being pulled, and will furnish some amount
of revenue, as well as green-manuring the ground.
7. The Vegetable Garden
comprises an area of about 2 acres, and was all under crop
when the year under review ended. At that time its contents


SPRAY IRRIGATION IN THE VEGETABLE GARDEN.


comprised beetroot, broad beans, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cab-
bages, carrots, cauliflowers, eschalots, leeks, lettuces, onions, peas,
radishes, rhubarb, spinach, and a few strawberries. The larger
proportion of its productions will be consumed upon the place,
but all surplus will be marketed to best advantage, and some
beetroot and a few odds and ends have already sold well. As it
is practically new, there is nothing yet to record in the way of
revenue, excepting its supplies to the establishment. A small
irrigating plant, on Nunan’s spray system, is installed here,
comprising a 21-inch centrifugal pump, driven when required by
the Farm portable engine, with pipes and thirty spray heads,
capable of distributing, very much in the form of natural rain,
7,500 gallons of water per hour, the water being obtained from a
great dam, on one side of which the garden abuts.
8. Millet Broom-making
is carried on dining a portion of the year, after the crop is
harvested, dried, and the seed lemoved. The hitter is used for
pig and poultry food. A small factory, fitted with hand power
broom-maker, dresser, and guillotine, is used, and some 200
dozen of brooms are turned out each season. A bleaching
chamber, simple ringing apparatus, and all needful tools are on
hand, and, so far, all brooms made have been sold at ordinary
market prices.
9. The Sawmill
is equipped with au 8 h.p. horizontal engine and a 12 h.p.
Colonial type boiler. It has two benches; one, with a rolling
table, to cut firewood ; and the other to cut construction timber
to any size required. Usually five 8-ton trucks of firewood are
sawn each week. During eight months of last year all the wood
was sold under a contract, but during the latter four months it
was sent to auction. Altogether, nearly £l,OOO was earned by
the mill during the year under review.
10. The Blacksmith’s Shop
contains a good forge, anvil, hand-drilling machine, stocks and
dies, and a full line of tools of all necessary sorts. Here all
horseshoes are made and horses shod. Also, all ironwork
required is made, and all except large or intricate repairs to
implements, Ac., are carried out, as well as the tyring required
by all vehicles. Every student puts in a couple of days now and
then in this shop, and may, if he chooses, learn to shoe a horse
and make the shoes for him, before he leaves the Farm.
11. The Saddler’s Shop
in like manner repairs all the harness used on the Farm, makes
all renewals required with the exception of collars. A good many
pairs of leggings are also made, and various articles required for
farm use that can be made of leather. Students are also sent


STUDENTS TAKING OUT TREE STUMPS WITH HYDRAULIC EXTRACTOR.


into this shop to try their haiuls at sewing, Stc., and may, if they
are diligent, become very useful before completing their term.
111. The Wheelwright's and Carpenter’s Shop
does all the repairing of vehicles and buildings and other wood-
work required about the place. It has much to do, for with the
exception of two contracts for main buildings, all the structures
on the Farm have been designed, erected, and completed without
resort to labour of any kind other than our own ; and the com-
pleted buildings are of so substantial a nature and such comely
appearance as to stand comparison with those put up in the usual
way, whether by contract or day-laboux.
13. The Tinsmith's Shop
repairs all the sheet-metal utensils and fitments used on the
place, and they are many and various, It also makes every thing
required .hat can be manufactured from tin or galvanized iron,
as well as doing all plumbing, guttering, etc., which may be
needed.
During last year these workshops did, between them, nearly
£5OO worth of work of various kinds.
From the pen picture I have presented, a very fair idea of the
Farm and its capabilities may be gathered ; an idea to which
additional clearness and definition will be given by the photo-
graphs and tabular statements which are appended.
I desire to add that although the plant is a large and fairly
complete one, -it does not include any machine or implement
which we should not reasonably expect to find on any up-to-
date farm. It has always been kept in mind that the lads
we deal with are intended to work, and to work with ordinary
and every-day appliances and conveniences, where these are
fairly up to a reasonable standard, and so no costly or elaborate
machinery which they would he unlikely to find on the farms
to which they are destined to go after their period of training,
has been installed. They are all intended to be farm workers,
and nothing has been done to obscure that central fact.
At time of writing, nearly 800 lads have been sent to the
Farm for training, only fifty-four of whom did not go, more
or less completely, through the prescribed course. All the
others have gone to work on the land, a few in orchards, a
very few on stations, and the great bulk of them to dairy
fa,-ms About 20 per cent, of these have found work for
themselves, or through friends ; all the rest have been placed
by the Department, and there are some hundreds of letters
and reports on tile both from the ex-students and their em-
ployers, expressing mutual satisfaction with the arrangements
made, and the employment provided. A large proportion of
them’ have gone to the Northern Rivers, but some have gone
to almost every district in the State excepting the far west.
The ages of the first 500 dealt with varied generally from


CLEARING LAND. — STUDENTS PULLING A STUMP,


|| to 19, but during the bust year or so the - lads have been
somewhat older, and their average age lias been nearly IS.
Our general experience has been that the jouuger the lad
the faster he learns, and the more facile he is; but we have
FIELD WORK.
had so many successes with lads and men of all ages, even
up to 40, that it would he unfair to predicate failure at any
reasonable age. We have dealt with boys, lads, and men who
have followed almost every occupation —tradesmen, however,
being in a noticeable minority—and T have been agreeably
surprised at the progress which has been made by some of
the apparently most unsuitable material. Every lad, without
any' exception, is greatly improved in physique by even a
month’s stay upon the Farm; while to many who have
previously followed clerical and other sedentary occupations,
the Farm training has been almost a re-making. -They take
part in turn —so many days in one place, and so man)’ in
another—in all the work of the Farm ; learning how to
harness, ride, and drive a horse; milk, feed, and look after-
cows, make butter ; feed and care for pigs; plough, harrow,
sow, reap, itc. Xhey are also employed in clearing, ring-
barking, suckering, making aird stacking hay, making and
storing of ensilage, ic., when any of such work requires to
be done ; and may also obtain an elementary knowledge of
farriery, the making aird repairing of farm vehicles arrd harness,
the construction of farm buildings, &c. Their daily working
hours are limited to eight, arrd no work is doire after 1-1
noon on Saturdays.
For the “ Dreadnought” lads there is a bonus of two pounds
(, £0 ) each, payable partly while under instruction, and the
remainder at the end of their period of tuition, provided
they go to employment approved of by the Director. To
which I may add that approval is never given to any employ
merit other than on the laud, whether on farm, dairy, orchard,
cr station. Although the compulsory period does not exceed


THE SAWMILL.— SAWING FIREWOOD.


ten weeks, anil the desired term is only thirteen, every lad
profits financially, as well as very greatly in other ways, by
undergoing the whole of the training provided with so much
care and, 1 may add, generosity. Applications to employ
students have always greatly exceeded the available supply,
and as farm labour has been chronically scarce for years past,
I think it will he agreed that no better means to meet the
deficiency has yet been propounded.
Not only are our students eagerly sought by farmeis and
others, but they can always command a fair rate of wages.
While some few get more, practically all our lads commence
work at 10s. per week, with board and lodging, and the
promise of an increase within a reasonable time, usually three
months. And such promises have to be kept, for if one
employer will not give it, a neighbouring one is always ready
to do so. Contrast this with the wages paid to similar boys
and lads in city employments, where if they get 10s. per week
for a start, tiiey have always to keep themselves, and in a
very large proportion of cases have to pay travelling expenses
to and from work.
.Further, there is a lamentable tendency in many city employ-
ments to rely largely on unskilled hoy labour, which is turned
adiift in early manhood in favour of further drafts of boj’S.
And the mass of unemployment is being continually recruited
by those who are thus dispensed with, and who have no
general or special industrial qualifications. Add to this the
still more pitiful fact that in all countries there is a tendency
for 'the rural populations to crowd into towns, and that these
new countries suffer just as much in that direction as the
older ones, and we have the most excellent and urgent reasons
why every city lad who is desirious of going into the country
should receive some amount of training, and every needful
assistance to realise his desire. But it must not be forgotten
that it is the few weeks training, short and simple as it is,
that makes our lads valuable, and renders them so far indepen-
dent that they are able to demand, and obtain, a fair rate of
remuneration for their services from the time they start work.
Rome of our ex-students have already taken up land, and
become permanent settlers, one or two even sending to our
Barm to employ other students going through the course
which gave them their own start. And I have no doubt
whatever, that many others will become landholders, and that
with the extensive policy of closer settlement which is now
proceeding, the demand for these trained lads will continually
increase, and that many of them will become independent
farmers in the fairly near future.
Many people competent to form a judgment have visited the
Barm from time to time, and many appreciations have been
uttered concerning it. Perhaps the most weighty is that of
the Scottish Agricultural Commissioners, all men of mark


THE NEW ORCHARD.—STUDENTS PICKING PEAS.-OVERSEER’S COTTAGE ON SKY-LINE.


who toured Australia during the latter portion of last year.
Mr, It. II Greig, F.K.8.E., who had charge of the educational
portion of their report, slipped away to Pitt Town one day,
and with Mr. Dove, Chairman of the Transvaal Land Settle-
ment ’Board, paid a wholly unexpected visit, this Farm not
being included in the Commissioner’s itinerary. Interviewed
BRINGING UP THE FEED.
afterwards concerning it, Mr. Greig said enthusiastically that
it .was -a grand institution, and that he had never struck
anything better in the way of organisation. He added : “ It’s
the best thing I have yet seen in Australia.” And as their
tour was then nearly ended, this was saying a great deal. He
went on to say : “ Australia wants farm labourers from Scot-
land, but we cannot spare them. Anyway they would have
much to unlearn, and a great deal to learn when they came
here; and I consider that a young man who knew nothing
about farming could come out here, and after three months’
training on such a farm as Pitt Town, he would he as useful
as any farm labourer we could send. There are thousands of
young men in the cities of Scotland who don’t want to be
clerks or shopmen, but circumstances force them into these
occupations, although they are anxious to get upon the land.
They are daunted by their lack of knowledge of farm life;
but if they knew' they could go to the Pitt Town Farm for
three months or so, they could be drawn in any number
from Scotland, and after the little preliminary training they
would make good useful men, and, in time, successful farmers.”
The revenue of the faun during the year ended 150th June,
1911, was £2,710 ; but, satisfactory as this was, it does not give
any fair idea of the produce and operations of the Farm during
the year. The following statements, as nearly' accurate as
circumstances will permit, present this in a graphic form.


During the year, which ended on the 30th June, the Farm—
£ s. d.
1. Received from sales of produce in cash
and credits ... ... ... ... 2,710 1 6
2. Supplied its own establishment with pro-
duce and meat valued at ... ... 1,271 0 6
3. Raised produce, of which it had on hand
on 30th June, articles valued at ... 318 10 10
4. Bred live stock, of which it had on hand
on 30th June, animals valued at ... 291 3 10
5. Purchased from its own earnings—
(n) Implements, tools, and materials,
costing ... ... ... ... 1,253 9 7
( h ) Provisions and clothing, costing ... 611 IS 10
(c) Seeds and manures, costing ... 140 17 6
( d) Live stock and fodder, costing ... 647 19 3
6. Improved the estate by clearing, fencing,
new buildings, ifcc., to the value of ... 1,073 10 0
There were also some growing crops, in the ground on 30th
June, which a conservative estimate valued at £538, but, as
they might wholly or partially fail, I have omitted them from
the above statement, and have also purposely omitted some
minor improvements, and articles manufactured on the Farm,
to a value of £393. All labour and material connected with
AMONG THE PODDIES.
these have been paid for in the year’s expenditure, and, subject
to the realisation of the crops, both of these might fairly be
added to the year’s production.
A list of the main improvements made during the year
comprises one large, new dormitory, 103 feet long by 35 feet
wide, with lavatory annexes and foreman’s room at each end ;
a new laundry ; additional rooms for cooks and stewards; a


large addition to the dining room; a small cottage for the
orchard foreman ; and some minor additions and improvements
to existing buildings. A new 8 h.-p, horizontal steam-engine
and 12 h.-p. boiler were installed in the sawmill, and a new
reaper and binder, seed drill, and several other items added to
the agricultural machinery. In addition, 15 acres of virgin
land were fenced, cleared, and ploughed ; 150 acres were cleared;
and 18 acres under-scrubbed and otherwise cleared up. 200
fruit-trees were planted in the new orchard, 3 acres of which
(out of a total of 18) were also stumped during the year. Many
minor improvements were carried out in all the sections of the
Farm.
In conclusion, 1 append a copy of the Regulations concerning
the admission, Arc., of the Farm Students, and of the bill of fare
on which they are fed while in residence.
W.F S.,
1, 1/12
GOVERNMENT AGRICULTURAL TRAINING FARM, SCHEYVILLE,
NEAR PITT TOWN, N.S.W.
REGULATIONS concerning the Instructional Course for
Farm Students.
1. Every person desirous of admission as a student must make
application in the form appended hereto, addressed to the
Director of Labour, who has discretionary power to refuse
admission to any applicant without assigning any reason for
sucli refusal.
2. If approved by the Director, the applicant will be admitted
to the Farm, and may remain there, subject to good behaviour,
for three months. When considered desirable, this term may be
extended by arrangement with the Director.
3. All travelling expenses, to and from the Farm, must be
borne by the student. Rail tickets at half the usual fare are
supplied to students on the Director’s certificate. “ Dread-
nought” lads are conveyed to the Farm free of charge to them.


I. Every student must take with him not less than one full
change of clothing; must change his linen and underclothing not
less than once in each week; and must wash such linen, etc.,
during each Saturday afternoon, or other designated time.
5. Forty-eight hours' work must be performed in each week
by every student, apportioned in every case as the Manager may
direct. In cases of necessity, any extra work required must be
cheerfully performed. Unless in cases of emergency, no work
will be required after 12 noon on Saturdays.
6. Students must cheerfully and promptly execute any orders
given them by the Farm Manager or his deputy. They will, as
far as possible, bo given a turn at every kind of work afford'd
by'the establishment, and will have opportunities to learn how to
ride and drive a horse ; milk, feed, and look after cows; feed and
care for pigs ; plough, harrow, sow, reap, etc. ; taking part in
fencing, ring-barking, suckering, etc., etc., when tiny such work
is available; and may also obtain elementary knowledge of horse-
shoeing, general blacksmithing, the making and repairing of
harness, construction and repair of vehicles, buildings, etc.
7 All cleaning, etc., required in the students’ dormitories,
dining-rooms, and the rooms of their instructors must be done by
the students, should the Manager at any time require them to
perform such duties.
8. No student is permitted to be in any dormitory or room on
tire Farm set apart for the, use of persons other than students,
excepting by permission of the Manager or his deputy. Any
student found breaking this rule will be promptly dismissed.
9. Students when hot at work must confine themselves to such
portions of the Farm as may be authorised by the Manager.
10. All students must be in their dormitory and in bed bv
!)’3O p.m. each night, at which time all lights arc to be extin-
guished. Leave to be out till any later hour must be obtained
from the Manager or his deputy.
11. No student may leave the Farm for any purpose whatever
without the permission of the Manager. Should anyone do so,
he will be considered as absent without leave, and will not be
re-admitted. Students wishing to terminate their course before,
its regular time of expiry may do so by giving one working day’s
notice to the Manager. “Dreadnought” students arc required
to stay on the Farm not less than ten weeks.
12. Students may obtain leave of absence to visit their friends
or for other purposes by application to the Manager. Hut no
concession ticket for return to the Farm will bo granted unless
the. Manager's certificate he presented at the olliee of the
Director.
13. While on the Farm, every student must observe all rules
of good order and discipline there in force. Minor infractions


will be met with a caution, but serious or second offences will
entail immediate dismissal.
1-1. Flo payment or allowance of any kind will be made to any
student, except food and shelter during period of residence.
“ Dreadnought” students may, however, earn a bonus of £2, by
complying with certain conditions which are exhibited on the
Farm.
U). No student shall, under any circumstances whatever, bring,
or have in his possession while at the Farm, any fermented or
spirituous liquor, or wine.
10. Any student who has any fault to find or request to make
shall do so to the Manager, who will at once decide any point
which may be raised.
1/. Any student who may consider himself aggrieved by any
decision of the Farm Manager may appeal to the Director, either
personally or in writing. The decision of the Director shall be
final and conclusive in all matters.
1 IS. A certificate of compi tency and conduct will be issued to
every student who completes a satisfactory course, but not
otherwise. No certificate will be issued for any period less than
ten weeks, nor to any student who goes to enqrloyment without
the consent and approval of the Director. No reason will be
assigned for any refusal to grant a certificate in any case.
Application for Admission.
I, the undersigned, * hereby apply to the Director of Labour to
be admitted as a student at the Government Agricultural
Training Farm.
I hereby certify that I have read the Regulations above
printed, and that I agree to be bound by them at all times while
resident on the Farm.
I am not destitute; I have sufficient clothing to last me
through the instructional term and to take me thereafter to
employment; and I have also sufficient money to pay for any
tobacco or other minor matters which I may require during the
training period.
I agree to stay on the Farm until employment shall be found
for me by the Director, provided that such be offered me within
thirteen weeks of my arrival on the Farm.
I will not seek nor accept any offer of employment made to me
by any other person during the said period of thirteen weeks,
without the consent of the Director.
Should I leave the Farm at any time in contravention of any
article of this Agreement, 1 agree and undertake to repay
forthwith the amount of any and all advances made to me while
on the Farm; and 1 hereby authorise the Director or the Farm
Manager to detain any goods I may be possessed of until the
amount of such advances shall have been paid by me.


.Breakfast.
Dinner.
Ten.
Monday—
Porridge, 1 pint
Milk, ] gill
Meat, 6 oz
Bread, 6 oz
Butter, 1 oz
Vegetables, % lb
Syrup or Jain, 1 oz.
Dripping, 1 oz
Jam or Syrup, 1 oz....
Tea, 2 pints.
Tea, 2 pints
Tuesday—
Porridge, 1 pint
Milk, 1 gill
Meat, 6 oz
Bread, 6 oz
Butter, 1 oz
Dripping, ) oz
Jam or Syrup, 1 oz. ..
Tea, 2 pints.
Tea, 2 pints
Wednesday—
Porridge, 1 pint
Pea Soup, 1 pint
Meat, fi oz.
Milk, 1 gill
TY , w.
Meat, 6 oz
Bread, 4 oz
Butter, 1 oz.
Bread, 6 oz
Potatoes, 11)
Dripping, 1 oz.
Butter, I oz
Dripping, 1 oz
Jam or Syrup, I oz....
Tea, 2 pints
Breakfast.
Dinner.
Tea.
Sunday —
Porridge, 1 pint
Meat. S oz.
Meat, 6 oz.
Milk, 1 gill
Meat, 6 oz
Bread, 0 oz. ,..
Vegetables, $ lb. ...
Dripping, 1 oz.
Butter, 1 oz
Pudding, .V lb
Syrup or Jam. 1 oz.
Dripping, 1 oz
n i 1 i ., * i
Jam or Syrup, 1 oz....
Tea, 2 pints.
Tea, 2 joints
„
1 was ynars of age last birthday ; my last trade or
calling was ; (I am a native of N.S.W.) ;
(or) (I last resided at and arrived in Sydney
011 - per s. sh’"p ),
(Signed)
I also consent and agree, being the parent or
guardian of the above signatory.
(Signed).,.
(Address)
Witness to both Signatures ;
(Date)
To the Director of Labour.
.1 he following is the Bill of Fare for the Students while on
the Farm :


Bill of Bare— continued .
Breakfast.
Dinner.
Tea.
Tjjuksday—
Porridge, 1 pint
Milk, 1 gill
Meat, G oz
Bread, C oz
Vegetables. y lb.
Dripping, 1 oz.
Butter, 1 oz
Sago or Rice, 2 oz
Syrup or Jam, 1 oz.
Dripping, 1 oz
Rhubarb, when available
Salad, when available.
Jam or Syrup, 1 oz
Tea, 2 pints
Tea, 2 pints.
Tea, 2 pints
Fri u a y—
Porridge, 1 pint
Soup, I pint
Milk, 1 gill
Meat, 6 oz
Bread, 0 oz
Potatoes, j lb
Dripping, 1 oz.
Butter, I oz
t'1 T .
Dripping, 1 oz
Jam or Syrup, 1 oz ...
Tea, 2 pints.
Tea, 2 pints
Breakfast.
.
Dinner.
Tea.
Saturday—
Porridge, 1 pint
Meat, 0 oz.
Bread, 10 oz.
Butter, 1 oz.
Dripping, 1 oz.
Syrup or Jam, 1 oz.
Salad, when available.
Tea, 2 pints.
Milk, 1 grill
M eat, 6 oz
Bread. 6 oz. ... .
Butter, 1 oz
Dripping, 1 oz
Jam or Syrup, 1 oz....
Vegetables, jib
Sagro or Rice t 2 oz. .
Tea, 2 pints
Tea, 2 pints
In addition to above, milk is put with all tea before serving, and 4
ounces of sugar per day is allowed to each student, as well as an
allowance of salt, pepper, mustard, and vinegar. The above list is subject
to such substitutions as the Manager may find necessary, but will not be
decreased in quantity. All weights, except pudding, are those of uncooked
materials, and meat, of course, includes bone. When rhubarb or other
cooked fruit is served, sugar will be added to it as necessary while
cooking. Sugar is served dry, daily ;or at the option of the students is
issued to the cook for sweetening tea and other articles of food requiring
the same.
SYDNEY: W. A. QULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. —1912.
