

THE PATTERN 1908 WEB
EQUIPMENT.
BY Authority:
J. KEMP, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
C.13342.
PUBLISHED BY THE WAR OFFICE,
AND RE-PRINTED 1.9.11.
(WITH CORRECTIONS.)




THE PATTERN 1908 WEB INFANTRY
EQUIPMENT.
SECTION I.—GENERAL REMARKS.
The main principle underlying the design of the Pattern 1908 Equipment
is the subdivision of the complete set into what may be called the “ march-
ing ” and “ fighting ” portions. In the latter nothing is included which is
not essential to the lighting efficiency of the soldier, and the articles com-
posing it consist of—
Rifle (with sling).
Bayonet.
Ammunition.
Intrenching tool.
Water.
To these may be added such cooked food as can be carried in the haver-
sack, together with an emergency ration and a spoon and fork.
Everything else which goes to complete the soldier’s field kit is to be
considered as surplus to his fighting requirements, and as such relegated
to the “ marching ” portion of his equipment. Such articles comprise—
Great coat Razor
Comforter cap Comb
Spare pair of socks Towel
Mess tin and cover Soap
Tooth brush Housewife
Shaving brush Paybook
and are carried in a readily removable pack.
This arrangement allows of the soldier having normally with him the
whole of his equipment, while, when an action is imminent, the pack and
its contents can be discarded, and their place taken, if necessary, by extra
ammunition in “ emergency ” bandoliers.
Some of the other features of the equipment are alluded to in the
following remarks: —
(a) The component parU of the equipment are all directly connected
together. —The result of this is that the whole of it can be taken
off in one motion, and, unless it is required to be taken apart
for any purpose, remains intact and ready for putting on again
at a moment’s notice. The advantages of such an arrangement
are obvious. Men can turn out in barracks or camp fully
equipped in a tew moments, even in the dark. Separate articles
have not to bo hunted for, by no means an easy matter in a
crowded tent; all that each man has to do is to seize his rifle
and equipment and double to the place of assembly, and within
a few seconds of his arrival there he is ready to march off.
Again, when a halt occurs on the line of march, every man
can at once, if he wishes, divest himself of the whole of his load,
resuming it the moment the order is given to fall in.


( B) The equipment is perfectly balanced.- - All former equipments have
suffered from the defect that with no ammunition in the pouches
in front, and with a pack or rolled great coat on the back, the
weight of the latter pulls up the belt in front. In the 1908
equipment this does not occur ; for no matter whether the
cartridge carriers are full or empty, and whatever the contents
of the pack may weigh, no movement of tho equipment over the
shoulders can, if it has been properly fitted, take place.
(c) There are no straps crossing the chest. —This feature, taken in con-
junction with that referred to in (b), accounts for the fact that
the soldier can at all times march with his waistbelt undone, and
every button of his coat unfastened. 'Tho advantages to be
derived therefrom are too obvious to mention, but it should be
clearly understood that the correct balance of the equipment
is in no wijy impaired even under these conditions.
(D) Flexibility of the equipment. -With the exception of the pack,
which, when worn, must alwaya.be on the back, the articles
carried by the soldier can be disposed in a variety of ways.
By means of the end pieces provided there are altogether four
places in which tho haversack, waterbotllc, and intrenching
tool can be carried, and their relative positions can therefore be
varied at will. For example, assuming the pack to have been
discarded, the haversack and waterbottlc can bo taken away
from their normal positions on the hips, fastened together, and
placed on the back. In this way tho hips are freed from every-
thing except the bayonet and intrenching tool, whereby the
man's actions are leas hampered, especially in rough or difficult
country.
SECTION II.—DESCRIPTION OF THE EQUIPMENT.
The equipment is made throughout of specially waterproofed and woven
webbing. The waterproofing process is applied to the yarn before it is
dyed, and thereby produces a material more ellicient in this respect than
others which are treated after being made up. The result of the treatment
is to render the material practically impervious to the weather, which might
otherwise tend to make it hard or cause it to stretch and shrink.
All the buckles used with the equipment arc of the tonguclcss or self-
looking variety. With this description of buckle the free end of the strap
is passed through the slot, over the central bar and tinder the horns of the
other side of the buckle. (Plate 1., Figs. I and 2.) The strap will then bo
found to be securely locked, and though it may bo tightened up it will not
slip back. The strap may either be threaded directly through the horns
of the buckle, or one edge of it can bo passed sideways in through the gate,
the other edge being subsequently inserted by pinching up the web. (Plate
I„ Fig. 3.)
To unfasten the attachment all that is necessary to do is to pinch the
edges of the strap together at a 'point just outside the horns of Iho buckle,
when the web will pass freely nut between the horns. (Plato 1., Fig. 1.)
The strap has then only to be pulled out through the slot.
The large buckle on the waist belt is constructed somewhat differently
from the others, being a double one ; the principle involved is. however,
just the same.


The component parts of the equipment consist of the following
(а) Waistbelt.
(б) Frog.
(c) Braces (2).
(d) Cartridge carriers (1 left, 1 right).
- (e) Pack.
(/) .Supporting straps (2).
(g) Haversack.
(A) Watcrbottle carrier.
'•(t) Intrenching tool carrier.
Plate 11.
(<») Waisllull. Tliis is issued in three sizes, large, medium, and small,
the overall length of the webbing'being 48, 44, and 40 inches
respectively. The width in each case is the same, viz., 3 inches.
It is fitted with a large buckle in front, and with two smaller
buckles and two end pieces in the centre of the hack. The
length of the belt is adjustable about the buckle end.
( b) Frog. —This consists of a loop to slip on the waist belt, and a body
lilted with two horizontal loops. The scabbard is inserted and
pushed through until the stud on the outside comes out between
the two loops.
(e) Braces. —These are interchangeable, and each consists of a strip of
webbing 50 inches long and 2 inches wide. This width is
increased to 35 inches for a short distance about the middle of
the brace in the older patterns. Each brace is provided with a
sliding buckle for the attachment of the pack.
Cartridge Carriers.— These are not interchangeable, one being
reserved for the right and one for the left hand side ; in all other
respects they are identical.
Each consists of an assemblage of five 15-round pockets in
two tiers with separate covers secured by means of snap fasteners.
An upper and a lower stud are provided for each fastener to bo
employed respectively when the pocket is filled and empty,
'file interior of each pocket is divided by means of partitions
into three receptacles, each holding one clip of five rounds.
The carrier is fitted with a double hook at each end for attach-
ing it to the waistbelt, to which it is further secured by two
narrow bands passing round the belt and snapped on to the
studs on the lower front edge of the carrier. A buckle and end
piece are fitted to the back, as also a narrower end piece sot
obliquely and protruding to the rear of the carrier.
(c) Pack.- -This consists of a rectangular shaped sack, the dimensions
of which arc approximately 15* x 13' x 5' (45' and 4' in older
patterns). It is open at the top and is closed by a folding cover
secured by two narrow straps. Weather flaps .qje provided
which fold down under the cover. Two web Ibdpf "are attached
to the bottom of the pack, through which the supporting straps
(f) are passed. A short suspension tab is fixed to each of the
upper corners on the side nearest to the wearer’s back, also small
buckles to which are attached the npjier ends of the supporting
straps (/).
(/) Suji/Hjrltng Straps, -These are interchangeable, and each consists
of a strip 'of 1-in webbing 32 inches long, tilted with a buckle
at one end.


(g) Haversack. —This consists of a rectangular bag of dimensions
(approximate) 11 x 9 x 2 inches, and has a cover secured by
two small straps and buckles. The interior is longitudinally
divided by means of a partition. In older patterns this parti-
tion is not provided. The haversack is fitted on the back with
two suspending tabs, at the ends with large buckles, and on the
back with smaller buckles at the bottom comers. In older
patterns these buckles are on the front.
The cover is fitted with a small buokle on the top and a loop
in the front. In older patterns a stud is provided lower down
on the haversack itself. These last-named attachments allow
of the waterbottle being carried on the haversack under certain
conditions.
(h) Waterhottle Carrier. —This consists of a skeleton framework in
which the waterbottle is inserted and secured by a snapped on
retaining strap. The carrier is fitted with two bnekles for
attachment to the end pieces of the equipment, and has a short
extension piece for use when the waterbottle is carried on the
front of the haversack (when the haversack is carried on the
back in place of the pack, see Sec. 111., 18).
(i) Camera, intrenching Uxil— Head, helve. —The carrier for the head of
the tool is bag-shaped, is made of the same material as the
“pack,” and fitted with short wob closing strap with snap
fastener; it is also fitted with two chapes and buckles for
attaching the carrier to the front end of the right brace, and to
the tab on the waistbelt on that side. In inserting the tool, it
should be put into the carrier pick end first, and as horizontally
as possible, to prevent the sharp edge being caught hy the bottom
of the bag.
The helve carrier is made in the form of two double loops of
webbing connected hy a chape, fitted with a buckle for fastening
the carrier to the tab on the hack of the frog. One set of the
loops is passed over the. bayonet scabbard, the helve is passed
through the other, thus securely connecting the helve and
bayonet scabbard together. The pari of the top loop which
passes round the helve is fitted with two brass eyeletted t ips and
a fastener. The helve is carried in front of the scabbard, as
shown in Mate VII.
Plato 11. shows the component parts of the eipiipment. and Plato 111.
an assembled set.
SECTION III. TO ASSEMBLE THE EQUIPMENT.
As has i>oon previously stated the design of the equipment admits of
variations in the relative positions of eertain portions of it. but the normal
arrangement will he as now deseribed.
(11 Adjust the waisthelt until it is comfortably ligbt, taking care that,
when fasti lied the large bnekle comes in the eentre of the body
in front, and that tin two smaller bnekles are in a pcrfuutly
eentral position at the hark. When the lull is fastened there
should lie about 3 inches of (he running end clear of the buckle
The ” outside ” of the tw it is the side on which the rear bnekles
arc lived.


(2) When the belt has been satisfactorily adjusted, lay it out on the
ground, inside downwards and the large buckie to the right.
Slip the bayonet frog over the tongue of the belt and bring it
round to a position on the left-hand side so that it will hang,
when the belt is put on, upon the left hip. The exact position
will vary with the physique of the wearer, and can only be
determined by experience.
(2) Attach the cartridge carriers on the outside of tho bolt by passing
the double hooks over and under the edges of the belt. Their
position on tho belt may, as injtho case of the frog, vary with
each man, but speaking generally, tho rear double hooka should
bo set close up to the rear buckles on tho belt. When the position
has been determined, pass the small securing straps round the
inside of the belt and snap them on to their studs.
(1) Take one of tho braces and secure one of its ends to one of the rear
buckles on tho belt, pulling it through the buckle until, in the
case of an averagely tall man, it coincides with the fixed end
piece on tho belt. Pass the other end of the brace (taking care
not to twist it) through the cartridge carrier buckle on the oppo-
site side, and pull it through until it coincides likewise with the
fixed end piece. Kepeat this operation with the other brace.
Although each of the braces is symmetrical, that is to say, is
reversible fore and aft, it is essential that their sliding buckles
should bo on the rear part of the braces, and so disposed that
tho open sides are toward the intersection of tho braces.
(5) Try the equipment on in its present state, getting into it as if it
were a waistcoat.; t lf it has been properly titled tho belt should
rest in its natural position all round the waist, while the braces
should show no slack in them. Tho latter will be crossed behind
and come down vertically in front, while four end pieces will
hang below tho belt on each side, two being to the front and two
to the rear, and one of each pair on top of the other. .Make any
necessary adjustments, then remove the equipment, and lay it
on the ground as before.
(0) Attach the haversack by its large buokles to the two outer end
pieces on the left-hand side. Adjust it so that it hangs in a
convenient position on the left hip without interfering with the
drawing or returning of the bayonet.
(7) In a similar way attach the intrenching tool carrier to the inner end
pieces on the right-hand side, adjusting it until it rests com-
fortably on tire hrp.
(8) Then similarly attach the water bottle carrier (with the water-
bottle in it, and with the centre upright hand secured at rear, at
shown in Plate VIII.) to the outer eud pieces on the some side,
and adjust both carriers until they ride comfortably.
The equipment as it now stands represents the “ fighting " portion, and
will usually suffice for drills and monceuvres. For marching order parades
or on other occasions on which the pack has to be carried, proceed os
follows:
(9) The table in the Appendix details the articles which are carried in
the pack, and they call for careful packing if a neat and compact
result is to be obtained. The mess tin should be the last article
placed in the pack.


10) Lay tha assembled equipment face downwards on the ground, and
place the pack with the opening upwards upon it. Attach the
buckle of one of the supporting straps to the narrow end pieces
coming out from the back lower comer of one of the cartridge
carriers, taking care that the buckle is as close up to tlie corner
of the carrier as possible. Puss the end of the supporting strap
through the web loop on the bottom of the pack, and lead it
diagonally across the front of the pack up to the small buckle
on the opposite suspension tab. Pass it through the buckle,
pull it as tight as it will go, and secure it. Repeat the operation
with the other strap (Plate IV.).
As the correct balance of the equipment depends almost entirely
upon these supporting straps, it ts very important (hat they should
be, as taut as possible, as they then bind the pack tightly to the main
body of the equipment and prevent it shifting.
(11) Adjust the sliding buckles on the braces so that they come naturally
to the point of attachment of the suspension tabs on the pac)c.
Pass the tabs through the sliding buckles on the braces; if
properly fitted, tho braces should now lie Hat against the back
of the pack, being neither slack nor in a state of strain, and the
bottom of tho pack should bo on a level with tho lower edge of
the waistbelt.
The essential point to remember is that the weight of the, pack is,
in the first instance at any rate, carried by the narrow end pieces
attached to the carriers, and not by the suspension labs at the top
of the pack. The function of these latter is to keep the pack
from (ailing away from tho body. After a short time, tho
weight of tho pack slightly stretches the narrow cud straps of
tho carriers, tho weight then becoming partly transferred to
the suspension tabs. If the whole or toe n the. greater portion of
the weight be allowed to be transferred to the suspension labs, the
essential merit of the design is sacrificed.
To Open tub Pack when Attached.
(12) Cast off the supporting straps from the buckles on tho suspension
tabs, loosen and open tho cover.
To Unclose the Pack.
(13) Secure the cover and refasten tho supporting straps as before,
taking care that they are drawn taut.
To Discard the Pack.
(1-1) Cast off tho lower ends of the supporting straps, and free tho
suspension tabs from tho brace buckles. Tho pack will then
drop oH, tho supporting straps remaining attached to it.
To put the Pack on again.
(15) Secure the suspension tabs to tho braco buckles, cast off the upper
ends of tho supporting straps, secure the lower ends as before,
and ro-sccuro the upper ends to the suspension tabs, pulling
them taut.
Of the operations numbered 12 to 16, number 14 is the only
cue which, after a little practice, can be carried out by tho soldier
unaided so long ns tho equipment is in position. Having regard
however, to tho speed and facility with which the whole equip-
ment can bo taken off and put on again the simplest way of
performing any one of these four operations is to take tho equip-
ment off, carry out what is required; aud put it on again.


To Cabby tub Haversack and Watebbottle on tub Back.
(16) Lay the equipment on the ground and remove the pack, water-
bottle carrier, and haversack. Secure the cartridge carrier end
pieces to the small buckles at the lower comers of the haversack.
Draw the sliding buckles down the braces until they come into
a convenient position opposite the fixed ends of the tabs with
brass tips at the top of the haversack. Secure these tabs to the
sliding buckles. The weight of the haversack should nob be
taken by these tabs, but by the lower corner buckles above
mentioned. Lay the waterbottle carrier on the front of the
haversack. If the waterbottle carrier is provided with the snap
fastener and the haversack with the corresponding stud, snap
the fastener on the stud and secure the extension piece on the
carrier to the small buckle on the-top of the haversack, pulling
it well through.
If there be no snap fastener on the waterbottle carrier, a
horizontal loop is provided on the flap of the haversack. This
latter arrangement is provided in the latest makes of carrier and
haversack (see paragraph (A), page 6). Withdraw the extension
piece of the carrier from the loop in the web piece running round
the upper portion of the waterbottle, pass it through the loop
on the flap of the haversack, then through the carrier loop, and
secure it to the buckle on the centre of the top of the haversack
as before.
To Cabby tub Watebbottle, Haversack, ob Intrenching Tool
Separate from the Best oi the Equipment.
(17) Separate one (or both if required) of the braces from the rest of
the equipment, and attach it (or them) by the ends to the article
(or articles) which it is desired to carry. The ordinary method
of slinging across the shoulder can then be resorted to. (Plate
VI.)
SECTION IV.—CARE AND PRESERVATION.
When the equipment has once been properlyrfitted to each man, it should
bo kept assembled as iar as possible, although the pack need not always
remain attached. It will be found convenient if, when a correct fit has
been obtained, a light mark is made to show where each adjustment should
always come. Thu saves troutis in case the equipment has to be taken
apart and re-assembled.
The webbing should not be washed or treated with any description of
dressing or preparation. Dust and mod (when dry) should be removed
with an ordinary clothes brush. The metal work should not be polished
but allowed to get dull, so as to avoid catching the rays of the sun.
SECTION V.—MARKING.
Ho web accoutrements are to be marked with J-in. copper inlaid stamps
and black marking paint, J-in. brass or gun-metal stamps being used tor
regimental terminals.
C. 13342. B


Table of
VVeuiuis.
(A) Personal clothing, as worn
by
(E) Articles carried in pack
:—
the soldier :—
lb.
OZ.
Greatcoat
lb. oz.
0 5
Helmet
1
OJ
Socks
0 4i
Jacket, with field dressing
2
Comforter cap
0 3J
Trousers
1
15
Mess tin and cover
i H
Jersey
1
H
Tooth brush ..
0 oi
Braces
0
4
Boot laces
0 0J
Shirt
1
1*
Housewife (fitted)
0 3
Woollen belt ..
0
Towel and soap
0 Hi
Socks
0
4i
Rarer and case
0 2J
Boots
8
14
Shaving brush..
0 1J
Puttees
0
12J
Comb
o oi
Clasp knife
0
7i
Pay book
0 2
Drawers
1
0
—
—
—
Total
9 9
Total
15
0
—
(B) Arms
Rifle, with sling _
8
(G) Rations and water ;—
Water (in bottle)
Emergency ration (9J oz.)
and portion of bread
ration (say 12 or.) car-
2 2*
Bayonet, scabbard, and
frog
1
*1
ried in haversack
Portion of meat ration
1 51
Toll’d ..
«>
(say 12 oz.) carried in
mess tin
0 12
Total
4 4
(C' Ammunition ;—
l.>0 rounds S.A..\.
9 m
Marching Equipment
—
—
(A) Personal clothing
15 0
(D) Intrenching tool and
carriage (say)
3
0
(B) Arms
(C) Ammunition ii5u
rounds) ..
9 8i
9 i:u
—
—
(D) Intrenching tool
3 0
(E) Accoutrements ; —
Waistboit
0
13
(E) Accoutrements
(F) Contents of pack
(G) Rations and waur
7 li
9 9
4 4
Two 75-round cartridge
carriers
1
7
Total
58 4i
Two braves
O
•)
fighting Egwipi:nnl.
Pack (with .-‘ipp. uting
strap)
1
s
Marching equipment
Deduct pack and contents..
i>8 4|
12 hi
Waterbottle (empty),
' with carrier
1
7*
45 142
Haversack T7 07.)
with tV.k -and
spoon \A nz,|
1
5
Add 120 rounds S.A.A. in
two emergency, bandoliers
7 14
'Total ..
Total weight of fighting
7
1*
equipment (270 rounds)..
63 12J
APPENDIX.


PLATE.I


PLATE II.
(b)) Intrenching tool helve is now carrie d in fr om of scabbar d, ?
Plate Vll.
(e) Braces are now m?de of same with throughou t.
(g) 1. Buckles showa at corucrs of haversacks are in near.
2.Stud in centre removed.
3.Web loop sewn on front of cover.
(h) See plate VIII. Showing [?]thod of fixing upright land in near of
carrier when water-bottle is carrier [?] the hip (Plate IV. Fig. 1)
(i) Patern modified, rich Plate VII.
All brass tips are now eyeleted


PLATE III.


PLA TE IV.—FiG. I


PLATE IV. — FiG. 2.


PLATE V.


Tlate VI.


PLATE VII.
(Showing Intrenching Implement and Carrier adopted 1st November, 1909; also
method of earrying Intrenching Implement Helve.)


Plate VIII.
{Showing method of securing centre upright hand at rear of Watcr-hottlo
Carrier when the water-bottle is carried on the hip.)
