

TH E
ASCANIAD
A
RAREWEIL
TO KHAKI
Souvenir




PREFACE.
Four months have elapsed since the arrival on Australian
soil of the subscribers to the Ascaniad, and the Souvenir is
only now seeing the light of day. While expressing deep
regret for the aforesaid delay, we cannot accept even an iota
of blame. Briefly, the circumstances are as follows :
Full and complete editorial responsibilities had been ac-
cepted by Mr. Kain, and to him was allotted the task of
publishing the Souvenir. No one could have reasonably
expected Mr. Kain to have entered upon his duties for at
least six weeks after arrival, because of his return home,
and the inviolable right to avail himself of the Nation’s
privileges and hospitality. Unfortunately, however, at the
expiration of eight weeks, Mr. Kain forwarded the manu-
script and photos in his possession to me, with a covering
note stating that time henceforth prevented him giving any
further attention to the matter. Instantly I telegraphed to
Mr. Burrell in Melbourne, explaining what had occurred.
A few days later Mr. Burrell arrived in Sydney, and with
his assistance the work of publication was expeditiously
set under way. To Mr. K. E. Webb, architect, of O’Connell
Street, Sydney, and Mr. F. Bird of Hartley Vale, we tender
our heartfelt thanks ; for the former’s gratuitous designing
of the Souvenir’s cover and the completion of the In
Memoriam page, and the latter’s presentation of cartoons,
works of Art which we feel assured will jointly commend
themselves to our readers. We would also offer our sincere
thanks to Mr. J. G. Moore, of Ghallis House, Sydney, for
the free use of his room and type-writing machine, and
his able revision of the proofs.
In view of the cost of publication and the limited funds
at our disposal, our aim, at the expense of the rejection of
many fine articles, has been purely to produce a Souvenir
rather than a booklet, and in this we sincerely trust that
we have not failed.
L.G.J.
November 10th, 1919.


EDITORIAL.
H.M.A.T. Ascanius.
THE greatest war in the history of mankind is over, and the
echo of the last barrage across No-man’s land lives to-day
with the wonderful men of the A.I.F. as but a mere memory.
For four and a half years many of the noblest sons of Aus-
tralia have gloriously yielded up their lives on the blood-
stained battlefields of Europe and Asia in the interests of
liberty and humanity. The legions of “ Kultur ” of the
Triple Alliance are to-day numbered amongst the van-
quished, but it has cost Australia approximatley 68,000
of the flower of her manhood and £360,000,000 in coin of
the realm to play her part. That she has played it well calls
for no comment here—rather would we prefer to rest upon
our laurels, leaving Great Britain and her Allies to breathe
whatever they will respecting the valour of our glorious
dead and the immortal deeds of the living. For the present,
our object, as a unit of the Australian Imperial Forces
returning to our beloved Homeland, is to forge the last link
in the great chain of battle-drama, per medium of this small
publication entitled “ The Ascaniad.” Farewell to Khaki !
Soon we shall see, across restless Pacific waves, sil-
houetted against an Austral sky, the fringe of the Continent
we love so well. Nor will the time be long when we shall
have embraced our dear ones, and are trying to settle down
to normal life in the civic arena. We cannot forget that we
are perhaps abnormal, and it is necessary to sit down and
think, before proceeding on life’s new journey. Your
Country, through the force of past experience, may feel it
incumbent upon her to greet her heroes with passivity and
coldness, but we feel confident that behind it all brave
hearts are beating, and deep down in those hearts the fire
of unquenchable love is burning.
To the men on H.M.A.T. Ascanius the Editorial Staff
offer their deepest thanks for their wonderful response to
our appeal for the necessary funds in order that a Souvenir
of the Voyage might be published. They alone know of
the insuperable difficulties that lay in our way. Not only


were our hands on the ship tied in many ways, but when the
atmosphere was sufficiently cleared for action, the brevity
of time prevented us availing ourselves of the excellent
talent down amongst the Diggers.
We now strive to produce something commensurate
with the situation, and if it serves as a word of advice, or a
link with the sacred past to the grand old Diggers, then
we are more than compensated for the slight trouble in-
volved. To Diggers in Khaki Thanks be to God ” —we
say Good-bye, though let us fervently hope that our spirit
of comradeship will live on through all the ages, and en-
shrined within our hearts shall ever be the memories of
those glorious men who paid the supreme sacrifice !
May you all, having done your duty to your Country,
in its darkest hour of need, enjoy lasting peace and prosperity
through the coming years of the future, is the sincere wish
of The Editor and his Staff.
LYNDON G. JAMISON.


1. — Signwriting Class. 2.—Saddlery and Harness Class. 3.—Education, Instructional Staff.
4.—Diggers’ Parliament. 5.—Building Construction Class.


THE VOYAGE
The morning of the 23rd September, 1919, saw Quota
70 entraining at Warminster en route for H.M.A.T.
Ascanius, lying berthed at Devonport. Embarkation was
accomplished expeditiously, the anchor weighed at 6 a.m.
on 24th September, and the voyage to Australia commenced.
With the last glimpse of Eddystone Lighthouse came the
prospect of the long trail down South. Fortunately the
weather held good. In a very short time affairs had settled
down and activities necessary to the welfare of those on
board made their presence felt.
During the nineteen days of travel between England and
Capetown, concerts, sports, whist-drives and Diggers’
parliaments added zest to life, reducing boredom to a negli-
gible quantity. Many interesting incidents occurred ; sports
provided some exciting moments, also amusing scenes.
But, as usual, with the absence of tin-fish and their accus-
tomed cargoes, monotony from time to time made itself
felt. At one juncture the placid life on board was disturbed
by a rumour to the effect that a runaway mine was drifting
in the track of our vessel, but a wide detour avoided trouble.
“ This news was strictly official,” hence what the eye does
not see the heart does not grieve for.
Prior to reaching Capetown, a Sports and Farewell
Concert was tendered to the A.I.F. Cricket Team. Perhaps
this affair had something to do with their splendid success
in the country of the Springbok !
The vessel moved under easy steam into the charjning
harbour of Capetown about 8 o’clock on the morning of
October 13th,
Across rippling waves of green, murmurings of native life
blended weirdly with the screams and twitterings of happy
sea-gulls, soaring high in the sunlit air. Table Mountain
lay across the Bay, picturesquely silhouetted against an
azure sky, and, at its base, nestling beneath a canopy of
soft blue smoke, was the chief city of South Africa. A few
dreamy mists were rising from valleys beyond, and a burst
of sunlight revealed most clearly, high on the ledge of the


range that wonderful monument of the Empire-builder
Rhodes.
Capetown is a fine city, remarkable from a spectacular
standpoint because of the number of fine new buildings it
contains, the blend of human types and the contrast between
Eastern and Western ideas. Short leave was granted the
troops. Those who would, availed themselves of the oppor-
tunity of seeing various places of interest. Our stay at
Capetown was brief; however, as it was known that coaling
had to take place at Durban many were the visions of
pleasant things to do in that city. On the morning of the
16th October we hove to outside Durban. Shortly after the
arrival of the pilot the ship was proceeding on its way into
the harbour.
A joyous welcome confirmed the anticipations of those
on board. With the granting of leave was a determined
rush and in the twinkling of an eye a broad khaki stream
overflowed the sides of the ship, drifting into far distant
quarters of the town. Rickshaw men quickly conveyed
passengers to places of interest. An entertaining way of
travel, and to the unwary an expensive amusement. Notice-
able features of this town are its public buildings.
Everyone lived in the expectation of remaining until the
19th —Sunday, but the adamant ruling of the authorities
soon dispelled any hopes of lingering in the languorous
Elysium of the South, with its seductive purple twilights.
On the 18th hurried farewells were the order of the day and
many were the regrets breathed o’er the taffrail to the stony-
hearted wharf below. Oranges and bananas, flung up by the
tireless energetic arm of Miss Campbell, were an evidence
of the large-hearted hospitality of the residents and proved
in some measure a compensation.
Soon mooring ropes falling with a splash, and the
ever-increasing distance twixt ship and land, made one
realise the departure. From the breakwater, Miss
Campbell semaphored the message of farewell and good
luck. As the ship slowly glided out to sea numerous
cameras focussed the beloved Aussie Heroine, and the
shadow of a brooding storm hung like a funeral pall over
the fair city of Durban.
Hitherto the weather had been splendid, but on sinking
from higher to lower latitudes a change came o’er the scene.


For three days shrieking seas flew over bows ; spray per-
meated everywhere ; meals were left untasted ; even
work and amusement ceased under the compelling touch
of mal-de-mer. On reaching lat. 40 conditions changed to
normal.
With the coming of calmer weather, the Pierrot troupe,
which hitherto, owing to lack of adequate attention and
preparation on the part of those in authority at Headquarters,
had not been able to secure the necessary equipment, came
into action. They immediately obtained appreciative and
interested audiences. Thanks to their efforts and to the
voluntary work of instructors in the Education Service, the
tedium of the long dreary stretch of Indian water was
materially lessened, and to these embryo Gamaliels we owe
a great debt of gratitude.
At such periods as these the mind and body wearied by
unusual conditions is liable to depression and sickness,
yet the record of the Ascanius in this connection is exceed-
ingly bright and favourable. She carried an adequate
number of Aussie Sisters designated in the A.I.F. because
of the Diggers’ admiration for them —“ ministering angels,”
but happily to say, their services were merely slightly
availed of.
When a few days off the coast of the Continent, a sad
event occurred, A young soldier who had been taken on
at Capetown, where owing to severe illness he had disem-
barked several months before our arrival, succumbed.
This tragic event cast unusual gloom over the ship’s com-
pany. No spectator of a burial at sea can help being
impressed with the solemnity of the scene. Hundreds of
khaki comrades wearing saddened expressions were called
to attention by the shrill sound of the bugle, whilst over the
silence, hushed by the stilling of the great swirling propel-
lers, came in clear tones the words, “ We therefore commit
this body to the deep, etc.” At this moment a comrade tend-
erly removed the Union Jack, and all that was mortal of
the deceased hero passed with a softened splash to the depth
of the Indian Ocean ; piercing shots rang out over the foam-
ing grave, and as the great liner glided gracefully through
the elements, everyone was deeply conscious that the last
sad rites had been paid.
Land was sighted on the 3rd November. Grim, forbid-
ding cliffs revealed themselves—one marvelled where


landings could be made —the gaunt gums stood nakedly
silhouetted on the hills. Our “ ain country.” The sight
awakened memories of the past. Threads of a life lived
among old world associations felt thinner and thinner as
the aspirations and hopes for the new life came crowding
in on the mind. Regrets intermingled strangely with
desires to recommence a work a few years before laid down.
The passage through the Rip took place on the sth
November, and the anchor crashed to its moorings off
Williamstown.
Next morning the ship proceeded up river to the wharf
and discharged part of its freight.
Little more remains to be told. Two days later the
remaining troops continued their journey to Sydney.
There on entering port the Ascanius found herself in a tumult
of sounds —hooting whistles of passing ferries filled the air,
smaller craft with more leisure came to pay respects, and
amidst an exchange of salutations the ship was berthed.
It was ended. The time had arrived to write FINIS !
VALETE.
J. B. BURRELL.


THE TERRIBLE TURK.


HOUSE
By R. H.
When the sea is calm and the weather’s fine,
Whether “ threepennyfull ” or “ single line,”
This is the game where the Diggers shine—
Better than stoushing Fritz.
For the ship is ‘‘ dry ” and the officers curse
The state of things in language terse,
So under the “ circs.” they might do worse
Than invest a few ” tray bits.”
And now the “ spruiker ” who runs the show
He issues the cards and collects the “ dough ”
Cries “ Who’ll have another before we go ? ”
And “ Eyes down ” “ Single line ”
So the “ caller ” draws from his bag of tricks,
Placing the numbers like rows of bricks,
“ Legs eleven ” and “ Clickety clicks,”
And the famous “ number nine ! ”
And the players sit down upon the hatch,
And cover their cards with pieces of match.
And all intent the number to catch
They sit as still as a mouse.
Then up in the room where the officers smoke,
Or down in the depths where the firemen stoke,
You’ll hear the echo —this is no joke—
When someone calls out “ HOUSE ! ”
And when you think of the prize he’ll get,
A solace for moments of anxious “ sweat ”
And “ Kings REGS ” say it isn’t a bet
You need not excel at figures.
To see that a game where a humble “ brown ”
May win a prize of half-a-crown,
And a game on which “ the heads ” don’t frown
Is just the game for the Diggers !
I don’t think !


So when MONOTONY gets its grip
And you’re tired of the sea, the heat, and the ship,
Buy a “ tuppenny card ” and if you don’t “ slip,”
You’ll find that you’ve solved the riddle
Of passing the time in the quickest way,
Of keeping cool on the hottest day,
And when you get to Table Bay
You’ll feel as fit as a fiddle.
DON’T
If you are tempted to reveal
A tale someone has told
About another, make it pass
Before you speak, Three Gates of Gold,
Three narrow gates : First, “ Is it true ? ”
Then, “Is it needful ? ” In your mind
Give truthful answer ; and the next,
Is last and narrowest—“ Is it kind ? ”
And if to reach your lips at last
It passes through these gateways three ;
Then you may tell the tale, nor fear
What the result of speech may be !
S. S. HANSEN.


1.—Arrival at Devonport. 2 .—Sports on Board. 3. —An incident unique (sailors don’t care, &c.) at Melbourne. 4. —Lecture in Mid
Ocean by Major Officer. 5.—Aussie Sisters. 6.—Miss Campbell’s Farewell from Durban breakwater. 7.—A.I.F. Cricket Team.
8.—Table Bay. 9.—The Last Post. 10. —Anzac Lounge, Capetown, 11.—The Pierrot Troupe. 12.—Leaving Durban
13. —Arrival at Sydney.




ASCANIUS—EDUCATION
An Appreciation, by Lyndon G. Jamison.
The'system of Education devised by the A.I.F. at the
close of the World’s Great War may not have been the best
possible of being called into being, yet it is reasonably safe
to assume that much was done through its instrumentality
to preserve untainted, “ as an heritage to posterity,” the
immortal glory of our Army.
Deeply do I regret my inability to deal with its multi-
farious phases in this Souvenir, and to record the history
of the movement on H.M.A.T. Ascanius, because common
decency, on account of personal implication, precludes the
taking of such a course. Yet a wonderful work in the name
of Education was carried out on the Ascanius by a large and
proficient voluntary staff. The Staff in question included
26 men of various ranks and degrees, and though some
had hoped for equitable treatment for their services at the
hands of the authorities, to whom they appealed by petition
through the Officer of Education, a deaf ear was turned to
their entreaties —nothing further being heard of their
appeal. However, one can set on record with a perfectly
clear conscience the fact that the work of Education on the
transport could not have been successfully carried through
but for the zeal, patriotism, and magnificent spirit of the
aforesaid instructors. Not only are those officially respon-
sible for the Diggers’ mental training deeply grateful, but it
is within the knowledge of the writer and may be of some
consolation to the Staff to know that hundreds of Diggers
have expressed their heartfelt thanks for instruction
received.


WOOLLY GILL.


CECIL RHODES’ MEMORIAL AND
GROOTE SCHURR
By R. Hazlewood.
Capetown was bathed in soft sunlight, with streams
of mixed nationalities surging through its fine streets, as
a large number of Diggers, under the auspices of the
Y.M.G.A., left the Anzac Lounge by train on a visit to the
Monument of the Empire-Builder and his home. The
tram threaded its way through massive blocks of archi-
tecture to the confines of the city, passing through beautiful
groves and charming ravines to the place of alightment.
The energy spent in traversing the steep slope of Table
Mountain to the monumental site was amply repaid by the
view that met the onlookers’ gaze.
Away at the base of the range, Capetown was lying,
presenting a panorama that escaped perfection only because
a few ocean-going liners were pouring their inky fumes
into the clear crisp air, and across the silvery bay in the
far distance, wonderful African mountains were faintly
silhouetted against a leaden sky.
The memorial takes the form of massive granite steps
flanked at each side with exquisite figures rising in tiers,
the whole being surmounted by a canopy resting on hand-
some circular granite columns. Beneath this striking
and substantial canopy reposes a very fine bronze figure,
depicting Rhodes leaning on a table, whilst emblazoned
on the wall behind are the words :
“ To the spirit and life-work of Cecil John Rhodes,
who loved and served South Africa.’’
At the foot of the steps is a wonderful statue by G. F.
Watts, entitled “ Physical Energy,” a replica of the one in
Hyde Park, London. In that statue and inscription, prob-
ably, is to be found the best epitome of a life remarkable in
itself and famous as that of one of our greatest Empire
builders. The cost of the colossal memorial is said to
have been about £BO,OOO, and it is probably the most inter-


RHODES’ MEMORIAL.


esting of Capetown sights. Especially should it be enshrined
the hearts of Colonials, for it is due to the munificence of
the deceased South African statesman that the Rhodes
Scholarships were founded.
Leaving the memorial, with the mighty cliffs of Table
Mountain and Lion’s Head frowning down upon it from the
rear, the party proceeded to the Zoo on the Rhodes estate.
A fine little Zoo it is, displaying quite a variety of the wild
birds and animal life of the great dark Continent. Large
eucalyptus trees were to be seen here and there, whilst a
welcome Aussie touch was given the scene by the presence
of emus and kangaroos. Later on, Groote Schuur, the last
residence of Rhodes, was visited. The name means “ Great
Barn,” and fills the conception in the Dutch mind of a
palatial structure. The Groote Schuur estate was be-
queathed to the Union of South Africa as a residence for the
Prime Minister, though at the time of the party’s visit,
owing to the lamented decease of its beloved statesman and
trusted leader, General Botha, it was untenanted. Quite a
lot of antique furniture adorns the interior, which stands
out in marked contrast with the plainness and simplicity
of the exterior. It had been purchased by Rhodes from
some of the oldest Dutch families. The bedroom of the
great Imperialist is preserved exactly as he left it, and by
noting the simplicity of his furnishing and lack of elabora-
tion, one gets an insight into the true character of the man.
It might even be said in the final analysis, that it takes a
great man to be simple in the true meaning of that much
abused word. From the bed-chamber the view is strik-
ingly beautiful. The foreground is filled with gardens
resplendent with the maze of gloriously tinted blooms,
and enthralling because of the wealth of tropical foliage
scintillating in a perfumed breeze. Away in the distance
are great grey cliffs, which make a wonderfully strong and
effective setting. Time forbade a longer stay, and space in
this Souvenir precludes further mention of the place so rich
in beauty and association with the great man of South
Africa.


LECTURER JAMISON.


CAPTAIN W. G. LYCETT
We reproduce with pleasure and pride a photo of our
Skipper-, Captain Lycett, familiarly known as the “ Grand
Old Man of the Ascanius.” The glorious traditions of the
Mercantile Marine were preserved with dignity by his
every action, and his stout heart—so typical of the men
who stood between England and starvation during the
dark days of the submarine campaign—was brimming
with sympathy towards the men who had fought for their
country. It was always a pleasure to the Captain to do
anything within his power to ameliorate the conditions of
those on board, and there is little doubt but that he takes
with him their united goodwill and esteem.
L. G. Jamison.




FIGHTING DAYS ARE OVER
Now your fighting days are over, and your laurels you have
won,
There’s many a friend will grip your hand and say to you
“ well done ! ”
You’ll be proud to feel you’ve done your bit, and given a
helping hand.
But you’ll think of those who lie beneath the soil of No-Man’s
Land.
You’ll tell your friends when you get home of the hist’ry
they have made,
For braver lads ne’er fought a fight than the Boys of your
Old Brigade.
Chorus—
Gallant lads we’re proud of you, we’re proud of what
you’ve done ;
You stuck it out when things looked blue, you’re heroes
ev’ry one.
Australia’s flag has been unfurl’d on a pinnacle of fame,
It’s honour’d right throughout the world, you fought
to make its name.
At Messines Ridge and the Somme, that’s where they made
their name,
Australia’s proud of the feats they’ve done, the world rings
out their fame.
Their country’s honour they’ve preserv’d, they fought to
keep her free,
To save her from the oppressor’s hands, and shape her
destiny.
Through shot and shell they fought their way, of death they
weren’t afraid,
They’ve done their part and nobly, too, those Boys of your
Old Brigade.


When at last you’re safe at home, amongst your kith and kin,
You’ll tell them of the hardships, and the battles you’ve
been in.
Your face will glow with pride tho’ your heart will sadden’d
be,
As you tell them of the comrades left behind across the sea.
How they fought and won and died, what great courage
they displayed,
For braver lads ne’er fought a fight than the boys of your
Old Brigade.
ROBERT W. MADDEN,
3rd Div. A.I.F.
PARNASSUS ON SEA
If you’re blest with a craving for knowledge
Of a fresh and superior kind—
Not the tripe they teach you at College,
But original food for the mind—
If you wish to sell mutton or matches,
If you burn to grow turnips or tea,
We can teach you these subjects in batches
If you come to Parnassus on Sea.
As we patiently ploughed the Atlantic
We willingly wallowed in wool ;
It drove the young porpoises frantic
To meet a competitive school.
In history, languages, science,
Our standard’s exceedingly high,
And our Skipper, in noble defiance,
Reads John Stuart Mill on the sly.
Our motto, “ Cum Marto Minerva,”
Has a ring that is certain to please ;
If you’re keen, we will teach you with fervour
To cultivate babies or bees.
We’ll return you to Aussie as sound as a bell—-
So take the suggestion from me—
For a life that is brainy and briny as well,
Just come to Parnassus on Sea !
R. O. RAPHAEL.


Publishers’ Notice.
Further Copies of THE ASCANIAD
may be obtained for 2/' by applying to
L G. JAMISON,
Langroyd,
Chats wood.
Blocks in the Souvenir engraved by Bacon & Go.
/p SIMMONS LTD
SYDNEY rx
