



"WOOL CLIP
o
o
CD
O §
§
« §•
_r (N
Ctf T—
■s. «
d
o o-
■§ 12
_Q ctJ
z: o_
o
(/)
_Q
Z 3
CO
AGAINST ALL RISKS
WITH THE
cz
=5 30
£2_ CD
- CO
<. CD
Q- 5
g.
"O c 1
i. o-
ft
tb
o
-<? o
£ s
GO ■
SAVE MONEY.
Insurances effected upon Wool from the TIME OF SHEARING until sold
in SYDNEY, or safely warehoused in LONDON, at LOW RATES.
Claims paid in Sydney or London at option of the Assured. Printed
forms and all information may be obtained at the Company’s Branch,
75 Pitt Street, Sydney.
LESLIE R. MITCHELL,
Resident Manager,


OZEN MEAT INDUSTRY
• F FACTS AND
A COMPENDIUM
FIGURES RELATING
TO THE FROZEN MEAT
REVIEW,”
BLISHED FOR THE “AUSTRALASIAN PASTORALISTS’
SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE.


HIP
The sale of Quibell’s Sheep Dip in Australasia, in 1890, exceeded
byTfour times the sale of 1889; the sale in the year 1891, exceeded the
former year by no less than upwards of eight times. It is estimated
from the immense number of new orders, that this season will far exceed
the previous enormous increase, which is without parallel in the history
of Sheep Dips.
the previous enormous increase, which is without parallel in the history
of Sheep Dips.
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
QUIBBLE’S WORKS, NEWARK.
liiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHuiiiiHilniiii
QUIBELL BROS, are by far the oldest firm in the Sheep-Dipping
Trade. The Australian sheepowners are realizing the fact, that
Quibell’s Powder Sheep Dip
is not only the best and far the cheapest, but is simplicity itself. It
dissolves itself in cold water —soft, hard, or brackish ; it can be mixed
and used without trouble by any station hand, and is so lasting in effect,
that sheep remain clean till next shearing.
This Dip is used by the most expert sheep breeders in Tasmania,
and their wool has realized the highest price. There is no case on record
of sheep being killed, or wool injured, by Quibell’s Sheep Dip.
In cases, to make 1,250 Gallons of Wash,
Full particulars sent free on application to
QUIBELL’S OFFICE FOR NEW SOUTH WALES:
41 ELIZABETH STREET, SYDNEY.


THE FROZEN MEAT INDUSTRY.
INTRODUCTORY.
THIS Pamphlet is published with a twofold purpose. First, it is
desired to place in the hands of the public, in a handy form, a
reprint of a series of articles on the Frozen Meat Industry which have
appeared, from time to time, during the past few months in the
columns of the Pastoralists Review. These articles, we may hope, have
contributed towards the recent revival of interest throughout Australia in
the question of how most effectually to deal with the surplus stock problem,
and although many statements in them which were new at the time of their
original publication, have since been republished with or without
acknowledgment, we believe that it is nevertheless worth while to give
them a more extended publicity. Secondly, it is intended to provide
those interested with a brief record of what has already been accom-
plished throughout Australasia in the development of the trade in frozen
meat; placing before the pastoralists and agents, as well as the general
public of Australia, the present magnitude of this branch of colonial
commerce, and its vast future possibilities.
Australasia, with a population a little less than four millions,
representing not one-fourhundredth of the inhabitants of the world,
possesses more than one-fifth of the world's sheep. Wonderful this is,
when it is remembered that 100 years ago the sheep in Australasia
numbered less than 100, and that in 1830 there were but 180,000.
As unquestionably our power of production is vastly in
excess of our channels of outlet, it becomes a bounden duty to weigh
every means by which these outlets may be expanded. Ihe old world,
with its congested population, is the natural market of the young world
with its vast productive capabilities arising from its immense unpeopled
areas, and its climatic advantages from a breeder’s point of view. That
this is so is strikingly illustrated by the statistics of the Australasian
Frozen Meat Trade, even for the comparatively brief period during
which it has already been existent. These statistics are of special interest
at this juncture when the one complaint is so general all over the interior,
the complaint of overstocking through lack of outlet for the natural
increase of our flocks and herds.
mssJ/~
X6S~rr


1886
66,960
655,888
30,000
434,699
1,187,547
1887
88,811
766,417
45,552
641,866
1,542,646
1888
112,214
939,231
—
924,003
1,975,488
1889
86,547
1,068,286
—
1,009,936
2,164,769
1890
207,984
1,533,393
10,168
1,196,531
2,948,076
1891
334,693
1,896,706
18,897
1,074,525
3,323,821
The beginning of the importation into Great Britain of mutton
in a frozen state was in 1880, when 400 carcases of Australian sheep
were so imported. Despite the cold, even hostile demeanour of
the British consumer, these figures grew in the following year to
17,275. In 1882 Australia exported to Great Britain 57,256 carcases,
and the year following, 63,733. In 1882 New Zealand took a hand in
the trade, and so true have the energetic people of that country been to
their own best interests that even as early as their second year (1883) r
New Zealand took the lead and has ever since held it strongly. In
1882, 8,839 were the figures for the eastern colony, but next year
they rose to 120,893, nearly double the number sent by the whole of
Australia. The following table eloquently sets forth the rapid advance of
the trade, and should afford encouragement to the most timorous and
doubting. The table shows the number of carcases of mutton imported
into Great Britain during the past eight years from all sources :
Year. Australia. New Zealand. Falkl'd Is. Argentine. Total.
1884 111,745 412,349
1885 95,051 492,269
108,823 632,917
190,571 777,891
In the beef trade Australia and New Zealand have a very powerful
competitor in America, whose vast herds, better means of transit ashore,
and easy communication by sea with the great centres of population in
Europe, naturally give her a tremendous advantage. Still in that direc-
tion also we have made good progress, and may safely look forward to
a rapid increase if the trade is taken in hand in a business-like way, and
the necessary capital judiciously applied to its development. The exports
in quarters and pieces of beef for the last nine years are as follow:
Year. Australia. New Zealand. Total.
1883 753 728 1,481
1884 2,389 1,725 4,114
1885 6,040 11,916 17,956
6,040 11,916 17,956
1886 5,796 16,264 22,060
1887 17 6,973 6,990
17 6,973 6,990
1888 1,334 25,888 27,222
1889 14,536 42,942 57,478
1890 14,496 54,823 69,319
1891 28,968 70,226 99,194
In this trade the graziers of the United States of America, with their
chilled meat, have a great advantage over the Australasian pastoralist,
who must freeze his beef, but that our export can be greatly enlarged
is shown by the rapid progress in this branch of trade, and with
no perceptible advantages over us, made by New Zealand. To show
what a market there exists in Europe for foreign beef, it is only


necessary to state that America, in 1887-8, exported 90,816,426 lbs., and
in the year 1888-9 the figures were 149,793,485 lbs., or an increase of
some 59 million pounds in one year ! an increase of 65 per cent.! That,
too, is in a trade which was not in existence ten years previously. With
such indubitable facts to guide us, is it any wonder if we say that the
possibilities of the Australasian meat trade with the European markets are
practically unlimited.
To revert, however, to what, after all, will probably be the
principal factor of our frozen meat trade, namely, mutton. It is worthy
of note, as affording proof of what energy and the proper application of
capital can do for this trade, that while Australia with her huge total of
100,000,000 sheep, last year exported only 834,693 carcases, New
Zealand, out of her total of 14,000,000, exported within a fraction of
two million carcases, or one-seventh of her available flocks. Australia
has an area, roughly speaking, of 3,000,000 square miles, whereas New
Zealand has only 104,235 square miles, of which much is mountainous
or otherwise unfit for pastoral use. No argument other than our com-
parative prosperity and consequent lack of energy can be advanced in
palliation of the tremendous disparity between the frozen meat export
ot Australia and New Zealand. What stimulated the activity of New
Zealand was the recognition of the fact that if she could not find a
fresh outlet for her production, her pastoralists would shortly be brought
face to face with disaster. Out of her necessities grew her success.
But now Australia, in some respects, has even greater need of a free
and regular drain upon her flocks, for the reason that they are oftener
imperilled by drought and flood than are those of the sister country, and
that their food supply is more precarious. Yet, hitherto, Australians
have given nothing like the amount of attention to this question which
its paramount importance demands. Truly, it is time the subject was
dealt with from the stand-point of public weal—for successful private
enterprise must benefit the public at large.
Under existing circumstances, a very large majority of Australian
pastoralists and graziers are handicapped to a serious extent by that
bugbear of country producers, the distance from their market. It is
only in good seasons that their flocks and herds can be brought to market
in anything like satisfactory condition, and it is seldom accomplished
without considerable loss in life and weight. Now if, instead of having to
travel their fat stock, say, 400 or 500 miles to, say, Sydney, the pastoralists
of the various large interior sections of country could avail themselves of
a central market in their own neighbourhood, or a series of such markets,
they would gain in every way. There would be no loss of weight, nor by
death, such as long journeys entail. The droving expenses would be
reduced to a minimum. The meat would not be impoverished and
fevered, so as to be unwholesome for the consumer. The waste products
would be utilised to enrich the ground from which they were drawn.
Time, a very valuable commodity where live stock is in question, would
be saved. Last, but perhaps not least, there would be none of that
anxiety and worry appertaining to the owner of a travelling mob of sheep


or cattle, for the iourney to the nearest chilling or freezing works would
be accompanied by little or no risk.
But the squatter and the pastoralist must not sit down and wait for
the merchant and the agent to bring the much needed relief. It behoves
every breeder of cattle or sheep in Australia to bestir himself in the
matter. At the present time, brave efforts are being made to establish
Chilling and Freezing works in all the grazing centres, and these efforts
must be seconded warmly by those most interested, those who will
benefit most by their success. It will not suffice for the pastoralist of any
given district to stand aloof and wait to see if the scheme of a chilling
establishment at his very doors is going to pay its promoters before he
embarks in it. Let the producers share in the expense of establishing
Chilling and Freezing works, the former at suitable inland centres, and
the latter at, or near, every coastal town which gives deep-sea shipping
accommodation, and there can be no doubt but that they will soon share,,
indirectly, if not directly, in the benefits which will ensue.
We cannot do better than close these introductory remarks by quoting
from a report issued in July last by Mr. Alexander Bruce, Chief Inspector
of Stock, N.S.W. Mr. Bruce says : —“ There is no doubt it is to freezing
the surplus of our prime fat sheep for export that we should look for
permanent relief, for not only does it cost less to send mutton home
frozen, but it is in that state that it is most acceptable to the consumer in
England, while it pays better to send it home frozen than tinned, and we
have seen that it pays better to tin than to boil down. This will be seen
from the following statements of the results of freezing and shipping a
fifty-two-pound and forty-seven-pound prime wether, and comparing the
returns under that process with those obtained by tinning and boiling
down :
“ Expenses on a fifty-two-pound three-year-old wether frozen and
shipped to London (taking the charges as now payable in New Zealand)
and net returns.—Receiving, killing and dressing, chilling, freezing and
weighing, '37; labelling and delivering alongside the ship, bagging and
export dues, - 08; freight, LOO; primage, 'O5; insurance against all risks,.
TO; conveyance to store, receiving, storage, delivery and commission on
sale, -28—L38, or (say) 2d. per lb., Bs. Bd. Sale of mutton, 52 lbs. at
3J per lb., 14s. Id.; skin (average during the year), Is. 9d.; tallow, etc..
Is. 8d —l7s. 6d.; net Bs. lOd. Net returns on a 47 lb. fat wether, —taking
the expenses and prices obtained at the same rates as in the case of the
52 lb. sheep, the return would be 7s. 7d.
“ Boiling, Tinning and Freezing contrasted. —Wether, 52 lbs.:
Boiled, net return, ss. o|d.; tinned, 7s. B^d.; frozen, Bs. lOd, This
shows that a 52 lb. prime fat wether will, under the tinning process,give a
better return than under the boiling by 2s. Bd., and that freezing gives a
better return than the tinning by Is. and by 3s. than the boiling.
Weight, 47 lbs.: Boiled, net return, 4s. 6Jd.; tinned, 6s. Bd.; frozen,
7s. 7d. This again shows that a 47 lb. prime fat wether will when tinned
give a better return than boiling by 2s. Ifd., and when frozen a better
return than tinning by lid., and by 3s. Ofd. than boiling.”


THE FROZEN MEAT INDUSTRY.
(Reprinted from the Australasian Pastoralists’ Review, April, 15, 1891.)
Ten years ago a vague hope began to occupy the minds of Australian
stock producers that carcases of sheep and cattle would find their way in
a frozen state to the larders of the wage-earners of the old world.
To-day the neighbouring colony of New Zealand is exporting over
millions of fat sheep annually, equal to about 10 per cent, of its total
sheep tally, in addition to many thousand head of cattle. It is a matter
for great regret that Australia plays such a bad second to New Zealand
in this trade, as demonstrated by the following comparison of figures :
Australia exported in 1882, 57,256, and in 1890, 210,831 carcases of
mutton ; New Zealand exported in 1882, 8,839, and in 1890, 1,562,647
carcases of mutton.
Believing, as we do, that Australia, with its 85 millions of sheep
and its 8 or 9 millions of cattle, should be catering for the meat supply
of the masses of Great Britain and the Continent of Europe, to an extent
that pastoralists little dream of to-day, it is our intention to devote
special and continued attention to the frozen meat trade. It is a
marvellous comment on the capabilities of the country that Queensland,
within a couple of years of a great drought, is already feeling the need
of an export outlet for its surplus fat stock. The works at Rockhampton
are in full swing; while the new Queensland Meat Export Company is
just about to erect a large freezing factory at Townsville, followed by a
second at Brisbane. An English company is also establishing freezing
works at Aberdeen, in the Hunter River district of New South Wales, on
the Northern Trunk Railway; and various schemes for chilling country-
killed meat are projected at Narrandera and Gunnedah in the same
colony. A syndicate of speculators has been buying sheep during the
last eighteen months at Homebush, the Sydney auction depot for stock,
freezing and shipping them to England ; with the result, it is claimed,
“ of enhancing values of prime fat wethers by fully Is. per head, and of
facilitating the disposal of stores at improved prices.”
It is not unusual to hear growers expressing belief that a continuous
export from Australia on a large scale could not be maintained. Give
the squatter and farmer a certain outlet for his fat stock, and it will be
speedily demonstrated that, side by side with a large and ever-increasing
export, the total sheep and cattle stock of the various colonies will be
substantially augmented. When irrigation is systematically adopted the
capabilities of the land to produce and fatten stock will be enormously
expanded. One of the great features of the New Zealand frozen mutton
trade is the success that has attended the efforts of growers in bringing
sheep to early maturity, without sensibly diminishing their weights. The
advantage of clearing the pastures rapidly, and thus making them


available for successive lots, cannot be over-estimated. A large pro-
portion of the sheep exported from New Zealand were two and four-tooth
wethers and maiden ewes, while nearly 300,000 lambs were included in
the 1890 shipments. At the present time New Zealand farmers are
being paid from 10s. to 14s. each for prime fat lambs, dropped within
the last six months —rates, it is needless to say, that are highly
remunerative.
Australia should make a great, united and prompt effort to secure
a share of this enormous trade. Its policy should be to do a large trade
at small profits, rather than a small trade with large profits, as the lowest
possible scale of charges will thus be obtained, and the area of
consumption widened. Shipping companies cannot be expected to
equip large steamers with freezing machinery and insulated holds until
the producer erects shore works and guarantees to supply the sheep or
cattle. It is gratifying to note the steady decrease in the charges, which,
in our opinion, can be reduced until l£d. to Ifd. per lb. will cover
every item of cost from the day the live animal is delivered at the
colonial freezing works until the carcase is hung up in the retail
butcher’s shop in England, ready for cutting up. The consolidated rate
of 2£d. per lb. now charged by the Lakes Creek Company, Rockhamp-
ton, is much too high, and in our opinion is an economic blunder.
With a large business a line of cargo steamers of moderate speed and
large capacity can profitably carry frozen meat to England, and insure
it against all risks, at from fd. to Id. per lb., while the day is
approaching when the entire cost of slaughtering, freezing, and placing
on board ship in the colonies, and of storing and selling in the United
Kingdom, will be brought within -|d. per lb. As we write news comes
rom New Zealand that as the outcome of a conference of freezing
companies now sitting in Wellington, freight rates from that colony will
be reduced id. per lb.; while a few weeks ago Messrs. Weddell and Co.,
of London, the well known agents, reported by cable that the dock
companies had reduced their storage charges for meat from -fd.
to id. per lb. It will not be prudent for breeders and graziers to
reckon on a higher permanent minimum than, say 3d. per lb. in
London; indeed, experience has taught us that when frozen meat gets
much over 4d. per lb. the consumption suddenly and rapidly decreases.
At this minimum price of 3d. per lb., when the trade assumes large
proportions, and when, consequently, the charges are lowered, the
grower may confidently count upon a net return of at least Ifd. per lb.
at the colonial depot, in addition to the value of the skin and offal —say
altogether 10s. per head. Under normal conditions another id. to Id.
per lb. would not infrequently be secured. It is an absolute certainty
that scientific skill will sooner or later perfect still more economical and
effective, as well as simpler, systems of freezing than those provided by
the Haslam, Lightfoot, or Hall dry-air machines; indeed, the new
freezing works in course of construction at Ngahauranga, New Zealand,
will be provided with an ammonia refrigerator supplied by the Linde
British Refrigerating Company.


Pastoralists must not shut their eyes to the fact that the original
risks of the trade have almost, if not altogether, disappeared. The taste
for meat is increasing in the old world, mainly owing to its cheapness;
while the working classes now demand a more luxurious style of living.
A gross value in London of per lb. to-day means a net return to the
producer fully equal to that obtained seven or eight years ago on a gross
value of to sd. per lb.
In subsequent articles we propose to discuss the numerous and
important incidental advantages of such an industry; the necessity of
choosing suitable centres for the works ; the questions of insurance,
freight, and sale in the United Kingdom; and also the most suitable
classes of sheep for the British palate. Meanwhile, sheep-farmers
should not neglect their obvious duty as well as that interest which
centres in their breeches pockets, but should force the running by
erecting works that will manipulate large quantities of stock, thus rapidly
creating an export of , fresh meat in a frozen state, second only to that of
wool in volume and importance.
CAN A MARKET BE FOUND FOR OUR SURPLUS
MERINO MUTTON?
(Reprinted from the Australasian Pastoralists’ Review, December 15, 1891.)
In the discussion which is going on with respect to the alleged over-
production of sheep in Australia, and more especially in New South
Wales, this question is being constantly asked, and it is receiving
various, and sometimes contradictory, answers. As the problem is one
of growing importance, and calls for a prompt and practical solution, it
is highly desirable that the matter should as speedily as possible be
thrashed out, and a definite line of action decided upon. By general
consent the grower’s chief hope lies in the direction of refrigeration, but
he is confronted with the very practical question—Can refrigeration be
carried out on remunerative lines ? On the one hand he is assured
with the utmost confidence that the trade can be made to pay
handsomely, and the experience of New Zealand is pointed to in proof
of this contention, whilst by other advisers, assuming an equal tone of
authority, he is told that the present prices for frozen mutton in the old
world are such as to render it absolutely impossible for the business to
be self-supporting. The truth will, we think, be found to lie between
these extremes. Those who cite the case of New Zealand as on all
fours with that of Australia, apparently forget the natural advantages
enjoyed by our neighbours in the proximity of their sheep to the
sea-board, in the possession by them of more succulent pastures,
and in the circumstance that crossbred sheep are more suitable for


refrigeration, and realise higher prices than merinos. There is not
only much to learn from the New Zealand trade, but there is also great
encouragement to be derived from its wonderful development and
undoubted success. It will, however, only lead to disappointment if it
is taken for granted that a similar measure of success will be likely to
attend the frozen mutton trade in Australia if carried out on a large
scale. But it is by no means satisfactorily shown that the export of
merino mutton from Australia mav not be in itself fairly remunerative,
whilst it is simultaneously conferring benefits upon the general
community, which, though they may be indirect, are none the less real
and valuable.
At the outset it may be well to assure growers that it will be useless
for them to expect to obtain for merino carcases after refrigeration the
same price as that which is secured for the best New Zealand crossbred.
Many sheep-breeders are difficult to convince on this point, and whilst we
do not propose here to argue the question on its merits, growers may
make up their minds that unless they accept this as one of the data upon
which they have to work, they are certainly doomed to disappointment.
The difference in value in England may be taken as about Id. per lb.
Moreover, it must likewise be granted that, at any rate at present, the
area of consumption is smaller for merino than for crossbred frozen
mutton. This, however, is a condition which may be modified, and
may ultimately disappear. Though we in Australia may choose to
pity the taste of the consumer who prefers the frozen crossbred to the
frozen merino, it is none the less true that the British consumer of
frozen meat who is able to pay the best price, usually selects the cross-
bred, whilst the merino is taken by the man who buys it mainly because
it is cheap. This is especially true of the London trade, but it is not
quite so marked in some parts of the country districts. In other parts
of the provinces it is, however, even more noticeable than in London.
The prevailing taste appears to be in a great measure affected (a) by the
character of the locally grown mutton, to which the population is-
accustomed, and ( b ) by the nature of the employment peculiar to
certain districts. Thus in Lincolnshire, where, however, the population
is small, heavy fat carcases are not objected to, simply because the
inhabitants all their lives have been used to mutton of that class. In
some of the larger manufacturing towns in the midlands and in the north
the nature of the work done by the operatives very markedly affects the
character of the prevailing demand. In the iron districts it is notorious
that a fatter carcase is taken than in industrial centres where the manual
work is less laborious and trying. It accordingly happens that crossbred
carcases, which are unduly fat and are unsuitable for the high-class
trade, are usually sent by consignees for disposal to such places as
Birmingham, Walsall, and some of the larger Yorkshire towns.
The best opening for merino carcases outside of London is on the
west and north-west coast of England, say in the cotton manufacturing
districts, where there are dense populations whose work is not of the
“heavy” class, or at such centres as Cardiff, where the proximity of the


native Welsh mutton accustoms the consumer to the small carcase.
Unfortunately, however, for the Australian producer, in the districts
where merino is most readily saleable, the River Plate mutton has got a
firm hold, and though somewhat inferior in quality, it proves a very
powerful competitor. The bulk of the River Plate supplies have lately
been diverted from London to Liverpool, the latter port proving to be on
the whole the best distributing centre for that class of mutton.
Australian mutton has thus far exclusively gone to London, and whilst
an occasional shipment might be made to the west coast, if suitable
freight arrangements could be effected, it is probably from the dense
masses of population living in the belt which immediately surrounds the
city of London that the chief demand must at present be looked for.
But, it is said, present prices cannot pay. To this it may be replied,
(1) that the period of the year, through which we have recently passed,
is that when prices for butchers’ meat in England are usually most
depressed, and (2) abnormal cheapness in the meat trade, as a rule,
very speedily cures itself by producing a rapid increase in consumption.
The East-ender who goes without butchers’ meat when it is dear, buys
it when it is cheap ; and the man in slightly better circumstances does
not, as a rule, spend less on meat when it is low in price than when it is
at a higher rate per lb., but simply procures a greater weight of meat
for the same money. Moreover, the cost of refrigeration and handling
have now been reduced within such moderate compass that the
producer can afford to take a low price without suffering actual loss,
whilst on the average, if he ships with regularity, the results for a
twelve-month might reasonably be expected to be satisfactory;
At the rates of freight which will c6me into force on Ist prox. the
total cost of handling New Zealand mutton from delivery at the freezing
works to ultimate sale is given at If d. per lb.; and there is no reason why
before very long the expenses on Australian mutton should not be
reduced to If d. per lb. This rate was quoted in our April number as a
thing of the near future; and though the forecast was at the time
looked upon in some quarters as too sanguine, we are now within
measurable distance of seeing it fulfilled. Were the expenses actually
reduced to that sum, as undoubtedly they shortly will be, even existing
quotations in London, which are looked upon as ruinously low, would
be remunerative. There must, of course, be some risk and responsibility
in the matter, but this the pastoralist should be prepared to take, having
regard to the enormous prospective advantages he is likely to enjoy
from refrigeration carried on upon an extensive scale. Whether this
should be done by means of a subsidy, or by sheepowners themselves
becoming shareholders in freezing companies, is now under discussion,
and no doubt a practical solution of the difficulty will shortly be found.
In the meantime, let the pastoralists of New South Wales use such
means as are placed within their reach. New freezing works, on an
extensive scale, have been erected at Aberdeen, on the Hunter River.
The promoters are mainly English capitalists conversant with the trade,
and they are apparently prepared to take the risks incident to the


business. They give owners three options—outright sale, partial sale,
with participations in the profits, or sale on consignment at owner’s risk.
The consolidated rate it is proposed to charge, in the case of consign-
ments at owner’s risk, may seem rather full (2-|d. per lb.), as the fat and
offal are to belong to the company, but it is possible that when they
have got fairly to work they may be able to reduce the charge. The
works are stated to be capable of dealing with 1,000 to 1,200 sheep
daily, and if they are utilised to their full capacity, some considerable
portion, at any rate, of the surplus stock would be got rid of, and the
local market would to that extent be benefited. Sheepowners must
not, however, be satisfied with the means of export already in existence,
for there is no reason why New South Wales should not export from
1,000,000 to 2,000,000 sheep per annum.
RETAIL PRICES OF FROZEN MUTTON.
(Reprinted from the Australasian Pastoralists’ Review, January 15, 1892.)
The wide margin which is generally supposed to exist between the
wholesale and retail prices of frozen meat is naturally a subject of great
interest to the grower, and it is one upon which it is desirable that a
correct judgment should be formed. If it be true, as it is so frequently
asserted, that the profits made by retailers are exorbitant, it is high time
that steps should be taken to correct the abuse in order that the exporter
may obtain a legitimate return for his shipments. This might be done
either by endeavouring, by means of combined effort, to raise wholesale
prices, or by shippers establishing on their own account retail depots at
the various centres of consumption. On the other hand, if it can be
shown that, speaking broadly, there is nothing abnormal in the difference
between wholesale and retail rates, the sooner the fact is recognised the
better, in order that the grower may arrive at the basis upon which his
calculations will have to be made, and that he may be prevented from
embarking in profitless or losing enterprises.
A letter which appeared in the daily press a short time ago stated
that “ the mutton sold wholesale at 2fd. per lb., is again sold at an
advance of from 100 to 200 per cent, upon that sum,” and the writer
went on to urge that there was no reason why the exporters should
not “ reap a portion of the profit thereby made.” With a view to
accomplishing this end, it was suggested that large retail shops in close
connection with a storage plant should be established in London and in
the principal manufacturing towns, and the mutton “ properly advertised
as ‘Australian’ in strong inverted commas.” The suggestion with respect
to the “ inverted commas ” is novel, but it is doubtful whether the plan
would prove efficacious. The statements relative to the alleged profit
made by the retailers, and the best means of obtaining a share of it, are
less novel, but they more or less reflect the views of many writers on the
subject, and they are worthy of much more serious consideration.


At the outset it may be as well to enquire what is a legitimate retail
profit on butchers’ meat. Percentages in this connection are a little
misleading, as when applied to any comparatively low-priced article they
are apt to convey an exaggerated notion of the differences in value set
forth. Thus an advance of id. per lb. on a parcel of fleece wool might
be described as an increment of, say 5 per cent., whereas a similar
advance on a parcel of locks might possibly be equal to, say 33 per cent.
The id. per lb. in the latter case is, of course, of more significance than
in the former, but when stated in the percentage form, an erroneous
impression is probably produced. A comparison of actual prices,
wholesale and retail, will in the present instance be most useful, and to
this we propose to adhere. Prime Scotch crossbred sheep realise the
highest price at Smithfield market, and the following particulars will
show the relation of wholesale to retail rates :
Prime Scotch sheep (wholesale) —72 lbs. at Bd. per 1b.... ... £2 8 0
Retail.
2 legs— lbs. at lid. per lb ... ... <£o 18
2 loins —14£lbs. at lOd. per lb. ... ... ... 012 1
2 shoulders —15 lbs. at 9d. per lb. ... ... ... 011 3
2 “ necks ” —l5 lbs. at B£d. per lb. ... ... ... 010
2 breasts—4 lbs. at 4d. per lb. ... ... ... 0 14
Waste fat—2lbs. at 2d. per lb. ... ... ... 0 0 4
Loss in weight in cutting up, 1 lb.
Total, 72 lbs. £2 14 5 £2 14 5
A profit of 6s. sd. per carcase is thus shown, and probably this would’be
necessary to the carrying on of a retail trade, for it must be remembered
that the butcher has rent and wages to pay, cost of horses and carts, as
well as risk of meat going bad or remaining unsold, to say nothing of
occasional bad debts. It is obvious that the retailer must get more per
lb. for some joints than the rate he pays for the whole carcase, as for
other portions he has to take considerably less. This is often lost sight
of when a comparison is being made between the price paid by the
wholesale buyer and that stated to be obtained when the meat is re-sold.
In the case above quoted, the butcher may be said to be making a
profit of 3d. per lb. on the legs, but if he did not do this it is probable
that the transaction, as a whole, would be a losing one. Let us now take
the case of a carcase of frozen mutton, and in order that the comparison
may be more readily made it will be well to select, as an example, a
prime New Zealand sheep of same weight:—
Prime New Zealand sheep (wholesale) —72 lbs. at_4d.'per lb. ... ,£1 4 0
Retail.
2 legs—l 9 lbs. at 7d. per lb. ... ... ... ... ■£() 11 1
2 loins —12 lbs. at 6d. per lb. ... ... ... ... 0 6 0
2 shoulders—l 4 lbs. at sd. per lb. ... ... ... 0 510
2 “ necks ” —l2 lbs. at 4d. per lb. ... ... ... 0 4 0
2 breasts —7 lbs. at 2jd. per lb. ... ... ... 0 15^
Waste fat—7 lbs. at 2d. per lb. ... ... ... 0 12
Loss in weight in cutting up —1 lb.
£1 9 6i £1 92L6*


In comparing these details with those of the Scotch sheep, it will be
observed that the weight of the more valuable joints is less and that of
the inferior greater, whilst the New Zealand sheep shows 71bs. waste fat
to 2 lbs. waste in the Scotch carcase. It is assumed that both carcases
are cut up for the same class of trade. If the New Zealand carcase
were cut up for a lower-class trade, less “trimming” would be required,
and hence there would be less waste fat. On the other hand, a correspond-
ingly smaller price would have to be taken for some of the joints. Even
a prime New Zealand carcase, it will thus be seen, is distinctly more
“wasteful,” from a butcher’s point of view, than a Scotch sheep, and this
feature is more accentuated when the frozen carcase happens to be an
extra heavy or fat one. The crossbred sheep which some years ago were
shipped from Melbourne usually gave at least 10 lbs. waste fat per car-
case. This special feature is less noticeable in a well-bred merino
carcase than in the ordinary New Zealand crossbred, but the relation of the
superior to the inferior joints in the former case is not more favourable—
often less so —than in the latter, whilst it must be borne in mind that
efforts to increase the weight of the merino for refrigerating purposes
are apt to result simply in the putting on of an excess of fat, and
consequently in the production of a carcase in all respects more
wasteful than the crossbred.
In the case of the New Zealand sheep just quoted the profit is shown
to be ss. 6|d. per carcase, and it may safely be said that the business
would not pay on any narrower margin. But the question is probably
instantly asked —Are we to believe that this is all the profit the retailer
of frozen mutton usually makes ? We are very far from wishing to take
up cudgels on behalf of the English butcher. The undertaking would
be too onerous, and we fear we should not have sufficient confidence in
our clients to make such advocacy of much value, but we nevertheless
venture the opinion that, speaking broadly, the retail profits of the frozen
meat trade may be reckoned on some such basis as that now indicated.
If this be so, it is well to look the matter plainly in the face, as it may
save the irritation and loss attendant upon enterprises based upon
erroneous premises. In expressing this opinion, we desire to make it
clear that we refer to the frozen-meat trade generally, and not to a small
and inconsiderable portion of it. Undoubtedly, it may be true that
frozen mutton is sometimes sold as best home-fed, but the quantity thus
disposed of must in any case be very limited, for, even granting that the
difference in quality is so small as to avoid detection, the external
appearance of meat which has been frozen, and is in process of thawing,
is so characteristic that few consumers can fail to recognise it.
But if, for the sake of argument, it be admitted that considerable
quantities of frozen mutton are sold as best English or Scotch, in what
respect is the producer injured? Objection, of course, might be taken
to the practice on ethical grounds, but just in proportion as the meat
was disposed of at a high profit, so would the demand for it increase,
and in a land of unlimited competition the wholesale price would
inevitably move upwards owing to the anxiety of increasing numbers to


share in so profitable a business. The idea of exorbitant profit may,
however, be dismissed as without foundation in fact, and nothing is
more likely to alter the opinion of holders of opposite views than to try
the experiment for themselves. Jt is a significant fact that any
considerable rise in the wholesale price of frozen mutton immediately
and very seriously curtails the demand. Large sales are practicable
only when the meat is comparatively cheap, and the most competent
distributors of the imports into England view with considerable
apprehension any sudden advance in values, caused, say, by a temporary
shortness of supplies, well knowing that a contraction in the consumption
will immediately result, and that when prices resume their normal level
time will be lost in getting the trade once more into its accustomed
channels. A rise of Id. or per lb. would be of very little
importance to the retailer who was obtaining the enormous profits
alleged to be made, and such an advance would have no effect upon the
aggregate sales, but as, speaking generally, retail prices for frozen
mutton are in harmony with wholesale rates, an advance of Id. per lb.
in the carcase means a corresponding advance in the price charged for
the different joints, and because these are dearer fewer of them are sold.
The bulk of the frozen mutton sold in England is at present
purchased by the lower middle class, the artisans, and by those who,
whatever may be their station, have carefully to look at every penny they
spend. Many can only afford to buy butchers’ meat when it is cheap,
and they have to go without, or at least to greatly limit the extent of their
purchases, when prices rises above a certain level. While this remains
the case no great advance can be looked for in present values, but there is
no reason why prices should not be at a level to admit of wide consumption,
and yet prove fairly remunerative to the grower. What is most to be
desired at the present time is that the more well-to-do portion of the
inhabitants of the old country should become larger purchasers of the
colonial meat. This can only come about gradually, and as the merits
of our mutton become more generally known. With this object, it
behoves shippers as far as possible to keep up the quality of their exports,
whilst their representatives at home should lose no opportunity of
bringing the mutton under the notice of those who are able to pay
remunerative prices for meat they like. Prejudice dies hard, but it can
be vanquished, and it is satisfactory to know that in regard to frozen meat
it is not nearly as powerful as it was a few years ago.
Lord Onslow has lately done good service in bringing prime New
Zealand mutton under the notice of men whose opinion, owing to their
position and influence, weighs with that portion of English society
which usually adopts a follow-my-leader policy, and a similar
distribution of prime Australian carcases might have an equally
desirable effect. Indeed, the chief justification for the proposed depots
for the sale of frozen mutton may be found in the fact that they might
prove a means of advertisement. If only prime meat were kept at such
establishments, they being under the control of the exporter or his
agents, good service might be done in this direction, but if the scheme


were carried out with a view to making profit, it would probably end in
disappointment. The butcher who wants to do a large and lucrative
trade does not limit himself to one particular class of meat, but provides
for the varying want of his customers. It is too much to expect that
consumers of frozen meat will be so enthusiastic in their liking for it as
to never want a change, and the British public considers it quite enough
to have to deal with one butcher at a time.
The producer should concentrate all his energies on growing good
meat, and on making sustained efforts to bring down the charges for
freezing, transit and sale—any attempt to enter into the retail trade can only
result in failure and heavy loss. The Scotch grazier some years ago
endeavoured to combine growing and retailing his mutton, but the
venture left him a sadder, wiser, and poorer man, and his colonial
brother cannot do better than profit by the experience.
THE SURPLUS MEAT PROBLEM.
( Reprinted from the Australasian Pastoralists’ Review, February, 15, 1892.)
The discussion which for some time past has been in progress on this
important topic has called forth a variety of opinions, but there are
certain salient features concerning which considerable unanimity has
prevailed, and to these, as the time for action has now arrived, it may
be useful to call attention. That there is a large surplus of meat,
principally mutton, to be dealt with, is universally acknowledged, and it
is generally conceded that in some form or other it must be exported, so
that disaster may be avoided when a dry season arrives, and that when
feed is plentiful the grower may have a fairly remunerative market for
his stock. Three principal methods of dealing with the meat are agreed
upon, viz., boiling down, tinning, and freezing, whilst other processes of
preservation have not lacked able advocates. Each of the three methods
enumerated has had its strong supporters, whilst it is now becoming more
generally recognised that having regard to the variety in the quality and
condition of the stock which has to be dealt with, each is suitable in its
place, and none must be neglected. The mutton which is adapted for
boiling down is not suitable for freezing, and vice versd, while the
process of tinning may be said to be ancillary to both. It is, however,
in the direction of freezing that the most sanguine hopes are entertained.
Undoubtedly it is chiefly to that process that growers must look as
providing them with a “ way out ” of their perplexities.
On the subject of the existing markets for merino mutton in a
frozen state, not much has been added to the information given in the
article entitled “Can a market be found for our surplus merino mutton?”
which appeared in our December number, but on the subject of the most
suitable sheep to breed for freezing purposes, granting that suitable


country is available, some most interesting details have been supplied by
Mr. Alexander Bruce, the chief inspector of stock for New South
Wales, in his able report on the general subject supplied to the Minister
for Mines and Agriculture for that Colony. As, however, Mr. Bruce
points out, it must be a considerable time before New South Wales
produces any large number of crossbred sheep suitable for refrigeration,
it is therefore with merino mutton that we have principally to deal.
Prices for this class of frozen meat in the English markets are low, and
are likely to remain low for some time to come, but with the gradual
reduction in the cost of transit and handling there is hope that a sufficient
margin may remain to remunerate the grower. In this connection we
notice that Messrs. W. Weddel and Co., in their exhaustive “ Review of
the Frozen Meat Trade for 1891,” refer to the fact that they have made
a contract on behalf of the Queensland Meat Export and Agency
Company with a London shipping syndicate, covering a period of five
years, for the conveyance of 1200 tons of frozen meat per month at
the rate of d|d- per lb. for mutton and lamb, and fd. per lb. for
beef from Brisbane and/or Townsville to London. The same firm like-
wise state that the total London charges on frozen mutton are now
usually covered by per lb., as compared with the -|d. consolidated
rate which was not long ago looked upon as an almost irreducible
minimum. These figures point in the direction of per lb. ultimately
covering the total cost of handling, the rate which we have more than
once mentioned as a thing of the near future.
When, however, due allowance is made for the small cost of
handling, there undoubtedly remains an element of risk in the conduct
of the frozen meat enterprise, and having regard to the collateral advant-
ages the squatter will reap from the establishment of the trade on a
permanent basis, this risk is one which he should be prepared to take.
The question which has recently occupied much attention is—ln what
way can the grower be made to share in the fortunes of the industry ?
Theoretically, a co-operative undertaking is undoubtedly the thing which
is to be desired, but owing to the wide area over which squatters are
scattered, as well as to other considerations, there are considerable difficul-
ties in practically giving effect to this plan. As an alternative a subsidy
has been proposed to be levied on the pastoralists themselves, and though
at first it met with some opposition, it has ultimately been adopted by
the very large majority of those interested as the most workable scheme
under the circumstances.
The bill dealing with this question which has been introduced in
the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales is so framed as to disarm
most of the criticism originally directed against the proposal when it was
in a crude form, and it may be hoped that, seeing the measure is a
Government one, no unnecessary delay will occur in carrying the bill
through its various stages. Great vigilance will, however, have to be
exercised with respect to the application of the levy when it is collected.
It must be used solely for the benefit of those by whom it is contributed,
and in the event of its being deemed expedient that existing establish-


ments should receive monetary assistance, proper care must be taken to
see that fully equivalent advantages are secured for growers from these
institutions. Much will depend upon the men to whom the practical
working of the scheme is entrusted, and too great care cannot be
exercised in their selection.
Under no circumstances should any part of the money, either
directly or indirectly, be spent in attempts to conduct a retail trade in
the old country on shippers’ account. Our reasons for strongly
deprecating any proposal having for its object an embarkation in the
retail business were fully set forth last month, but a renewed advocacy of
the plan in the daily press must be our apology for reverting to it.
Frozen mutton is sold by the carcase at 3d. per lb., and butche r s are
reported to be obtaining up to 7d. per lb. for joints in retail. The
question is asked —Why should not the producer have a share in the
profit of 4d. per lb.? But is there a profit of 4d. per lb.? Assuming
that 7d. per lb. was obtained for the two legs, which represent very little
more than one-fourth of the total weight ot the carcase, all the other
joints would realise lower rates, whilst the two “necks ” would probably
not make more, and the waste fat would certainly make less than the
wholesale price. In our last issue we showed that it was necessary to
obtain for the legs, at any rate, 3d. per lb. over the wholesale price per
carcase, in order to leave a bare margin of profit, due allowance being
made for the proportionately lower prices paid for the other joints, for
the waste fat and loss in cutting up, and for the occasional loss arising from
meat going bad or remaining unsold, and for the necessary expenses
attendant upon a retail trade. With respect to the case above cited, all
that can be said is that the retailers quoted were asking and, presumably,
obtaining for legs Id. per lb. more than what may be termed a strictly
moderate profit. It is, however, well known that in the lower districts of
the Metropolis late on Saturday night, especially if the weather is
unfavourable, large quantities of inferior joints—such as the buyers who
could afford to pick and choose will not have—are sacrificed at very low
rates, and occasionally almost given away. Legs are always saleable,
and if a butcher does not make sure of a good profit on them, he knows
that the average result of his sales is doubtful. It may be taken for
granted that the enormous competition which exists in England is,
speaking broadly, a sufficient safeguard against excessive profits being
made out of the retailing of an article of such widespread consumption
as butcher’s meat. Scotch mutton-producers at one time thought other-
wise, but the experience they purchased in trying to obtain a portion of
the supposed excessive retail profits soon taught them they were wrong.
New Zealand shippers at a later date were strongly imbued with a
similar notion, but they, too, after sundry experiments, abandoned the
project in disgust, and Australian shippers will do well to profit by their
experience. We must send the best mutton we can, we must constantly
agitate and work for a reduction in charges, and having selected
competent consignees for the meat, we must leave it to them to secure
the best wholesale price for it which is obtainable.


London consignees should be, and generally are, very willing to
give all due attention to the suggestions of shippers or their representatives
as to how their meat shall be handled, and much good may be done by
personal conferences, but after all, those who are on the spot, and who
have had a wide local experience, should be best able to judge as to how
most profitably to place consignments on the market. At the present
juncture, however, it might be well for shippers to urge their European
representatives very seriously to consider the question of again trying the
French market. Shipments must be made direct from Australia, if at
all, but very full and precise information should be obtained from
London regarding the change in the conditions of the Paris market,
brought about by the recent alterations in the tariff, before any commit-
ment is made. River Plate mutton is regularly sold there, and the
reason that the attempts to introduce New Zealand carcases were not
successful was that the sheep were hardly suitable for the Parisian taste,
whilst the cost of handling via London was too great to leave any
margin of profit. The English markets are being gradually opened up.
It will be a grand thing for the shipper of merino mutton if a new
market can be found for his produce in France.
THE FROZEN MEAT INDUSTRY IN AUSTRALIA.
{Reprintedfrom Pastoralists’ Review, June 15, 1892.)
The recently-imposed Victorian stock tax supplies another reason, if
one were needed, for pastoralists in New South Wales and Queensland
to bestir themselves in order that they may be in a position to avail
themselves of the outside market which undoubtedly exists for their
surplus mutton and beef. Steady work in this direction is being done
in Queensland, an q the recent proposal to erect a freezing establishment
on the Gulf of Carpentaria sufficiently indicates that those who are
interested in the trade in that colony do not intend to rest content with
the facilities for export already in existence. The progress made in New
South Wales is, however, hardly so satisfactory. Considerable disappoint-
ment was felt at the fact that the Government was unable last session to
pass the bill enabling stockowners to tax themselves with a view to
providing funds for dealing with their surplus stock, and though
laudable efforts are being made to stimulate private enterprise there
seems to be a too general disposition to pursue a waiting policy pending
the reintroduction of that measure. The Government, we believe,
intends next session either to submit the bill once more to the house as
one of its own measures or, at any rate, to render cordial support to any
private member to whom its fortunes may be intrusted. It will not do,
however, to place too much reliance upon the adoption of this scheme,
and as in any case it cannot be carried into immediate effect, it is


desirable that prompt and independent action should be taken by those
most largely interested in the trade. Co-operation ought to be possible
quite apart from the powers sought for under the enabling bill.
In the meantime the whole of New South Wales is practically
dependent on two freezing establishments, one in Sydney and the other
at Aberdeen on the Hunter River, and there is accordingly an urgent
necessity that the export facilities should be increased We are glad to
learn that one of the Sydney wool and produce houses is making a move in
this direction, and their enterprise it may be hoped will lead others to
take the mattter in hand. In Victoria the works at Newport are being
reopened, and it is possible that some carcases from the Southern
Riverina districts will be sent thither under bond for freezing and
export.
In urging pastoralists to make use of the outside market we reiterate
the opinion previously expressed in these columns, namely, that if the
business is conducted with discretion and economy there is no reason
why the shipment of merino mutton to England—and that must form
our staple export —should not pay its own way, quite irrespective of the
enormous collateral advantages which would arise from the establish-
ment of a large export trade. Shippers must not, however, be misled
by figures based upon rates which are unlikely to be obtained. Such
merino mutton as has recently been exported from New South Wales
and Queensland may be expected on average to realise prices ranging
from 3d. to per pound. The price may occasionally fall below 3d.,
but probably such a decline would only be temporary, whilst rates
higher than 3|d. may rule for limited periods, but the range given is
probably that which will furnish the safest basis of operation.
If shippers fully realised what was the best interest of the trade they
would have no wish, at any rate at present, to see prices much over
per pound, for undoubtedly such an increase in price would have the
immediate effect of curtailing the demand. What is wanted is a large,
steady trade at a price which will prove just remunerative to the shipper.
The collateral advantages he will enjoy by the establishment of such a
trade are incalculable, and they are too obvious to call for detailed
enumeration.
It is difficult to give anything like a close range of values for frozen
beef. Average results, if the consignments are judiciously handled, maybe
expected to be satisfactory, but the fluctuations in prices will often be wide.
Frozen beef is what is known in market phraseology as a “ sympathetic”
article, that is, its value very largely depends upon the course of prices
for another similar commodity. The market for frozen beef is in fact
almost entirely dominated by that for American chilled beef. When
American beef is plentiful, frozen beef is almost unsaleable, or is only
saleable at very low prices. The chilled beef does not lose colour as does
its frozen competitor when thawed, and if American supplies are cheap,
even those butchers who have the necessary facilities for thawing beef
which has been hard frozen, much prefer to purchase the more sightly
article. Thus great judgment is required in placing frozen beef on the


market, and with regard to that portion which is realised in London it is
found convenient to store it close to Smithfield market so that immediate
advantage can be taken of any temporary shortage in the American
supplies. Thus an Atlantic steamer may have arrived at Liverpool just
too late to admit of a considerable consignment of beef being despatched
by the customary train for Smithfield, with the result that supplies there
on a particular morning are unexpectedly small. The opportunity is an
excellent one for placing a fair quantity of frozen beef on the market,
and if the meat is readily accessible this can at once be done. Shippers
of colonial beef must be prepared for somewhat irregular results, but
there is no reason why on the average they should not be remunerative.
With respect to frozen mutton there can be no question but that the
New Zealand shipper is in a more favourable position than his Austral-
ian neighbour, inasmuch as he can produce a carcase which commands
a relatively better price, but on the other hand it must be remembered
that the Australian shipper has the enormous advantage of his neighbour’s
experience for his guidance, and he directly reaps the benefit of much of
the pioneering work which has been done. For example, were it not for
the large, regular, and increasing shipments from New Zealand, the
question of the charges on frozen meat would not have been in so
favourable a position as it is now, nor would there be the assured prospect
of a further reduction at no distant date. Further, when the New Zealand
shipper commenced operations it was impossible to effect insurance
against all risks, and it was not until underwriters had a somewhat
lengthy experience to guide them, and were likewise satisfied that the
initial difficulties had been to a large extent overcome, that they were
prepared to quote a rate on this basis. That rate has from time to time
been reduced —and it will bear still further reduction—an advantage for
which the Australian shipper must thank his New Zealand competitor.
In brief it may be said that the position of the Australian now with his
merino mutton is decidedly more favourable than was the position of the
New Zealander a few years ago with his crossbred. New Zealand has
made the trade a success, why should not Australia ?
MEAT CHILLING AND FREEZING.
{Reprinted from the Australasian Pastoralists’ Review, July 15, 1892.)
Whilst the history of the frozen meat trade in New Zealand affords
stimulus to the Australian pastoralist, and furnishes him with much
valuable information as to the manner in which the industry should
be conducted, there are some important problems connected with it
which, owing to differing local conditions, the Australian grower will


have to master for himself. The proximity of the fattening pastures
to the seaboard in New Zealand renders comparatively easy the trans-
ference of the stock to the chilling and freezing establishments which
have been established near all the principal ports in that colony, but
the problem which confronts the Australian grower is one much less
easy of solution. He has to deal with vast areas, and in many cases
with a semi-tropical climate. Some of the best fattening country lies
over 500 miles from a convenient seaport, and the question as to how
the meat is to be conveyed to the coast is one not lightly to be answered.
To bring sheep and cattle alive such long distances, even though
the larger part of the journey is covered by rail, necessarily means
deterioration in the quality of the meat, and it now appears to be
generally acknowledged that whatever means of conveyance are ultim-
ately decided upon, it is necessary that the stock should be slaughtered
near the pastures, and that the meat should travel in carcase form.
It must, however, receive some artificial treatment in order that it may
travel with safety, and the problem now to be solved is how to insure
that safety at the minimum of cost. Safety is, of course, of primary
importance, but expense is of almost equal moment, as the success
of the industry very largely depends upon the cost of placing the meat
upon the ultimate markets. It cannot be too clearly recognised that the
gross price likely to be realised in the English markets is not likely to
advance beyond the present level, whilst under the pressure of increased
supplies it may slightly decline, so that the success of the trade almost
entirely turns upon the question of expense.
One method proposed is that of establishing freezing works at suitable
points inland, freezing the meat ready for shipment and sending it to the
coast in insulated cars, which could be discharged alongside the export
vessel. To this it may be objected that the risk of the meat thawing,,
in the event of breakdown or unlocked for delay, is considerable, and
that in any case, with existing appliances, there must be a limit to the
distance from the coast at which such works could safely be erected.
Undoubtedly there is an element of risk, but in the case of one existing
establishment, that at Aberdeen, N.S.W., which is over eighty miles from
the port of shipment, it has been found that with due precautions and care
the meat can be placed in the hold of the export steamer in good order.
But before the distance from the coast can be indefinitely increased
it will be needful to do more than simply stow the carcases in insulated
cars which have previously been charged with cold air. The cars will
require to be continuously refrigerated, and probably the only way in
which this can effectually be done will be for the locomotive engine
to carry the necessary refrigerating machinery. It is claimed that such
an engine has been invented, and that it can be placed upon the railway
when the Railway Commissioners of the various colonies can be induced
to consent to its experimental use. If this project can successfully
be carried out, the element of risk practically disappears, and the
question of expense is the only one which has to be disposed of. The
cost distributed over the large number of carcases which would be


conveyed in one such train ought not to be anything considerable, and
it is highly probable that if such a combined locomotive and refrigerating
engine can be made to work satisfactorily, freezing works will undoubt-
edly be established at certain important centres, a considerable distance
inland.
In the meantime, however, we have to deal with the fact that there is
a distance beyond which, with existing appliances, it will be unsafe to
attempt to convey frozen meat. What the limit of distance is it is not
easy to say, but it is interesting to note that in New Zealand frozen
mutton has, without injury, been conveyed a distance of 230 miles, say
from Christchurch to Dunedin or vice versa, the insulated vans simply
being charged with cool air prior to their being loaded. Allowance must
necessarily be made for difference of climate, but if a journey of 230
miles can safely be accomplished in New Zealand, and one of over
eighty miles is regularly covered in New South Wales, there appears no
reason why meat should not be frozen, say, at Albury, brought down by
rail during the night to Melbourne (191) miles, and shipped before the
sun is very far above the horizon.
But such establishments as these, which might suitably be erected at
important centres within convenient access to a port, will not by any
means meet all the necessities of the case. Chilling works must be
erected in localities more remote, where the carcases, after slaughter, can
be cooled and ultimately chilled to a point a few degrees above freezing
in order that in that condition the meat may be conveyed to freezing
works situated, say, at the port of shipment, where they can be hard-frozen
for export. The task of keeping such meat in a chilled condition during
a railway journey is in some respects a simpler one than that of preserving
frozen carcases in a proper state, but the meat so conveyed would occupy
more space than if frozen, and the system likewise necessarily involves
the establishment of two separate sets of works. At remote points however,
and in very hot climates, chilling and subsequent freezing will most
probably be found the best plan to adopt, whilst experience may ultimately
lead to a general acceptance of the system, as at once the safest and the
most economical. In its favour it may likewise be said that it affords
facilities for more palatable meat being supplied for local consumption, but
the quantity so dealt with would not be sufficiently large to materially affect
the choice of the system to be carried out. Local conditions will in the
first instance largely affect the nature of the plan adopted, and ultimately
the least expensive system will gain the day.
As the success or otherwise which may attend the working of the
combined locomotive and refrigerating engine, to which allusion has
been made, will materially affect the character of the works about to
be erected in certain districts, it is highly important that the necessary
experiments should at once be made. It is difficult to understand on
what ground Railway Commissioners have thus far declined to accede
to the inventor’s very reasonable request, and it is to be hoped, having
regard to the enormous interests which are at stake, that they will very
speedily see cause to modify their decision.


Compressed Ammonia ...
... ... 978 units
Ammonia (absorption principle)
594 „
Ether
244 „ ■
Air (compressed and expanded)
... 127 „
REFRIGERATING PROCESSES.
It is manifestly impossible to describe at length in the small limits of
this brochure the different machines designed for the purposes of
artificial refrigerating. We must, therefore, as far as possible under this
heading, deal with principles only, making but brief reference to the
most approved inventions. In the various systems of refrigeration now
in use the following media are used : Ammonia, ether, compressed air,
sulphurous anhydride, carbonic anhydride, and some of the marsh gas
series. With the single exception of compressed air, all these refriger-
ating agents are compressed to a liquefying point, and have the power
on subsequent expansion of abstracting heat from surrounding bodies.
In the compressed air machines, such as the Haslam, Lightfoot, etc.,
the ordinary atmospheric air is subjected to a pressure of about 451bs.
to the square inch, the heat of compression being abstracted by means
of a condenser, and the air is permitted to expand at atmospheric
pressure into the refrigerating chambers. Temperature equal to 100°
below zero (Fahr.) has been obtained by this method. The compressed
air processes seem peculiarly adapted for use on shipboard, and it does
not seem likely that any of the more recent methods will displace
compressed air for sea work. Compressed ammonia has of recent years
come very generally into use; but there are indications that machines
using carbonic anhydride—a recent invention—will divide its popularity
in connection with large schemes of refrigeration. The most recent
experience of the New Zealand refrigerating engineers would seem to
indicate a preference for a mixed system —the agents being compressed
air and compressed ammonia. The use of ammonia on the absorption
principle is more suited for small than for large works.
A series of very complete experiments was made in England some
time ago, as to the relative effectiveness of the then known refrigerating
agents, by Mr. J. K. Kilbourn. He demonstrated that, taking the
thermal unit as the amount of heat necessary to change the temperature
of one pound of water one degree Fahr., the maximum cooling effects
obtainable by the expenditure of one pound of steam from the agents
tested by him were —
With reference to these experiments, however, we are assured by
Mr. Greenstreet, of the firm of Coxon and Greenstreet, who erected
the majority of the New Zealand freezing works, that ammonia
loses much of its effectiveness when dealing with exceedingly low
temperatures.
In referring to the inventions now in use, we shall carefully avoid
“ puffing ” any particular system, merely mentioning the chief advantages
claimed for the several processes. It is worth while reminding our
readers that results obtained in England, America, and other cold


climates are not reliable in Australia, where the temperature of the cooling
water probably averages 20 degrees higher than in the temperate countries
of the northern hemisphere.
The Haslam. —The essential feature of this process of refrigeration
consists in the method of drying the air before expansion. This is
achieved by carrying the moist air of the atmosphere, while in a state of
compression, through an exchanger; this being placed in a colder
atmosphere, produced by a waste current of air from the chamber,
causes the moisture to deposit on the surface of the tubes when it is
removed by automatic traps before entering the expansion cylinder.
The exchanger has also the effect of reducing the temperature of the
condensed air below the temperature of the cooling water, and conse-
quently, when permitted to expand, it produces proportionately lower
terminal atmospheres, thus giving greater efficiency per indicated horse-
power. The Haslam machine is in use on most of the vessels engaged
in the meat-carrying trade, and in several land works in Australia,
including the Fresh Food and Ice Company and the South Coast and
Camden Co-operative Co., also at Maitland and Balmain, N.S.W., and
in most of the New Zealand freezing works.
The Linde Process. —ln this process, which has been but recently
introduced in Australia, provision is made for the compression and
evaporation of ammonia in the usual way, but in place of carrying the
brine pipes through several rooms, as in other systems, the moist air is
drawn from the rooms by means of fans, and is then passed over a
series of evolving discs, which dip half into chilled brine. The heated
moisture drawn from the rooms is deposited on these discs, and the
purified, dry cold air is returned to the freezing chambers. It is
claimed for the Linde process that the meat being gradually frozen its
keeping qualities are enhanced. Linde machines are working, amongst
other places, at the Metropolitan Ice Company’s works, Sydney, at the
Wellington Meat Freezing Company’s works, New Zealand, and at
Townsville, Queensland, and are ordered for the Pastoral Finance
Association, Sydney, the Fish Markets, Woolloomooloo, Sydney, and
at the Metropolitan Meat Markets, Melbourne.
The De La Vergne. —The De La Vergne process uses compressed
ammonia, and the advantages claimed for it are chiefly in matters of
detail. For instance, provision is made for eliminating losses of
ammonia, and the prevention of leakage, the latter being achieved by
the pumping of a certain quantity of oil into the compressor at each
stroke of the piston. A De La Vergne has been in operation at the
Fresh Food and Ice Company’s works, Sydney, for about twelve
months.
The W. Walker System. —This is also an ammonia compression
system, its chief feature being the liquefying of the ammonia at a far
lower pressure than in any other system, thus economising power, and
saving the wear and tear on working parts. It is the invention of
Mr. W. Walker, Wh. Ex. Refrigerating Engineer of Sydney.


Ammonia Absorption Machines. —The best known machines
worked on this principle are the Kropff, the Vass-Litman, and the
Taylor. The fundamental principle is the liquefication of ammonia by
heat instead of by compression. The Ta\lor machine, which of all
these named is perhaps the best known in Australia, and is a Victorian
invention, is unique, inasmuch as it dispenses with all moving parts. A
steam pipe causes the ammonia to circulate through the chambers.
These latter are lined with rock salt, and the air circulating by its own
gravity, the moisture is condensed on the rock salt. A Taylor machine
may be seen at the Metropolitan Meat Market, North Melbourne.
The Hall Process. —In the working of this process, carbonic
anhydride is allowed to evaporate in an evaporator composed of a series
of coils. These coils submerged in brine absorb the heat, and the
chilled brine circulated in pipes throughout the freezing chamber reduce
the temperature to the necessary degree. It has just been adopted by
the Messrs. Nelson at their meat freezing works in Napier, New Zealand,
and several plants have recently been ordered for Australia.
AUSTRALIAN MEAT FREEZING WORKS.
New South Wales Fresh Food and Ice Company. —The works of
the N.S.W. Fresh Food and Ice Company are situated in Harbour Street,
at the head of Darling Harbour, Sydney. The Company has hitherto had
almost the whole of the frozen meat trade of the colony in its own hands,
owing partly to the fact that no other firm had the requisite plant and
facilities so complete. In the years 1890 and 1891 the Company froze
371,408 sheep, and a large amount of pieces of beef, the whole of which
was exported to London. Up to June 4of this year (1892) out of a
total export by New South Wales of 120,118 carcases, 109,700 were
shipped by the Fresh Food and Ice Company, the balance of 10,418
being handled by the South Coast and West Camden Company. The
manager of the Fresh Food and Ice Company, Mr. Henry Pateson,
estimates that his company will have frozen and shipped 250,000
carcases by the end of the current year. The works have facilities for
freezing 2500 sheep per diem, and a new machine, capable of adding
1500 per diem, has been ordered. Within three years the company has
expended £40,000 on enlarging its premises and adding to its original
plant. The machinery now working is equal to the production of 120
tons of ice a day, and Mr. Pateson expects to have additional power up
to 160 tons, or its equivalent in cold-producing, shortly available. The
company’s experience is that sheep under 501bs. weight are unsuitable to
the English market.
Chilling Works at Tenterfield and Narrandera, N.S.W.—
To the energy of Mr. Robert Hudson, of Hudson Bros., Ltd., New
South Wales owes its present most excellent device upon which our


refrigerating railway car is built. For three years Mr. Hudson gave
this matter his attention, devoting time and money unsparingly to
perfecting his idea of enabling the animals to be killed on their native
heath instead of having to be driven “ poor” on their journey to Sydney.
Mr. Hudson also toured New Zealand, taking copious notes of all
advantages and defects of the great freezing works of that country. The
results of his labours are the Riverina Chilling Company’s works
at Narrandera, and the Tenterfield Meat Chilling works, which are
described below. The Riverina Chilling Company's works at Narrandera
are capable of killing, dressing, and freezing 600 sheep and 30 bullocks
per diem (day work only). The Company’s railway siding takes
Hudson’s patent cars right alongside the chill rooms, thus obviating any
unnecessary handling or exposure to the atmosphere. The machinery
is by Hudson Bros., Ltd., and comprises engines and anhydrons,
ammonia compressor, with refrigerator and condenser cods, ice boxes,
and brine tanks (the machine is capable of turning out five tons of ice
per diem), the refrigerator and chill rooms, the latter having capacity for
the daily killing, and rendering it fit for loading within twenty-four
hours. The manufacture of ice in such a climate as that at Narrandera,
where the Summer register is 109 in the shade, is an immense boon to
the people of the district, and the ice brings “ fancy ” prices. There
is the usual tallow digester, clarifiers, and cooler in a separate Duilding,
the floor of which is raised to level of cars to facilitate loading the heavy
casks of tallow with the least possible outlay on labour and appliances.
The pens open on the killing floor, in which is a blood gutter covered
with a wooden grating, which serves to allow the free escape of the
blood, and keep the fleeces clean. A plentiful supply of clean water is
at hand, and constantly in use, purifying the slaughter yards and
premises generally. By time and labour saving appliances the offal,
paunches, head, feet, etc., are borne away to the digester, which is a
special Melbourne patent, having a steam cylinder piston-head of great
strength, fitting the inside diameter of the digester and perforated. The
steam pressure is applied to this piston-head, and crushes all bones quite
small at the same time as it extracts all marrow, fat, etc., therefrom,
most effectually gaining every fraction of fat from paunches, heads, etc.,
and preparing the refuse for the steam-dryer and crushing-mill. This
refuse makes excellent manure, and commands a ready sale for that
purpose. The machine is invaluable, owing to its capacity for treating
every particle of the insides of sheep and cattle, as well as the heads.
Underground tanks receive the slaughter-yard washings, and the liquor
from the digester, and thence the fluid is pumped by the windmill
through pipes and V-shaped wooden flumes to any reasonable distance
for irrigation purposes. The land thus treated will grow large crops of
maize or millet, on which pigs are fed for the market, either as bacon
and hams, or frozen meat. The millet straw finds a ready sale for
broom-making, many tons of such broom being now imported for that
industry. The cool chambers are most carefully constructed, with
hollow walls, containing at least three spaces each, lined with specially


prepared insulating paper, and absolutely air-tight. The necessary
degree of cold is produced by the brine-circulation process, which is
found to answer admirably, as only chilling and not freezing is aimed
at. This is found the best plan, as once the meat is frozen it should be
kept so continually until thawed off in London. Forty to forty-five
degrees is found to answer for this chilling process. The cars are
about the same temperature, kept so by Mr. Hudson’s patent ice
process, as described in another portion of this article. The Narrandera
works cost £9OOO. The Tenterfield works are situated 483 miles north
of Sydney, and have a capacity of 200 sheep and 32 bullocks daily.
Such, however, has been the measure of success attending their
operations that it is intended at no distant date to largely increase that
capacity, at all events in regard to the chilling accommodation. The
killing and dressing rooms are capable of a much larger output by
working double shifts. The meat from this district is much sought
after, and well worthy inspection as it arrives daily at the Government
Meat Markets, Darling Harbour. At Tenterfield, as at Narrandera, the
refrigerating cars run right to the chill rooms, under a covered way.
The meat leaves the works, say, Monday at 1.30, and arrives in Sydney
on Wednesday morning, being sold by auction at 11 o’clock on that
day. The plant and appliances generally are very similar to those above
described as existing and proving so satisfactory at Narrandera.
South Coast and West Camden Co-operative Company.—
This Company, with head quarters in Sydney, has refrigerating
machinery equal to the freezing and storage of 5000 mutton carcases per
week. During the first six months of this year (1892) this company has
frozen for export over 10,000 carcases of mutton.
The Australian Meat Chilling and Freezing Company.—
This Company has established freezing works at Aberdeen in the
northern district of the colony of New South Wales, works which are
second to none in Australia, though not yet up to the extensive scale of
some of the New Zealand establishments. The company secured 640
acres of the Segenhoe Estate, and early in 189 L commenced the erection
of the present fine buildings and plant, which for completeness of detail
and modernity of machinery are unsurpassed anywhere. At the present
time the capacity is equal to the storage of some 35,000 or 40,000
carcases of sheep, and the works are capable of freezing 16,000
carcases per diem. The meat is shipped direct from Newcastle, being
carried thither by rail from the Aberdeen station, which is close to the
works, the company having a siding between them and the station.
The slaughtering yards are some twenty feet above the level of the
railway, and thus a down-grade is obtained, and the carcases are run to
the station on travelling beams, thus vastly economising labour. There
are four freezing-chambers, each calculated to hold 1600 sheep. After
being dressed the carcases are run down travelling beams to the cooling
chambers, kept always below 50 degrees Fahrenheit, where they remain
twelve hours, till the natural heat has entirely departed, when they are


placed in the freezing chambers and thoroughly frozen, being thence
stored in the chilled storage rooms below. The walls of these and the
freezing chambers are constructed with a view to the prevention of the
slightest entrance of the outside atmosphere or any of its effects. They
are absolutely air and moisture proof. The outer brickwork is eighteen
inches thick, and this is lined with eleven inches of compressed charcoal,
which effectually prevents any warmth from entering. The walls and
chimney stack alone cost £24,000, while £IO,OOO was spent on the
machinery, which is exactly similar to that used in the finest works of a
similar nature in New Zealand. The whole cost of the works was some
£60,000. Plans have been prepared for cold storage rooms at Newcastle.
Two of Haslam’s dry-air refrigerating machines are in use, each capable
of throwing 120,000 cubic feet of air per minute. One is sufficient to
keep the whole chambers(each one of which is separate and independent of
the others) at the required degree of cold. Four of Babcock & Wilcox’s
patent tubular boilers, each 80-horse power, supply the steam to drive
the machines, and every portion of the plant in this line is duplicated in
case of accident. The works are in full swing night and day, some 350
tons of coal per week being consumed. There is a large production of
tallow in three grades, and the demand for the company’s tinned
sheep’s tongues largely exceeds the supply. Since February last
60,000 carcases of mutton have been shipped to London, and by the end
of the year the manager, Mr. Benn, looks forward to having recorded
300,000. The company purchase their own sheep, but hope soon to be able
to induce pastoralists to send their stocks on consignment. At present the
charge of 2d. per lb. to land in London —and the company retaining
the skins, kidneys, tallow and tongues —is somewhat prohibitory. In
New Zealand the charge is much less, probably consequent on
competition, and hence many of the freezing companies in that colony
work exclusively on consignments for producers. The Aberdeen works
of the Australian Meat Chilling and Freezing Co. employ twelve
slaughtermen, who receive £1 per 100 for killing and dressing, and all
told fifty hands are engaged on the works. When good cattle are
obtainable the company will turn attention to beef-freezing. Over 1,000
pigs are fed on the refuse after all fat has been removed and conveyed
to the digester to be converted into tallow. In July last, the manager
announced that he had made provision for an export of 50,000 carcases
per month.
The Queensland Meat Export and Agency Company. —This
company, of recent birth, has been pushed with great energy, and
possesses works at Brisbane and Townsville. These works are practi-
cally identical in arrangements, etc., and their united capacity is equal
to dealing with the carcases of 60,000 head of cattle, or 720,000 sheep
per annum. The plants at each comprise a Haslam refrigerator, used
in conjunction with the Linde ammonia plant. The first shipment was
to be made from the Townsville works in July (1892), and it was
expected that the Brisbane works would be making an output in
September. The company has arranged with Messrs, Houlder Bros.,


of London, to provide the tonnage for a freight of fd. per lb. on beef,
and J-i-ths of a penny per lb. on mutton. The company’s charges to
shippers, including slaughtering, dressing, freezing, weighing, shipment,
freight, insurance, dock charges at London, warehouse expenses there,
and disposal will be :
Brisbane Works. Townsville Works.
Beef ... ... ... lyfd- P er lb. 2 T Ig-d. 1 g -d. per lb.
Mutton and lamb ... 2d. ~ 2|-d. ~
with a reduction of x Qth of a penny per lb. on all meat frozen during
the months of August, September, October, and November. Special
care is being taken to turn the bye-products to the best account, and
canning plants are provided at both the works to preserve any parts not
suitable for freezing, while the tallow will be manufactured into oleo-
margarine on the premises. The company purpose extending their
operations so as to tap the rich cattle country on the Gulf of Carpentaria
and this will be achieved by establishing works, similar to those at
Brisbane and Townsville, at some suitable point on the Gulf Coast.
The Central Queensland Meat Export Co., Limited. —Works
situated at Lakes Creek, on the Fitzroy River, Rockhampton, Queensland.
It is the pioneer freezing company of Queeensland. —Freezing, canning,
and boiling down. Freezing machines used : Bell-Coleman, and Haslam.
Freezing capacity of works, 500 tons per month, equal to, in sheep,
1.000 daily. Boiling down capacity, from September next, equal to
2.000 sheep daily. Carcases put through during 1891, 21,000 head of
cattle and 168,500 sheep. Importance of industry to district: The
company distributes locally upwards of £50,000 per annum in wages,
coals, timber, and stores. Number of hands employed, 400.
PROJECTED ENTERPRISES.
The N.S.W. Refrigerating and Meat Export Co.—The revival of
interest in the subject of meat freezing for export, produced by the
necessity of facing the problem of how to deal with the over-stocking of
the runs, has led to the floating of several companies throughout the
colonies having for their raison d'etre the trading in frozen meat; while
a number of corporations interested in pastoral matters are manifesting
a desire to add this industry to their various businesses. Amongst the
new companies, the N.S.W. Refrigerating and Meat Export Company,
with a capital of £500,000, is deserving of mention. It embraces
a very extensive scheme, including the freezing of meat at suitable
centres in the inland districts of New South Wales, transmission to the
markets of the old world, and its disposal there at both wholesale and
retail depots. About 500 pastoralists, representing a wide range of
territory, have, it is stated, become shareholders, while the list of provisional
directors includes many men whose names are familiar in connection
with pastoral pursuits. A British syndicate, it is stated, have promised to


endeavour to obtain one-half the capital, and it is hoped that the balance
will be subscribed in New South Wales. It is intended to establish works
at Wagga, Hay, Cooma, Forbes or Orange,Tamworth, Deniliquin, Dubbo,
Wellington, Newcastle, and other centres.
J. H. Geddes and Co., The Pastoral Finance Association. —ln
connection with their large wool trade and tallow business, Messrs. J. H.
Geddes and Co., of Sydney, are establishing a large refrigerating plant
at Kirribilli Point, opposite Circular Quay, .Sydney, which will have a
storage capacity for 15,000 carcases, and will freeze close on 5,000
carcases per week. Provision, however, will be made for increasing
the freezing capacity to 12,000 carcases per week. The meat, chilled
at the country depots, will be brought by train to Darling Harbour, and
then the trucks will be placed on barges and conveyed right into the
Kirribilli Works by means of a canal which bisects the building. The
Linde process of refrigerating is to be used, and it is anticipated that the
first shipment of meat will take place before the end of this year (1892).
Arrangements are now being made for establishing chilling depots in
many of the inland towns of New South Wales, which will act as
feeders to the Sydney establishment. We are informed that they have
already arranged for establishing these depots at Narrabri, Gunnedah,
Quirindi, Mudgee, Wagga, Jerilderie, Cooma, and Goulburn, and are
negotiating with pastoralists at Hay, Orange, and Forbes. With respect
to these depots the firm guarantees that upon any district subscribing
the sum of £3,500, to devote the whole of the nett money so subscribed
to the establishment of works capable of dealing with 80,000 mutton
carcases (or equivalent in beef) per annum, besides supplying the local
demand for ice. Messrs. Geddes and Co. also point out that they offer
a number of other advantages to pastoralists, including : —The election
of a local director by the local shareholders under whose supervision
the industry will be economically carried on, thus guaranteeing capable
management without further demand upon the local shareholders, all
working expenses being paid by the association ; the assurance of a
uniform price for meat and other produce in the home markets, with an
almost immediate increase in the producing power of the land in New
South Wales ; the option of selling in the Sydney market or shipping to
Europe under liberal advance ; expert supervision from the reception
at chilling depot, order of refrigerating cars, storage in Sydney, sub-
mitting to metropolitan competition, or freezing, preparing, shipping,
insuring, receiving in England, storing and selling under one consolidated
charge.
A Victorian Enterprise. —Messrs. John Hotson, in conjunction
with Messrs. Phipps Turnbull and Co., of Melbourne, are embarking
in the frozen meat industry on an extensive scale, and are trading under
the style of Turnbull, Hotson and Co. They have secured from the
railway authorities the use of the slaughtering and refrigerating works at
Newport, near Melbourne, and as there is a railway siding at the works,
sheep may be brought from any part right into the establishment. It is


probable that from Newport the vast flocks of the Riverina district of
New South Wales will be principally dealt with, as, despite the Stock
Tax passed by the Victorian Government, provision has been made for
conveying in bond through Victorian territory, sheep intended for
export. That the proposals of Messrs. Turnbull and Hotson have the
confidence of the pastoralists is shown by the fact that many of the
leading squatters have consented to act as a “Board of Advice,”
including such men as Hon. William Halliday, M.L.C., of Brookong ;
J. S. Horsfall, of Widgiewa; Matt. O’Shanassy, of Moira; and the Hon.
W. McCulloch. At present the freight from the Port of Melbourne is
Id. per lb., but it is believed that this may be brought down to Lf-ths of
a penny.
THE FROZEN MEAT TRADE IN NEW ZEALAND.
Our New Zealand neighbours having successfully solved the
problem of how to establish a payable trade in frozen meat, it
is to Maoriland that the Australian pastoralist naturally turns for
information. The trade in New Zealand was commenced on a
small scale early in the eighties, and the path of the pioneers
was beset with difficulty and discouragement. Freights were high,
steamer services irregular, freezing machinery had not reached
its present state of comparative perfection, and many cargoes were
damaged, and worst of all, the insular prejudices of the English
consumer had to be overcome. Pluck and perseverance in a decade
has raised the frozen meat trade from weakness and uncertainty to an
industry absolutely of the front rank. Out of £9,428,761, representing
New Zealand’s total exports for 1890, frozen meat was responsible for
£1,087,617. It was second only to wool, and came before grain and
gold, which for a generation have been almost the foremost staple
products of the island colony. The export of frozen meat from New
Zealand commenced in 1882, when mutton and beef to the value of
£19,339 was exported. It rose by leaps and bounds. The export
trade was valued at £345,090 in 1885, at £455,870 in 1887, £783,347
in 1889, and for 1891, we are informed by M. Von Dadelzen, the
Deputy Registrar General, the value was £1,194,724. Notwithstanding
this heavy depletion of the flocks, the sheep have increased remarkably.
In 1886 they numbered 11,704,000, and in 1891, 18,117,000, while
during the same period the cattle increased from 495,000 to 832,000
head. It is the frozen meat industry, indeed, that has raised New
Zealand from the slough of depression into which it sank when the
Government expenditure of borrowed money ceased, and there seems
little doubt but that in the course of a year or two it will have raised the
country to a pinnacle of prosperity not attained previously during the
whole of its history. We say this without any hesitation. Ten years
ago when the meat realised a lesser price in the London market than it
does now, freight and other charges came to nearly threepence per lb.;


now they have been reduced to l|d. per lb. The New Zealand Loan
and Mercantile Agency Company estimate the charges now ruling for
New Zealand mutton as follows ;
Slaughtering, dressing, freezing, weighing, labelling, and delivering
at ship’s side ... ... ... ... ... ... ... - 37
Ronro ond ovnnrf dnec •AQ
Bags and export dues ... ... ... ... ... ... ... -08
Freight from January Ist, 1892 ... ... ... ... ... TOO
Primage, 5 per cent. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... -05
Insurance, “ all risks ” ... ... ... ... ... - 10
London charges ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... '2B
The following list of freezing works
will be of interest: —
now existent in New Zealand
SOUTH
ISLAND
Freezing
Where Situated. i in
Name of Company.
Sheep per
annum.
Canterbury Frozen Meat and Dairy
Export Co., Ltd.
Christchurch Meat Co. ...
South Canterbury Refrigerating Co.
New Zealand Refrigerating Co.
Southland Frozen Meat Co.
Produce
Belfast ... ... 443,000
Islington ... ... 448,000
Timaru ... ... 275,000
Oamaru and Burnside 300,000
Bluff 144,000
1,610,000
NORTH
ISLAND,
Freezing
capacity in
Sheep per
annum.
Name of Company.
Where Situated,
Mount Egmont Freezing Co.
Longburn Slaughtering and Freezing Co.
Wanganui Meat Freezing Co
Wellington Meat Export Co
Gear Meat Co.
Auckland Freezing Company
Nelson Bros., Ltd.
North British and Hawkes Bay Freezing Co,
Ltd
Auckland
Gisborne, etc.
Napier
Waitara
100,000
700,000
Palmerston North
Wanganui
Wellington
Petone
130,000
Total for Colony
65,000
200,000
150.000
350.000
360.000
2,055,000
3,665,000


The vessels now engaged in the carrying of frozen meat from New
Zealand have a carrying capacity for 2,539,850 sheep. The average
weight of the carcases sent from New Zealand last year was 59 lbs.
About the middle of last year (1891) a conference of the several
New Zealand freezing companies was convened for the purpose of
considering a number of matters affecting the trade, and the circular
convening the meeting contains some very suggestive questions
regarding the handling of the meat after it leaves the freezing chambers.
These questions are :
1. The expediency of appointing an officer to inspect meat as
delivered to ships, in order to obtain clear bills of lading, and preclude
subsequent dispute as to whether meat shall have been properly frozen
when shipped.
2. The effective survey of ships and ships’ chambers and
machinery prior to receiving meat in New Zealand, and to require
guarantee from owners in respect of ships that shall have damaged meat
previously.
3. The expediency of requiring that the existing practice of paying
premiums to captains and engineers for saving coal be abandoned-
affording, as it does, temptation to withhold coal, so as to prejudice the
safe carriage of the meat.
4. That the captain be held responsible for supervision of
machinery and temperatures of chambers during the voyage.
5. To provide against careless or improper handling of meat in
discharging from ships or in the docks, and to secure the systematic
inspection of temperatures in the dock stores and the machinery and
insulation of these stores.
6. The expediency of taking such united action as shall secure the
consent of shipowners to the payment of freight at destination, and only
on delivery of meat in good condition.
THE FROZEN MEAT FLEET*
The following information regarding the principal lines of vessels
engaged in the carrying of frozen meat will be of interest to shippers :
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co.
The steamers of this company, the Oceana, Arcadia, Victoria,
Britannia, Ballaarat, Parramatta, Massilia, Valetta and Rome, have a
united freezing capacity of 126,300 carcases, or an average per ship of
14,033. The Himalaya and Australia, which are about to be placed
on the Australian line of the Peninsula and Oriental Company are fitted
with refrigerators and can carry 7,400 carcases each.
* This is not a complete list of the vessels engaged in the frozen meat trade. For total
carrying vessels, etc,, see statistical information at end of pamphlet.


The Orient Line.
The fine steamers of this company, the Austral, Cuzco, Oroya,
Orizaba, Orient, Ormuz, Oratava, Ophir and Oruba, are all fitted with
refrigerators, and at present convey about 120,000 carcases to London.
The freezing accommodation, however, can be greatly increased should
circumstances warrant.
The Tyser Line.
The following steamers of this line are on the New Zealand
Queensland, and English trade :
Carrying Capacity
in Carcases.
Hawkes Bay ... ... ... ... ... ... 63,000
Indramayo ... ... ... ... ... ... 60,000
Celtic King .... ... ... ... ... ... 55,000
Maori King ... ... ... ... ... ... 55,000
Star of Victoria ... ... ... ... ... ... 48,000
Star of England ... ... ... ... ... 48,000
Bayley 39,000
List of Vessels belonging to The New Zealand Shipping Company
ENGAGED IN THE FROZEN MEAT TRADE.
Mail Steamers.
Name. Tons Register. F . rozen Meat £ a Pf cit y
° in Carcases Mutton.
Tongariro ... ... ... ... 4,163 27,000
Aorangi ... ... ... ... ... 4,163 27,000
Ruapheu ... ... ... ... 4,163 27,000
Kaikoura ... ... ... ... 4,474 34 500
Rimutaka ... ... ... ... 4,474 37,000
Ruahine 6,127 71,000
Cargo Steamers.
Tekoa 4,120 60,000
Otarama ... ... ... ... 3,808 53,000
Duke of Sutherland ... ... ... 3,116 40,000
Duke of Westminster ... ... ... 3,726 40,000
Duke of Buckingham ... ... ... 3,123 37,000
Sailing Ships.
Mataura... ... ... ... ... 898 10,000
Turakina ... ... ... ... 1,247 13,000
Opawa 1,131 10,000
14 48,733 486,500


Shaw, Savill, and Albion Co.
List of vessels of this Company with carcase carrying capacity:—
STEAMERS. Carcases.
lonic ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33,000
Doric 33,000
Coptic 32,000
Arawa ... ... ... ... 32,000
Tainui ... ... 32,000
Mamari ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45,000
Matatua ... ... ... ... ... 38,500
Rangatira... ... ... ... .. ... ... 47,300
Maori 32,000
Pakeha ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47,000
SAILING VESSELS.
Canterbury ... ... ... ... ... ... 11,000
Oamaru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11,000
Invercargill ... ... ... ... ... ... 12,000
Wellington ... ... ... ... ... ... 10,000
Timaru 14,000
Hinemoa 22,000
Turnbull, Martin & Co.’s Line.
This line, trading to New Zealand, possesses the following
Steamers. Carcases,
Elderslie ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32,500
Fifeshire 29,500
NairnsLire ... ... ... ... ... ... 30,000
Morayshire ... ... ... ... ... ... 45,000
.'ATISTICAL
INFORMATION
Table
I. —Showing
1880 to 18
the total British
Imports
of Frozen Mutton from
1891
Year.
Australia.
New Zealand.
Falkland
Islands.
108,823
190,571
434,699
641,866
924,003
1,009,936
1,196,531
1,063,525
17,275
57,256
63,733
111,745
95,051
66,960
88,811
112,214
86,547
207,984
334,693
Total
Carcases.
120,893
412,394
492 269
655,888
766,417
939.231
17,275
30.000
40.000
1,068,286
1,533,393
1,896,706
20,168
18,897
1,242,669
7,894,271
104,617
5,597,139
66,095
201 791
632,917
777,891
1,187,547
1,542,646
1,975,448
2,164 269
2,948,070
3,323,821
14,838,676


Year.
Country to which
Exported.
Weight.
Value.
cwt.
cwt.
£
£
1881
Great Britain
9,980
8,554
1882
Great Britain
10,231
18,282
1882
Victoria
3,251
4,628
13,782
22,910
1883
Great Britain
29,141
35,304
1883
Victoria
1,870
2,224
1883
Java
3,900
5,572
34,911
43,100
1884
Great Britain
13,302
12,314
1884
Victoria
7
7
13,309
6,271
12,321
6,064
1885
Great Britain
1886
do.
4,852
4,671
1887
do.
21,831
19,310
1888
do.
52,262
44,537
1889
do.
37,868
33,426
1890
do.
72,304
71,534
1891
do.
105,013
101,828
Total
372,383
.£868,255
Note. —The above quantity
is the total exported, and is all of domestic produce.
Table III. —Showing the Quantity and Value of Frozen Meat Exported
from Victoria prior to the year
1892; supplied specially for
this work by Mr. Hayter, Government Statist of Victoria : —
Frozen Meat Exported.
Year.
Quantity.
Value.
cwt.
£
1884
41,373
53,196
1885
39,107
61,617
1886
39,384
70,319
1887
15,425
27,270
Total ...
135,289
.£212,402
Table II. —Showing the total Exports of Frozen Meat from New South
Wales; supplied specially for this work by Mr. Coghlan,
Government Statist of New South Wales :


Table IV. —Showing the Exports of Frozen Meat from New Zealand ;
supplied specially for this work by Mr. Von Dadelzen, Deputy
Registrar-General of New Zealand :—
Year.
Cwts.
Value.
1882
15,244
.£19,339
1883
87,975
118,328
1884
254,069
345,090
1885
296,473
373,857
1886
346,055
427,193
1887
402,107
455,870
1888
552,298
628,800
1889
656,822
783,374
1890
898,894
1,087,617
1891
1,000,037
. 1,194,724
Total ...
4,510,074
5,434,192
Table V.
—Summary of Frozen Meat Exported from New Zealand for
the six months ending 31st December, 1891: —
nber, 1891 : —
Lamb.
Carcases.
Weight
in lbs.
1,780
17
1,457
50,628
548
50,355
984
29,058
6,730
259,853
i
12,788
95,963
13,756
486,405
327,837
11,581,903
341,593
12,068,308
279,500
10,013,146
Carcases.
Mutton
Legs.
Pieces
Weight
in lbs.
Beef.
Weight
in lbs.
Auckland
Gisborne
Napier
4,696
10,632
51,769
Waitara
Wanganui ..
Wellington
Picton
1,670
27,278
110,442
19,148
Lyttelton
Timaru
Oamaru
Dunedin
Bluff
167,316
81,535
17,846
55,762
42,153
269,790
629,893
3,544,719
571,099
13,562
90,299
1,716,971
6,974,034
Shipments for
Half -Year
ending 30
June, 1891
865,426
32,710
59,734
Total for the
Year 1891
1,436,525
92,444
9,339,552
4,691,679
948,198
3,202,856
2,495,935
274,545
352,918
1,035,823
903,321
Total for the
Year 1890
1,353,857
67,894
33,903,926
52,379,009
58,915
3,504,764
86,282,935
44,041
6,174,327
5,673,512
81,010,844
11,847,839
9,910,766


Ports.
Mutton.
Lamb.
Beef.
Carcases.
Legs.
Pieces
Weight
in lbs.
Carcases.
Weight
in lbs.
Weight
in lbs.
Auckland ...
17,851
1,013,109
2,406
81,522
323,859
Gisborne ...
49,176
186
3,087,993
3,251
99,230
360,664
Napier
296,321
18,271,401
40,345
1,229,911
1,407,260
Waitara
11,638
671,758
2,870
94,513
1,466,556
Wellington
327,664
66,510
105
20,734,444
35,139
1,246,961
6,530,668
Picton
10,814
565,550
2,688
96,673
Lyttelton ...
379,786
591
1,960
21,475,537
171,643
6,268,187
189,437
Timaru
132,248
7,688,949
35,194
1,235,737
Oamaru
103,709
5,900,457
36,900
1,287,201
55,204
Dunedin
105,485
6,314,759
18,915
699,270
Bluff
66,266
4,056,587
8,565
324,655
27
1,500,958
67,101
2,251
89,780,544
357,916
12,663,860
10,333,675
Year.
1887
1888
1889
1890
1891
Table Vl.—Return of Frozen Meat Exported from New
by the various Freezing Companies for the year
30th June, 1891:
Table VII. —Statement showing meat carrying capacity of vessels
engaged in frozen meat trade between Australasia and England
during 1891 :
Zealand
ending
No. of Vessels.
New Zealand
Australia...
C Sailing Ships, 10
( Steamers, 33
Steamers, 21
Carrying Capacity
each Voyage:
Carcases.
125,000
1,337.000
128,000
1,590,000
Table VIII. —Statement of meat exported from
supplied for this work by Mr. Blakeney,
Maximum
Meat Exported.
5,436,039
4,176,215
3,876,626
8,982,548
15,366,842
125,000
Queensland, specially
Registrar General: —
Annual Export-
ing Capacity.
3,250,000
350,000
3,825,000
Value.
102,553
80,714
83,168
122,566
222,761


t 3 rt '7^
§ grt w
g.l- S
3 rt
•5 CO
IT.
rQ
6
d
h-i
T 3 22 O
"..SsS
olg = g
o-.t. “b,“
E S
M <Qio
T 3
a
CU
<U
<D
in
'o
■3 S-g?
|2|S
s
S—(
<D
g ■SgSc^
s .g S g a t;
S? eg ta |B.
T 3 2 u O .5
c
g
o
t>c
_c
<L>
c
>+-1
o
fl
o
i> t> Oo GO CVJ iq_ CO
00 rd uf CO*' GO*' of ccT id h}T
COrHGOCOGOrHGOOCO
rH rH 04 CO
VO CO H o 0 CO CD H lO
CO(MNOSCDOCCCOG4
rH GO CD CO O Oi
id CO O' tJT r-T t?' C 5 CO CO*
H rH tJI CO G 5 O rH O
H H H
CO O O 00 N H cc CO CD
Qo_ 00 (N (N CO i>
o~ of of lO CO of 00 of co"
(M H 05 lO CO CO CO CO OJ
H CD N Oi q lO GO
rH rH rH
rH I''* rH i>» CO 00 05 CO rH
NOGO
rH* (Ji* J> l> of icT rfT Q 0 of
(M co i> rH i—l oCO
rH H H (M cf CO
cs _ 000000000
"p 'S-T3 y. . 000000000
o_ooooo
S' ES,c2 rt § 00 CO I.oT of os id rfT
o '2S‘SJi :3 P. r? CO lO OCOOOCO CO
Ph c 5 6 c m_ co oosh l oih< cc io
e«~ X oT o' ad" os' oo' os r co“
00 Z<« g <M(MCOtNSC|(M<MCOCO
c
ooooooooo
•g Ov, . 000000000
° gU t» | 505q00055
g. 3 P p I CD lO Hosh®oo od o
■Sm O 2 1 H 1(5 »1> lO NlO o
i HoibOoirownco
4 > 6 g rH r-T
Z - rt
0
c n
1
X'
hH
O i -d
I-* ,M •£! cd c<u w
OtJ u) J OJ W
-csj3c .uo J
S SiS c w
a s « «•- g," E
z ® UTS _O 3
rt ■“ E 2 c
14 S «
000000000
000000000
N Qo_ (M_ 0_ 00 CD_ O O O
01 CTt>C(fo ld~ rfT N r}T
NlOlNOO®l>ffl®H
CO J> 0_ lO lO CD Hf l
HHWHHHHNCO
H i—lt —lrHrHrHrHrHrH
- OOOOOOOOCO
S ooooooooco
.2 0 © S o<o <o oo o o
a ©f ©f uf J> ©f of 4> HfT
Hoc4ooiio 0000
'S co 05 CC X> O H GO H N
g wf wf CO* CO 4> id GO*' i>
CH u cococccocococococo
w
rJ
H
<
V)
3
V)
C
<D
U
00 CO CO CO 00 00 00 Oi OJ
GOGOGOGOOOGOOOQOGO
rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH
d
H
I
i
xi
w
t-i
ca
<
05
oB
tH
M-H
<D
<v
PQ
rC
CO
<D
J—i
Ph
o
co
H
O
Ph
a
HH
T 3
c
oJ
s'
o
TD
bO
.s
HH
T 3
<u
"5
£)
a
to
CD
i>
'N
I -
o'
8
CD
00
CD
(M
O’
r—l
o
CD
Ci
O
CO
CD
O’
rH
u
>+-i
o
>1
<u
rQ
a
&
bo
a
V
o
x
c n
t)OT3 :
cj z S >.S « «j :
c CJ a; Dh 7-5 cj <u <d
I s ».= JslQ-jj-d'
| s a‘--° s« s"S = s-Sf
Q O r I —) -g O rG W u.« >


NEW SOUTH WALES
FRESH FOOD & ICE CO., LTD.
HARBOUR STREET,
STDITET.
THE LARGEST REFRIGERATING WORKS
IN THE COLONIES.
Any information regarding Freezing or Refrigerating
Machinery can be had on application to the
Manager.


BEFORE PURCHASING ELSEWHERE,
; ’INSPECT |
THE MAGNIFICENT STOCK
nj C<T , f of
ENGINES, ******
* * BOILERS, * * •
»**»«« PUMPS,
AND
GENERAL MACHINERY
OF ATX DESCRIPTIONS AND SIZES
ON VIEW AT
THE SPACIOUS SHOW ROO
TANGYES, LIMITED,
AT
HAY STREET, SYDNEY.
