

the Proceedings oj the Linnean Society of New South Wales,
1911, Vol. xxxvi., Part f October 25th.~\
'HE GASES PRESENT IN THE FLOATS (VESICLES)
OF CERTAIN MARINE ALGiE.
By A. H. S. Lucas, M.A., B.So.
[lssued 16th May, 1912.]


f From the Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales,
1911 , Vol. xxxvi., Part If, October 26h.~\
THE GASES PRESENT IN THE FLOATS (VESICLES)
OF CERTAIN MARINE ALGM.
A. H. S. Lucas, M.A., B.Sc.


Amongst our Australian Marine Algae, vesicles filled with gas.
are found only in a few genera of the Brown Seaweeds, Fucoidese.
These are Sargassum, Garpophyllum, Turbinaria, Cystophora,
Cystoseira (more typically a Northern genus), Scaberia, Phyllo-
spora amongst the Sargassaceae; Hormosira of the Fucaceae;
Macrocystis, and possibly Adenocystis, of the Laminariacese.
Several receive their names from the habit.
The function of the vesicles is evidently to support the fronds
in a more or less upright position in the water. In young plants,
and, in sheltered situations in shallow water, in even the mature
fruit-bearing individuals, there are no vesicles. This often causes
difficulty in the identification of a form which normally bears
characteristic vesicles.
I have not seen anywhere any account of analyses of the gases
occurring in the floats of seaweeds, and have accordingly devoted
some little time to this inquiry as to the nature of the gaseous
content. Naturally the question of the origin of the gases is
most prominent in one’s mind. There seem to be three possible
sources : (1) atmospheric air, (2) the gases dissolved in sea-water,
(3) gases produced in the metabolism of the plants themselves.
The main object of my experiments was to see if the results would
decide which of the three is the actual source.
I may say, at once, that I have never detected any gases
beyond nitrogen and oxygen in the floats. It is hardly conceiv-
able that any process of metabolism should yield these two gases
only, without any carbon compounds. The issue is then narrowed,
and the gases must l>e derived from those of the atmosphere, or
those dissolved in the sea-water.


Nitrogen. ..
67-12
Oxygen
26-03
CO„
6-85
I tried other methods of analysis, but found that absorption by
phosphorus over water was the cleanest, surest, and readiest.
Practically in a couple of hours, fresh cut phosphorus removed all
the oxygen which my simple apparatus could measure. By
choosing the time of the day for the experiments, the total
volume and the volume of the remaining nitrogen could be deter-
mined under practically the same conditions of temperature and
pressure. Ido not claim any extreme accuracy for the
experiments.
First, by way of testing the method, I made several analyses
of atmospheric air, of air dissolved in tap-water, and of the gases
dissolved in sea-water. The ratio of nitrogen to oxygen given by
the apparatus for air, was the orthodox 79:21. To collect the
gas from water, the water was boiled into a vessel containing
water made previously gas-free by prolonged boiling. Thus
250 c.c. of tap-water yielded 3 - 9 c.c. at ordinary temperature and
pressure, of which 2-6 c.c. were nitrogen, and 1-3 c.c. oxygen. The
ratio of the nitrogen to the oxygen was then 2:1, as it should be
if all the gas were dissolved from atmospheric air, inasmuch as
oxygen is twice as soluble as nitrogen. There was no carbon
dioxide.
The analyses of sea-water gas varied considerably, as might be
expected. On referring to the analyses of South Pacific Surface
Water collected by the “Challenger,” I found that of 16 analyses
published in the Report, no two were alike. The carbon dioxide
varied from 10T8 to 23T2 per cent, of the total gas. The ratio
of nitrogen to oxygen varied from 62-43 : 26-59 to 54-51 : 28-64,
evidently varying about a mean of 2 :1. It would seem that the
presence of organisms alters considerably the natural ratio of the
gases dissolved from the air. One of the analyses I obtained
was—
la 100 vols. of sea-water gas
100 00


The water was wave-water taken off the shor e at Bondi, on the
ocean beach. 250 c.c. of sea-water yielded 3'65c.c. of gas, or at
the rate of 14-6 c.c. per litre. The “Challenger” average was
15 c.c.
Another analysis of Coogee ocean-water gave
In 100 vols. of sea-water gas
Nitrogen 58'33
Oxygen 3055
CO a 1111
This is almost identical with a “Challenger” analysis.
The following is a Table of the analyses of the gases of the floats
of some of our algse.
Percentage
of Nitrogen.
Percentage
of Oxygen.
Species.
Comments.
Fresh-looking plants
cast up on the shore.
Just cast up.
Phyllospora comosa (1)
Hormosira hanksii (1)
Growing.
Same gathering kept a
day longer.
„ (2)
Gystophora moniliftra
Floating in the sea.
The analyses
disappointed me, for I,
perhaps unreasonably,
hoped for nearly un
last, however, it will
is less, usually much
the cavity, and in a’
dissolved in water.
uniform results. With
the exception of the
be seen that in all the
less, than if air had be
he proportion of oxygen
been taken directly into
notably less than in air
all the proportion is
less than in air
The proportion of oxygen being then less than in ordinary air,
and much less than in water-dissolved air, it would seem that the
plants, however they may obtain the gas, use up some of the
oxygen, sometimes a good deal, for other purposes than levitation.


The analyses give no decisive evidence as to which of the two
possible sources of supply is the actual one. The gases as found
may be residues of either ordinary or water-dissolved air. The
plants, while in the main submerged, are at low water as large
waves retire, exposed to the air. Hormosira may often be left
quite exposed at low tide. The vesicle is always closed; there
are no passages or pores in the walls. The structure of the walls
is as continuous as that of the rest of the frond. The vesicle
originates in a solid growth from the frond, the growing cells
gradually separating from the centre and leaving a central
cavity. Hence diffusion from the air seems to be excluded, for
the gas must be formed in the cavity, pari passu , with its growth,
otherwise the vesicle would collapse. Hence we seem to be driven
to osmosis, or osmosis with selective absorption, as the process by
which the gas passes, dissolved in water, through the cells of the
plant until the residue is set free in the cavity. Algee obtain all
their nourishment, including the oxygen necessary for respira-
tion, from the surrounding sea-water, and there must exist a
circulation from cell to cell, which I have termed, perhaps rather
crudely, a selective osmosis. It is in this way that the plants
obtain their salts, with a marked preference for potassium sul-
phate, and their oxygen, and it seems perfectly natural that just
as common salt is very generally rejected, not absorbed, so the
useless nitrogen, together with the oxygen not required, may be
eliminated, and set free in the floats in order to serve a mechanical
purpose. All the surface of the plant can be employed in the
initial absorption, and in many individuals the great number of
the floats seems to require some such general agency. I consider,
then, that the source of the gases is the gas dissolved in the sur-
rounding sea-water.
The Gases of the Inflated Capsules of two Land-plants.
It was suggested to me by Mr. T. Steel, that I should examine,
as a parallel investigation, the gaseous contents of the Balloon
Vine, Cardiospermum Halicacahum L,, plants of which were
growing in his garden. He kindly supplied me with sufficient of


the balloons, freshly gathered from the vine. A single balloon
yielded over lOc.c. of gas.
No evidence could be obtained of the presence of carbon
dioxide above the amount ordinarily present in air. There was
no evident absorption by potash; and though the gas was allowed
to stand over lime-water for six hours, not the slightest film of
carbonate formed on the surface.
Three separate determinations of oxygen were made by the
phosphorus method. Simultaneously with the third sample of
gas, an equal volume (10c.c.) of air was tested under practically
the same conditions of temperature and pressure The results
were-
Gas No. 1. Oxygen 20'3%. Using graduated vessel A.
Gas N 0.2. Oxygen 19'0%. ~ ~ ~ B.
Gas N 0.3. Oxygen 20 0%. ~ ~ ~ A.
Air Oxygen 190%. ~ ~ ~ B.
It seems plain, then, that the gas is identical with ordinary
air, the difference in reading being probably due to the slightly
unequal graduations of the two measuring vessels.
The balloons were of a vivid tender green The outer surface
has a distinct epidermis provided with hairs and stomata.
There is no inner epidermis, the lining tissue having the
same loose structure as that of the septa dividing the capsule.
It is plain, then, that atmospheric air can be admitted under
the control of the guard-cells of the stomata, and can pene-
trate all the loose tissues of the thin capsule-walls, passing
through to the cavity within. As the balloons were gathered in
the early morning, it would seem that any free carbon dioxide
formed during respiration passes out of the stomata, and does not
accumulate inside the capsule.
The use of the balloons is apparently to allow of the distribu-
tion of the capsules by the wind. They are easily detached when
ripe, and from their shape can be rolled along the ground as well
as carried in the air. And the plant secures the gas necessary
for inflation by the readiest means from the handiest supply, i.e.,
the surrounding atmosphere.


While staying at the entrance to the Tuggerah Lakes, I
gathered the inflated capsules of the Wild Cotton Plant, Gompho-
carpus fruticosus R. Br., and made parallel analyses of the con-
tained gas, and of the air of the place. In the former I found
21 %of oxygen, and in the latter 21*1 %. This also shows that
the cavities were filled with air drawn directly from the
atmosphere.
Portuguese Man of War.
At the same place, I found a number of Portuguese Men of
War freshly thrown up on the ocean beach, and tested the gas of
the floats in the same way. It appeared to be identical with the
atmospheric air analysed at the same time. Here diffusion seems
to be the process by which the float is filled, the growth of the
cells providing the necessary cavity. The membrane appears to
be thin enough for diffusion to be able to act.
