

THE SECOND BOND
OF POETRY
STABLE
<
U-i
L
oc
o
OC
<
2;
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
CATHEDRAL BUILDINGS, MELBOURNE




THE SECOND BOND
OF POETRY




THE SECOND BOND
OF POETRY
A BOOK OF VERSE FOR
AUSTRALIAN SCHOOLS
SELECTED BY
J. J. STABLE
" Coelum non animum mutant qui trans marc current "
Hor. Epp. I. xi. 27
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
CATHEDRAL BUILDINGS. MELBOURNE
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK, TORONTO
CAPETOWN, BOMBAY AND MADRAS


REGISTERED AT THE G.P.0., MELBOURNE, FOR TRANSMISSION
THROUGH THE POST AS A BOOK
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA
BY BROWN, PRIOR, ANDERSON PTY. LTD.,
PRINTCRAFT HOUSE, 430 LITTLE BOURKE ST.,
MELBOURNE, C.l, 1938.


FOREWORD
IN compiling this Second Bond of Poetry for use in
our Australian schools, I have followed the main
feature of the original Bond of Poetry, published some
fourteen years ago, where selections from the works
of Australian poets begin each section of the Anthology.
Poets who draw their material from conditions of life
familiar to us, and bid us share with them the beauty
they have discovered in our natural scenery and sur-
roundings, surely offer us in their work, especially when
we are young, the best means of understanding that
intimate connection which exists between life and poetry.
' The writings of a contemporary,' says Coleridge (when
referring to the youthful student), 'perhaps not many
years older than himself, surrounded by the same cir-
cumstances, and disciplined by the same manner, possess
a reality for him, and inspire an actual friendship, as of
a man for a man. . . . The poems themselves assume pro-
perties of flesh and blood.' The certainty of the poet's
truth to life as he sees it, feels it, and responds to it,
when acquired, will go far to quicken interest in the
poetry of past ages and to discover therein not only
patterns of beautiful things but a highroad to the worth-
while in real life.
Apart from this main feature, the arrangement of the
poems in the following pages differs from that of the


original Bond of Poetry, and I am indebted to several
friends engaged in the teaching of English literature in
our secondary schools for the suggestions that have
resulted in this alteration. The poems are divided into
two sections, each providing material for one year's
work in the course leading to the ' Intermediate ' or
' Junior ' standard, and each beginning with poems of
Australian origin, followed bv selections from contem-
o -
porary English poets, then back through the ages to the
time of Chaucer. Beyond Chaucer, unfortunately,
linguistic difficulties do not allow us to go. The first
section is intended as an introduction to the studv of
/
poetry, and offers as wide a range as possible of poems,
most of them without difficultv, in which the narrative
w *
and descriptive interests predominate. The second
section is more advanced, and consists of poems more
definitely lyrical and reflective than are those included
in the first section. Many of these poems demand close
attention, but none of them, in its obvious meaning at all
events, is beyond the grasp of youth.
In compiling this Anthology, I have been influenced
by the fact that, for the majority of the students in our
secondary schools, the Intermediate or Junior studies
end the period of supervised instruction. So the poems
have been selected chiefly to illustrate both the wide
ur
interest of poetry in every-day life and the permanence
of its main function. For the same reason, several
extracts from longer poems have been included, poems
that otherwise would probably remain unknown to the
students who leave school at or lie fore the age of
sixteen.


Foi* permission to use copyright poems. lam deeply
indebted to the living authors represented in this
Anthology and to the literary executors of D. H.
Lawrence (Airs. Frieda Lawrence), Rudyard Kipling
(Mrs. Kipling), Robert Bridges (Mrs. Bridges),
Austin Dobson (A. T. A. Dobson), Julian Grenfell
(Lady Desborough), James Elroy Flecker (Mrs.
Flecker), A. E. Housman (Messrs. James B. Pinker
and Son).
I am also greatly indebted to the following publishers,
either for their permission to use poems of which they
hold the copyright or for confirming the permission
granted bv authors or their literary executors:
Messrs. Angus and Robertson Ltd., for the poems by W. H.
Ogilvie, Henry Lawson, A. B. Paterson, D. McKee Wright,
Victor Dale}-, J. Brunton Stephens.
Messrs. William Blackwood and Sons, for the poem by Alfred
Noyes.
The Bulletin Newspaper Company, for the poem by R. D.
Fitzgerald.
Messrs. J. M. Dent and Sons Ltd., for the poem by Miss
Mackellar.
Messrs. Dymock's Book Arcade Ltd., for the poem by L. H.
Allen.
Messrs. William Heinemann Ltd., for poems by John Mascfield,
reprinted from Collected Poems, and for the poems by D. H.
Lawrence and A. C. Swinburne.
Messrs. Hodder and Stoughton, for Rudyard Kipling's poem,
' The King's Pilgrimage,' reprinted from Inclusive Verse.
The Lothian Publishing Company Ltd., for the poems by Louis
Esson, Shaw Neilson, T. S. Williamson and William Gay.
Messrs. Macmillan and Co. Ltd., for the poems by W. B. Yeats
and Sir Alfred Austin, and for Lord Tennyson's ' Crossing
the Bar.'


Messrs. Methuen and Co. Ltd., for two poems by Rudyard
Kipling, * Recessional/ reprinted from The Five Nations,
and ' Coastwise Lights/ reprinted from The Seven Seas.
Messrs. John Murray, for the three poems by Sir Henry
Newbolt.
The Oxford University Press, for the poems by Robert Bridges,
Austin Dobson, and for Rudyard Kipling's ' The Glory ot
the Garden/ reprinted from A School History of, England.
Messrs. Martin Seeker and Warburg Ltd., for the poem by
J. Elroy Flecker.
Messrs. Sidgwick and Jackson Ltd. for the poem by Rupert
Brooke. And
Mr. E. A. Vidler, for the poems by J. B. O'Hara and J.
Hebblethwaite.
Two sonnets by the late Sir Archibald Strong have been
included in this anthology, but the usual acknowledgments
have not been recorded as I have been unable to trace th< a
copyright-holder of his poems.


PREFACE
THIS Anthology will not be your introduction to
poetry, for surely you have long before now
learnt some poems by heart, read others, and found in
them something that attracted you, and perhaps you
have even acquired some elementary information on
poetic measure and poetic diction. But the work before
you in your English poetry class, work for which this
little book will provide the material, breaks new ground
for you in that it implies a first systematic study of the
oldest literary form practised by man, a study which is,
I hope, to lead you to an understanding of the real
significance of poetry, of the influence it has on those
of us who have learnt to value it, and of the reason why
the poet, since the beginning of the recorded history of
civilization, has acquired an honour roll all his own,
one more memorable than any other. Homer, Virgil,
Dante, Shakespeare, Milton are familiar and honoured
names to all, even to those who have never read a line
belonging to them, while few of us, unless we have
actually studied history, can recall the names of princes,
rulers and conquerors who were outstandingly important
at the time when those poets lived. This first sys-
tematic study of poetry will also, I hope, aid you to
distinguish between what is real and worthwhile, the
song of the few to whom, as Browning tells us, ' God


has whispered in the ear.' and the verse of the man)*
who deal in futilities and loose thinking, hiding their
nothingness in the glamour of some sort of metrical
form. Now this power of right selection is something
well worth while, for inevitably we are influenced by our
surroundings, by our occupation, by the hooks we read
in search of instruction or of pleasure. Just as we must
select the best within our reach to sustain and develop
our bodies, so should we choose the best only, and that
best is within our easy reach, to quicken and develop our
mental powers. If we are content with futilities and
mediocrities, we are in danger of being ourselves futile
or mediocre. This, you will say, is obvious, but less
obvious is the fact that at no other time in history have
the facilities for the; production and distribution of the
futile and mediocre in literature been as great as they arc
to-day; consequently, we are surrounded with reading
matter of little worth, and so it is very necessary that
you should now, while at school, begin the mental train-
ing that will enable you to distinguish between the true
and the false.
There is another tendency you have to guard against,
one also very prominent at the present time, the tendency
to avoid or belittle the study of any subject that does not
seem to have a direct hearing upon the daily work for
which you are being trained. You may have heard some-
one say, perhaps you repeated it yourself: ' What is the
use of poetry? It is a waste of time, and won't help one
to earn a living.' This purely utilitarian view would
condemn you to a life of narrowness, one limited to the
needs of your occupation, and would deprive you of the


means enabling you to acquire, in addition to your daily
bread, that power to a full and useful life which in
itself is an art, the art of living.
Poetry will teach you something of the art of living,
a function it shares with the other arts, and, in fact,
with all cultural' subjects. In the exercise of that
function, poetry, being more versatile, has definitely an
advantage over the other arts, for, like music, it appeals
to the ear, and, like painting or sculpture, it appeals to
the eye, although indirectly, through the word picture
the poet fashions. Poetry can do more than the
painters' or the sculptors' art in that, not being static,
it may deal with a series of events, or trace an action,
an emotion, or a thought through all its phases. Its one
limitation is the limitation of words.
Many attempts have been made to define poetry, but
none of them is really adequate, for poetry, rooted as it
is in life, is too wide and too deep to be shackled by a
definition. We can, however, lay down principles that
indicate the aim, the functions and the material of
poetry, principles that will help us to understand its
scope and its significance. Poetry has one aim, which
it shares with the other arts, and that is delight. This
one aim of poetry was indicated more than two thousand
years ago by the Greek philosopher, who is also our first
critic, Aristotle, and it has never been seriously chal-
lenged since then. The poet delights in responding to
the urge, to the inspiration within him, for which he
seeks adequate expression in the song he fashions, and
we, for our part, in listening to that song, find within
ourselves an echo of the delight that was his. In fashion-


ing his song, the poet calls into play his whole being, for
he seeks not only to express his thoughts, but also the
emotions that have given rise to those thoughts or have
been kindled by them. He may allow his imagination to
soar away from the matter of fact of life, and seek for
truth in ' the light that never was on sea or land,' or,
giving play to his fancy (a quality depending for its
effectiveness on observation, stimulated by imagination
and controlled by good sense), he may lift what appears
to us to be commonplace in thought or images into some-
thing that grips our attention and delights us with a
beauty our eyes did not see, and with a significance our
minds did not grasp.*
The poet is a seer in that his observation penetrates
deeper into the heart of things, and responds to them
emotionally more fully and sympathetically than you
and I are able to do, and he delights in revealing to us
what he sees, the impression it has made on him, the
thought it has quickened within him, and the passion it
has stirred in his breast. The poet is also a maker;
indeed, the word poet, which comes originally from the
Greek, means maker, for in the exercise of his imagina-
tion he re-fashions from what we call the facts of life a
dream world of his own which, to him, leads nearer to
truth than those facts of themselves can lead him. In all
this the poet, in a sense, is closer to primitive man than
are the rest of us, for his emotional response has not
Good Sense is the Body of poetic genius, Fancy its Drapery, Motion
its Life, and Imagination the Soul that is everywhere and in each} and
forms all into one graceful and intelligent whole.' —Coleridge
(Biographia L 'ttcraria).


been blunted by the artificialities of civilization as much
as have ours, and there is in him a nearness to nature
(varying, of course, in degree according to his indivi-
duality) that gives him a more comprehensive under-
standing of the joy and sorrow of life. Lastly, the poet
is a singer, for he has in him something of the music of
the universe, and strives to use its revealing power in
the rhythmic and sound harmony of the words he selects
to convey to us his meaning.
The great poet deals in truth, and in truth only. His
work is sincere, conveying to us, as precisely as the
means at his disposal permit, the picture he sees, the
emotion he feels, the right he believes in, and the wrong
that has moved him. This sincerity is at the root of
his delight, and he bids us share it with him, not as a
propagandist, but as an artist. Great poetry is teaching
us all the time, but indirectly only, for poetry with
deliberate didactic intent is rarely if ever great. Didac-
tic poetry may be just informative, and as such it will
lack the directness of prose, or it may be the result of a
biased point of view, and as such will, lack the essential
quality of universal truth. Nevertheless, great poetry
is teaching us all the time, for it is revelation, ' devoted,'
says Robert Bridges, ' to the high imaginative task of
displaying the beauty, solemnity and mystery of man's
life on earth.'
There is yet another aspect of the poet's art that can
afford us guidance, even in the practical aims of modern
utilitarian studies, an aspect that is of major import-
ance at the present time. The great poet is a stylist,
in that he uses words to their utmost capacity, and is


at infinite pains to select those only that will convey his
meaning or impression with the greatest possible pre-
cision. His art, according to Coleridge, demands ' the
best words in their best order,' and, consequently, good
poetry is an excellent aid to the acquisition of a ready
and precise vocabulary. Our English language is a
magnificent vehicle of thought, built up through the
centuries by the genius of our race, but its effectiveness
can easily be weakened, and, nowadays especially, many
adverse influences are undermining its structure.
Slovenly expression, verbal exaggeration, domestic
slang, scientific jargon, the importation of overseas bar-
barisms are all weakening the effectiveness of our
means of expression, and, consequently, are destructive
of genius. The study of real poetry, where none of these
faults is to be found, will help you to cultivate one of the
most valuable assets you can acquire, a ready and effec-
tive means of expression.
Of course, poetry varies considerably according to the
personality and power of the poet, to the means within
his reach, to the subject matter of his poem, and (but this
is not necessarily a major factor) according to the genius
of his own generation which he may either lead, reflect
or react against. So, quite apart from artistic work, we
can divide our poetic literature into an extraordinary-
number of groups, based on either the metrical form
used by the poet, such as, for instance, blank verse,
heroic couplet, lyrical forms; or on the kind of poetry
selected, such as sonnets, ballads, epics, songs, drama;
or on the mood it reflects, such as satire, the elegy,
reflective poetry, heroic poetry, humorous verse; or on


the period during which the poems were written, such
as Elizabethan poetry, Victorian poetry, post-war
poetry; or, according to the nationality of the poet,
English, Scottish, Irish, American, Australian.
Such divisions are a useful aid to the student, and
enable him to find his way among the many avenues of
our poetic literature, but we must never lose sight of
the fact that, in spite of its many divisions, poetry speaks
to us with one voice, and means to us to-day precisely
the same thing, and offers us precisely the same delight
as it did in the days of Chaucer, of Shakespeare, or of
Tennyson. Great poetry as a revelation of life is
unchanging, whatever garb it may assume, and from
whatever conditions it may spring, and, further, its
motive is consistent in that, directly or indirectly, it is a
song of praise. You will see that this is so as you study
the poems in this book, poems representative of some
five hundred years in our history, and illustrating many
poetic forms and moods. In the course of your study
you will range from the direct simplicity of the old
ballad, the poetry that delighted the uneducated country
folk hundreds of years ago, to the stately periods of a
Milton, rich in memories of Ancient and Modern cul-
ture, and from the light lyric, playing with some emotion,
to the deep note found in Coleridge's ' Dejection Ode.'
At first, probably, the narrative poems will attract
most of you, and those written by Australian writers
will be especial favourites. That Australian poems
should appeal to you is natural, and this quite apart
from their artistic worth, for they spring from sur-
roundings that are familiar, they emphasize character-


istics you look upon as your own, and they offer you a
revelation the truth of which you can grasp, and to the
call of which you can readily respond. The work of the
modern English poets represented in this Anthology
will also appeal to you, for, although some 12,000 miles
of land and sea lie between them and you, their poems
are attuned to the present-day outlook which is yours as
well as theirs. Yet, as you follow time, poem by poem,
back through the centuries to Chaucer, you will soon
discover that all of them seem to be modern in their
outlook, in spite of the changes wrought by the march
of civilization. Modern they all are, because real poetry
springs from and deals with feelings and thoughts which
are, and always have been, rooted in human nature, and
remain there unchanged whatever the outward condi-
tions of life may be, and because the function of poetry
remains the same, a function which Matthew Arnold
calls ' the power of so dealing with things as to awaken
in us a wonderful, new and intimate sense of them and
of our relation with them.'
Now, a little advice before I conclude. Do not look
upon this book merely as material for school work lead-
ing to the inevitable examination test. If you approach
your study of poetry from that angle only you are in
danger of casting out from your life a power of enjoy-
ment and understanding that cannot but be a per-
manent influence through the future that awaits you.
It is your duty to acquire from your studies, not at
second hand, but from within yourselves, the cul-
tural tastes that you will develop through life. It is
your duty now, during your school years, to equip your-


selves not only with the knowledge that will enable you
to start earning your living, and to rise in whatever
occupation you select, but also with an understanding
of the wide significance of life. Now, that understand-
ing will come to you through your participation in what
are called cultural activities, and, of these, there are
many, the poets' art is not only the most readily acces-
sible, but can be also, for the average individual, the most
illuminating.
The poems in this Anthology have been selected to
cover as wide a field of interests within your grasp as
possible, and even those of you who imagine that they
have no artistic bent, will find therein poems that will
quicken their interest and arouse their emotion. Pick
out those poems, learn them by heart, make them part
of yourself, and try to discover why they interest you,
why you respond to them emotionally. It may be only
the story that attracts you, it may be the rhythm that
moves you, it may be a vividly accurate description of a
familiar scene, it may be felicity of expression, or a well-
turned thought that has haunted you —whatever it is,
find out, for your response to it is an indication of your
own natural taste, and your discovery will be a step
towards that understanding of yourself which you must
acquire if you desire your life to be worth while. Then,
as it is to your infinite advantage to develop the natural
taste that is within you, try to widen your interest by
increasing your knowledge of the authors whose poems
have interested you, and by seeking to understand the
appeal other poems have for other people.
If you do this, you will be surprised how quickly


your own response to the poet s call will grow, and
from that growth there will surely emerge an interest
that will stay with you through life.
' Poetry,' says Coleridge, ' has been to me its own
exceeding great reward; it has given me the habit of
wishing to discover the good and beautiful in all that
meets and surrounds me.'


CONTENTS
PART I
POEMS—NARRATIVE AND DESCRIPTIVE
Palmer, Edward Vance .
Palmer, Edward Vance .
Esson, Louis
Neilson, Shaw ....
Ogilvie, William Henry .
Lawson, Henry ....
Bayldon, Arthur Albert .
Souter, Charles Henry .
Paterson, Andrew Barton
Lawrence, David Herbert
Noyes, Alfred
Masefield, John . . . .
Masefield, John . . . .
Kipling, Rudyard . . .
Kipling, Rudyard . . .
Newbolt, Sir Henry . .
Bridges, Robert ....
Kendall, Henry ....
Kendall, Henry ....
Dobson, Austin ....
Gordon, Adam Lindsay .
Kingsley, Charles . . .
Tennyson, Lord Alfred .
Macaulay, Lord Thomas .
. . . The Scrub Pool 3
The Snake 4
. . The Shearers Wife 5
Old Granny Sullivan 6
Drought 9
The Teams 11
Night Mail 12
lrish Lords 14
. Story of Mongrel Grey 15
Snake 18
Shcrzvood 22
The Blozoing of the Horn 24
. . . Spanish Waters 26
. The Coastzvise Lights 29
. The King's Pilgrimage 30
Gillespie 33
. . . . London Snozv 35
. The Last of His Tribe 36
. . Sutherland's Grave 38
The Ballad of 'Beau Bro-
cade ' 40
. . . Wolf and Hound 43
The Ballad of Earl Hal-
dan's Daughter ... 47
. The Lady of Shaioit 48
. . . . The Armada 54


Shelley, Percy Bysshe The Forest 59
Byron, Lord Alfred Waterloo 61
Hunt, Leigh The Glove and the Lions 64
Campbell, Thomas Lord Ullin's Daughter 65
Southey, Robert The Battle of Blenheim 68
Scott, Sir Walter Allen-a-Dale 70
Wordsworth, William On the Lake 71
Cowper, William Boadicea 73
Goldsmith, Oliver The Village Preacher 74
Author unknown King John and the Abbot
of Canterbury ... 76
Milton, John The Death of Samson 80
Fletcher, John The Boy 82
Shakespeare, William Envy 83
Shakespeare, William Cleopatra 84
Shakespeare, William Queen Mab 85
Spenser, Edmund The Dragon's Death 87
Author Unknown Robin Hood and Alan-a-
Dale 89
Author unknown Sir Patrick Spens 93
Chaucer, Geoffrey The Oxford Student 96
PART II
LYRICS AND POEMS OF REFLECTION
Fitzgerald, Robert D Inland 101
Mackellar, Dorothea Colour 102
Allen, Leslie Holdsworth The Reaper 103
Strong, Sir Archibald Australia } 1905 104
Strong, Sir Archibald Australia, 191.4 104
Neilson, Shaw Heart of Spring 105
Wright, David McKee . . .A Song of Little Gardens 106
O'Dowd, Bernard The Bush 108
Williamson, Frank S I he Magpie's Song 109
Gay, William Australia, 1894 111


Gay, William
Gay, William
Paterson, Andrew Barton .
O'Hara, John Bernard .
Daley, Victor James . . .
Hebblethwaite, James . . .
Grenfell, Julian
Brooke, Rupert
Flecker, James Elroy . . .
Masefield, John
Masefield, John
Yeats, William Butler . .
Kipling, Rudyard ....
Kipling, Rudyard ....
Newbolt, Sir Henry . . .
Newbolt, Sir Henry . . .
Housman, Alfred Edward .
Cuthbertson, James Lister .
Bridges, Robert
Kendall, Henry
Dobson, Austin
Swinburne, Algernon Charles
Stephens, James Brunton
Austin, Alfred
Arnold, Matthew ....
Bronte, Emily Jane ....
Browning, Robert ....
Browning, Robert ....
Browning, Robert ....
Tennyson, Lord Alfred . .
Tennyson, Lord Alfred . .
Keats, John
. Australian Federation 112
Primroses 113
. The Wind's Message 113
. Keep Summer in Thy
Heart 115
The Muses of Australia 116
Wanderers 119
lnto Battle 120
. . .The Soldier, 1914 122
To a Poet a Thousand
Years Flence .... 122
Sea Fever 123
Roadways 124
. The Fiddler of Dooney 125
Recessional 126
The Glory of the Garden 127
. . . Vital Lampada 129
. . . . Drake's Drum 130
. . . . Fancy's Knell 131
The Bush 133
. . . . Nightingales 133
Orara 134
A Fancy from Fontenelle 137
4
. . . Flope and Fear 138
Even Song 138
.Is Life Worth Living? 140
Requiescat 142
Last Lines 142
. . . The Lost Leader 143
Grozv Old Along With Me 145
. .. . Pippa's Song 146
. Ring Out, Wild Bells 147
. . . Crossing the Bar 148
. . A Thing of Beauty 149


Shelley, Percy Bysshe . .
Cunningham, Allan
Moore, Thomas . . .
Wordsworth, William
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor
Rogers, Samuel. . .
Burns, Robert ....
Burns, Robert ....
Blake, William . . .
Blake, William . . .
Cowper, William . .
Pope, Alexander . .
Dryden, John ....
Cowley, Abraham . .
Milton, John ....
Herrick, Robert . .
Fletcher, John . . .
Jonson, Ben ....
Campion, Thomas . .
Campion, Thomas . .
Shakespeare, William .
Shakespeare, William .
Shakespeare, William .
Shakespeare, William .
Shakespeare, William .
Marlowe, Christopher .
, Ode to the IF est Wind 150
A Wet Sheet and a Fiozv-
ing Sea 153
. . O, The Shamrock! 154
Nature 156
. . Dejection, an Ode 157
. . . . Nature's Gift 163
My Love is like a Red,
Red Rose 163
. . . . . . IVinter 164
And Did Those Feet in
Ancient Time? . - 165
The Dance 166
. . The FaFien Poplars 167
. . . Ode on Solitude 167
.A Song for St. Cecilia's
Day, 1687 168
Of Myself 170
. . On His Blindness 171
.... To Daffodils 172
To Fan 172
To Celia 173
. . . . Jack and Joan 174
The Man Upright of Life 175
All the World's a Stage 176
Shall I Compare Thee to
a Summers Day? . . 177
Blow, Blow/, Thou Winter
Wind 178
Music 178
. . . A Winter Song 179
The Passionate Shepherd
to FT is Love .... 180
Sackville, Thomas Peace 181
Surrey, Henry Howard, Earl of . From Boy to Man 181
Author unknown Summer is Coining xS3


PART I
POEMS, NARRATIVE AND DESCRIPTIVE




THE SCRUB POOL
WELL we knew that evil pool,
Hidden deep in darkest scrub.
Prickly thorn and poisonous shrub
Hemmed it round, and foliage cool
Met and formed a covert high
Shutting out the flaming sky.
There no friendly beast would drink,
There no sunlight ever came;
Monstrous growths without a name
Crouched around the water's brink.
Bulbous lilies, red as blood,
Burst in splendour through the mud.
And things foul and beautiful
Squatted near the treacherous slime;
Green and golden snakes would climb
Round the fallen logs, and pull
Screaming frogs from secret holes
In the rotting blackwood boles.
And basking lizards, still as death,
With horny backs and jewelled eyes
Fished with coloured tongues for flies,
While through the water, whose foul breath
Stained the stagnant air around
Mud-eels moved without a sound.


There the winged fox made his home.
There the night-hawk found its prey;
Hidden from the light of day
Fungi frothed in scarlet foam,
And orchids big as parrots won
Pride from the forgotten sun.
Well we know that haunted spot!
Evil's self was prisoned there.
Kept from tainting purer air,
Kept in Beauty's toils to rot-
Till boyhood's vision broke and hurled
Beauty and Evil through the world.
THE SNAKE
I KILLED a snake this morning in the grass,
A lovely, sinister thing of gleaming jet:
I see it yet,
Gliding across the place my feet would pass,
In effortless motion, fluid as molten glass,
Yet live as fire, and evilly aware
Of all the magic in its jewelled stare,
The founts of poison in its being set.
I struck with savage force, and now it lies
With small ants swarming round its mangled head;
Surely it's dead!
Yet in the sunlight myriad shapes arise
And flow in rhythm before my dazzled eyes;
Each black stick melts in curves, each tussock holds
Its crimson belly and its shining folds,
Till mind and sense recoil in nameless dread.


Who dragged this creature from the nether streams
And on an innocent world its presence thrust ?
Its eyes hold lust
And evil will beyond man's darkest dreams;
Yet when it moves a baleful beauty gleams,
The shy birds flutter and shriek, each lyric note
Turned to a bat's cry in the quivering throat
Bv this insidious dragon of the dust.
J O
O slender vial filled with poisoned wine !
If all the subtle alchemy vou hold
To turn men cold
Had been denied you in that first design,
Would harmonies of form, and colour, and line
Flood all my being now with life intense ?
Or would I pass with unawakened sense
A coloured worm that wriggled in the mould?
EDWARD VANCE PALMER
THE SHEARER'S WIFE
BEFORE the glare o' dawn I rise
To milk the sleepy cows, an' shake
The droving dust from tired eyes,
Look round the rabbit traps, then bake
The children's bread.
There's hay to stook, an' beans to hoe,
An' ferns to cut in the scrub below.
Women must work, when men must go
Shearing from shed to shed.


I patch an' darn, now evening comes,
An' tired I am with labour sore,
Tired o' the bush, the cows, the gums,
Tired, but we must dree for long months more
What no tongue tells.
The moon is lonely in the sky,
Lonely the bush, an' lonely I
Stare down the track no horse draws nigh,
An' start ... at the cattle bells.
Louis ESSON.
OLD GRANNY SULLIVAN
A PLEASANT shady place it is, a pleasant place and cool-
The township folk go up and down, the children pass to
school.
Along the river lies my world, a dear sweet world to
me:
I sit and learn—l cannot go; there is so much to see.
But Granny she has seen the world, and often by her
side
I sit and listen while she speaks of youthful days of
pride;
Old Granny's hands are clasped; she wears her
favourite faded shawl —
I ask her this, I ask her that: she says, ' I mind it all.'
The boys and girls that Granny knew, far o'er the seas
are thev,


But there's no love like the old love, and the old world
far away;
Her talk is all of wakes and fairs —or how, when night
would fall,
' 'Twas many a quare thing crept and came,' and Granny
' minds them all.'
A strange new land was this to her, and perilous, rude
and wild —
Where loneliness and tears and care come to each
mother's child,
The wilderness closed all around, grim as a prison
wall;
But white folk then were stout of heart —ah! Granny
' minds it all.'
The day she first met Sullivan —she tells it all to me-
How she was hardly twenty-one and he was twenty-
three.
The courting days! the kissing days! —but bitter things
befall
The bravest hearts that plan and dream. Old Granny
' minds it all.'
Her wedding-dress I know by heart; yes! every flounce
and frill;
And the little home they lived in first, with the garden
on the hill.
'Twas there her baby boy was born; and neighbours
came to call,
But none had seen a boy like Jim —and Granny ' minds
it all.'


They had their fight in those old days; but Sullivan was
strong,
A smart, quick man at anything; 'twas hard to put him
wrong . . .
One day they brought him from the mine . . . (The big
salt tears will fall.)
' 'Twas long ago, God rest bis soul!' Poor Granny
' minds it all.'
The first dark davs of widowhood, the wearv days and
+ * ■/ «r
slow,
The grim, disheartening, uphill fight, then Granny lived
to know.
' The childer,' ah! they grew and grew —sound, rosy-
cheeked and tall:
' The childer ' still they are to her. Old Granny ' minds
them all.'
llow well she loved her little brood! Oh, Granny's
heart was brave!
She gave to them her love and faith —all that the good
God gave.
They change not with the changing years; as babies
just the same
She feels for them, though some, alas ! have brought her
grief and shame:
The big world called them here and there, and many a
mile away:
They cannot come —she cannot go —the darkness haunts
the day;


And I, no flesh and blood of hers, sit here while shadows
fall—
I sit and listen —Granny talks; for Granny ' minds
them all.'
Just fancy Granny Sullivan at seventeen or so,
In all the floating finery that women love to show ;
And oh! it is a merry dance: the fiddler's flushed with
wine,
And Granny's partner brave and gay, and Granny's
eyes ashine. . . .
'Tis time to pause, for pause we must; we only have our
day:
Yes, by and by our dance will die, our fiddlers cease to
play ;
And we shall seek some quiet place where great grey
shadows fall,
And sit and wait as Granny waits —we'll sit and ' mind
them all.'
Shaw Neilson.
DROUGHT
My road is fenced with the bleached, white bones
And strewn with the blind, white sand,
Beside me a suffering, dumb world moans
On the breast of a lonely land.
On the rim of the world the lightnings play,
The heat-waves quiver and dance,
And the breath of the wind is a sword to slay
And the sunbeams each a lance.


I have withered the grass where my hot hoofs tread
I have whitened the sapless trees,
I have driven the faint-heart rains ahead
To hide in their soft green seas.
I have bound the plains with an iron band,
I have stricken the slow streams dumb!
To the charge of my vanguards who shall stand?
Who stay when my cohorts come?
The dust-storms follow and wrap me round,
The hot winds ride as a guard;
Before me the fret of the swamps is bound
And the way of the wild-fowl barred.
I drop the whips on the loose-flanked steers;
I burn their necks with the bow ;
And the green-hide rips and the iron sears
Where the staggering, lean beasts go.
I lure the swagman out of the road
To the gleam of a phantom lake;
I have laid him down, I have taken his load,
And he sleeps till the dead men wake.
My hurrying hoofs in the night go by,
And the great flocks bleat their fear
And follow the curve of the creeks burnt dry
And the plains scorched brown and sere.
The worn men start from their sleepless rest
With faces haggard and drawn;
They cursed the red Sun into the west
And they curse him out of the dawn.


They have carried their outposts far, far out,
But —blade of my sword for a sign! —
I am the Master, the dread King Drought,
And the great West Land is mine !
W. H. OGILVIE
THE TEAMS
A CLOUD of dust on the long white road,
And the teams go creeping on
Inch by inch with the weary load;
And by the power of the green-hide goad
The distant goal is won.
With eyes half-shut to the blinding dust,
And necks to the yokes bent low,
The beasts are pulling as bullocks must;
And the shining tires might almost rust
While the spokes are turning slow.
With face half-hid 'lieath a broad-brimmed hat
That shades from the heat's white waves,
And shouldered whip with its green-hide plait,
The driver plods with a gait like that
Of his weary, patient slaves.
He wipes his brow, for the day is hot,
And spits to the left with spite;
He shouts at ' Bally,' and flicks at ' Scot,'
And raises dust from the back of ' Spot,'
And spits to the dusty right.


He'll sometimes pause as a thing of form
In front of a settler's door,
And ask for a drink, and remark, ' It's warm,'
Or say, ' There's signs of a thunder-storm;'
But he seldom utters more.
But the rains are heavy on roads like these;
And, fronting his lonely home,
For weeks together the settler sees
The teams bogged down to the axletrees,
Or ploughing the sodden loam.
And then when the roads are at their worst,
The bushman's children hear
The cruel blows of the whips reversed
While bullocks pull as their hearts would burst,
And bellow with pain and fear.
And thus with little of joy or rest
Are the long, long journeys done;
And thus —'tis a cruel war at the best —
Is distance fought in the mighty West,
And the lonely battles won.
HENRY LAWSON (1867-1922).
NIGHT MAIL
INTO the silent night
With a shriek and a spume and a spasm of light,
With the long bustling platform fast gliding from
sight,
With signals saluting like flags : All Right!


I move palpitating with might,
Under the solemn stars
Dragging my lighted cars
I harry the Bush with a roar like thunder:
Now rumbling o'er a bridge,
Now skirting a mountain ridge—
Now plunging thereunder
Through a long tunnel I strain
Cloaked in a hurricane
Of smothering smoke
With a hoarse rumbling rhyme
Pitched off to the time
Of my thundering stroke;
Anon with a clash
At the clattering points I out of it dash
To leap all the trees into light with my flash.
Untiring I reel
Twin ribbons of steel
And jar the deep hush of a weird moving vision;
Where my firelight gleams
Flit gullies and streams
And trees gesture like crones with derision,
Till I see like a star the clear signal afar
And whistle ere smoothly I glide
Past the yellow lustre of lamp-lights acluster
With a hoarse panting train on one side
With a platform of faces, of luggage and cases
On the other a moment descried.
Into the gloom again
Threading a lonely plain


With a cot here and there shedding light,
Thrusting the darkness back,
Showering sparks down the track
I trail out my plume to the night.
ARTHUR ALBERT BAYLDON
IRISH LORDS
THE clover burr was two feet high, and the billabongs
were full;
The brolgas danced a minuet, and the world seemed
made of wool;
The nights were never wearisome, and the days were
never slow,
When first we came to Irish Lords, on the road to
Ivanhoe.
The rime was on the barley-grass as we passed the
homestead rails;
A Darling jackass piped us in, with his trills and turns
and scales;
And youth and health and carelessness sat on the saddle-
bow —
And Mary lived at Irish Lords, on the road to Ivanhoe.
On every hand was loveliness, and the Fates were fair
and kind ;
We drank the very wine of life, and we never looked
behind;
And Mary! Mary, everywhere, went flitting to and fro,
When first we came to Irish Lords, on the road to
Ivanhoe.


The window of her dainty bower, where the golden
banksia grew,
Stared like a dead man's glazing eye, and the roof had
fallen through.
No violets in her garden bed. And her voice—hushed,
long ago!
When last we camped at Irish Lords, on the road to
Ivanhoe.
CHARLES HENRY SOUTER.
STORY OF MONGREL GREY
THIS is the story the stockman told
On the cattle camp, when the stars were bright;
The moon rose up like a globe of gold
And flooded the plain with her mellow light.
We watched the cattle till dawn of day
And he told me the story of Mongrel Grey.
He was a knock-about station hack,
Spurred and walloped, and banged and beat;
Ridden all day with a sore on his back,
Left all night with nothing to eat.
That was a matter of everyday
♦
Normal occurrence with Mongrel Grey.
We might have sold him, but someone heard
He was bred out back on a flooded run,
Where he learnt to swim like a waterbird;
Midnight or midday were all as one—
In the flooded ground he would find his way;
Nothing could puzzle old Mongrel Grey.


'Tis a trick, no doubt, that some horses learn;
When the floods are out they will splash along
In girth-deep water, and twist and turn
From hidden channel and billabong,
Never mistaking the road to go;
For a man may guess —but the horses know.
I was camping out with my youngest son-
Bit of a nipper, just learnt to speak —
In an empty hut on the lower run,
Shooting and fishing in Conroy's Creek.
The youngster toddled about all day,
And there with our horses was Mongrel Grey
All of a sudden a flood came down,
At first a freshet of mountain rain,
Roaring and eddying, rank and brown,
Over the flats and across the plain.
Rising and rising—at fall of night
Nothing but water appeared in sight!
'Tis a nasty place when the floods are out,
Even in daylight; for all around
Channels and billabongs twist about,
Stretching for miles in the flooded ground.
And to move seemed a hopeless thing to try
In the dark with the storm-water racing by.
I had to risk it. I heard a roar
As the wind swept down and the driving rain;
And the water rose till it reached the floor
Of our highest room; and 'twas very plain —
The way the torrent was sweeping down —
We must make for the highlands at once,
drown.


Off to the stable I splashed, and found
The horses shaking with cold and fright;
I led them down to the lower ground,
But never a yard would they swim that night!
They reared and snorted, and turned away,
And none would face it but Mongrel Grey.
I bound the child on the horse's back,
And we started off, with a prayer to heaven,
Through the rain and the wind and the pitchy black,
For I knew that the instinct God has given
To prompt His creatures by night and day
Would guide the footsteps of Mongrel Grey.
He struck deep water at once and swam-
I swam beside him and held his mane-
Till we touched the bank of the broken dam
In shallow water; then off again,
Swimming in darkness across the flood,
Rank with the smell of the drifting mud.
He turned and twisted across the back,
Choosing the places to wade or swim,
Picking the safest and shortest track —
The blackest darkness was clear to him.
Did he strike the crossing by sight or smell ?
The Lord that led him alone could tell!
He dodged the timber whene'er he could,
But timber brought us to grief at last;
I was partly stunned by a log of wood
That struck my head as it drifted past;
Then lost my grip of the brave old grey,
And in half a second he swept away.


I reached a tree, where I had to stay,
And did a perish for two days' hard;
And lived on water —but Mongrel Grey,
He walked right into the homestead yard
At dawn next morning, and grazed around,
With the child strapped on him safe and sound.
We keep him now for the wife to ride,
Nothing too good for him now, of course;
Never a whip on his fat old hide,
For she owes the child to that brave grey horse.
And not Old Tyson himself could pay
The purchase money of Mongrel Grey.
ANDREW BARTON PATERSON.
SNAKE
A SNAKE came to my water-trough
On a hot, hot day, and I in pyjamas for the heat,
To drink there.
In the deep, strange-scented shade of the great carob-
tree
I came down the steps with my pitcher
And must wait, must stand and wait, for there he was at
the trough before me.
He reached down from a fissure in the earth-wall in the
gloom
And trailed his yellow-brown slackness soft-bellied
down, over the edge of the stone trough
And rested his throat upon the stone bottom,


And where the water had dripped from the tap, in a
small clearness,
He sipped with his straight mouth,
Softly drank through his straight gums, into his slack
long body,
Silently.
Someone was before me at my water-trough,
And I, like a second comer, waiting.
He lifted his head from his drinking, as cattle do,
And looked at me vaguely, as drinking cattle do,
And flickered his two-forked tongue from his lips, and
mused a moment,
And stooped and drank a little more,
Being earth-brown, earth-golden from the burning
bowels of the earth
On the day of Sicilian July, with Etna smoking.
The voice of my education said to me
He must be killed,
For in Sicily the black, black snakes are innocent, the
gold are venomous.
And voices in me said, If you were a man
You would take a stick and break him now, and finish
him off.
But must I confess how I liked him,
How glad I was he had come like a guest in quiet, to
drink at my water-trough
And depart peaceful, pacified, and thankless,
Into the burning bowels of this earth ?


Was it cowardice, that I dared not kill him ?
Was it perversity, that I longed to talk to him,
Was it humility, to feel so honoured?
I felt so honoured.
And yet those voices:
If you were not afraid, you would kill him!
And truly I was afraid, I was most afraid,
But even so, honoured still more
That he should seek my hospitality
From out the dark door of the secret earth.
He drank enough
And lifted his head, dreamily, as one who has drunken,
And flickered his tongue like a forked night on the air.
so black,
Seeming to lick his lips,
And looked around like a god, unseeing, into the air,
And slowly turned his head,
And slowly, very slowly, as if thrice adream,
Proceeded to draw his slow length curving round
And climb again the broken bank of my wall-face.
And as he put his head into that dreadful hole,
And as he slowly drew up, snake-easing his shoulders
and entered farther,
A sort of horror, a sort of protest against his with-
drawing into that horrid black hole,
Deliberately going into the blackness, and slowly draw-
ing himself after,
Overcame me now his back was turned.


I looked round, I put down my pitcher,
I picked up a clumsy log
And threw it at the water-trough with a clatter.
I think it did not hit him,
But suddenly that part of him that was left behind
convulsed in undignified haste,
Writhed like lightning, and was gone
Into the black hole, the earth-lipped fissure in the wall-
front,
At which, in the intense still noon, I stared with fasci-
nation.
And immediately I regretted it.
I thought how paltry, how vulgar, what a mean act!
I despised myself and the voices of my accursed human
education.
And I thought of the albatross,
And I wished he would come back, my snake.
For he seemed to me again like a king,
Like a king in exile, uncrowned in the underworld,
Now due to be crowned again.
And so, I missed my chance with one of the lords
Of life.
And I have something to expiate;
A pettiness.
DAVID HERBERT LAWRENCE (1885-1930).


SHERWOOD
SHERWOOD in the twilight, is Robin Hood awake?
Grey and ghostly shadows are gliding through the
brake,
Shadows of the dappled deer, dreaming of the morn,
Dreaming of a shadowy man that winds a shadowy horn.
Robin Hood is here again: all his merry thieves
Hear a ghostly bugle-note shivering through the leaves,
Calling as he used to call, faint and far away,
In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.
Merry, merry England has kissed the lips of June:
All the wings of fairyland were here beneath the moon,
Like a flight of rose-leaves fluttering in a mist
Of opal and ruby and pearl and amethyst.
Merry, merry England is waking as of old,
With eyes of blither hazel and hair of brighter gold:
For Robin Hood is here again beneath the bursting
spray
In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.
Love is in the greenwood building him a house
Of wild rose and hawthorn and honeysuckle boughs
Love is in the greenwood, dawn is in the skies,
And Marian is waiting with a glory in her eyes.
Hark! The dazzled laverock climbs the golden steep !
Marian is waiting: is Robin Hood asleep?
Round the fairy grass-rings frolic elf and fay,
In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day


Oberon, Oberon, rake away the gold,
Rake away the red leaves, roll away the mould,
Rake away the gold leaves, roll away the red,
And wake Will Scarlett from his leafy forest bed.
Friar Tuck and Little John are riding down together
With quarter-staff and drinking-can and grey goose
feather.
The dead are coming back again, the years are rolled
away
In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.
Softly over Sherwood the south wind blows.
All the heart of England hid in every rose
Hears across the greenwood the sunny whisper leap,
Sherwood in the red dawn, is Robin Hood asleep?
Hark! the voice of England wakes him as of old,
And, shattering the silence with a cry of brighter gold,
Bugles in the greenwood echo from the steep,
Sherwood in the red dawn, is Robin Hood asleep?
Where the deer are gliding down the shadowy glen
All across the glades of fern he calls his merry men —
Doublets of the Lincoln green glancing through the May
In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day—
Calls them and they answer : from aisles of oak and ash
Rings the Follow! Follow! and the boughs begin to
crash,
The ferns begin to flutter and the flowers begin to fly,
And through the crimson dawning the robber band goes
by.


Robin! Robin! Robin! All his merry thieves
Answer as the bugle-note shivers through the leaves
Calling as he used to call, faint and far away,
In Sherwood, in Sherwood, about the break of day.
ALFRED NOYES
THE BLOWING OF THE HORN
(From The Song of Roland)
ROLAND gripped his horn with might and main,
Put it to his mouth and blew a great strain.
The hills were high and the sound was very plain,
Thirty leagues thence they heard the strain,
Charles heard it, and all his train.
' Our men are fighting,' said Charlemain.
And the Count Guenes answered him again,
' If another said that, we should think him insane.'
Ahoy.
Roland was broken by pain and outworn,
In great anguish he blew his horn ;
Out of his mouth the bright blood did fall,
The temples of his brain were now all torn :
He blew a great noise as he held the horn.
Charles heard it in the pass forlorn,
Naimes heard it, the Franks listened all,
Then the King said, ' I hear Roland's horn ;
He would never blow it if he were not overborne.'
Guenes answered, 'You are old and outworn,
Such words are worthy of a child new-born,
There is no battle at all, neither won nor lorn.'
Ahoy.


' Moreover, you know of Roland's great pride,
It is a marvel that God lets him bide.
Without your command, and knowing you would chide,
He took Noples, and killed the men inside,
With his sword Durendal he smote them hip and side,
Then with water washed the fields where the blood had
dried,
So that his killings might never be spied.
All day long he will horn a hare and ride,
Gabbing before his peers, showing his pride,
No man would dare attack him in all the world wide.
Press on your horse now. Why do you abide ?
France is still far from us over the divide.'
Ahoy.
Count Roland's mouth bled from a vein,
Broken were the temples that held his brain,
He blew his horn with grief and in pain,
The Franks heard it and Charlemain.
The King said, ' That horn blows a long strain.'
Duke Naimes answered, ' Roland is in pain.
There is a battle, by my hope of gain,
He here has betrayed him who did so feign;
Put on your war-gear, cry your war-cry again,
Go and succour your noble train,
You hear clearly how Roland does complain.'
Ahoy.
The Emperor made his trumpets blow clear,
The Franks dismounted to put on their gear.
Hawberks and helmets and swords with gold gear,
Men had shields and many a strong spear,
And banners scarlet, white and blue in the air to rear.


On his war-horse mounted each peer,
And spurred right through the pass among the rocks
sheer:
Each man said to his comrade dear,
' If we reach Roland ere he be dead on bier,
We will strike good blows with him and make the
pagans fear.'
But they had stayed too long, and they were nowhere
near.
Ahoy.
SPANISH WATERS
SPANISH waters, Spanish waters, you are ringing in my
ears,
Like a slow, sweet piece of music from the grey for-
gotten years ;
Telling tales, and beating tunes, and bringing weary
thoughts to me
Of the sandy beach at Muertos, where I would that I
could be.
There's a surf breaks on Los Muertos, and it never stops
to roar,
And it's there we came to anchor, and it's there we went
ashore,
Where the blue lagoon is silent amid snags of rotting
trees,
Dropping like the clothes of corpses cast up by the seas.
We anchored at Los Muertos when the dipping sun was
red,


We left her half-a-mile to sea, to west of Nigger Head;
And before the mist was on the Cay, before the day was
done,
We were all ashore on Muertos with the gold that we
had won.
We bore it through the marshes in a half-score battered
chests,
Sinking, in the sucking quagmires, to the sunburn on
our breasts,
Heaving over tree-trunks, gasping, damning at the flies
and heat,
Longing for a long drink, our of silver, in the ship's cool
lazareet.
The moon came white and ghostly as we laid the
treasure down,
There was gear there'd make a beggarman as rich as
Lima Town,
Copper charms and silver trinkets from the chests of
Spanish crews,
Gold doubloons and double moidores, louis d'ors and
portagues,
Clumsy yellow-metal earrings from the Indians of
Brazil,
Uncut emeralds out of Rio, bezoar stones from
Guayaquil;
.Silver, 'in the crude and fashioned, pots of old Arica
bronze,
Jewels from the bones of Incas desecrated by the Dons.
We smoothed the place with mattocks, and we took and
blazed the tree,


Which marks yon where the gear is hid that none will
ever see,
And we laid aboard the ship again, and south away we
steers,
Through the loud surf of Los Muertos which is beating
in my ears.
I'm the last alive that knows it. All the rest have gone
their ways,
Killed, or died, or come to anchor in the old Mulatas
Cays,
And I go singing, fiddling, old and starved and in
despair,
And I know where all that gold is hid, if I were only
there.
It's not the way to end it all. I'm old, and nearly blind,
And an old man's past's a strange thing, for it never
leaves his mind.
And I see in dreams, awhiles, the beach, the sun's disc
dipping red,
And the tall ship, under topsails, swaying in past Nigger
Head.
I'd be glad to step ashore there. Glad to take a pick and
go
To the lone blazed coco-palm tree in the place no others
know,
And lift the gold and silver that has mouldered there
for years
By the loud surf of Los Muertos which is beating in
my ears.
JOHN MASEFIELD.


THE COASTWISE LIGHTS
(From A Song of the English)
OUR brows are bound with spindrift, and the weed in
on our knees;
Our loins are battered 'neath us by the swinging,
smoking seas.
From reef and rock and skerry—over headland, ness,
and voe —
The Coastwise Lights of England watch the ships of
England go!
Through the endless summer evenings, on the lineless,
level floors;
Through the yelling Channel tempest when the siren
hoots and roars —
By day the dipping house-flag and by night the rocket's
trail—
As the sheep that graze behind us so we know them
where they hail.
We bridge across the dark, and bid the helmsman have
a care,
The flash that wheeling inland wakes his sleeping wife
to prayer;
From our vexed eyries, head to gale, we bind in burning
chains
The lover from the sea-rim drawn—his love in English
lanes.
We greet the clippers wing-and-wing that race the
Southern wool;


We warn the crawling cargo-tanks of Bremen, Leith
and Hull;
To each and all our equal lamp at peril of the sea —
The white wall-sided warships or the whalers of Dundee!
Come up, come in from Eastward, from the guardports
of the Morn!
Beat up, beat in from Southerly, O gipsies of the Horn!
Swift shuttles of an Empire's loom that weaves us,
main to main,
The Coastwise Lights of England give you welcome
back again!
Go, get you gone up-Channel, with the sea-crust on
your plates;
Go, get you into London with the burden of your
freights!
Haste, for they talk of Empire there, and say, if any
seek,
The Lights of England sent you, and by silence shall
ye speak.
THE KING'S PILGRIMAGE
King George's Visit to War Cemeteries in France,
1922
OUR King vcent forth on pilgrimage
His prayers and vows to pay
To them that saved our heritage
And cast their own away.


And there was little show of pride,
Or prows of belted steel,
For the clean-swept oceans every side
Lay free to every keel.
And the first land he found, it was shoal and banky
ground-
Where the broader seas begin,
And a pale tide grieving at the broken harbour-mouth
Where they worked the death-ships in.
And there was neither gull on the wing,
Nor wave that could not tell
Of the bodies that were buckled in the lifebuoy's
ring
That slid from swell to swell.
All that they had they gave —they gave; and they shall
not return,
For these are those that have no grave where any heart
may mourn.
And the next land he found, it was low and hollow
ground-
Where once the cities stood,
And the man-high thistles had been master of it all,
Or the bulrush by the flood.
And there was neither blade of grass,
Nor lone star in the sky
But shook to see some spirit pass
And took its agony.


And the next land he found, it was bare and hilly
ground-
Where once the bread-corn grew,
But the fields were cankered and the water was defiled,
And the trees were riven through.
And there was neither paved highway,
Nor secret path in the wood,
But had borne its weight of the broken clay
And darkened 'neath the blood.
Father and mother they put aside, and the nearer love
also —
An hundred thousand men who died ivhose graves shall
no man know.
And the last land he found, it was fair and level ground
About a carven stone,
And a stark Sword brooding on the bosom of the Cross
Where high and low are one.
And there was grass and the living trees,
And the flowers of the spring,
And there lay gentlemen from out of all the seas
That ever called him King.
'Twixt Newport sands and the eastern lands where the
Four Red Rivers spring,
Five hundred thousand gentlemen of those that served
their King
All that they had they gave—they gave
In sure and single faith.


There can no knowledge reach the grave
To make them grudge their death
Save only if they understood
That, after all was done,
We they redeemed denied their blood
And mocked the gains it won.
RUDYARD KIPLING (1865-1936)
GILLESPIE
RIDING at dawn, riding alone,
Gillespie left the town behind;
Before he turned by the Westward road
A horseman crossed him, staggering blind.
' The Devil's abroad in false Vellore,
The Devil that stabs by night,' he said,
' Women and children, rank and file,
Dying and dead, dying and dead.'
Without a word, without a groan,
Sudden and swift Gillespie turned,
The blood roared in his ears like fire,
Like fire the road beneath him burned.
He thundered back to Arcot gate,
He thundered up through Arcot town,
Before he thought a second thought
In the barrack-yard he lighted down.
Trumpeter, sound for the Light Dragoons,
Sound to saddle and spur,' he said;
' He that is ready may ride with me,
And he that can may ride ahead.'


Fierce and fain, fierce and fain,
Behind him went the troopers grim,
They rode as ride the Light Dragoons,
But never a man could ride with him.
Their rowels ripped their horses' sides,
Their hearts were red with a deeper goad,
But ever alone before them all
Gillespie rode, Gillespie rode.
Alone he came to false Vellore,
The walls were lined, the gates were barred
Alone he walked where the bullets hit,
And called above to the Sergeant's Guard.
' Sergeant, Sergeant, over the gate,
Where are your officers all?' he said;
Heavily came the Sergeant's voice,
' There are two living and forty dead.'
' A rope, a rope,' Gillespie cried:
They bound their belts to serve his need;
There was not a rebel behind the wall
But laid his barrel and drew his bead.
There was not a rebel among them all
But pulled his trigger and cursed his aim,
For lightly swung and rightly swung
Over the gate Gillespie came.
He dressed the line, he led the charge,
They swept the wall like a stream in spate,
And roaring over the roar they heard
The galloper guns that burst the gate.


Fierce and fain, fierce and fain,
The troopers rode the reeking flight:
The very stones remember still
The end of them that stab by night.
They've kept the tale a hundred years,
They'll keep the tale a hundred more :
Riding at dawn, riding alone,
Gillespie came to false Vellore.
SIR HENRY NEWBOLT (1862-1938).
LONDON SNOW
WHEN men were all asleep the snow came flying,
In large white flakes falling on the city brown,
Stealthily and perpetually settling and loosely lying,
Hushing the latest traffic of the drowsy town;
Deadening, muffling, stifling its murmurs failing;
Lazily and incessantly floating down and down:
Silently sifting and veiling road, roof, and railing;
Hiding difference, making unevenness even,
Into angles and crevices softly drifting and sailing.
All night it fell, and when full inches seven
It lay in the depth of its uncompacted lightness,
The clouds blew off from a high and frosty heaven;
And all woke earlier for the unaccustomed brightness
Of the winter dawning, the strange unheavenly glare:
The eye marvelled —marvelled at the dazzling white-
ness ;
The ear harkened to the stillness of the solemn air;
No sound of wheel rumbling nor of foot falling,
And the busy morning cries came thin and spare.


Then boys I heard, as they went to school, calling,
They gathered up the crystal manna to freeze
Their tongues with tasting, their hands with snowball-
Or rioted in a drift, plunging up to the knees;
Or peering up from under the white-mossed wonder,
' O look at the trees !' they cried, ' O look at the trees !'
With lessened load a few carts creak and blunder,
Following along the white deserted way,
A country company long dispersed asunder:
When now already the sun, in pale display
Standing by Paul's high dome, spread forth below
His sparkling beams, and awoke the stir of the day.
For now doors open, and war is waged with the snow,
And trains of sombre men, past tale of number,
Tread long brown paths, as toward their toil they go:
But even for them awhile no cares encumber
Their minds diverted; the daily word is unspoken,
The daily thoughts of labour and sorrow slumber
At the sight of the beauty that greets them, for the
charm they have broken.
ROBERT BRIDGES (1844-1930).
THE LAST OF HIS TRIBE
He crouches, and buries his face on his knees,
And hides in the dark of his hair;
For he cannot look up to the storm-smitten trees,
Or think of the loneliness there—
Of the loss and the loneliness there.


The wallaroos grope through the tufts of the grass,
And turn to their coverts for fear;
But he sits in the ashes and lets them pass
Where the boomerangs sleep with the spear-
With the nullah, the sling and the spear.
Uloola, behold him! The thunder that breaks
On the tops of the rocks with the rain,
And the wind which drives up with the salt of the lakes,
Have made him a hunter again—
A hunter and fisher again.
For his eyes have been full with smouldering thought;
But he dreams of the hunts of yore,
And of foes that he sought, and of fights that he fought
With those who will battle no more—
Who will go to the battle no more.
It is well that the water which tumbles and fills,
Goes moaning and moaning along;
For an echo rolls out from the sides of the hills,
And he starts at a wonderful song —
At the sound of a wonderful song.
And he sees, through the rents of the scattering fogs,
The corroboree warlike and grim,
And the lubra who sat by the fire on the logs,
To watch, like a mourner, for him —
Like a mother and mourner for him.
Will he go in his sleep from these desolate lands,
Like a chief, to the rest of his race,
With the honey-voiced woman who beckons and stands,
And gleams like a dream in his face —
Like a marvellous dream in his face?


SUTHERLAND'S* GRAVE
ALL night long the sea out yonder —all night long the
wailful sea,
Vext of winds and many thunders, seeketh rest un-
ceasingly !
Seeketh rest in dens of tempest, where, like one dis-
traught with pain,
Shouts the wild-eyed sprite, Confusion —seeketh rest,
and moans in vain:
Ah! but you should hear it calling, calling when the
haggard sky
Takes the darks and damps of Winter with the mourn-
ful marsh-fowl's cry;
Even while the strong, swift torrents from the rainy
ridges come
Leaping down and breaking backwards —million-
coloured shapes of foam!
Then, and then, the sea out yonder chiefly looketh for
the boon
Portioned to the pleasant valleys and the grave sweet
summer moon :
Boon of Peace, the still, the saintly spirit of the dew-
dells deep—■
Yellow dells and hollows haunted by the soft, dim
dreams of sleep.
All night long the flying water breaks upon the stubborn
rocks—
*Forby Sutherland, one of Captain Cook's seamen, who died shortly
after the Endeavour anchored in Botany Bay, 1770. He was the first
Englishman buried in Australia.


Ooze-filled forelands burnt and blackened, smit and
scarred with lightning shocks;
But above the tender sea-thrift, but beyond the flower-
ing fern,
Runs a little pathway westward —pathway quaint with
turn on turn —
Westward trending, thus it leads to shelving shores and
slopes of mist:
Sleeping shores, and glassy bays of green and gold and
amethyst!
There tread gently— gently, pilgrim; there with thought-
ful eyes look round;
Cross thy breast and bless the silence: 10, the place is
holy ground!
Holy ground for ever, stranger! All the quiet silver
lights
Dropping from the starry heavens through the soft
Australian nights—
Dropping on those lone grave-grasses —come serene,
unbroken, clear,
Like the love of God the Father, falling, falling, year by
year!
Yea, and like a Voice supernal, there the daily wind doth
blow
In the leaves above the sailor buried ninety years ago.
HENRY KENDALL (1841-1882)


THE BALLAD OF ' BEAU BROCADE
SEVENTEEN hundred and thirty-nine :■
That was the date of this tale of mine.
First great George was buried and gone ;
George the Second was plodding on.
London, then, as the ' Guides ' aver,
Shared its glories with Westminster;
And people of rank to correct their ' tone,'
Went out of town to Marybone.
Those were the days of the War with Spain,
Porto-Bello would soon be ta'en;
Whitefield preached to the colliers grim,
Bishops in lawn sleeves preached at him;
Walpole talked of ' a man and his price ';
Nobody's virtue was over-nice;
Those, in fine, were the brave days when
Coaches were stopped by . . . Highwaymet
Highwaymen!
And of all the knights of the gentle trade
Nobody bolder than ' Beau Brocade.'
This they knew on the whole way down;
Best —may be —at the Oak and Crown.
(For timorous cits on their pilgrimage
Would ' club ' for a ' Guard' to ride the stage;
And the Guard that rode on more than one
Was the Host of this hostel's sister's son.)


Open we here on a March day fine,
Under the oak with the hanging sign.
There was barber Dick with his basin by;
Cobbler Joe with the patch on his eye;
Portly product of Beef and Beer,
John the host, he was standing near.
Straining and creaking, with wheels awry,
Lumbering came the Plymouth Fly;—
Lumbering up from Bagshot Heath,
Guard in the basket armed to the teeth;
Passengers heavily armed inside;
Not the less surely the coach had been tried!
Tried! —but a couple of miles away,
By a well-dressed man! —in the open day !
Tried successfully, never a doubt —
Pockets of passengers all turned out!
Cloak-bags rifled, and cushions ripped
Even an Ensign's wallet stripped!
Even a Methodist hosier's wife
Offered the choice of her Money or Life!
Highwayman's manners no less polite,
Hoped that their coppers (returned) were right;
Sorry to find the company poor,
Hoped next time they'd travel with more;


Plucked them all at his ease, in short:
Such was the Plymouth Fly's report.
Sympathy! horror ! and wonderment!
'Catch the Villain!' (But Nobody went.)
Hosier's wife led into the bar,
(That's where the best strong waters are!)
Followed the tale of the hundred-and-one
Things that Somebody ought to have done.
Ensign (of Bragg's) made a terrible clangour:
But for the Ladies had drawn his hanger!
Robber, of course, was ' Beau Brocade';
Out-spoke Dolly the Chambermaid.
Devonshire Dolly, plump and red,
Spoke from the gallery overhead ;■
Spoke it out boldly, staring hard:
' Why didn't you shoot then, George the Guard?
Spoke it out bolder, seeing him mute: —
' George the Guard, why didn't you shoot ?'
Portly John grew pale and red,
(John was afraid of her, people said) ;
Gasped that ' Dolly was surely cracked'
(John was afraid of her —that's a fact!)
George the Guard grew red and pale,
Slowly finished his quart of ale: —


' Shoot ? Why—Rabbit him ! —didn't he shoot ? '
Muttered —' The Baggage was far too 'cute!'
' Shoot ? Why, he'd flashed the pan in his eye!'
Muttered, ' She'd pay for it by and by!'
Further than this made no reply.
Nor could a further reply be made,
For George was in league with ' Beau Brocade '!
And John the Host, in his wakefullest state,
Was not —on the whole —immaculate.
But nobody's virtue was over-nice
When Walpole talked of ' a man and his price ';
And wherever Purity found abode,
'Twas certainly not on a posting road.
AUSTIN DOBSON (1840-1921).
WOLF AND HOUND
YOU'LL take mv tale with a little salt,
But it needs none, nevertheless,
I was foil'd completely, fairly at fault,
Dishearten'd too, I confess.
At the splitters' tent I had seen the track
Of horse-hoofs fresh on the sward,
And though Darby Lynch and Donovan Jack
(Who could swear through a ten-inch board)
Solemnly swore he had not been there,
I was just as sure that they lied,
For to Darby all that was foul was fair,
And Jack for his life was tried.


We had run him for seven miles or more
As hard as our nags could split;
At the start they were all too weary and sore
And his was quite fresh and fit.
Young Marsden's pony had had enough
On the plain, where the chase was hot;
We breasted the swell of the Bittern's Bluff,
And Mark couldn't raise a trot;
When the sea, like a splendid silver shield,
To the south-west suddenly lay;
On the brow of the Beetle the chestnut reel'd,
And I bid good-bye to M'Crae —
And I was alone when the mare fell lame,
With a pointed flint in her shoe,
On the Stony Flats: I had lost the game,
And what was a man to do?
I turned away with no fixed intent
And headed for Hawthorndell;
I could neither eat in the splitters' tent
Nor drink at the splitters' well.
I knew that they gloried in my mishap,
And I cursed them between my teeth-
A blood-red sunset through Brayton's Gap
Flung a lurid fire on the heath.
Could I reach the Dell? I had little reck,
And with scarce a choice of mv own
I threw the reins on Miladi's neck —
I had freed her foot from the stone.


That season most of the swamps were dry,
And after so hard a burst
In the sultry noon of so hot a sky
She was keen to appease her thirst-
Or by instinct urged or impelled by fate-
I care not to solve these things—
Certain it is that she took me straight
To the Warrigal water springs.
I can shut my eyes and recall the ground
As though it were yesterday—
With a shelf of the low, grey rocks girt round,
The springs in their basin lay;
Woods to the east and wolds to the north
In the sundown sullenly bloom'd;
Dead black on a curtain of crimson cloth
Large peaks to the westward loomed.
I led Miladi through weed and sedge,
She leisurely drank her fill;
There was something close to the water's edge,
And my heart with one leap stood still,
For a horse's shoe and a rider's boot
Had left clean prints on the clay ;
Someone had watered his beast on foot.
'Twas he —he had gone. Which way?
Then the mouth of the cavern faced me fair,
And I turned and fronted the rocks;
So, at last, I had pressed the wolf to his lair,
I had run to his earth the fox.


I thought so. Perhaps he was resting. Perhaps
He was waiting, watching for me.
I examined all my revolver caps,
I hitched my mare to a tree-
I had sworn to have him, alive or dead,
And to give him a chance was loth.
He knew his life had been forfeited
He had even heard my oath.
In my stocking'd soles to the shelf I crept,
I crawl'd safe into the cave —
All silent—if lie was there he slept
Not there. All dark as the grave.
Through the crack I could hear the leaden hiss!
See the livid face through the flame!
How strange it seems that a man should miss
When his life depends on his aim!
There couldn't have been a better light
For him, nor a worse for me.
We were coop'd up, caged like beasts for a fight,
And dumb as dumb beasts were we.
Flash! flash! bang! bang! and we blazed away,
And the grey roof reddened and rang ;
Flash! flash 1 and I felt his bullet flay
The tip of my ear. Flash ! bang!
Bang! flash ! and my pistol arm fell broke;
I struck with my left hand then —
Struck at a corpse through a cloud of smoke-
I had shot him dead in his den!
ADAM LINDSAY GORDON (1833-1870)


THE BALLAD OF EARL HALDAN'S
DAUGHTER
IT was Earl Haldan's daughter,
She looked across the sea;
She looked across the water;
And long and loud laughed she:
' The locks of six princesses
Must be my marriage fee,
So hey bonny boat, and ho bonny boat!
Who comes a-wooing me ? '
It was Earl Haldan's daughter,
She walked along the sand;
When she was aware of a knight so fair,
Come sailing to the land.
His sails were all of velvet,
His mast of beaten gold,
And ' Hey bonny boat, and ho bonny boat!
Who saileth here so bold?'
' The locks of five princesses
I won beyond the sea;
I clipt their golden tresses,
To fringe a cloak for thee.
One handful yet is wanting,
But one of all the tale;
So hey bonny boat, and ho bonny boat!
Furl up thy velvet sail!'
He leapt into the water,
That rover young and bold,


He gript Earl Haldan's daughter,
He clipt her locks of gold:
' Go weep, go weep, proud maiden,
The tale is full to-day.
Now hey bonny boat, and ho bonny boat!
Sail Westward ho! away!'
CHARLES KINGSLEY (1819-1875)
THE LADY OF SHALOTT
ON either side the river lie
Long fields of barley and of rye,
That clothe the wold and meet the sky;
And thro' the field the road runs by
To many-tower'd Camelot;
And up and down the people go,
Gazing where the lilies blow
Round an island there below,
The island of Shalott.
Willows whiten, aspens quiver,
Little breezes dusk and shiver
Thro' the wave that runs for ever
By the island in the river
Flowing down to Camelot.
Four grey walls, and four grey towers,
Overlook a space of flowers,
And the silent isle imbowers
The Lady of Shalott


By the margin, willow-veil'd,
Slide the heavy barges trail'd
By slow horses ; and unhail'd
The shallop flitteth silken-sail'd
Skimming down to Camelot:
But who hath seen her wave her hand ?
Or at the casement seen her stand ?
Or is she known in all the land,
The Lady of Shalott?
Only reapers, reaping early
In among the bearded barley,
Hear a song that echoes cheerly
From the river winding clearly,
Down to tower'd Camelot:
And by the moon the reaper weary,
Piling sheaves in uplands airy,
Listening, whispers, ' 'Tis the fairy
Ladv of Shalott.'
w
There she weaves by night and day
A magic web with colours gay.
She has heard a whisper say,
A curse is on her if she stay
To look down to Camelot.
She knows not what the curse may be,
And so she weaveth steadily,
And little other care hath she,
The Lady of Shalott.


And moving thro' a mirror clear
That hangs before her all the year,
Shadows of the world appear.
There she sees the highway near
Winding down to Camelot
There the river eddy whirls,
And there the surly village-churls,
And the red cloaks of market girls,
Pass onward from Shalott.
Sometimes a troop of damsels glad,
An abbot on an ambling pad,
Sometimes a curly shepherd-lad,
Or long-hair'd page in crimson clad,
Goes by to tower'd Camelot
And sometimes thro' the mirror blue
The knights come riding two and two :
She hath no loyal knight and true,
The Lady of Shalott.
But in her web she still delights
To weave the mirror's magic sights,
For often thro' the silent nights
A funeral, with plumes and lights
And music, went to Camelot
Or when the moon was overhead,
Came two young lovers lately wed;
' I am half sick of shadows,' said
The Lady of Shalott.


A bow-shot from her bower-eaves,
He rode between the barley-sheaves,
The sun came dazzling thro' the leaves,
And flamed upon the brazen greaves
Of bold Sir Lancelot.
A red-cross knight for ever kneel'd
To a lady in his shield,
That sparkled on the yellow field,
Beside remote Shalott.
The gemmy bridle glitter'd free,
Like to some branch of stars we see
Hung in the golden Galaxy.
The bridle bells rang merrily
As he rode down to Camelot :
And from his blazon'd baldric slung
A mighty silver bugle hung,
And as he rode his armour rung,
Beside remote Shalott.
All in the blue unclouded weather
Thick-jewell'd shone the saddle-leather,
The helmet and the helmet-feather
Burn'd like one burning flame together,
As he rode down to Camelot.
As often thro' the purple night,
Below the starry clusters bright,
Some bearded meteor, trailing light,
Moves over still Shalott.


His broad clear brow in sunlight glow'd;
On burnish'd hooves his war-horse trode;
From underneath his helmet flow'd
His coal-black curls as on he rode,
As he rode down to Camelot.
From the bank and from the river
He flash'd into the crystal mirror,
' Tirra lirra,' by the river
Sang Sir Lancelot.
She left the web, she left the loom,
She made three paces thro' the room,
She saw the water-lily bloom,
She saw the helmet and the plume,
She look'd down to Camelot.
Out flew the web and floated wide;
The mirror crack'd from side to side;
' The curse is come upon me,' cried
The Lady of Shalott.
In the stormy east-wind straining,
The pale yellow woods were waning,
The broad stream in his banks complaining,
Heavily the low sky raining
Over tower'd Camelot;
Down she came and found a boat
Beneath a willow left afloat,
And round about the prow she wrote
The Lady of Shalott.


And down the river's dim expanse-
Like some bold seer in a trance,
Seeing all his own mischance —
With a glassy countenance
Did she look to Camelot.
And at the closing of the day
She loosed the chain, and down she lay;
The broad stream bore her far away,
The Lady of Shalott.
Lying, robed in snowy white
That loosely flew to left and right-
The leaves upon her falling light-
Thro' the noises of the night
She floated down to Camelot:
And as the boat-head wound along
The willowy hills and fields among,
They heard her singing her last song,
The Lady of Shalott.
Heard a carol, mournful, holy,
Chanted loudly, chanted lowly,
Till her blood was frozen slowly,
And her eyes were darken's wholly,
Turn'd to tower'd Camelot.
For ere she reach'd upon the tide
The first house by the water-side,
Singing in her song she died,
The Lady of Shalott.
Under tower and balcony,
By garden-wall and gallery,


A gleaming' shape she floated by,
A corse between the houses high,
Silent into Camelot.
Out upon the wharfs they came,
Knight and burgher, lord and dame,
And round the prow they read her name,
The Lady of Shalott.
Who is this? and what is here?
And in the lighted palace near
Died the sound of royal cheer;
And they cross'd themselves for fear,
All the knights at Camelot:
But Lancelot mused a little space;
He said, ' She has a lovely face ;
God in His mercy lend her grace,
The Lady of Shalott.'
LORD TENNYSON (1809-1892).
THE ARMADA
ATTEND, all ye who list to hear our noble England's
praise ;
I tell you of the thrice famous deeds she wrought in
ancient days,
When that great fleet invincible against her bore in vain
The richest spoils of Mexico, the stoutest hearts of
Spain.
It was about the lovely close of a warm summer day,
There came a gallant merchant-ship full sail to Plymouth
Bay;


Her crew had seen Castile's black fleet beyond Aurigny's
isle,
At earliest twilight, on the waves lie heaving many a
mile.
At sunrise she escaped their van, by God's especial
grace,
And the tall Pinta, till the noon, had held her close in
chase.
Forthwith a guard at every gun was placed along the
wall;
The beacon blazed upon the roof of Edgecumbe's lofty
hall ;
Many a light fishing-bark put out to pry along the coast,
And with loose rein and bloody spur rode inland many
a post.
With his white hair, unbonneted, the stout old sheriff
comes;
Behind him march the halberdiers, before him sound
the drums;
His yeomen, round the market cross, make clear an
ample space;
For there behoves him to set up the standard of her
Grace.
And haughtily the trumpets peal, and gaily dance the
bells,
As slow upon the labouring wind the royal blazon
swells.
Look how the Lion of the sea lifts up his ancient crown,
And underneath his deadly paw treads the gay Lilies
down


So stalked he when he turned to flight, on that famed
Picard field,
Bohemia's plume, and Genoa's bow, and Caesar's eagle
shield.
So glared he when at Agincourt in wrath he turned to
bay,
And crushed and torn beneath his claws the princely
hunters lay.
Ho! strike the flagstaff deep, sir Knight: ho! scatter
flowers, fair maids:
Ho! gunners, fire a loud salute : ho ! gallants, draw your
blades:
Thou sun, shine on her joyously; ye breezes, waft her
wide;
Our glorious semper cad em , the banner of our pride.
The freshening breeze of eve unfurled that banner's
massy fold;
The parting gleam of sunshine kissed that haughty
scroll of gold;
Night sank upon the dusky beach, and on the purple
sea,
Such night in England ne'er had been, nor e'er again
shall be.
From Eddystone to Berwick bounds, from Lynn to
Milford Bay,
That time of slumber was as bright and busy as the day;
For swift to east and swift to west the ghastly war-flame
spread,
High on St. Michael's Mount it shone: it shone on
Beachy Head.


Far on the deep, the Spaniard saw, along each southern
shire,
Cape beyond cape, in endless range, those twinkling
points of fire.
The fisher left his skiff to rock on Tamar's glittering
waves;
The rugged miners poured to war from Mendip's sun-
less caves;
O'er Longleat's towers, o'er Cranbourne's oaks, the
fiery herald flew
And roused the shepherds of Stonehenge, the rangers
of Beaulieu.
Right sharp and quick the bells all night rang out from
Bristol town,
And ere the day three hundred horse had met on
Clifton down;
The sentinel 011 Whitehall gate looked forth into the
night,
And saw o'erhanging Richmond Hill that streak of
blood-red light.
Then bugle's note and cannon's roar the death-like
silence broke,
And with one start, and with one cry, the royal city
woke.
At once on all her stately gates arose the answering
fires ;
At once the wild alarum clashed from all her reeling
spires;
From all the batteries of the Tower pealed loud the
voice of fear;


And all the thousand masts of Thames sent back a louder
cheer:
And from the farthest wards was heard the rush of
hurrying feet,
And the broad streams of pikes and flags rushed down
each roaring street;
And broader still became the blaze, and louder still the
din,
As fast from every village round the horse came spur-
ring in:
And eastward straight, from wild Blackheath, the war-
like errand went,
And roused in many an ancient hall the gallant squires
of Kent.
Southward, from Surrey's pleasant hills flew those
bright couriers forth;
High on bleak Hampstead's swarthy moor they started
for the North;
And on, and on, without a pause, untired they bounded
still:
All night from tower to tower they sprang; they sprang
from hill to hill:
Till the proud Peak unfurled the flag o'er Darwin's
rocky dales
Till like volcanoes flared to heaven the stormy hills of
Wales,
Till twelve fair counties saw the blaze on Malvern's
lonely height,
Till streamed in crimson on the wind the Wrekin's
crest of light,


Till broad and fierce the star came forth on Ely's stately
fane,
And tower and hamlet rose in arms o'er all the boundless
plain;
Till Belvoir's lordly terraces the sign to Lincoln sent,
And Lincoln sped the message on o'er the wide vale of
T rent;
Till Skiddaw saw the fire that burned on Gaunt's
embattled pile,
And the red glare on Skiddaw roused the burghers of
Carlisle.
LORD MACAULAY (1800-1859).
THE FOREST
(From Alastor)
THp noonday sun
Now shone upon the forest, one vast mass
Of mingling shade, whose brown magnificence
A narrow vale embosoms. There, huge caves,
Scooped in the dark base of those aery rocks
Mocking its moans, respond and roar for ever.
The meeting boughs and implicated leaves
Wove twilight o'er the Poet's path, as led
By love, or dream, or god, or mightier Death,
He sought in Nature's dearest haunt, some bank,
Her cradle, and his sepulchre. More dark
And dark the shades accumulate —the oak,
Expanding its immense and knotty arms,


Embraces the light beech. The pyramids
Of the tall cedar overarching, frame
Most solemn domes within, and far below,
Like clouds suspended in an emerald sky,
The ash and the acacia floating hang
Tremulous and pale. Like restless serpents, clothed
In rainbow and in fire, the parasites,
Starr'd with ten thousand blossoms, flow around
The grey trunks, and, as gamesome infants' eyes,
With gentle meanings, and most innocent wiles,
Fold their beams round the hearts of those that love,
These twine their tendrils with the wedded boughs
Uniting their close union; the woven leaves
Make net-work of the dark blue light of day,
And the night's noontide clearness, mutable
As shapes in the weird clouds. Soft mossy lawns
Beneath these canopies extend their swells,
Fragrant with perfumed herbs, and eyed with blooms,
Minute yet beautiful. One darkest glen
Sends from its woods of musk-rose, twined with jasmine,
A soul-dissolving odour, to invite
To some more lovely mystery. Through the dell,
Silence and twilight here, twin sisters, keep
Their noonday watch, and sail among the shades,
Like vaporous shapes half-seen; beyond, a well,
Dark, gleaming, and of most translucent wave,
Images all the woven boughs above,
And each depending leaf, and every speck
Of azure sky, darting between their chasms;
Nor aught else in the liquid mirror laves
Its portraiture, but some inconstant star


Between one foliaged lattice twinkling fair,
Or painted bird, sleeping beneath the moon,
Or gorgeous insect, floating motionless,
Unconscious of the day, ere yet his wings
Have spread their glories to the gaze of noon.
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY (1792-1822)
WATERLOO
(From Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto III)
THERE was a sound of revelry by night,
And Belgium's capital had gathered then
Her Beauty and her Chivalry, and bright
The lamps shone o'er fair women and brave men.
A thousand hearts beat happily; and when
Music arose with its voluptuous swell,
Soft eyes looked love to eyes which spake again,
And all went merry as a marriage bell;
But hush ! hark! a deep sound strikes like a rising knell!
Did ye not hear it? —No; 'twas but the wind,
Or the car rattling o'er the stony street;
On with the dance! let joy be unconfined;
No sleep till morn, when Youth and Pleasure meet
To chase the glowing hours with flying feet.
But hark! —that heavy sound breaks in once more
As if the clouds its echo would repeat;
And nearer, clearer, deadlier than before!
Arm ! arm ! it is—it is—the cannon's opening roar!


Within a windowed niche of that high hall
Sate Brunswick's fated chieftain; he did hear
That sound, the first amidst the festival,
And caught its tone with Death's prophetic ear;
And when they smiled because he deemed it near,
His heart more truly knew that peal too well
Which stretched his father on a bloody bier,
And roused the vengeance blood alone could quell.
He rushed into the field, and, foremost fighting, fell.
Ah! then and there was hurrying to and fro,
And gathering tears, and tremblings of distress,
And cheeks all pale, which but an hour ago
Blushed at the praise of their own loveliness ;
And there were sudden partings, such as press
The life from out young hearts, and choking sighs
Which ne'er might be repeated: who could guess
If ever more should meet those mutual eyes,
Since upon night so sweet such awful morn could rise!
And there was mounting in hot haste: the steed,
The mustering squadron and the clattering car,
Went pouring forward with impetuous speed,
And swiftly forming in the ranks of war ;
And the deep thunder peal on peal afar;
And near, the beat of the alarming drum
Roused up the soldier ere the morning star;
While thronged the citizens with terror dumb,
Or whispering with white lips—' The foe ! They come !
They come!'


And wild and high the ' Cameron's gathering' rose
The war-note of Lochiel, which Albyn's hills
Have heard, and heard, too, have her Saxon foes;
How in the noon of night that pibroch thrills,
Savage and shrill! But with the breath which fills
Their mountain pipe, so fill the mountaineers
With the fierce native daring which instils
The stirring memory of a thousand years,
And Evan's, Donald's fame rings in each clansman's
ears!
And Ardennes waves above them her green leaves,
Dewy with Nature's tear-drops, as they pass,
Grieving, if aught inanimate e'er grieves,
Over the unreturning brave, —alas !
Ere evening to be trodden like the grass
Which now beneath them, but above shall grow
In its next verdure, when this fiery mass
Of living valour, rolling on the foe,
And burning with high hope, shall moulder, cold and
low.
Last noon beheld them full of lusty life,
Last eve in Beauty's circle proudly gay,
The midnight brought the signal sound of strife,
The morn the marshalling in arms —the day
Battle's magnificently stern array!
The thunder-clouds close o'er it, which when rent
The earth is covered thick with other clay,
Which her own clay shall cover, heaped and pent,
Rider and horse —friend, foe —in one red burial blent!
LORD BYRON (1788-1824).


THE GLOVE AND THE LIONS
KING Francis was a hearty king, and loved a royal sport,
And one day, as his lions fought, sat looking on the
court ;
The nobles filled the benches, with the ladies by their
side,
And 'niongst them sat the Count de Lorge, with one for
whom he sighed:
And truly 'twas a gallant thing to see that crowning
show,
Valour and love, and a king above, and the royal beasts
below.
Ramped and roared the lions, with horrid laughing
jaws;
They bit, they glared, gave blows like bears, a wind went
with their paws;
With wallowing might and stifled roar they rolled on
one another,
Till all the pit with sand and mane was in a thunderous
smother;
The bloody foam above the bars came whizzing through
the air;
Said Francis then, ' Faith, gentlemen, we're better here
than there.'
De Lorge's love o'erheard the King, a beauteous lively
dame,
With smiling lips and sharp bright eyes, which always
seemed the same;


She thought, 'The Count my lover is brave as brave
can be ;
He surely would do wondrous things to show his love
of me;
King, ladies, lovers, all look on; the occasion is divine;
I'll drop my glove, to prove his love; great glory will
be mine.'
She dropped her glove, to prove his love, then looked at
him and smiled;
He bowed, and in a moment leaped among the lions wild:
The leap was quick, return was quick, he has regained
his place,
Then threw the glove, but not with love, right in the
lady's face.
'By Heav'n !' said Francis, ' rightly done !' and he rose
from where he sat:
' No love,' quoth he, ' but vanity, sets love a task like
that.'
LEIGH HUNT (1784-1859).
LORD ULLIN'S DAUGHTER
A CHIEFTAIN to the Highlands bound
Cries, ' Boatman, do not tarry!
And I'll give thee a silver pound
To row us o'er the ferry.'
' Now who be ye would cross Lochgyle,
This dark and stormy water?'
' O, I'm the chief of Ulva's isle,
And this, Lord Ullin's daughter.


' And fast before her father's men
Three days we've fled together,
For, should he find us in the glen,
My blood would stain the heather.
' His horsemen hard behind us ride;
Should they our steps discover,
Then who will cheer my bonny bride
When they have slain her lover?'
Outspoke the hardy Highland wight,
' I'fl go, my chief ! I'm ready;
It is not for your silver bright,
But for your winsome lady:
' And, by my word! the bonny bird
In danger shall not tarry;
So, though the waves are raging white,
I'll row you o'er the ferry.'
By this the storm grew loud apace,
The water-wraith was shrieking;
And in the scowl of heaven each face
Grew dark as they were speaking.
But still, as wilder blew the wind,
And as the night grew drearer,
Adown the glen rode armed men —
Their trampling sounded nearer.


' O haste thee, haste!' the lady cries,
' Though tempests round us gather ;
I'll meet the raging 1 of the skies,
But not an angry father.'
The boat has left a stormy land,
A stormy sea before her, —
When, oh! too strong for human hand,
The tempest gathered o'er her.
And still they rowed amidst the roar
Of waters fast prevailing:
Lord Ulliii reached that fatal shore —
His wrath was changed to wailing.
For, sore dismayed, through storm and shade,
His child he did discover:
One lovely hand she stretched for aid,
And one was round her lover.
' Come back! come back! ' he cried in grief,
' Across this stormy water :
And I'll forgive your Highland chief,
My daughter ! oh, my daughter!'
'Twas vain: the loud waves lashed the shore,
Return or aid preventing;
The waters wild went o'er his child,
And he was left lamenting.
THOMAS CAMPBELL (1777-1844)


THE BATTLE OF BLENHEIM
IT was a summer evening,
Old Kaspar's work was done,
And he before his cottage door
Was sitting in the sun;
And by him sported on the green
His little grandchild Wilhelmine.
She saw her brother Peterkin
Roll something large and round,
Which he beside the rivulet
In playing there had found;
He came to ask what he had found,
That was so large, and smooth, and round.
Old Kaspar took it from the boy,
Who stood expectant by;
And then the old man shook his head,
And with a natural sigh,
' 'Tis some poor fellow's skull,' said he,
' Who fell in the great victory.
' I find them in the garden,
For there's many here about;
And often when I go to plough,
The ploughshare turns them out!
For many thousand men,' said he,
' Were slain in that great victory.'
' Now tell us what 'twas all about,'
Young Peterkin, he cries;


And little Wilhelmine looks up
With wonder-waiting eyes ;
' Now tell us all about the war,
And what they fought each other for.'
' It was the English,' Kaspar cried,
'Who put the French to rout;
But what they fought each other for
I could not well make out ;
But everybody said,' quoth he,
' That 'twas a famous victory.
' Mv father lived at Blenheim then,
Yon little stream hard by;
They burnt his dwelling to the ground,
And he was forced to fly;
So with his wife and child he fled,
Nor had he where to rest his head.
' With fire and sword the country round
Was wasted far and wide,
And many a childing mother then,
And new-born baby died;
But things like that, you know, must be
At every famous victory.
' They say it was a shocking sight
After the fight was won;
For many thousand bodies here
Lay rotting in the sun;
But things like that, you know, must be
After a famous victory.


' Great praise the Duke of Marlbro' won,
And our good Prince Eugene.'
' Why, 'twas a very wicked thing!'
Said little Wilhelmine.
' Nay . . . nay . . . my little girl,' quoth he,
' It was a famous victory.
' And everybody praised the Duke
Who this great fight did win.'
' But what good came of it at last ?'
Quoth little Peterkin.
' Why, that I cannot tell,' said he,
' But 'twas a famous victory.'
ROBERT SOUTHEY (1774-1843)
ALLEN-A-DALE
(From Rokeby)
ALLEN-A-DALE has no fagot for burning,
Allen-a-Dale has no furrow for turning,
Allen-a-Dale has no fleece for the spinning,
Yet Allen-a-Dale has red gold for the winning.
Come, read me my riddle! come, hearken my tale!
And tell me the craft of bold Allen-a-Dale.
The Baron of Ravensworth prances in pride,
And he views his domains upon Arkindale side ;
The mere for his net, and the land for his game,
The chase for the wild, and the park for the tame ;
Yet the fish of the lake, and the deer of the vale,
Are less free to Lord Dacre than Allen-a-Dale!


Allen-a-Dale was ne'er belted a knight,
Though his spur be as sharp, and his blade be as bright;
Allen-a-Dale is no baron or lord,
Yet twenty tall yeomen will draw at his word;
And the best of our nobles his bonnet will vail,
Who at Rere-cross on Stanmore meets Allen-a-Dale.
Allen-a-Dale to his wooing is come;
The mother, she ask'd of his household and home:
' Though the castle of Richmond stand fair on the hill,
My hall,' quoth bold Allen, ' shows gallanter still;
'Tis the blue vault of heaven, with its crescent so pale,
And with all its bright spangles !' said Allen-a-Dale.
The father was steel, and the mother was stone;
They lifted the latch, and they bade him be gone:
But loud, on the morrow, their wail and their cry:
He had laugh'd on the lass with his bonny black eye,
And she fled to the forest to hear a love-tale,
And the youth it was told by was Allen-a-Dale!
SIR WALTER SCOTT (1771-1832).
ON THE LAKE
(From The Prelude)
ONE summer evening (led by her) I found
A little boat tied to a willow tree
Within a rocky cave, its usual home.
Straight I unloosed her chain, then stepping in
Pushed from the shore. It was an act of stealth
And troubled pleasure, nor without the voice


Of mountain-echoes did my boat move on;
Leaving behind her still, on either side,
Small circles glittering idly in the moon,
Until they melted all into one track
Of sparkling light. But now, like one who rows,
Proud of his skill, to reach a chosen point
With an unswerving line, I fixed my view
Upon the summit of a craggy ridge,
The horizon's utmost boundary; far above
Was nothing but the stars and the grey sky.
She was an elfin pinnace; lustily
I dipped my oars into the silent lake,
And, as I rose upon the stroke, my boat
Went heaving through the water like a swan;
When, from behind that craggy steep till then
The horizon's bound, a huge peak, black and huge,
As if with voluntary power instinct,
Upreared its head. I struck and struck again,
And growing still in stature the grim shape
Towered up between me and the stars, and still,
For so it seemed, with purpose of its own
And measured motion like a living thing,
Strode after me. With trembling oars I turned,
And through the silent water stole my way
Back to the covert of the willow tree;
There in her mooring-place I left my bark.
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH (1770-1850).


BOADICEA: AN ODE
WHEN the British warrior queen,
Bleeding from the Roman rods,
Sought, with an indignant mien,
Counsel of her country's gods,
Sage beneath a spreading oak
Sat the Druid, hoary chief ;
Every burning word he spoke
Full of rage, and full of grief.
' Princess! if our aged eyes
Weep upon thy matchless wrongs,
'Tis because resentment ties
All the terrors of our tongues.
' Rome shall perish —write that word
In the blood that she has spilt;
Perish, hopeless and abhorred,
Deep in ruin as in guilt.
Rome, for empire far renowned
Tramples on a thousand states;
Soon her pride shall kiss the ground-
Hark ! the Gaul is at her gates!
' Other Romans shall arise,
Heedless of a soldier's name;
Sounds, not arms, shall win the prize-
Harmony the path to fame.
' Then the progeny that springs
From the forests of our land,


Armed with thunder, clad with wings,
Shall a wider world command.
' Regions Caesar never knew
Thy posterity shall sway,
Where his eagles never flew,
None invincible as they.'
Such the bard's prophetic words,
Pregnant with celestial fire,
Bending, as he swept the chords
Of his sweet but awful lyre.
She, with all a monarch's pride,
Felt them in her bosom glow;
Rushed to battle, fought, and died;
Dying, hurled them at the foe.
' Ruffians, pitiless as proud,
Heaven awards the vengeance due;
Empire is on us bestowed,
Shame and ruin wait for you.'
WILLIAM COWPER (1731-1800)
THE VILLAGE PREACHER
(From the Deserted Village)
NEAR yonder copse, where once the garden smiled,
And still where many a garden-flower grows wild;
There, where a few torn shrubs the place disclose,
The village preacher's modest mansion rose.


A man he was to all the country dear,
And passing rich with forty pounds a year;
Remote from towns he ran his godly race,
Nor e'er had changed, nor wished to change, his place;
Unpractised he to fawn, or seek for power,
By doctrines fashioned to the varying hour;
Far other aims his heart had learned to prize,
More skilled to raise the wretched than to rise.
His house was known to all the vagrant train;
He chid their wanderings, but relieved their pain :
The long-remember'd beggar was his guest,
Whose beard descending swept his aged breast;
The ruined spendthrift, now no longer proud,
Claimed kindred there, and had his claims allowed;
The broken soldier, kindly bade to stay,
Sat by his fire, and talked the night away,
Wept o'er his wounds, or tales of sorrow done.
Shouldered his crutch, and showed how fields were won.
Pleased with his guests, the good man learned to glow,
And quite forgot their vices in their woe;
Careless their merits or their faults to scan,
His pity gave ere charity began.
Thus to relieve the wretched was his pride,
And e'en his failings leaned to virtue's side;
But in his duty prompt at every call,
He watched and wept, he prayed and felt, for all;
And, as a bird each fond endearment tries
To tempt its new-fledged offspring to the skies,
He tried each art, reproved each dull delay,
Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way.
OLIVER GOLDSMITH (1728-1774).


KING JOHN AND THE ABBOT OF
CANTERBURY
AN ancient story I'll tell you anon
Of a notable prince who was called King John;
And he ruled England with main and with might,
For he did great wrong, and maintained little right.
And I'll tell you a story, a story so merry,
Concerning the Abbot of Canterbury;
How for his house-keeping and high renown,
They rode post for him to fair London town.
An hundred men, the king did hear say,
The abbot kept in his house every day;
And fifty gold chains, without any doubt,
In velvet coats waited the abbot about.
' How now, father abbot, I hear it of thee,
Thou keepest a far better house than me;
And for thy house-keeping and high renown,
I fear thou work'st treason against my crown.'-
' My liege,' quoth the abbot, ' I would it were known
I never spend nothing but what is my own;
And I trust your grace will do my no deere,
For spending of my own true-gotten gear.'-
' Yes, yes, father abbot, thy fault it is high,
And now for the same thou needest must die;
For except thou canst answer me questions three,
Thy head shall be smitten from thy bodie.


' And first,' quoth the king, ' when I'm in this stead,
With my crown of gold so fair on my head,
Among all my liegemen so noble of birth,
Thou must tell me to one penny what I am worth.
' Secondly, tell me, without any doubt,
How soon I may ride the whole world about;
And at the third question thou must not shrink,
But tell me here truly what do I think.' —
' O these are hard questions for my shallow wit,
Nor I cannot answer your grace as yet.
But if you will give me but three weeks' space,
I'll do my endeavour to answer your grace.'—
' Now three weeks' space to thee I will give,
And that is the longest time thou hast to live;
For if thou dost not answer my questions three,
Thy lands and thy livings are forfeit to me.'
Away rode the abbot all sad at that word,
And he rode to Cambridge and Oxenford;
But never a doctor there was so wise
That could with his learning an answer devise.
Then home rode the abbot of comfort so cold,
And he met his shepherd a-going to fold;
' How now, my lord abbot, you are welcome home;
What news do you bring us from good King John?'


' Sad news, sad news, shepherd, I must give,
That I have but three days more to live;
For if I do not answer him questions three,
My head will be smitten from my bodie.
' The first is to tell him there in that stead,
With his crown of gold so fair on his head,
Among all his liegemen so noble of birth,
To within one penny of what he is worth.
' The second, to tell him, without any doubt,
How soon he may ride the wdiole world about ;
And at the third question I must not shrink,
But tell him there truly what he does think.'
' Now cheer up, sir abbot, did you never hear yet
That a fool he may learn a wise man wit ?
Lend me horse and serving-men, and your apparel,
And I'll ride to London to answer your quarrel.
' Nay, frown not, if it hath been told unto me
I am like your lordship as ever may be;
And if you will but lend me your gown,
There is none shall know us at fair London town.'-
' Now horses and serving-men thou shalt have,
With sumptuous array most gallant and brave,
With crozier and mitre, and rochet and cope,
Fit to appear 'fore our father the Pope.'
' Now, welcome, sir abbot,' the king he did say,
' 'Tis well thou'st come back to keep thy day:
For and if thou canst answer my questions three,
Thy life and thy living both saved shall be.


' And first when thou seest me here in this stead,
With my crown of gold so fair on my head,
Among all my liegemen so noble of birth,
Tell me to one penny what I am worth.' —
' For thirty pence Our Saviour was sold
Among the false Jews, as I have been told.
And twenty-nine is the worth of thee,
For I think thou art one penny worser than He.'
The king he laughed, and swore by St. Bittel,
' I did not think I had been worth so little!
• —Now secondly, tell me without any doubt
How soon I may ride this whole world about.'-
' You must rise with the sun and ride with the same,
Until the next morning he rises again;
And then your grace need not make any doubt
But in twenty-four hours you'll ride it about.'
The king he laughed, and swore by St. John,
' I did not think it could be done so soon!
■—Now from the third question thou must not shrink,
But tell me here truly what I do think.' —
' Yea, that shall I do, and make your grace merry;
You think I'm the Abbot of Canterbury;
But I'm his poor shepherd as plain you may see,
That am come to beg pardon for him and for me.'
The king he laughed, and swore by the mass,
' I'll make thee lord abbot this day in his place! '■
' Now nay, my liege, be not in such speed,
For alack! I can neither write nor read.' —


' Four nobles a week then I will give thee,
For this merry jest thou has shewn unto me;
And tell the old abbot when thou comest home,
Thou hast brought him a pardon from good King John.
AUTHOR UNKNOWN.
THE DEATH OF SAMSON
(From Samson Agonistes)
A MESSENGER SPEAKS
OCCASIONS drew me early to this city,
And as the gates I entered with sunrise,
The morning trumpets festival proclaimed
Through each high street. Little I had dispatched,
When all abroad was rumoured, that this day
Samson should be brought forth to show the people
Proof of his mighty strength in feats and games;
I sorrowed at his captive state, but minded
Not to be absent at that spectacle.
The building was a spacious theatre,
Half-round, on two main pillars vaulted high,
With seats, where all the lords and each degree
Of sort might sit in order to behold;
The other side was open, where the throng
On banks and scaffolds under sky might stand;
I among these aloof obscurely stood.
The feast and noon grew high, and sacrifice
Had filled their hearts with mirth, high cheer, and wine
When to their sports they turned. Immediately
Was Samson as a public servant brought,


In their state livery clad; before him pipes
And timbrels, on each side went armed guards,
Both horse and foot, before him and behind
Archers, and slingers, cataphracts, and spears.
At sight of him the people with a shout
Rifted the air, clamouring their god with praise,
Who had made their dreadful enemy their thrall.
He patient, but undaunted, where they led him,
Came to the place, and what was set before him,
Which without help of eye might be assayed,
To heave, pull, draw, or break, he still performed,
All with incredible stupendous force,
None daring to appear antagonist.
At length, for intermission sake, they led him
Between the pillars; he his guide requested,
For so from such as nearer stood we heard,
As over-tired, to let him lean awhile
With both his arms on those two massy pillars,
That to the arched roof gave main support.
He, unsuspicious, led him; which when Samson
Felt in his arms, with head awhile inclined,
And eyes fast fixed he stood, as one who prayed,
Or some great matter in his mind revolved :
At last, with head erect, thus cried aloud:
' Hitherto, lords, what your commands imposed
I have performed, as reason was, obeying,
Not without wonder or delight beheld:
Now of my own accord such other trial
I mean to show you of my strength, yet greater;
As with amaze shall strike all who behold.'
This uttered, straining all his nerves, he bowed.


As with the force of winds and waters pent,
When mountains tremble, those two massy pillars
With horrible convulsion to and fro
He tugged, he shook, till down they came, and drew
The whole roof after them, with burst of thunder,
Upon the heads of all who sat beneath,
Lords, ladies, captains, counsellors, or priests,
Their choice nobility and flower, not only
Of this, but each Philistian city round,
Met from all parts to solemnize this feast.
Samson, with these immixed, inevitably
Pulled down the same destruction on himself.
JOHN MILTON (1608-1674).
cataphracts : men and horses in armour.
THE BOY
(From The Philaster, Act I, Sc. ii)
HUNTING the buck,
1 found him sitting by a fountain's side,
Of which he borrowed some to quench his thirst,
And paid the nymph again as much in tears.
A garland lay him by, made by himself
Of many several flowers bred in the vale,
Stuck in that mystic order that the rareness
Delighted me: but ever when he turned
His tender eyes upon them, he would weep,
As if he meant to make them grow again.
Seeing such pretty helpless innocence
Dwell in his face, I asked him all his story:
He told me that his parents gentle died,
Leaving him to the mercy of the fields


Which gave him roots; and of the crystal springs,
Which did not stop their courses; and the sun,
Which still, he thanked him, yielded him his light.
Then took he up his garland, and did show
What every flower, as country-people hold,
Did signify, and how all, ordered thus,
Expressed his grief; and, to my thoughts, did read
The prettiest lecture of his country-art
That could be wished: so that methought I could
Have studied it. I gladly entertained
Him, who was glad to follow; and have got
The trustiest, loving'st, and the gentlest boy
That ever master kept.
JOHN FLETCHER (1579-1625).
ENVY
(From Julius Caesar, Act i, Sc. ii)
I WAS born free as Caesar, so were you!
We both have fed as well, and we can both
Endure the winter's cold as well as he :
For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
Caesar said to me ' Dar'st thou Cassius, now
Leap in with me into this angry flood,
And swim to yonder point?' Upon the word,
Accoutred as I was, I plunged in,
And bade him follow: so indeed he did.
The torrent roared, and we did buffet it
With lusty sinews, throwing it aside,
And stemming it with hearts of controversy;
But ere we could arrive the point proposed,


Caesar cried —' Help me, Cassius, or I sink!'
I, as /Eneas, our great ancestor,
Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
The old Anchises bear, so, from the waves of Tiber
Did I the tired Caesar! And this man
Is now become a god, and Cassius is
A wretched creature, and must bend his body
If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
He had a fever when he was in Spain,
And when the fit was on him, I did mark
How he did shake: 'tis true, this god did shake!
His coward lips did from their colour fly,
And that same eye, whose bend doth awe the world,
Did lose his lustre: I did hear him groan :
Ay, and that tongue of his, that bade the Romans
Mark him, and write his speeches in their books,
Alas, it cried, ' Give me some drink, Titinius,'
Like a sick girl. Ye gods! it doth amaze me
A man of such a feeble temper should
So get the start of the majestic world,
And bear the palm alone.
CLEOPATRA
(From Antony and Cleopatra, Act n, Sc. ii)
THE barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne,
Burn'd on the water: the poop was beaten gold;
Purple the sails, and so perfumed, that
The winds were love-sick with them: the oars were
silver,
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
The water, which they beat, to follow faster,


As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggar'd all description: She did lie
In her pavilion, (cloth of gold, of tissue,)
O'er-picturing that Venus, where we see
The fancy out-work nature: on each side her
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
With diverse-colour'd fans, whose wind did seem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid, did.
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
So many mermaids, tended her in the eyes,
And made their bends adornings: at the helm
A seeming Mermaid steers; the silken tackle
Swell with the touches of the flower-soft hands,
That yarely frame the office. From the barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
Her people out upon her; and Antony,
Enthroned in the market-place, did sit alone
Whistling the air: which, but for vacancy,
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
And made a gap in nature.
QUEEN MAB
(From Romeo and Juliet, Act i, Sc. iv)
SHE is the Fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies


Athwart men's noses as they He asleep:
Her waggon spokes made of long spinners' legs;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Her traces, of the smallest spider's web ;
The collars, of the moonshine's watery beams,
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut,
Made by the joiner-squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the Fairies' coach-makers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on curtsies straight
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Sometimes she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then he dreams of smelling out a suit;
And sometimes comes she with a tith-pig's tail,
Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,
Then dreams he of another benefice ;
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then he dreams of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is the very Mab


That plats the manes of horses in the night;
And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes;
This is she —
Rom. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace,
Thou talk'st of nothing.
Merc. True, I talk of dreams
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy:
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
And more inconstant than the wind who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the North.
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE (1564-1616)
THE DRAGON'S DEATH
(From The Faerie Qucene, Book i, Canto xi)
THEN freshly up arose the doughty Knight.
All healed of his hurts and woundes wide.
And did himself to battle ready dight;
Whose early foe awaiting him beside
To have devoured, so soon as day he spied,
When now he saw himself so freshly rear,
As if late fight had nought him damnified,
He waxed dismayed and 'gan his fate to fear:
Nathless with wonted rage he him advanced near.
And in his first encounter, gaping wide,
He thought at once him to have swallowed quite,


And rushed upon him with outrageous pride;
Who him encountering fierce, as hawk in flight,
Perforce rebutted back. The weapon bright,
Taking advantage of his open jaw,
Ran through his mouth with so importune might,
That deep empierced his darksome hollow maw,
And, back retired, his life-blood forth with all did draw
So down he fell, and forth his life did breathe,
That vanished into smoke and cloudes swift;
So down he fell, that the earth him underneath
Did groan, as feeble so great load to lift!
So down he fell, as a huge rocky clift,
Whose false foundation waves have washed away,
With dreadful poise is from the mainland rift,
And rolling down great Neptune doth dismay;
So down he fell, and like a heaped mountain lay.
The knight himself even trembled at his fall,
So huge and horrible a mass it seemed;
And his dear Lady, that beheld it all,
Durst not approach for dread which she misdeemed;
But yet at last when as the direful fiend
She saw not stir, off-shaking vain affright
She nigher drew, and saw that joyous end:
Then God she praised and thanked her faithful knight,
That had achieved so great a conquest by his might.
EDMUND SPENSER (1552( ?)-1599).
dig/it: prepare. poise : force.
Nat/iless: none the less. dread tvhich\ fear that.
zvontcd'. usual. misdeemed : misjudged.
importune : violent.


ROBIN HOOD AND ALAN-A-DALE
COME listen to me, you gallants so free,
All you that love mirth for to hear,
And I will tell you of a bold outlaw
That lived in Nottinghamshire.
As Robin Hood in the forest stood,
All under the greenwood tree,
He was aware of a brave young man,
As fine as fine might be.
The youngster was clothed in scarlet red,
In scarlet fine and gay,
And he did frisk it over the plain,
And chanted a roundelay.
As Robin Hood next morning stood,
Amongst the leaves so gay,
There did he espy the same young man
Come drooping along the way.
The scarlet he wore the day before,
It was clean cast away;
And every step he fetcht a sigh,
' Alack and well-a-day!'
Then stepped forth brave Little John
And Much the miller's son,
Which made the young man bend his bow,
When as he saw them come.
' Stand off, stand off!' the young man said,
'What is your will with me?' —
' You must come before our master straight,
Under yon greenwood tree.'


And when he came bold Robin before,
Robin askt him courteously,
4 O hast thou any money to spare,
For my merry men and me? '
' I have no money,' the young man said,
' But five shillings and a ring;
And that I have kept these seven long years,
To have it at my wedding.
' Yesterday I should have married a maid,
But she is now from me ta'en,
And chosen to be an old knight's delight,
Whereby my poor heart is slain.'
' What is thy name ? ' then said Robin Hood,
' Come, tell me without any fail.' —
4 By the faith of my body,' then said the young man,
4 My name it is Alan-a-Dale.'
4 What wilt thou give me,' said Robin Hood,
4 In ready gold or fee,
To help thee to thy true-love again,
And deliver her unto thee ?'
4 1 have no money,' then quoth the young man,
4 No ready gold nor fee,
But I will swear upon a book
Thy true servant for to be.'
4 But how many miles to thy true-love ?
Come, tell me without any guile.' —
4 By the faith of my body,' then said the young man,
4 It is but five little mile.'


Then Robin he hasted over the plain,
He did neither stint nor lin,
Until he came unto the church
Where Alan should keep his wedding.
' What dost thou do here ? ' the Bishop he said,
' I prithee now tell to me ':
' I am a bold harper,' quoth Robin Hood,
' And the best in the north countrey.'
' O welcome, O welcome!' the Bishop he said,
' That musick best pleaseth me.' —
' You shall have no musick,' quoth Robin Hood
' Till the bride and the bridegroom I see.'
With that came in a wealthy knight,
Which was both grave and old,
And after him a finikin lass,
Did shine like glistering gold.
' This is no fit match,' quoth bold Robin Hood,
' That you do seem to make here;
For since we are come unto the church,
The bride she shall choose her own dear.'
Then Robin Hood put his horn to his mouth,
And blew blasts two or three;
When four-and-twenty bowmen bold
Came leaping over the lee.
And when they came into the churchyard,
Marching all on a row,
The first man was Alan-a-Dale,
To give bold Robin his bow.


' This is thy true-love,' Robin he said,
'Young Alan, as I hear say;
And you shall be married at this same time,
Before we depart away.'
' That shall not be,' the Bishop he said,
'For thy word it shall not stand;
They shall be three times asked in the church,
As the law is of our land.'
Robin Hood pull'd off the Bishop's coat,
And put it upon Little John;
' By the faith of my body,' then Robin said,
' This cloath doth make thee a man.'
When Little John went into the quire,
The people began for to laugh;
He askt them seven times in the church,
Least three should not be enough.
' Who gives me this maid ?' then said Little John;
Quoth Robin, ' That do I!
And he that doth take her from Alan-a-Dale
Full dearly he shall her buy.'
And thus having ended this merry wedding,
The bride lookt as fresh as a queen,
And so they returned to the merry greenwood,
Amongst the leaves so green.
AUTHOR UNKNOWN.
finikin : fine.
stint', stop.
lin: give up.


SIR PATRICK SPENS
The Sailing
THE king sits in Dumfermline town
Drinking the blude-red wine;
' O whare will I get a skeely skipper
To sail this new ship o' mine?'
O up and spalc an eldern knight,
Sat at the king's right knee;
' Sir Patrick Spens is the best sailor
That ever sailed the sea.'
Our king has written a braid letter,
And sealed it with his hand,
And sent it to Sir Patrick Spens,
Was walking on the strand.
' To Noroway, to Noroway,
To Noroway o'er the faem;
The king's daughter o' Noroway,
'Tis thou must bring her hame.'
The first word that Sir Patrick read,
So loud, loud laughed he;
The neist word that Sir Patrick read,
A tear blinded his e'e.
' O wha is this has done this deed,
And tauld the king o' me,
To send us out at this time o' year,
To sail upon the sea?


' Be it wind, be it weet, be it hail, be it sleet,
Our ship must sail the faem;
The king's daughter o' Noroway,
'Tis we must fetch her hame.'
They hoysed their sails on Monenday morn
Wi a' the speed they may;
They hae landed in Noroway
Upon a Wodensday.
The Return
' Male ready, mak ready, my merry men a'!
Our gude ship sails the morn.'—
' Now ever alack, my master dear,
I fear a deadly storm.
' I saw the new moon late yestreen
Wi' the auld moon in her arm;
And if we gang to sea, master,
I fear we'll come to harm.'
They hadna sailed a league, a league,
A league but barely three,
When the lift grew dark, and the wind blew loud
And gurly grew the sea.
The ankers brak, the top-mast lap,
It was sic a deadly storm!
And the waves cam owre the broken ship,
Till a' her sides were torn.


' O whare will I get a glide sailor
To tak' my helm in hand,
Till I get up to the tall top-mast,
To see if I can spy land?' —
' O here am I, a sailor gude,
To tak' the helm in hand,
Till you go up to the tall top-mast,
But I fear you'll ne'er spy land.'
He hadna gone a step, a step,
A step but barely ane,
When a bolt flew out of our goodly ship,
And the salt sea it came in.
' Go fetch a web o' the silken claith,
Another o' the twine,
And wap them into our ship's side,
And let nae the sea come in.'
They fetched a web o' the silken claith,
Another o' the twine,
And they wapped them round that gude
But still the sea came in.
ship's side,
O laith, laith were our gude Scots lords
To wet their cork-heel'd shoon;
But lang or a' the play was played
They wat their hats aboon.
And mony was the feather bed
That flatter'd on the faem;
And mony was the gude lord's son
That never mair cam hame.


O lang, lang may the ladies sit
Wi' their fans into their hand,
Before they see Sir Patrick Spens
Come sailing to the strand!
And lang, lang may the maidens sit
Wi' their gowd kames in their hair,
A-waiting for their ain dear loves
For them they'll see nae mair!
Half-owre, half-owre to Aberdour,
'Tis fifty fathoms deep,
And there lies gude Sir Patrick Spens
Wi' the Scots lords at his feet.
AUTHOR UNKNOWN
skeely : skilful.
lap : sprang.
bout: bolt.
tcap: wrap.
laith: loath.
braid: dissembling.
neisf. next.
lift\ sky.
gurly : angry.
jlatter y d: floated.
THE OXFORD STUDENT
(From the Prologue to the Canterbury Tales)
A CLERIC there was of Oxenford also,
That unto logic hadde long y-go.
As lene was his horse as is a rake,
And he was not right fat, I undertake;
But looked holwe, and thereto soberly.
Full threadbare was his overset courtepy;
For he had geten him yet no benefice
Nor was so worldly for to have office,
For him was lever have at his bed's head


Twenty bookes, clad in black or red,
Of Aristotle and his philosophy,
Than robes rich, or fiddle, or gay sautry,
But all be that he was a philosopher,
Yet hadde he but little gold in cofifer;
But all that he might of his friendes hente
On bookes and on learning he it spente
And busily did for the soules pray
Of them that gave him wherewith to scoleye
Of study took he most care and most heed,
Not a word spoke he more than was need,
And that was said in form and reverence,
And short and quick, and full of high sentence,
Souninge in moral virtue was his speech,
And gladly would he learn, and gladly teach.
GEOFFREY CHAUCER (1340(?)-1400)
y-go: given himself. was lever: it was better to.
holtve: hollow. sautry: kind of harp.
all be that : athough.
hente : obtain.
thereto soberly: solemn as well.
overest courtepy : top coat.
geten him: acquired.
scoleye: study.
benefice: church living.
for: as.
souninge in: tending to.




PART II
LYRICS AND POEMS OF REFLECTION




INLAND
WHEN I turn to these hills they are silent straightway,
Elf and fairy depart;
I have never a pass for the guarded gateway
Unto their magic heart.
By cliff and harbour, by sea and river,
I have lived my whole life long.
Ripples that gleam in the sun and quiver,
Are the notes that make my song.
r -
My world is the world of waves beating
On cliffs shod in foam,
Where every wind sends spray as greeting
And there have I found my home.
But here I am far from the great sea steamers,
The tide that falls and fills,
And the port which seems a haven for dreamers,
Between steep, wooded hills.
These plains and flats of struggling grasses;
I know there's a song they sing.
They shout it to every wind that passes
On a shadowy wing.
But they trust not me, and from me 'tis hidden,
Never a note revealed;
For a stranger's ear 'tis a strain forbidden;
So every lip is sealed.


The great, gaunt, ringbarkecl trees hiss : ' Danger !
Here's a new face to scan.'
Wherever I go I am a stranger
Under the Stranger's ban.
ROBERT D. FITZGERALD.
COLOUR
THE lovely things that I have watched unthinking,
Unknowing, day by day,
That their soft dyes had steeped my soul in colour
That will not pass away:—
Great saffron sunset clouds, and larkspur mountains,
And fenceless miles of plain,
And hillsides golden-green in that unearthly
Clear shining after rain ;
And nights of blue and pearl; and long smooth beaches,
Yellow as sunburnt wheat,
Edged with a line of foam that creams and hisses,
Enticing weary feet;
And emeralds, and sunset-hearted opals,
And Asian marble, veined
With scarlet flame; and cool green jade, and moonstones,
Misty and azure-stained;
And almond-trees in bloom, and oleanders,
Or a wide purple sea
Or plain-land gorgeous with a lovely poison-
The evil Darling pea: —


If I am tired I call on these to help me
To dream —and dawn-lit skies,
Lemon and pink, or faintest, coolest lilac,
Float on my soothed eyes.
There is no night so black but you shine through it
There is no morn so drear,
O Colour of the World, but I can find you,
Most tender, pure, and clear.
Thanks be to God Who gave this gift of colour
Which who shall seek shall find;
Thanks be to God Who gives me strength to hold it
Though I were stricken blind.
DOROTHEA MACKELLAR
THE REAPER
UNDER the dying sun
And the moon's frail shell,
The fields are clear as glass:
I love them well.
A horse's amber flanks
Shine in the grain.
The wheel of the reaper cleaves
A yellow lane.
The reaper is ruddy gold
Unearthly bright,
Driving an amber cloud,
Touched with its light.


They say the earth's a stone
Wrinkled and old,
Yet she has steeds of fire
And men of gold!
LESLIE HOLDSWORTH ALLEN.
AUSTRALIA, 1905
CARELESS she lies along the Southern Main,
The lovely maiden, wanton with the spell
Of sun and vastness and the ocean swell:
Northward the great gnomes watch her beauty, fain
To snatch her wealth of gold and fleece and grain,
And bend her being to their purpose fell;
But she lies lazy, and the passing bell
Of older glory stirs her sense in vain.
Nor shall she wake and know her danger near
Till some high heart and true, her fated lord,
Shall kiss her lips, and all her will control,
And fill her wayward heart with holy fear,
And cross her forehead with his iron sword,
And bring her strength, and armour, and a soul
AUSTRALIA, 1914
The night is thick with storm and driving cloud,
Lurid at instants through the blackness break
Quick gleams of war across the perilous lake
From yonder isles that awe and magic shroud:


Far in the northland smite Thor's hammers loud
On steel that warlocks for her spoilure make,
Till lo! from sleep Australia starts awake
And lifts the queenly head that sloth has bowed.
Not yet her eyes are clear: throughout her brain
Still swarm the antic creatures of her dream,
The idiot mirth, the sports that kill the soul,
Yet shall not night lay hold on her again,
For through the rack she spies the morning gleam
Clear on the sword that lights her to her goal.
SIR ARCHIBALD STRONG (1876-1930).
HEART OF SPRING
O HEART of Spring!
Spirit of light and love and joyous day,
So soon to faint beneath the fiery Summer:
Still smiles the Earth, eager for thee alway:
Welcome art thou, soever short thy stay,
Thou bold, thou blithe newcomer!
Whither, oh whither this thy journeying,
O Fleart of Spring?
O Heart of Spring!
After the stormy days of Winter's reign,
When the keen winds their last lament are sighing,
The Sun shall raise thee up to life again:
In thy dim death thou shalt not suffer pain:
Surely thou dost not fear this quiet dying?
Whither, oh whither blithely journeying,
O Heart of Spring?


O Heart of Spring!
Youth's emblem, ancient as unchanging light,
Uncomprehended, unconsumed, still burning:
Oh that we could, as thou, rise from the night
To find a world of blossoms lilac-white
And long-winged swallows unafraid returning
Whither, oh whither this thy journeying,
O Heart of Spring?
SIIAW NEILSON.
A SONG OF LITTLE GARDENS
THERE'S a hum of quiet music in the deepening of the
twilight,
Like far bells in distant valleys heard through lull of
murmuring trees,
Or the elfin chant that haunts us when the thin moon
casts a shy light
Down a happy wind-tossed mountain with a cornfield
at its knees.
'Tis the song of little gardens, 'tis the song of quiet
labour,
Of the purple grapes in cluster and the rose upon the
wall,
Of the blue smoke climbing skyward and the kindly-
nodding neighbour,
And the moist, warm earth upbreathing its brown
benison for all.


"Fall white angels, winging higher through the incense
that enshrouds them,
Striking with their slim, white figures chords with
Godward longing tense,
Pause and bend with eager faces through the mystery
that clouds them,
As that lower, sweeter earth-note trembles on their
holy sense.
'Tis the song of little gardens, weeded borders green
and growing,
Watered seed-beds faintly breathing where the star-
light fires the dew,
Youngest tendrils closely clinging, and the broad leaves
softly blowing
Over buds that kiss in darkness when the warm wind
wakes anew.
Where the drums of death are throbbing, and the fires
of doom are burning,
And the lightnings fork and shiver through the fields
of God's despair,
Where the torrent slaughter pouring hellward with
each day's returning,
Drowns the world in tears of madness, comes a
murmur on the air.
Tis the song of little gardens, trampled under foot and
wasted,
Of the withered leaf and blossom by the black and
broken wall,


Of the vine torn from the trellis, and the fruit that falls
untasted,
And the awful thing unburied where the weeds are
rank and tall.
Through the world-cry and the darkness, stony grief,
and fierce red sorrow,
Through the war hymns and the shouting, through
the victor's shuddering cheer,
Comes the hope-voice, faint, but clearly borne on mist-
wings of the morrow,
Calling all the earth to quiet, making music of her
fear.
'Tis the song of little gardens, better walled and safely
guarded,
With the large fruit hanging golden o'er the graves
of broken kings;
And the holy sweat of labour by the brown earth's gifts
rewarded,
With the peoples calm to listen while the warm, sweet
summer sings.
DAVID MCKEE WRIGHT (1869-1928).
THE BUSH
(From The Bush)
SHE is the scroll on which we are to write
Mythologies our own and epics new:
She is the port of our propitious flight
From Ur idolatrous and Pharaoh's crew.
She is our own, unstained, if worthy we,
By dream, or god, or star we would not see:


Her crystal beams all but the eagle dazzle.
Her wind-wide ways none but the strong-winged sail:
She is Eutopia, she is Hy-Brasil,
The watchers on the tower of morning hail!
Yet she shall be as we, the Potter, mould:
Altar or tomb, as we aspire, despair :
What wine we bring shall she, the chalice, hold :
What word we write shall she, the script, declare:
Bandage our eyes, she shall be Memphis, Spain:
Barter our souls, she shall be Tyre again:
And if we pour on her the red oblation,
O'er all the world shall Asshur's buzzards throng:
Love-lit, her Chaos shall become Creation:
And dewed with dream, her silence flower in song.
BERNARD O'DOWD.
THE MAGPIE'S SONG
WHERE the dreaming Tiber wanders by the haunted
Appian Way,
Lo! the nightingale is uttering a sorrow-burdened lay;
While the olive trees are shaking and the cypress boughs
are stirred,
Palpitates the moon's white bosom to the sorrow of the
bird ;
Sobbing, sobbing, sobbing; yet a sweeter song I know:
'Tis the magpie's windblown music where the Gippsland
rivers flow.


Oh, I love to be by Bincli where the fragrant pastures are,
And the Tambo to his bosom takes the trembling
Evening Star —
Just to hear the magpies warble in the blue-gums on
the hill
When the frail green flower of twilight in the sky is
lingering still;
Calling, calling, calling to the abdicating day:
Oh, they fill my heart with music as I loiter on my way.
Oh, the windy morn of Matlock when the last snow-
wreath had gone,
And the blackwoods robed by tardy Spring with star-
like beauty shone;
When the lory showed his crimson to the golden blossom
spread
And the Goulburn's grey-green mirror showed the
loving colours wed:
Chiming, chiming, chiming in the pauses of the gale-
How the magpies' notes came ringing down the moun-
tain, o'er the vale.
Oh, the noon beside the ocean, when the spring tide
landward set
Cast ashore the loosened silver from the waves of violet;
As the seagod sang a lovesong and the she-oak answer
made,
Came the magpie's carol wafted down the piny colon-
nade,
Trolling, trolling, trolling in a nuptial melody,
As it floated from the moaning pine to charm the singing
sea.


And the dark hour in the city, when my Love had
silent flown,
Nesting in some far-off valley to the seraphs only
known,
When the violet had no odour and the rose no purple
bloom,
And the grey-winged vulture, Sorrow, came rustling
through the gloom;
Crooning crooning, crooning on the swaying garden
bough:
Oh, the song of hope you uttered then my heart is
trilling now.
Voice of happy shepherd chanting by a stream in
Arcady
Seems thy song this blue-eyed morning over lilac borne
to me;
In his arms again Joy takes me, Hope with dimpling
cheek appears,
And my life seems one long lovely vale where grow the
rosy years:
Lilting, lilting, lilting; when I slumber at the last,
Let your music in the joyous wind be ever wandering
past.
FRANK S. WILLIAMSON.
AUSTRALIA, 1894
SHE sits a queen whom none shall dare despoil
Her crown the sun, her guard the vigilant sea,
And round her throne are gathered, stalwart, free,
A people proud, yet stooping to the soil,


Patient to swell her greatness with their toil,
And swift to leave, should dire occasion be,
The mine, the flock, the desk, the furrowed lea,
And force the invader to a dark recoil.-
Yet as she gazes o'er the plains that lie
Fruitful about her throne, she sighs full sore
To see the barriers Greed has builded high,
Dividing them who brothers were before,
When still they dwelt beneath a sterner sky
And heard the thunders of a wilder shore.
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION
FROM all division let our land be free,
For God has made her one: complete she lies
Within the unbroken circle of the skies,
And round her indivisible the sea
Breaks on her single shore; while only we,
Her foster children, bound with sacred ties
Of one dear blood, one storied enterprise
Are negligent of her integrity.
Her seamless garment, at great Mammon's nod,
With hands unfilial we have basely rent,
With petty variance our souls are spent,
And ancient kinship underfoot is trod:
O let us rise, united, penitent,
And be one people,—mighty, serving God!


PRIMROSES
THEY shine upon my table there,
A constellation mimic, sweet,
No stars in Heaven could shine more fair,
Nor Earth has beauty more complete;
And on my table there they shine,
And speak to me of things Divine.
In Heaven at first they grew, and when
God could no fairer make them, He
Did plant them by the ways of men
For all the pure in heart to see,
That each might shine upon its stem
And be a light from Him to them.
They speak of things above my verse,
Of thoughts no earthly language knows,
That loftiest bard could ne'er rehearse,
Nor holiest prophet e'er disclose,
Which God Himself no other way
Than by a primrose could convey.
WILLIAM GAY (1865-1897).
THE WIND'S MESSAGE
THERE came a whisper down the Bland between the
dawn and dark,
Above the tossing of the pines, above the river's flow;
It stirred the boughs of giant gums and stalwart iron-
bark ;
It drifted where the wild ducks played amid the swamps
below;


It brought a breath of mountain air from off the hills
of pine,
A scent of eucalyptus trees in honey-laden bloom;
And drifting, drifting far away along the southern line
It caught from leaf and grass and fern a subtle strange
perfume.
It reached the toiling city folk, but few there were that
heard —
The rattle of their busy life had choked the whisper
down;
And some but caught a fresh-blown breeze with scent
of pine that stirred
A thought of blue hills far away beyond the smoky town;
And others heard the whisper pass, but could not under-
stand
The magic of the breeze's breath that set their hearts
aglow,
Nor how the roving wind could bring across the Over-
land
A sound of voices silent now and songs of long ago.
But some that heard the whisper clear were filled with
vague unrest;
The breeze had brought its message home, they could
not fixed abide;
Their fancies wandered all the day towards the blue
hills' breast,
Towards the sunny slopes that lie along the river-side.
The mighty rolling western plains are very fair to see,
Where waving to the passing breeze the silver myalls
stand.


But fairer are the giant hills, all rugged though they be,
From which the two great rivers rise that run along
the Bland.
Oh, rocky range, and rugged spur, and river running
clear
That swings around the sudden bends with swirl of
snow-white foam,
Though we, your sons, are far away, we sometimes
seem to hear
The message that the breezes bring to call the wan-
derers home.
The mountain peaks are white with snow that feeds a
thousand rills,
Along the river banks the maize grows tall on virgin
land,
And we shall live to see once more those sunny southern
hills,
And strike once more the bridle track that leads along
the Bland.
ANDREW BARTON PATERSON.
KEEP SUMMER IN THY HEART
KEEP summer in thy heart and thou shalt hear
No chiding of the melancholy days
When flowers perish and the frost wind slays
The fruitage that the toiling seasons rear.
Then will the naked autumn-time appear
Mother of shining Aprils and sweet Mays-


Then will the garland of thy quiet praise
Circle the forehead of the dying year.
Yea, lock God's sunshine deep within the nest
Of thy brave heart's inviolate treasury;
There, guarded safe from time's despoiling quest,
Its flame will light thy soul and thou shalt see
Life but a noisy foam upon the crest
Of the rolling waters of Eternity.
JOHN BERNARD O'HARA
THE MUSES OF AUSTRALIA
SHE plays her harp by hidden rills,
The sweet shy Muse who dwells
In secret hollows of the hills,
And green untrodden dells.
Her voice is as the voice of streams
That under myrtles glide;
Our Kendall saw her face in dreams,
And loved her till he died.
At times, by some green-eyelashed pool,
She lies in slumber deep:
Her slender hands are white and cool
As are the hands of sleep.
And, when the sun of Summer flaunts
His fire the hills along,
She keeps her secret sunless haunts,
And sings a shadowy song.


She weaves a wild, sweet magic rune,
When o'er the tree-tops high
The silver sickle of the moon
Shines in a rose-grey sky.
But in the dawn, the soft red dawn,
When fade the stars above,
She walks upon a shining lawn,
And sings the song of love.
But, 10, the Muse with flashing eyes,
And backward-streaming hair!
She grips her steed with strong brown thighs,
Her panting breasts are bare.
In trances sweet, or tender dreams,
She has not any part —
Her blood runs like the blood that streams
Out of the mountain's heart.
Her lips are red; the pride of life
Her heart of passion thrills;
She is the Muse whose joy is strife,
Whose home is on the hills.
Her voice is as a clarion clear,
And rings o'er the hill and dell;
She sings a song of gallant cheer-
Dead Gordon knew her well,
She checks her steed upon a rise
The wind uplifts his mane—
And gazes far with flashing eyes
Across the rolling plain.


Who comes in solemn majesty
Through haze of throbbing heat
It is the Desert Muse, and she
Is veiled from head to feet.
Yet men the Mountain Muse will leave,
And leave the Muse of Streams,
To follow her from dawn to eve-
And perish in their dreams.
She passes far beyond their ken,
With slow and, solemn pace,
Over the bleaching bones of men
Who died to see her face.
Her secrets were to some revealed
Who loved her passing well —
But death with burning fingers sealed
Their lips ere they could tell.
In silence dread she walks apart-
Yet I have heard men say
The song that slumbers in her heart
Will wake the world some day.
She is the Muse of Tragedy,
And walks on burning sands ;
The greatest of the Muses Three
In our Australian lands.
VICTOR JAMES DALEY (1858-1905)


WANDERERS
As I rose in the early dawn,
While stars were fading white,
I saw upon a grassy slope
A camp-fire burning bright;
With tent behind and blaze before
Three loggers in a row
Sang all together joyously-
Pull up the stakes and go !
As I rode on by Eagle Hawk,
The wide blue deep of air,
The wind among the glittering leaves,
The flowers so sweet and fair,
The thunder of the rude salt waves,
The creek's soft overflow,
All joined in chorus to the words-
Pull up the stakes and go!
Now by the tent on forest skirt,
By odour of the earth,
By sight and scent of morning smoke,
By evening camp-fire's mirth,
By deep-sea call and foaming green,
By new stars' gleam and glow,
By summer trails in antique lands —
Pull up the stakes and go!
The world is wide and we are young,
The sounding marches beat,
And passion pipes her sweetest call
In lane and field and street;


So rouse the chorus, brothers all,
We'll something have; to show
When death comes round and strikes our tent-
Pull up the stakes and go!
JAMES HEBBLETHWAITE (1857-1921)
INTO BATTLE
1915
THE naked earth is warm with Spring,
And with green grass and bursting trees
Leans to the sun's gaze glorying,
And quivers in the sunny breeze;
And life is Colour and Warmth and Light,
And a striving evermore for these;
And he is dead who will not fight;
And who dies fighting has increase.
The fighting man shall from the sun
Take warmth, and life from the glowing earth;
Speed with the light-foot winds to run,
And with the trees to newer birth;
And find, when fighting shall be done,
Great rest, and fullness after dearth.
All the bright company of Heaven
Hold him in their high comradeship,
The Dog-star, and the Sisters Seven,
Orion's Belt and sworded hip.


The woodland trees that stand together,
They stand to him each one a friend;
They gently speak in the windy weather;
They guide to valley and ridge's end.
The kestrel hovering by day,
And the little owls that call by night,
Bid him be swift and keen as they,
As keen of ear, as swift of sight.
The blackbird sings to him,' Brother, brother,
If this be the last song you shall sing,
Sing well, for you may not sing another;
Brother, sing.'
In dreary doubtful waiting hours,
Before the brazen frenzy starts,
The horses show him nobler powers ;-
O patient eyes, courageous hearts!
And when the burning moment breaks,
And all things else are out of mind,
And only joy of battle takes
Him by the throat, and makes him blind,
Through joy and blindness he shall know,
Not caring much to know, that still
Nor lead nor steel shall reach him, so
That it be not the Destined Will.
The thundering line of battle stands,
And in the air Death moans and sings ;
But Day shall clasp him with strong hands,
And Night shall fold him in soft wings.
JULIAN GRENFELL (1888-1915)


THE SOLDIER
1914
IF I should die, think only this of me:
That there's some corner of a foreign field
That is for ever England. There shall be
In that rich earth a richer dust concealed;
A dust whom England bore, shaped, made aware,
Gave, once, her flowers to love, her ways to roam,
A body of England's, breathing English air,
Washed by the rivers, blest by suns of home.
And think, this heart, all evil shed away,
A pulse in the eternal mind, no less
Gives somewhere back the thoughts by England
given;
Her sights and sounds; dreams happy as her day;
And laughter, learnt of friends; and gentleness,
In hearts at peace, under an English heaven.
RUPERT BROOKE (1887-1915).
TO A POET A THOUSAND YEARS HENCE
I WHO am dead a thousand years,
And wrote this sweet archaic song,
Send you my words for messengers
The way I shall not pass along.
I care not if you bridge the seas,
Or ride secure the cruel sky,
Or build consummate palaces
Of metal or of masonry.


But have vou wine and music still,
And statues and a bright-eyed love,
And foolish thoughts of good and ill,
And prayers to them who sit above ?
How shall we conquer? Like a wind
That falls at eve our fancies blow,
And old Maeonides the blind
Said it three thousand years ago.
O friend unseen, unborn, unknown,
Student of our sweet English tongue,
Read out my words at night, alone:
I was a poet, I was young.
Since I can never see your face,
And never shake you by the hand,
I send my soul through time and space
To greet you. You will understand.
JAMES ELROY FLECKER (1884-1915).
SEA-FEVER
I MUST go down to the sea again, to the lonely sea and
the sky,
And all I ask is a tall ship and a star to steer her by,
And the wheel's kick and the wind's song and the white
sail's shaking,
And a grey mist on the sea's face and a grey dawn
breaking.


I must go down to the seas again, for the call of the run-
ning tide
Is a wild call and a clear call that may not be denied;
And all I ask is a windy day with the white clouds flying,
And the flung spray and the blown spume, and the sea-
gulls crying.
I must go down to the seas again, to the vagrant gypsy
life,
To the gull's way and the whale's way where the wind's
like a whetted knife;
And all I ask is a merry yarn from a laughing fellow-
rover,
And quiet sleep and a sweet dream when the long trick's
over.
ROADWAYS
ONE road leads to London,
One road runs to Wales,
My road leads me seawards
To the white dipping sails.
One road leads to the river,
As it goes singing slow;
My road leads to shipping,
Where the bronzed sailors go.
Leads me, lures me, calls me
To salt green tossing sea;
A road without earth's road-dust
Is the right road for me.


A wet road heaving, shining,
A wild with seagulls' cries,
A mad salt sea-wind blowing
The salt spray in my eyes.
My road calls me, lures me
West, east, south, and north;
Most roads lead men homewards,
My road leads me forth.
To add more miles to the tally
Of grey miles left behind,
In quest of that one beauty
God put me here to find.
JOHN MASEFIELD.
THE FIDDLER OF DOONEY
WHEN I play on my fiddle in Dooney,
Folk dance like a wave of the sea;
My cousin is priest in Kilvarnet,
My brother in Moharabuiee.
I passed my brother and cousin:
They read in their books of prayer;
I read in my book of songs
I bought at the Sligo fair.
When we come at the end of time,
To Peter sitting in state,
He will smile on the three old spirits,
But call me first through the gate;


For the good are always the merry,
Save by an evil chance,
And the merry love the fiddle,
And the merry love to dance:
And when the folk there spy me,
They will all come up to me,
With ' Here is the fiddler of Dooney!'
And dance like a wave of the sea.
WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
RECESSIONAL
(1897)
GOD of our fathers, known of old,
Lord of our far-flung battle-line,
Beneath whose awful Hand we hold
Dominion over palm and pine—
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget —lest we forget!
The tumult and the shouting dies;
The Captains and the Kings depart:
Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice,
An humble and a contrite heart.
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget —lest we forget!
Far-called, our navies melt away;
On dune and headland sinks the fire:
Lo, all our pomp of yesterday
Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!
A A
Judge of the Nations, spare us yet,
Lest we forget—lest we forget!


If, drunk with sight of power, we loose
Wild tongues that have not Thee in awe,
Such boastings as the Gentiles use,
Or lesser breeds without the Law-
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget—lest we forget!
For heathen heart that puts her trust
In reeking tube and iron shard,
All valiant dust that builds on dust,
And guarding, calls not Thee to guard,
For frantic boast and foolish word-
Thy mercy on Thy People, Lord!
THE GLORY OF THE GARDEN
OUR England is a garden that is full of stately views,
Of borders, beds and shrubberies and lawns and
avenues,
With statues on the terraces ana peacocks strutting by;
But the Glory of the Garden lies in more than meets
the eye.
For where the old thick laurels grow, along the thin red
wall,
You find the tool- and potting-sheds which are the
heart of all;
The cold-frames and the hot-houses, the dungpits and
the tanks,
The rollers, carts and drain-pipes, with the barrows
and the planks.


And there you'll see the gardeners, the men and 'pren-
tice boys
Told off to do as they are bid and do it without noise;
For, except when seeds are planted and we shout to
scare the birds,
The Glory of the Garden it abideth not in words.
And some can pot begonias and some can bud a rose,
And some are hardly fit to trust with anything that
grows;
But they can roll and trim the lawns and sift the sand
and loam,
For the Glory of the Garden occupieth all who come.
Our England is a garden, and such gardens are not
made
By singing: ' Oh, how beautiful!' and sitting in the
shade,
While better men than we go out and start their working
lives
At grubbing weeds from gravel-paths with broken
dinner-knives.
There's not a pair of legs so thin, there's not a head so
thick,
There's not a hand so weak and white, nor yet a heart so
sick,
But it can find some needful job that's crying to be done,
For the Glory of the Garden glorifieth every one.
Then seek your job with thankfulness and work till
further orders,
It it's only netting strawberries or killing slugs on
borders;


And when your back stops aching and your hands begin
to harden,
You will find yourself a partner in the Glory of the
Garden.
Oh, Adam was a gardener, and God who made him sees
That half a proper gardener's work is done upon his
knees,
So when your work is finished, you can wash your
hands and pray
For the Glory of the Garden, that it may not pass away!
And the Glory of the Garden it shall never pass away!
RUDYARD KIPLING (1865-1936.)
VITAI LAM PAD A
THERE'S a breathless hush in the Close to-night-
Ten to make and the match to win—
A bumping pitch and a blinding light,
An hour to play and the last man in.
And it's not for the sake of a ribboned coat,
Or the selfish hope of a season's fame,
But his Captain's hand on his shoulder smote :
' Play up! play up! and play the game!'
The sand of the desert is sodden red, —
Red with the wreck of a square that broke:
The Gatling's jammed and the colonel dead,
And the regiment blind with dust and smoke.
The river of death has brimmed his banks,
And England's far, and Honour a name,
But the voice of a schoolboy rallies the ranks,
' Play up ! play up ! and play the game !'


This is the word that year by year,
While in her place the School is set,
Every one of her sons must hear,
And none that hears it dare forget.
This they all with a joyful mind
Bear through life like a torch in flame,
And falling, fling to the host behind —
' Play up! play up! and play the game!'
DRAKE'S DRUM
DRAKE he's in his hammock an' a thousand mile away,
(Capten, art tha sleepin' there below?),
Slung atween the round shot in Nombre Dios Bay,
An' dreamin' arl the time o' Plymouth Hoe.
Yarnder lumes the Island, yarnder lie the ships,
Wi' sailor-lads a-dancin' heel-an'-toe,
An' the shore-lights flashin', and the night-tide dashin',
He sees et arl so plainly as he saw et long ago.
Drake he was a Devon man, an' ruled the Devon seas.
(Capten, art tha sleepin' there below?),
Rovin' tho' his death fell, he went wi' heart at ease,
An' dreamin' arl the time o' Plymouth Hoe.
' Take my drum to England, hang et by the shore,
Strike et when your powder's runnin' low;
If the Dons sight Devon, I'll quit the port o' Heaven,
An' drum them up the Channel as we drummed them
long ago.'


Drake he's in his hammock till the great Armadas come,
(Capten, art tha sleepin' there below?),
Slung atween the round shot, listenin' for the drum,
An' dreamin' arl the time o' Plymouth Hoe.
Call him on the deep sea, call him up the Sound,
Call him when ye sail to meet the foe;
Where the old trade's plyin' an' the old flag flyin'
They shall find him ware an' wakin', as they found
him long ago!
SIR HENRY NEWBOLT (1862-1938).
FANCY'S KNELL
WHEN lads were home from labour
At Abdon under Clee,
A man would call his neighbour
And both would send for me.
And where the light in lances
Across the mead was laid,
There to the dances
I fetched my flute and played.
Ours were idle pleasures,
Yet oh, content we were,
The young to wind the measures,
The old to heed the air;
And I to lift with playing
From tree and tower and steep
The light delaying,
And flute the sun to sleep.


The youth toward his fancy
Would turn his brow of tan,
And Tom would pair with Nancy
And Dick step off with Fan;
The girl would lift her glances
To his, and both be mute:
Well went the dances
At evening to the flute.
Wenlock Edge was umbered,
And bright was Aldon Burf,
And warm between them slumbered
The smooth green miles of turf;
Until from grass and clover
The upshot beam would fade,
And England over
Advanced the lofty shade.
The lofty shade advances,
I fetch my flute and play:
Come, lads, and learn the dances
And praise the tune to-day.
To-morrow, more's the pity,
Away we both must hie,
To air the ditty,
And to earth I.
ALFRED EDWARD HOUSMAN (1859-1936)


THE BUSH
GIVE US from dawn to dark
Blue of Australian skies,
Let there be none to mark
Whither our pathway lies.
Give us when noontide comes
Rest in the woodland free-
Fragrant breath of the gums,
Cold, sweet scent of the sea.
Give us the wattle's gold
And the dew-laden air,
And the loveliness bold
Loneliest landscapes wear.
These are the haunts we love,
Glad with enchanted hours,
Bright as the heavens above,
Fresh as the wild bush flowers.
JAMES LESTER CUTHBERTSON (1851-1910).
NIGHTINGALES
BEAUTIFUL must be the mountains whence ye come,
And bright in the fruitful valleys the streams, where-
from
Ye learn your song:
Where are those starry woods? O might I wander
there,
Among the flowers, which in that heavenly air
Bloom the year long!


Nay, barren are those mountains and spent the
streams:
Our song is the voice of desire, that haunts our
dreams,
A throe of the heart,
Whose pining visions dim, forbidden hopes profound,
No dying cadence nor long sigh can sound,
For all our art.
Alone, aloud in the raptured ear of men
We pour our dark nocturnal secret; and then,
As night is withdrawn
From these sweet-springing meads and bursting boughs
of May,
Dream, while the innumerable choir of day
Welcome the dawn.
ROBERT BRIDGES (1844-1930).
ORARA*
THE strong sob of the chafing stream
That seaward fights its way
Down crags of glitter, dells of gleam,
Is in the hills to-day.
But far and faint, a grey-winged form
Hangs where the wild lights wane —
The phantom of a bygone storm,
A ghost of wind and rain.
*A tributary of the river Clarence,


The soft white feet of afternoon
Are on the shining meads,
The breeze is as a pleasant tune
Amongst the happy reeds.
The fierce, disastrous, flying fire,
That made the great caves ring,
And scarred the slope, and broke the spire,
Is a forgotten thing.
The air is full of mellow sounds,
The wet hill-heads are bright,
And, down the fall of fragrant grounds,
The deep ways flame with light.
A rose-red space of stream I see,
Past banks of tender fern;
A radiant brook, unknown to me
Beyond its upper turn.
The singing, silver life I hear,
Whose home is in the green,
Far-folded woods of fountains clear,
Where I have never been.
Ah, brook above the upper bend,
I often long to stand
Where you in soft, cool shades descend
From the untrodden land!
Ah, folded woods, that hide the grace
Of moss and torrents strong,
I often wish to know the face
Of that which sings your song!


But I may linger, long, and look
Till night is over all:
My eyes will never see the brook,
Or sweet, strange waterfall.
The world is round me with its heat,
And toil, and cares that tire;
I cannot with my feeble feet
Climb after my desire.
But, on the lap of lands unseen,
Within a secret zone,
There shine diviner gold and green
Than man has ever known.
And where the silver waters sing
Down hushed and holy dells,
The flower of a celestial Spring-
A tenfold splendour, dwells.
Yea, in my dream of fall and brook
By far sweet forests furled,
I see that light for which I look
In vain through all the world-
The glory of a largef sky
On slopes of hills sublime,
That speak with God and morning, high
Above the ways of Time!
Ah! haply in this sphere of change
Where shadows spoil the beam,
It would not do to climb that range
And test my radiant Dream.


The slightest glimpse of yonder place,
Untrodden and alone,
Might wholly kill that nameless grace,
The charm of the unknown.
And therefore, though I look and long,
Perhaps the lot is bright
Which keeps the river of the song
A beauty out of sight.
HENRY KENDALL (1841-1882).
A FANCY FROM FONTENELLE
' De memoires de Roses on n'a point vu mourir
le Jardinier'
THE Rose in the garden slipped her bud,
And she laughed in the pride of her youthful blood,
As she thought of the Gardener standing by—
'He is old —so old! And he soon must die !'
The full Rose waxed in the warm June air,
And she spread and spread till her heart lay bare;
And she laughed once more as she heard his tread-
'He is older now! And will soon be dead!'
But the breeze of the morning blew, and found
That the leaves of the blown Rose strewed the ground;
And he came at noon, that Gardener old,
And he raked them gently under the mould.
And I wove the thing to a random rhyme,
For the Rose is Beauty, the Gardener, Time.
AUSTIN DOBSON (1840-1921).


HOPE AND FEAR
BENEATH the shadow of dawn's aerial cope,
With eyes enkindled as the sun's own sphere,
Hope from the front of youth in godlike cheer
Looks Godward, past the shades where blind men
grope
Round the dark door that prayers nor dreams can
ope,
And makes for joy the very darkness dear
That gives her wide wings play; nor dreams that
fear
At noon may rise and pierce the heart of hope.
Then, when the soul leaves off to dream and yearn,
May truth first purge her eyesight to discern
What once being known leaves time no power to
appal ;
Till youth at last, ere yet youth be not, learn
The kind wise word that falls from years that
' Hope thou not much, and fear thou not at all.'
ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE (1837-1909).
EVEN-SONG
(From Convict Once)
LINGER, oh Sun, for a little, nor close yet this day of a
million!
Is there not glory enough in the rose-curtained halls
of the West?


Hast thou no joy in the passion-hued folds of thy
kingly pavilion ?
Why shouldst thou only pass through it? Oh rest
thee a little while, rest!
Why should the Night come and take it, the wan Night
that cannot enjoy it,
Bringing pale argent for golden, and changing ver-
milion to grey?
Why should the Night come and shadow it, entering
but to destroy it?
Rest 'mid thy ruby-trailed splendours! Oh stay thee
a little while, stay!
Rest thee at least a brief hour in it! 'Tis a right royal
pavilion.
Lo, there are thrones for high dalliance all
gloriously canopied o'er!
Lo, there are hangings of purple, and hangings of blue
and vermilion,
And there are fleeces of gold for thy feet on the
diapered floor!
Linger, a little while linger. To-morrow my heart may
not sing to thee:
This shall be Yesterday, numbered with memories,
folded awav.
/
Now should my flesh-fettered soul be set free! I would
soar to thee, cling to thee,
And be thy rere-ward Aurora, pursuing the skirts of
To-day!
J. BRUNTON STEPHENS (1835-1902)


IS LIFE WORTH LIVING?
Is life worth living? Yes, so long
As Spring revives the year,
And hails us with the cuckoo's song,
To show that she is here;
So long as May of April takes
In smiles and tears farewell,
And windflowers dapple all the brakes,
And primroses the dell;
While children in the woodlands yet
Adorn their little laps
With ladysmock and violet,
And daisy-chain their caps ;
While over orchard daffodils
Cloud-shadows float and fleet,
And ousel pipes and laverock trills,
And young lambs buck and bleat;
So long as that which bursts the bud
And swells and tunes the rill
Makes springtime in the maiden's blood
Life is worth living still
Is life worth living? Yes, so long
As there is wrong to right,
Wail of the weak against the strong,
Or tyranny to fight;
Long as there lingers gloom to chase,
Or streaming tear to dry,
One kindred woe, one sorrowing face
That smiles as we draw nigh;


Long as at tale of anguish swells
The heart, and lids grow wet,
And at the sound of Christmas bells
We pardon and forget;
So long as Faith with Freedom reigns,
And loyal Hope survives,
And gracious Charity remains
To leaven lowly lives;
While there is one untrodden tract
For Intellect or Will,
And men are free to think and act,
Life is worth living still.
Not care to live while English homes
Nestle in English trees,
And England's Trident-Sceptre roams
Her territorial seas!
Not live while English songs are sung
Wherever blows the wind,
And England's laws and England's tongue
Enfranchise half mankind!
So long as in Pacific main
Or on Atlantic strand,
Our kin transmit the parent strain,
And love the Mother-land;
So long as flashes English steel,
And English trumpets shrill,
He is dead already who doth not feel
Life is worth living still.
SIR ALFRED AUSTIN (1835-1913).


REQUIESCAT
STREW on her roses, roses,
*
And never a spray of yew!
In quiet she reposes :
Ah, would that I did too!
Her mirth the world required;
She bathed it in smiles of glee.
But her heart was tired, tired,
And now they let her be.
Her life was turning, turning.
In mazes ot neat and suuntl.
But for peace her soul was yearning,
And now peace laps her round.
Her cabin'd, ample spirit,
It flutter'd and fail'd for breath.
To-night it doth inherit
The vasty hall of death.
MATTHEW ARNOLD (1822-1888)
LAST LINES
No coward soul is mine,
No trembler in the world's storm-troubled sphere:
I see Heaven's glories shine,
And faith shines equal, arming me from fear.
O God within my breast,
Almighty, ever-present Deity!
Life —that in me has rest,
As I —undying Life —have power in Thee !


Vain are the thousand creeds
That move men's hearts: unutterably vain;
Worthless as withered weeds,
Or idlest froth amid the boundless main,
To waken doubt in one
Holding so fast by Thine infinity ;
So surely anchored on
The steadfast rock of immortality.
With wide-embracing love
Thy spirit animates eternal years,
Pervades and broods above,
Changes, sustains, dissolves, creates, and rears.
Though earth and man were gone,
And suns and universes ceased to be,
And Thou were left alone,
Every existence would exist in Thee.
There is not room for Death,
Nor atom that his might could render void:
Thou —-THOU art Being and Breath,
And what THOU art may never be destroyed.
EMILY JANE BRONTE (1818-1848)
THE LOST LEADER
I
JUST for a handful of silver he left us,
Just for a riband to stick in his coat-
Found the one gift of which fortune bereft us,
Lost all the others she lets us devote;


They, with the gold to give, doled him out silver,
So much was theirs who so little allowed:
How all our copper had gone for his service!
Rags —were they purple, his heart had been proud!
We that had loved him so, followed him, honoured him,
Lived in his mild and magnificent eye,
Learned his great language, caught his clear accents,
Made him our pattern to live and to die!
Shakespeare was of us, Milton was for us,
Burns, Shelley, were with us —they watch from their
graves!
He alone breaks from the van and the freemen,
He alone sinks to the rear and the slaves!
We shall march prospering—not thro' his presence;
Songs may inspirit us —not from his lyre;
Deeds will be done —while he boasts his quiescence,
Still bidding crouch whom the rest bade aspire:
Blot out his name, then, record one lost soul more,
One task more declined, one more footpath untrod,
One more triumph for devils and sorrow for angels,
One wrong more to man, one more insult to God!
Life's night begins: let him never come back to us!
There would be doubt, hesitation and pain,
Forced praise on our part —the glimmer of twilight,
Never glad confident morning again!
Best fight on well, for we taught him —strike gallantly,
Menace our heart ere we master his own;
Then let him receive the new knowledge and wait us,
Pardoned in Heaven, the first by the throne !


GROW OLD ALONG WITH ME
GROW old along with me!
The best is yet to be,
The last of life, for which the first was made:
Our times are in His hand
Who saith, ' A whole I planned,
Youth shows but half; trust God : see all, nor be afraid !'
Then, welcome each rebuff
That turns earth's smoothness rough,
Each sting that bids nor sit nor stand but go !
Be our joys three-parts pain!
Strive, and hold cheap the strain ;
Learn, nor account the pang; dare, never grudge the
throe!
Not on the vulgar mass
Called ' work,' must sentence pass,
Things done, that took the eye and had the price;
O'er which, from level stand,
The low world laid its hand,
Found straightway to its mind, could value in a trice:
But all, the world's coarse thumb
And finger failed to plumb,
So passed in making up the main account;
All instincts immature,
All purposes unsure,
That weighed not as his work, yet swelled the man's
amount:


Thoughts hardly to be packed
Into a narrow act,
Fancies that broke through language and escaped;
All I could never be,
All, men ignored in me,
This, I was worth to God, whose wheel the pitcher
shaped.
So, take and use Thy work !
Amend what flaws may lurk,
What strain o' the stuff, what warpings past the aim!
Mv times be in Thv hand !
j /
J J
Perfect the cup as planned !
Let age approve of youth, and death complete the same!
PIPPA'S SONG
The year's at the spring,
And day's at the morn;
Morning's at seven;
The hill-side's dew-pearled;
The lark's on the wing;
The snail's on the thorn;
God's in his heaven-
All's right with the world!
ROBERT BROWNING (1812-1889).


RING OUT, WILD BELLS
(From In Menioriani)
RING out, wild bells, to the wild sky,
The flying cloud, the frosty light:
The year in dying in the night;
Ring out, wild bells, and let him die.
Ring out the old, ring in the new,
Ring, happy bells, across the snow:
The year is going, let him go;
Ring out the false, ring in the true.
Ring out the grief that saps the mind,
For those that here we see no more ;
Ring out the feud of rich and poor,
Ring in redress to all mankind.
Ring out a slowly dying cause,
And ancient forms of party strife;
Ring in the nobler modes of life,
With sweeter manners, purer laws.
Ring out the want, the care, the sin,
The faithless coldness of the times ;
Ring out, ring out my mournful rhymes,
But ring the fuller minstrel in.
Ring out false pride in place and blood,
The civic slander and the spite;
Ring in the love of truth and right,
Ring in the common love of good.


Ring out old shapes of foul disease;
Ring out the narrowing lust of gold;
Ring out the thousand wars of old,
Ring in the thousand years of peace.
Ring in the valiant man and free,
The larger heart, the kindlier hand;
Ring out the darkness of the land,
Ring in the Christ that is to be.
CROSSING THE BAR
SUNSET and evening star,
And one clear call for me!
And may there be no moaning of the bar,
When I put out to sea.
But such a tide as moving seems asleep,
Too full for sound and foam,
When that which drew from out the boundless deep
Turns again home.
Twilight and evening bell,
And after that the dark!
And may there be no sadness of farewell,
When I embark;
For tho' from out our bourne of Time and Place
The flood may bear me far,
I hope to see my Pilot face to face,
When I have crost the bar.
LORD TENNYSON (1809-1892)


A THING OF BEAUTY
(From Endymion)
A THING of beauty is a joy for ever:
Its loveliness increases; it will never
Pass into nothingness; but still will keep
A bower quiet for us, and a sleep
Full of sweet dreams, and health, and quiet breathing.
Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing
A flowery band to bind us to the earth,
Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth
Of noble natures, of the gloomy days,
Of all the unhealthy and o'er-darkened ways
Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all,
Some shape of beauty moves away the pall
From our dark spirits. Such the sun, the moon,
Trees old and young, spouting a shady boon
For simple sheep; and such are daffodils
With the green world they live in; and clear rills
That for themselves a cooling covert make
'Gainst the hot season; the mid-forest brake,
Rich with a sprinkling of fair musk-rose blooms :
And such also is the grandeur of the dooms
We have imagined for the mighty dead;
All lovely tales that we have heard or read:
An endless fountain of immortal drink,
Pouring unto us from the heaven's brink.
Nor do we merely feel these essences
For one short hour; no, even as the trees
That whisper round a temple become soon
Dear as the temple's self, so does the moon,


The passion poesy, glories infinite,
Haunt us till they become a cheering light
Unto our souls, and bound to us so fast,
That, whether there be shine or gloom o'ercast,
They always must be with us, or we die.
JOHN KEATS (1795-1821).
ODE TO THE WEST WIND
O WILD West Wind, thou breath of Autumn's being,
Thou, from whose unseen presence the leaves dead
Are driven, like ghosts from an enchanter fleeing.
Yellow, and black, and pale, and hectic red,
Pestilence-stricken multitudes: O thou,
Who chariotest to their dark wintry bed
The winged seeds, where they lie cold and low,
Each like a corpse within its grave, until
Thine azure sister of the Spring shall blow
Her clarion o'er the dreaming earth, and fill
(Driving sweet buds like flocks to feed in air)
With living hues and odours plain and hill:
Wild Spirit, which art moving everywhere;
Destroyer and preserver; hear, oh, hear!
Thou on whose stream, 'mid the steep sky's commotion
Loose clouds like earth's decaying leaves are shed,
Shook from the tangled boughs of Heaven and Ocean


Angels of rain and lightning: there are spread
On the blue surface of thine aery surge,
Like the bright hair uplifted from the head
Of some fierce Maenad, even from the dim verge
Of the horizon to the zenith's height.
The locks of the approaching storm. Thou dirge
Of the dying year, to which this closing night
Will be the dome of a vast sepulchre,
Vaulted with all thy congregated might
Of f 1 W nose solid atmosphere
Black rain, and fire, and hail will burst: oh, hear!
Thou who didst waken from his summer dreams,
The blue Mediterranean, where he lay,
Lulled by the coil of his crystalline streams,
Beside a pumice isle in Baiae's bay,
And saw in sleep old palaces and towers
Quivering within the wave's intenser day,
All overgrown with azure moss and flowers
So sweet, the sense faints picturing them ! Thou
For whose path the Atlantic's level powers
Cleave themselves into chasms, while far below
The sea-blooms and the oozy woods which wear
The sapless foliage of the ocean, know
Thy voice, and suddenly grow grey with fear
And tremble and despoil themselves : oh, hear !


If I were a dead leaf thou mightest bear;
If I were a swift cloud to fly with thee;
A wave to pant beneath thy power, and share
The impulse of thy strength, only less free
Than thou, O uncontrollable ! If even
I were as in my boyhood, and could be
The comrade of thy wanderings over heaven,
As then, w ken to outstrip thy skiey speed
Scarce seemed a vision; 1 wouta nev, ctriwn
As thus with thee in prayer in my sore need.
Oh, lift me as a wave, a leaf, a cloud!
I fall upon the thorns of life! I bleed!
A heavy weight of hours has chained and bowed
One too like thee: tameless, and swift, and proud.
Make me thy lyre, even as the forest is:
What if my leaves are falling like its own !
The tumult of thy mighty harmonies
Will take from both a deep, autumnal tone,
Sweet though in sadness. Be thou, Spirit fierce,
My spirit! Be thou me, impetuous one!
Drive my dead thoughts over the universe
Like withered leaves to quicken a new birth!
And, by the incantation of this verse,


Scatter, as frotrt an unextinguished hearth
Ashes and sparks, rny words among mankind!
Be through my lips to uuawakened earth
The trumpet of a prophecy! O Wind,
If Winter comes, can Spring be fat behind?
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY (1/32-1822)
A WET SHEET AND A FLOWING SEA
A WET sheet and a flowing sea,
A wind that follows fast
And fills the white and rustling sail
And bends the gallant mast;
And bends the gallant mast, my boys,
While like the eagle free
Away the good ship flies and leaves
Old England on the lee.
O for a soft and gentle wind!
I heard a fair one cry:
But give to me the snoring breeze
And white waves heaving high;
And white waves heaving high, my lads,
The good ship tight and free —
The world of waters is our home,
And merry men are we.
There's tempest in yon horned moon,
And lightning in yon cloud;
But hark the music, mariners!
The wind is piping loud;


The wind is piping loud, my boys,
The lightning flashes free —
While the hollow oak our palace is,
Our heritage Oe sea.
CUNNINGHAM (1784-1842)
O THE SHAMROCK!
THROUGH Erin's Isle,
To sport awhile,
As Love and Valour wander'd,
With Wit, the sprite,
Whose quiver bright
A thousand arrows squander'd;
Where'er they pass,
A triple grass
Shoots up, with dew-drops streaming,
A softly green
As emerald seen
Through purest crystal gleaming.
O the Shamrock, the green, immortal Shamrock!
Chosen leaf
Of Bard and Chief,
Old Erin's native Shamrock!
Says Valour, ' See,
They spring for me,
Those leafy gems of morning! '
Says Love, ' No, no,
For me they grow,
My fragrant path adorning.'


But Wit perceives
The triple leaves,
And cries, ' Oh! do not sever
A type that blends
Three godlike friends,
Love, Valour, Wit, for ever!'
the Shamrock, the green, immortal Shamrock!
Chosen leaf
Of Bard and Chief,
Old Erin's native Shamrock!
So firmly fond
May last the bond
They wove that morn together,
And ne'er may fall
One drop of gall
On Wit's celestial feather!
May Love, as twine
His flowers divine,
Of thorny falsehood weed 'em!
May Valour ne'er
His standard rear
Against the cause of Freedom!
the Shamrock, the green, immortal Shamrock!
Chosen leaf
Of Bard and Chief,
Old Erin's native Shamrock!
THOMAS MOORE (1779-1852)


NATURE
(From Tint em Abbey)
I DARE to hope,
Though changed, no doubt, from what I was when
I came among these hills; when like a roe
I bounded o'er the mountains, by the sides
Of the deep rivers, and the lonely streams,
Wherever Nature led: more like a man
Flying from something that he dreads, than one
Who sought the thing he loved. For Nature then
(The coarser pleasures of my boyish days,
And their glad animal movements all gone by)
To me was all in all. —I cannot paint
What then I was. The sounding cataract
Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock,
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
Their colours and their forms, were then to me
An appetite; a feeling and a love,
That had no need of a remoter charm,
By thought supplied, nor any interest
Unborrowed from the eye. —That time is past,
And all its aching joys are now no more,
And all its dizzy raptures. Not for this
Faint I, nor mourn nor murmur; other gifts
Have followed; for such loss, I would believe,
Abundant recompense. For I have learned
To look on Nature, not as in the hour
Of thoughtless youth; but hearing oftentimes
The still, sad music of humanity,
Nor harsh nor grating, though of ample power


To chasten and subdue. And I have felt
A presence that disturbs me with the joy
Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
And the round ocean, and the living air,
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man :
A motion and a spirit, that impels
All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
And rolls through all things. Therefore am I still
A lover of the meadows and the woods,
And mountains; and of all that we behold
From this green earth; of all the mighty world
Of eye, and ear —both what they half create,
And what perceive; well pleased to recognize
In Nature and the language of the sense
The anchor of my purest thoughts, the nurse,
The guide, the guardian of my heart, and soul
Of all my moral being.
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH (1770-1850)
DEJECTION: AN ODE
Late, late yestreen I saiv the new Moon,
With the old Moon in her arms;
And I fear, I fear, my Master dear!
We shall have a deadly storm.
' Ballad of Sir Patrick Spence


Well! If the Bard was weather-wise who made
The grand old ballad of Sir Patrick Spence,
This night, so tranquil now, will not go hence
Unroused by winds, that ply a busier trade
Than those which mould yon cloud in lazy flakes,
Or the dull sobbing draft, that moans and rakes
Upon the strings of this Eolian lute,
Which better far were mute.
For lo! the new Moon winter-bright!
And overspread with phantom light,
(With swimming phantom light o'erspread
But rimmed and circled by a silver thread),
I see the old Moon in her lap, foretelling
The coming on of rain and squally blast.
And oh! that even now the gust were swelling,
And the slant night-shower driving loud and fast!
Those sounds which oft have raised me, whilst they
awed,
And sent my soul abroad,
Might now perhaps their wonted impulse give,
Might startle this dull pain, and make it move and live!
A grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear,
A stifled, drowsy, unimpassioned grief,
Which finds no natural outlet, 110 relief,
In word, or sigh, or tear-
O Lady! in this wan and heartless mood,
To other thoughts by yonder throstle woo'd,
All this long eve, so balmy and serene,
Have I been gazing on the western sky,


And its peculiar tint of yellow green:
And still I gaze —and with how blank an eye!
And those thin clouds above, in flakes and bars,
That give away their motion to the stars;
Those stars, that glide behind them or between,
Now sparkling, now bedimmed, but always seen:
Yon crescent Moon as fixed as if it grew
In its own cloudless, starless lake of blue;
I see them all, so excellently fair,
I see, not feel, how beautiful they are!
My genial spirits fail;
And what can these avail
To lift the smothering weight from off my breast?
It were a vain endeavour,
Though I should gaze for ever
On that green light that lingers in the west
I may not hope from outward forms to win
The passion and the life, whose fountains are within
O Lady! we receive but what we give,
xAnd in our life alone does nature live :
Ours is her wedding-garment, ours her shroud!
And would we aught behold, of higher worth,
Than that inanimate cold world allowed
To the poor loveless ever-anxious crowd,
Ah! from the soul itself must issue forth,
A light, a glory, a fair luminous cloud


Enveloping the Earth —
And from the soul itself must there be sent
A sweet and potent voice, of its own birth,
Of all sweet sounds the life and element!
O pure of heart! Thou need'st not ask of me
What this strong music in the soul may be
What, and wherein it doth exist,
This light, this glory, this fair luminous mist,
This beautiful and beauty-making power.
Joy, virtuous Lady! Joy that ne'er was given,
Save to the pure, and in their purest hour,
Life, and Life's effluence, cloud at once and shower
Joy, Lady! is the spirit and the power,
Which w r edding Nature to us gives in dower,
A new Earth and new Heaven,
Undreamt of by the sensual and the proud —
Joy is the sweet voice, Joy the luminous cloud-
We in ourselves rejoice!
And thence flows all that charms or ear or sight,
All melodies the echoes of that voice,
All colours a suffusion from that light.
There was a time when, though my path was rough,
This joy within me dallied with distress,
And all misfortunes were but as the stuff
Whence Fancy made me dreams of happiness
For hope grew round me, like the twining vine,
And fruits, and foliage, not my own, seemed mine.


But now afflictions bow me down to earth :
Nor care I that they rob me of my mirth,
But oh! each visitation
Suspends what nature gave me at my birth,
My shaping spirit of Imagination.
For not to think of what I needs must feel,
But to be still and patient, all I can ;
And haply by abstruse research to steal
From my own nature all the natural man-
This was my sole resource, my only plan:
Till that which suits a part infects the whole,
And now is almost grown the habit of my soul.
Flence, viper thoughts, that coil around my mind,
Reality's dark dream!
I turn from you, and listen to the wind,
Which long has raved unnoticed. What a scream
Of agony by torture lengthened out
That lute sent forth! Thou Wind, that ravest without,
Bare craig, or mountain-tairn,* or blasted tree,
Or pine-grove whither woodman never clomb,
Or lonely house, long held the witches' home,
Methinks were fitter instruments for thee,
Mad Lutanist! who in this month of showers,
Of dark brown gardens, and of peeping flowers,
Mak'st Devils' yule, with worse than wintry song,
The blossoms, buds, and timorous leaves among.
*Tairn is a small lake, generally, if not always, applied to the
lakes up in the mountains, and which are the feeders of those in the
valleys. This address to the Storm-wind will not appear extravagant to
those who have heard it at night, and in a mountainous country.


Thou Actor, perfect in all tragic sounds!
Thou mighty Poet, e'en to frenzy bold!
What tell'st thou now about ?
'Tis of the rushing of a host in rout,
With groans of trampled men, with smarting
wounds —
At once they groan with pain, and shudder with the
cold!
But hush! there is a pause of deepest silence!
And all that noise, as of a rushing crowd,
With groans, and tremulous shudderings—all is over —
It tells another tale, with sounds less deep and loud!
A tale of less affright,
And tempered with delight,
As Otway's self had framed the tender lay,
'Tis of a little child
Upon a lonesome wild,
Not far from home, but she hath lost her way:
And now moans low in bitter grief and fear,
And now screams loud, and hopes to make her mother
hear.
VIII
'Tis midnight, but shall thoughts have I of sleep:
Full seldom may my friend such vigils keep !
Visit her, gentle Sleep! with wings of healing,
And may this storm be but a mountain-birth,
May all the stars hang bright above her dwelling,
Silent as though they watched the sleeping Earth !
With light heart may she rise,
Gay fancy, cheerful eyes,


Joy lift her spirit, joy attune her voice;
To her may all things live, from pole to pole,
Their life the eddying of her living soul!
O simple spirit, guided from above,
Dear Lady! friend devoutest of my choice,
Thus mayest thou ever, evermore rejoice.
SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE (1772-1834)
NATURE'S GIFT
NATURE denied him much,
But gave him at his birth what most he values:
A passionate love for music, sculpture, painting,
For poetry, the language of the gods,
For all things here, or grand or beautiful,
A setting sun, a lake among the mountains,
The light of an ingenuous countenance,
And, what transcends them all, a noble action.
SAMUEL ROGERS (1763-1855)
MY LOVE IS LIKE A RED, RED ROSE
My love is like a red, red rose
That's newly sprung in June:
My love is like the melodie
That's sweetly played in tune.
As fair art thou, my bonnie lass,
So deep in love am I:
And I will love thee still, my dear,
Till a' the seas gang dry.


Till a' the seas gang dry, my dear,
And the rocks melt wi' the sun:
And I will love thee still, my dear,
While the sands o' life shall run.
And fare thee weel, my only love,
And fare thee weel awhile !
And I will come again, my love,
Tho' it were ten thousand mile.
WINTER
THE wintry wast extends his blast,
And hail and rain does blaw;
Or the stormy north sends driving forth
The blinding sleet and snaw:
While, tumbling brown, the burn comes down
And roars frae bank to brae:
And bird and beast in covert rest,
And pass the heartless day.
' The sweeping blast, the sky o'ercast,'
The joyless winter-day,
Let others fear, to me more dear
Than all the pride of May:
The tempest's howl, it soothes my soul,
My griefs it seems to join;
The leafless trees my fancy please,
Their fate resembles mine!
wast\ west.


Thou Pow'r Supreme, whose mighty scheme
These woes of mine fulfil,
Here, firm, I rest —they must be best,
Because they are Thy will!
Then all I want (Oh! do thou grant
This one request of mine!)
Since to enjoy thou dost deny,
Assist me to resign.
ROBERT BURNS (1759-1796).
AND DID THOSE FEET IN ANCIENT TIME
AND did those feet in ancient time
Walk upon England's mountain green?
And was the holy Lamb of God
On England's pleasant pastures seen?
And did the countenance divine
Shine forth upon our clouded hills?
And was Jerusalem builded here
Among these dark Satanic mills?
Bring me my bow of burning gold!
Bring me my arrows of desire !
Bring me my spear: O clouds, unfold!
Bring me my chariot of fire!
I will not cease from mental fight,
Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand,
Till we have built Jerusalem
In England's green and pleasant land.


THE DANCE
Thou perceivest the Flowers put forth their precious
odours,
And none can tell how from so small a centre comes such
sweet ....
First, ere the morning breaks, joy opens in the flowery
bosoms,
Joy even to tears, which the Sun rising dries; first the
Wild Thyme
And Meadow-sweet, downy and soft, waving among
the reeds,
Light springing in the air, lead the sweet Dance: they
wake
The Honeysuckle sleeping on the Oak, the flaunting
beauty
Revels along upon the wind; the White-thorn, lovely
May,
Opens her many lovely eyes; listening, the Rose still
sleeps.
None dare to wake her. Soon she bursts her crimson-
curtained bed
And comes forth in the majesty of beauty. Every
Flower—
The Pink, the Jessamine, the Wallflower, the Carnation,
The Jonquil, the mild Lily opes her heavens; every
Tree
And Flower and Herb soon fill the air with an innumer-
able Dance,
Yet all in order sweet and lovely,
WILLIAM BLAKE (1757-1827).


THE FALLEN POPLARS
THE poplars are felled; farewell to the shade
And the whispering sound of the cool colonnade:
The winds play no longer and sing in the leaves,
Nor Ouse on his bosom their image receives.
Twelve years have elapsed since I first took a view
Of my favourite field, and the bank where they grew;
And now in the grass behold they are laid,
And the tree is my seat that once lent me a shade.
The blackbird has fled to another retreat
Where the hazels afford him a screen from the heat,
And the scene where his melody charmed me before
Resounds with his sweet-flowing ditty 110 more.
WILLIAM COWPER (1731-1800).
ODE ON SOLITUDE
HAPPY the man, whose wish and care
A few paternal acres bound,
Content to breathe his native air
In his own ground :
Whose herds with milk, whose fields with bread,
Whose flocks supply him with attire;
Whose trees in summer yield him shade,
In winter, fire :
Blest, who can unconcernedly find
Hours, days, and years, slide soft away
In health of body, peace of mind,
Quiet by day,


Sound sleep by night; study and ease
Together mixed; sweet recreation,
And innocence which most does please,
With meditation.
Thus let me live, unseen, unknown;
Thus unlamented let me die,
Steal from the world, and not a stone
Tell where I lie.
ALEXANDER POPE (1688-1744)
A SONG FOR ST. CECILIA'S DAY,
1687
FROM harmony, from heavenly harmony,
This universal frame began:
When Nature underneath a heap
Of jarring atoms lay,
And could not heave her head,
The tuneful voice was heard from high,
' Arise, ye more than dead!'
Then cold, and hot, and moist, and dry,
In order to their stations leap,
And Music's power obey.
From harmony, from heavenly harmony
This universal frame began:
From harmony to harmony
Through all the compass of the notes it ran,
The diapason closing full in Man.


What passion cannot Music raise and quell ?
When Jubal struck the chorded shell,
His listening brethren stood around,
And, wondering, on their faces fell
To worship that celestial sound:
Less than a God they thought there could not dwell
Within the hollow of that shell,
That spoke so sweetly and so well.
What passion cannot Music raise and quell?
The trumpet's loud clangour
Excites us to arms,
With shrill notes of anger,
And mortal alarms.
The double double double beat
Of the thundering drum
Cries ' Hark! the foes come;
Charge, charge, 'tis too late to retreat!'
The soft complaining flute,
In dying notes, discovers
The woes of hopeless lovers,
Whose dirge is whisper'd by the warbling lute.
Sharp violins proclaim
Their jealous pangs and desperation,
Fury, frantic indignation,
Depth of pains, and height of passion,
For the fair, disdainful dame.


But O, what art can teach,
What human voice can reach,
The sacred organ's praise?
Notes inspiring holy love,
Notes that wing their heavenly ways
To mend the choirs above.
Orpheus could lead the savage race,
And trees uprooted left their place,
Sequacious of the lyre;
But bright Cecilia raised the wonder higher:
When to her organ vocal breath was given,
An angel heard, and straight appear'd
Mistaking Earth for Heaven!
JOHN DRYDEN (1631-1700)
OF MYSELF
THIS only grant me, that my means may lie
Too low for envy, for contempt too high.
Some honour I would have,
Not from great deeds, but good alone;
The unknown are better than ill-known:
Rumour can ope the grave.
Acquaintance I would have, but when't depends
Not on the number, but the choice, of friends.
Books should, not business, entertain the light,
And sleep, as undisturbed as death, the night.
My house a cottage more
Than palace, and should fitting be
For all my use, no luxury.


My garden painted o'er
With Nature's hand, not Art's, and pleasures yield,
Horace might envy in his Sabine field.
Thus would I double my life's fading space;
For he, that runs it well, twice runs his race.
And in this true delight,
These unbought sports, this happy state,
I would not fear nor wish my fate;
But boldly say each night,
To-morrow let my sun his beams display,
Or in clouds hide them; I have lived to-day.
ABRAHAM COWLEY (1618-1667).
ON HIS BLINDNESS
WHEN I consider how my light is spent,
Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide,
And that one talent which is death to hide,
Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent
To serve therewith my Maker, and present
My true account, lest He returning chide,
Doth God exact day-labour, light denied ?
I fondly ask; but Patience, to prevent
That murmur, soon replies, God doth not need
Either man's work or His own gifts: who best
Bear His mild yoke, they serve Him best; His state
Is kingly. Thousands at His bidding speed
And post o'er land and ocean without rest:
They also serve who only stand and wait.
JOHN MILTON (1608-1674)
fondly, foolishly.


TO DAFFODILS
FAIR daffodils, we weep to see
You haste away so soon:
As yet the early-rising sun
Has not attained his noon.
Stay, stay,
Until the hasting day
Has run
But to the even-song;
And, having prayed together, we
Will go with you along.
We have short time to stay, as you,
We have as short a Spring ;
As quick a growth to meet decay
As you, or any thing.
We die,
As your hours do, and dry
Away
Like to the Summer's rain;
Or as the pearls of morning's dew
Ne'er to be found again.
ROBERT HERRICK (1591-1674)
TO PAN
ALL ye woods, and trees, and bowers,
All ye virtues and ye powers
That inhabit in the lakes,
In the pleasant springs or brakes,


Move your feet
To our sound,
Whilst we greet
All this ground
With his honour and his name
That defends our flocks from blame.
He is great and he is just,
He is ever good, and must
Thus be honoured. Daffodillies,
Roses, pinks, and loved lilies,
Let us fling,
Whilst we sing,
Ever holy!
Ever holy!
Ever honoured! ever young!
Thus great Pan is ever sung.
JOHN FLETCHER (1579-1625).
TO CELIA
DRINK to me only with thine eyes,
And I will pledge with mine ;
Or leave a kiss but in the cup,
And I'll not look for wine.
The thirst that from the soul doth rise,
Doth ask a drink divine :
But might I of Jove's nectar sup,
I would not change for thine.


I sent thee late a rosy wreath,
Not so much honouring thee,
As giving it a hope that there
It could not withered be.
But thou thereon didst only breathe,
And sent'st it back to me:
.Since when it grows, and smells, I swear,
Not of itself, but thee.
BEN JONSON (1573-1637)
JACK AND JOAN
JACK and Joan, they think no ill,
But loving live, and merry still;
Do their weekday's work, and pray
Devoutly on the holy day;
Skip and trip it on the green,
And help to choose the summer queen;
Lash out, at a country feast,
Their silver penny with the best.
Well can they judge of nappy ale,
And tell at large a winter tale;
Climb up to the apple loft,
And turn the crabs till they be soft.
Tib is all the father's joy,
And little Tom the mother's boy.
All their pleasure is content;
And care, to pay their yearly rent.


Joan can call by name her cows,
And deck her windows with green boughs;
She can wreaths and tutties make,
And trim with plums a bridal cake.
Jack knows what brings gain or loss ;
And his long flail can stoutly toss ;
Makes the hedge, which others break,
And ever thinks what he doth speak.
Now, you courtly dames and knights,
That study only strange delights,
Though you scorn the homespun grey
And revel in your rich array;
Though your tongues dissemble deep,
And can your heads from danger keep;
Yet, for all your pomp and train,
Securer lives the silly swain!
THE MAN UPRIGHT OF LIFE
THE man upright of life, whose guiltless heart is free
From all dishonest deeds, or thought of vanity;
The man whose silent days in harmless joys are spent,
Whom hopes cannot delude, nor sorrow discontent;
That man needs neither towers nor armour for defence,
Nor secret vaults, to fly from thunder's violence :
He, only, can behold with unaffrighted eyes
The horrors of the! deep, and terrors of the skies.


Thus, scorning all the cares that fate or fortune brings,
He makes the heaven his book; his wisdom, heavenly
things;
Good thoughts, his only friends ; his wealth, a well-spent
age;
The earth his sober inn, and quiet pilgrimage.
THOMAS CAMPION (1567(?)-1619).
ALL THE WORLD'S A STAGE
(From As You Like It, Act u, Sc. vii)
ALL the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players:
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
And then the whining schoolboy, with his satchel,
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to School. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier
Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe, and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances;


And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
His youthful hose well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
SHALL I COMPARE THEE TO A SUMMER'S
DAY?
SHALL I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed:
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance, or nature's changing course, untrimmed.
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st;
So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.


' BLOW, BLOW, THOU WINTER WIND '
(From As You Like It)
Blow, blow, thou winter wind:
Thou art not so unkind
As man's ingratitude;
Thy tooth is not so keen,
Because thou art not seen,
Although thy breath be rude
Heigh-ho ! sing heigh-ho ! unto the green holly:
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly
Then heigh-ho, the holly!
This life is most jolly.
Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
That dost not bite so nigh
As benefits forgot:
Though thou the waters warp,
Thy sting is not so sharp
As friend remembered not.
Heigh-ho ! sing heigh-ho ! unto the green holly:
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly
Then heigh-ho, the holly!
This life is most jolly.
MUSIC
(From The Merchant of Venice, Act v, Sc. i)
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!
Here will we sit, and let the sounds of music
Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night
Become the touches of sweet harmony.


Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold:
There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st
But in his motion like an angel sings,
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins;
Such harmony is in immortal souls;
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.
A WINTER SONG
(From Love's Labour Lost)
WHEN icicles hang by the wall,
And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,
And Tom bears logs into the hall,
And milk comes frozen home in pail,
When blood is nipped and ways be foul,
Then nightly sings the staring owl,
Tuwhoo!
Tuwhit! tuwhoo ! A merry note,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
When all aloud the wind doth blow,
And coughing drowns the parson's saw,
And birds sit brooding in the snow,
And Marian's nose looks red and raw,
When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,
Then nightly sings the staring owl,
Tuwhoo!
Tuwhit! tuwhoo! A merry note,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE (1564-1616)


THE
PASSIONATE SHEPHERD TO HIS LOVE
COME live with me and be mv love,
J 7
And we will all the pleasures prove
That hills and valleys, dale and field,
And all the craggy mountains yield.
There will we sit upon the rocks
And see the shepherds feed their flocks,
By shallow rivers, to whose falls
Melodious birds sing madrigals.
And I will make thee beds of roses
And a thousand fragrant posies,
A cap of flowers, and a kirtle
Embroidered all with leaves of myrtle.
A gown made of the finest wool,
Which from our pretty lambs we pull,
Fair lined slippers for the cold,
With buckles of the purest gold.
A belt of straw and ivy buds
With coral clasps and amber studs:
And if these pleasures may thee move,
Come live with me and be my love.
The shepherd swains shall dance and sing
For thy delight each May-morning:
If these delights thy mind may move,
Then live with me and be my love.
CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE (1564-1593).


PEACE
MIDNIGHT was come, when every vital thing
With sweet sound sleep their weary limbs did rest:
The beasts were still, the little birds that sing
Now sweetly slept beside their mother's breast;
The old and all were shrouded in their nest:
The waters calm, the cruel seas did cease,
The woods, and fields, and all things held their peace.
The golden stars were whirled amid their race,
And on the earth did laugh with twinkling light,
When each thing, nestled in his resting place,
Forgat day's pain with pleasure of the night:
The hare had not the greedy hounds in sight,
The fearful deer of death stood not in doubt,
The partridge dreamed not of the falcon's foot.
The ugly bear now minded not the stake,
Nor how the cruel mastives do him tear;
The stag lay still unroused from the brake,
The foamy boar feared not the hunter's spear:
All things were still in desert, bush, and brere:
With quiet heart, now from their travails ceased,
Soundly they slept in midst of all their rest.
THOMAS SACKVILLE, Earl of Dorset ( 1536(?)-1608).
FROM BOY TO MAN
LAID in my quiet bed
In study as I were,
I saw within mv troubled head
*
A heap of thoughts appear.


And every thought did show
So lively in my eyes,
That now I sighed, and then I smiled,
As cause of thoughts did rise.
I saw the little boy,
In thought how oft that he
Did wish to God, to 'scape the rod,
A tall young man to be.
The young man' eke that feels
His bones with pains opprest,
Hjow he would be a rich old man,
To live and lie at rest :
The rich old man that sees
His end draw on so sore,
How he would be a boy again,
To live so much the more!
Whereat full oft I smiled,
To see how all these three,
From boy to man, from man to boy
Would chop and change degree;
And musing thus, I think,
The case is very strange
That man from wealth, to live in woe
Doth ever seek to change.
Whereat I sighed and said,
' Farewell, my wonted joy,
Truss up thy pack, and trudge from me
To every little boy;


' And tell them thus from me,
Their time most happy is,
If, in their time, they reason had
To know the truth of this.'
HENRY HOWARD, Earl of Surrey ( 1517(?)-1547).
SUMMER IS COMING
SUMMER is a-coming in!
Loud sing cuckoo:
Groweth seed and bloweth mead,
And springeth the wood now.
Sing cuckoo, cuckoo.
Ewe bleateth after lamb,
Loweth after calf the cow;
Bullock starteth, buck verteth;
Merry sing, cuckoo,
Cuckoo, cuckoo.
Well singest thou cuckoo;
Nor cease thou never now,
Sing cuckoo now,
Sing cuckoo.
Author Unknown (13th century).




INDEX OF AUTHORS
Allen, L. li., 103
Arnold, M., 142
Austin, Sir Alfred, 140
Author Unknown, 76, 89, 93,
183
Bayldon, A. A., 12
Blake, W., 165, 166
Bridges, R., 35, 133
Bronte, E. J., 142
Brooke, R., 122
Browning, R., 143, 145, 146
Burns, R., 163, 164
Byron, Lord A., 61
Campbell, T., 65
Campion, T., 174, 175
Chaucer, G., 96
Coleridge, S. T, 157
Cowley, A., 170
Cowper, W., 73, 167
Cunningham, A., 153
Cuthbertson, J. L., 133
Daley, V. J., 116
Dobson, A., 40, 137
Dryden, J., 168
Esson, L., 5
Fitzgerald, R. D., 101
Flecker, J. E., 122
Fletcher, J., 82, 172
Gay, W., 111, 112, 113
Goldsmith, 0., 74
Gordon, A. L., 43
Grenfell, J., 120
Hebblethwaite, J., 119
Herrick, R., 172
Housman, A. E., 131
Hunt, L., 64
Jonson, 8., 173
Keats, J., 149
Kendall, H., 36, 38, 134
Kingslev, C., 47
Kipling, R., 29, 30, 126, 127
Lawrence, D. PL, 18
Lawson, H., 11
Macaulay, Lord T., 54
Mackellar, D., 102
Marlowe, C, 180
Masefield, J., 24, 26, 123,
124
Milton, J., 80, 171
Moore T., 154
Neilson, S., 6, 105
Newbolt, H., 33, 129, 130
Noyes, A., 22
O'Dowd, 8., 108
Ogilvie, W. H., 9
O'Hara, J. 8., 115
Palmer, V., 3, 4
Paterson, A. 8., 15, 113
Pope, A., 167
Rogers, S., 163
Sackville, T., 181
Scott, W., 70
Shakespeare, W., 83, 34, 85,
176, 177, 178, 178, 179
Shelley, P. 8., 59, 150
Souter, C. PL, 14
Southey, R., 68
Spenser, E., 87
Stephens, J. 8., 138
Strong, Sir A., 104, 104
Surrey, H. PL, 181
Swinburne, A. C., 138
Tennyson, Lord A., 48, 147,
148
Williamson, F. S., 109
Wordsworth, W., 71, 156
Wright, D. McK., 106
Yeats, W. 8., 125
Brown, Prior, Anderson Pty. Ltd., 430 Little Bourke St., Melb., C.I.


