

Final Report
SECRET
ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
MINISTRY OF AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION




FEEDEN MISSION REPORT
SECTION 5
Assigned to
Address
Copy No
Date of issue
This report contains confidential information, and must
therefore be treated accordingly by the person to whom this copy
is issued. 'Anything contained in this report must only be com-
municated to approved and accredited executives of Government de-
partments or firms undertaking the manufacture of aircraft or ac-
cessories for His Majesty's Government; and must not be published
or disclosed to unauthorised persons.
There is a considerable amount of detailed information in
this report which may only be of interest to those specialising on
the particular problem. In order, therefore, to assist executives,
this report has been so framed that at the beginning of e?ch Part
a special coloured page has been provided which sets out as short-
ly as possible the broad policy conclusions of the Mission on this
particular subject, including the action that is advised.
By this means it is hoped that those concerned with policy
may have as concise a picture as possible of what is considered
should be done to put into effect the work of the Mission.
The purpose of the Mission was to learn what American
methods could be introduced into this country to improve our out-
put, and to investigate certain technical problems and new devel-
opments in America. The report is therefore mainly concerned
with those aspects in which the American industry is ahead of ours,
and with promising technical developments. No emphasis has been
laid on points where the Mission consider that British production
methods or technical development are ahead of American.
S.T.A.M.
Cook's Building,
40 Stratton Street, W.l
June, 1943


This report is issued in seven separately bound Sections, as follows:
SECTION 1 CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY ANT) GENERAL CONCLUSION'S
OF THE MISSION
" 2 AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
" 3 AIRCRAFT DESIGN
" 4 * IN GINSs, P07/ER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
" 5 ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
" 6 EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
" 7 POST-"VAR p ROBLE' r S
Each Section is divided into two or more Parts, and a list of
contents appears at the beginning of each p art. The P arts in a
section are lettered A, 3, C etc.
Each Part is divided into Chapters, the first of which. (on a
coloured page) gives the broad policy conclusions for the ’"‘art. The
Chapters are made up of Items, and each T tem has a number indicating
the Chapter to which it belongs and its position within the Chapter.
For example:
2.03 indicates the third item of Chapter 2
3.12 M " twelfth " " " 3
For specifying completely any item, it is also necessary to
quote the Section and r> art, and in the text, at the beginning of
each Item, its complete reference is given.
For example:
3A - 2.03 indicates Section 3, Part A, Chapter 2, third item.
4C - 3.12 indicates Section 4, Part C, Chapter 3, twelfth item.


CONTENTS OF THE WHOLE REPORT
SECTION 1 - CONSTITUTION. SUMMAKT Al£) GENERAL OQNCLUSICNS
PART A - OBJECTS OF THE MISSION, PERSONNEL AND ITINERARY
Chapter 1 Scope, object and general survey of the Mission
" 2 Itinerary, December 1942 to March 1943
" 3 Hroad policy conclusions
" 4 Future policy in regard to Missions to America
PART B - AMERICAN NATIONAL AIRCRAFT ORGANISATIONS
Chapter 1 General
" 2 Army Air Force
” 3 Navy Department
" 4 War Production Board
” 5 Joint Aircraft Committee
” 6 Offioe of Scientific Research and Development
SECTION 2 ~ AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
PART A - ORGANISATION
■ *i ■■ ■ ■——■ i M ■ ■
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Engineering departments
" 3 Factory layout
" 4 General notes on organisation of airframe factories
" 3 Boeing Aircraft, Seattle
M 6 Consolidated Aircraft, San Diego
" 7 North American Aviation, Inglewood
" 8 Bell Aircraft, Buffalo
tt 9 Curtiss Wright
" 10 Other aircraft firms
M 11 Data*on American airframe factories
” 12 Canadian aircraft industry
PART B - FACTORY LAYOUT AND PROCESSES
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
M 2 Special applications of lofting
" 3 Economy of floor space
" 4 Conveyors
" 3 Drop hammer
M 6 Rubber die press
" 7 Mechanical press
M 8 Stretcher
” 9 Special tools
" 10 Farnum rolls
n 11 Rivet sorting
n 12 Finishing and painting
" 13 Extrusion manipulation
” 14 Pipe bending
” 15 Glenn Mart in skin stretching process
" 16 Plaster moulds for light alloy casting
" 17 Powder metallurgy
” 18 Riveting
w 19 Spot welding
M 20 Flash welding of undercarriages and engine mountings
" 21 Heliarc welding
” 22 Cycleweld


SECTION 3 - AIRCRAFT DESIGN
BART A - GENERAL DESIGN TECHNIQUE
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Scope and organisation of engineering departments
3 Weight analysis
4 Factors and design requirements
" 5 American stressing technique
" 6 Aerodynamic design
" 7 Aerodynamic controls
8 Stressed skin construction
■ 9 Pressure cabins
• 10 Undercarriage design
• 11 Materials
9 12 Processes
" 13 Aircraft testing procedure
PART B - REVIEW OF AMERICAN AIRCRAFT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Description of new North American P.51
3 Description of.Curtiss P.60
• 4 Description of Bell P.63
• 5 Description of Douglas A.26
6 The Boeing B.29 and Consolidated B.32
7 Current fighters in production
8 Current heavy bombers in production
" 9 Transport types
• 10 Wooden aircraft
" 11 Flying boats
• 12 Tailless aircraft
• 13 Tabulated data
PART C - PHOTO LOFTTNTC
Chapter 1 Board policy conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
■ 3 Layout procedure
4 Alternative reproduction processes
9 5 Camera procedure
9 6 Miscellaneous
PART D - SEIF SEALING FUEL TANKS, OIL TANKS AND FUEL HOSE
Chapter 1 Broad conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
3 Fuel tanks - American practice
" 4 Hose - American practice
SECTION 4 - ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND FROPST1 ires
PART A - PR0DT7CTTQN
Chapter 1 Broad Policy conclusions
2 General design and production notes on firms visited
3 Organisation and output
4 Engine and propeller production processes and equipment
PART B - DESIGN
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Technical review of American engine developments
" 3 Propeller design
" 4 Power plait policy and installation
5 Specific technical items


PART C - REGENERATIVE ENGINE TESTING PLANT.
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
3 Methods of absorbing engine power
* 4 Speed control
■ 5 Relative merits of testing plant end methods
6 The Buick arrangements at Melrose Park, Chicago
PART D - FUEL ATP OIL
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 Fuel
" 3 Oil
SECTION 5 - ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PART A - ELECTRIC WIRING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 Suumary and conclusions
" 3 Principles underlying American methods
" 4 American wiring practice
" 5 Maintenance and repair aspect
" & Comparative appraisement of British and American
practice.
* 7 Developments in relation to alternating current
8 Application to British development and production
PART B - AIRCRAFT ELECTRICS
Chapter 1* Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Conclusions
3 Present use of low pressure direct current
4 Effect of operating conditions on choice of system
5 Review of electrical services in relation to hydraulics
" 6 Manuals on installations
1 7 Design and production of electrical equipment
" 8 New developments in aircraft electrics
" 9 Approval and standardisation of equipment
" 10 Liaison with America on electrics
PART C - INSTRUMENTS AND RADIO INSTALLATIONS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 Aircraft instruments
" 3 Radio installations
PART D - AIRCRAFT VIBRATION TESTING AND EQUIPMENT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 Summary and conclusions
" 3 Introduction
" 4 Equipment
■ 5 Application
" 6 Scope of activities
" 7 Review of technique
* 8 Equipment ordered for M.A.P.
■ 9 Application to British development


PART E - INSTRUMENTATION OF TEST FLIGHTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
• 2 Summary and conclusions
• 3 Introduction
■ 4 Outline of installations
• 3 Organisation
• 6 Equipment
• 7 Review of technique
• 8 Application to British development
SECTION 6 - EDUCATION AND RESEARCH,
PART A - ENGINEERING STAFF
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
• 2 Economical use of present aircraft engineering
staff
• 3 American publications and engineering propaganda
■ 4 Manuals prepared by firms for instruction of drawing
office staff etc,
• 3 Manuals prepared by firms to explain administration and
define duties
• 6 Standardisation
PART B - INDUSTRIAL AND SERVICE TRAINING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
• 2 Technical manuals for part time study
• 3 Schools for training industrial and service personnel
■ 4 Instruction manuals prepared by firms on their products
■ 3 Instructional films
PART C - UNIVERSITY EDUCATION OF AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
■ 2 American education
PART D - RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Need for increased researcu equipment in Britain
• 3 Langley Field
• 4 Canadian National Research Council
■ 3 American wind tunnels
■ 6 Engine research
SECTION 7 - POST WAR PROBLEMS.
Chapter 1 Review of the civil aviation position in America
• 2 Training aircraft


ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PARS A ELECTRIC WIRING
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item lTol American Practice
" 1.02 Advantages
M 1.03 Benefits to British Production
w 1.04- Action
CHAPTER 2 - SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Item 2*ol Production
” 2.02 Technical
" 2.03 Repairs
" 2.04- Benefits in British Aircraft
tt 2.05 Proposals for revised policy
" 2.06 Application
CHAPTER 3 - PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING- AMERICAN METHODS
Item 3*ol Principlesof American Practice
” 3*02 Facilitating Production
M 3.03 Damage and Defects
” 3.04- Junction Boxes and Conduit
" 3.05 Multi-pin connectors
" 3.06 Elimination of Soldering
CHAPTER 4 AMERICAN WIRING- HIACTICB
Item 4.01 High Degree of Uniformity
n 4.02 General Description
” 4*03 Manufacture in Aircraft Factories
w 4.04 Type of cable
" 4.05 Attachment of Lugs
" 4*06 Testing
CHAPTER 3 - MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR ASPECT
Item 5.01 Occurrence of faults
w 5.02 Methods of Repair
CHAPTER 6 - COMPARATIVE APPRAISEMENT OF BRITISH AND AMERICAN PRACTICE
Item 6.01 Brief Review of British Practice
H 6.02 Production Aspect -
" 6.03 Technical Aspect
M 6.04 Maintenance Aspect
CHAPTER 7 - DEVELOPMENTS IN RELATION TO ALTERNATING CURRENT
Item 7.01 Use of Single Core Cable
” 7.02 Checking of Phases
M 7*03 Standard of Insulation
CHAPTER 8 - APPLICATION TO BRITISH DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION
Item 8.01 Short Term Production Aspect and Concurrent Benefits
M 8.02 New Official Requirements
M 8.03 S.B.A.C. Proposals
" 8.04 Specific Application
” 8.05 Use of Sockets and Plugs without soldering
- PARTICULARS OF DOCUMENTS ETC. BROUGHT FROM AMERICA.




CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
5A-1.01 American Practice# American opinions and practice are
solidly for open wiring with single core light cable and with
terminal lugs attached by mechanical pressure instead of
soldering. Conduit junction boxes and multi-pin connectors
are reduced to the minimum*
5A-1.02 Advantages* This method assists production and is capable
of being maintained and repaired in service with simple
material and tools*
5A-1 *03 Benefits to British Production. British aircraft production
would benefit considerably from the adoption of similar practice,
the degree of benefit being dependent on the extent to which the
American methods are approached.
5A-1.04 Action
(i) It is recommended that a start be made with the
adoption of open wiring and solderless jointing on
the Lancaster and Mosquito in overseas and home
production, followed by the Halifax and
other types.
(ii) Immediate attention should be given to the intro-
duction and distribution of tools and splicing
connectors for repair purposes on American and
British aircraft in M.A.P. Depots and R.A.F. Stations
t and Units.




CHAPTER 2 - SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
5A-2.01 Production. Simplicity is the keynote of American methods of wiring
aircraft, the chief aim "being to facilitate production with the minimum of
skilled labour, critical material and such things as multi-pin plugs and
sockets, junction boxes and conduits.
5A-2.02 Technical. As opposed to the enclosing of connections in confined
junction boxes, it is preferred to keep these points as open as possible
to avoid technical difficulties with condensation, to reduce vulnerability
and to facilitate inspection without dislocation. Cables used are single
core, run in bundles tucked into the airframe structure for shielding and
safety.
5A-2.03 Repairs. Although this wiring is difficult to get out for repair, new
means are being introduced for effecting repairs in the aircraft, using
the production method of attaching cable ends by mechanical pressure
instead of soldering.
5A-2.04 Benefits in British Aircraft. Considerable savings could be effected
in production both of aircraft and equipment by a close approach to the
American technique. There would also be savings of space and weight in
the aircraft and in the storing and supply of spares.
5A-2.05 Proposals for Revised Policy. A new British standard aircraft wiring
system could be based on the use of single core cables with non-soldered
connections, the utmost restriction of conduits, tubing, junction boxes or
enclosure of terminals, and preferably one type of cable end suitable both
for normal use in terminal blocks and for splicing of repairs. Should such
a system become policy, it would then be necessary for production of such
terminations, and hand and power tools for their application; to be proceeded
with quickly. They could also be used for repairs in existing aircraft.
Such a system would be suitable either for complete fabrication in aircraft
works or for sub-contract. The recent proposals of the S.B.A.C. Committee
on wiring could well form the basis of the new system, with the introduction
of a maximum of simplicity and open character as seen in the latest
American practice.
5A-2.06 Application. Owing to the wideness of manufacture of the Lancaster and
Mosquito, and the likelihood of their continuance in production for a
considerable time, it would be well worth considering these two types for
such a system. It could be applied to Canadian manufacture comparatively
quickly (perhaps using initial supplies of American material). This
would in no way interfere with the development of the s 37s tern for wider
application in British production.
CHAPTER 3 - PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING AMERICAN METHODS
5A-3.01 Principle of American Practice. American practice is based on the
following main principles:-
(aj To facilitate the sub-assembly method of aircraft production.
(b) To avoid vulnerability and wiring defects.
(c) To save weight, materials, manhours and technical weaknesses *
in junction boxes and conduit.
(d) To reduce multi-pin connectors to a minimum.
(e) To eliminate the soldering of cable connections as far as
possible.
5A-3»02 Facilitating Production. The breaking down of the airframe into easily
handled sub-assemblies is a cardinal feature of American production
methods, and wiring assemblies are therefore treated as items to be built
in as early as possible.
5A-3»03 Damage and Defects. The avoidance of vulnerability and wiring defects
is receiving increasing attention in America with the growth of combat exper-
ience to confirm or modify the earlier ideas on these points. Similarly
ordinary damage through wiring forming obstructions in confined spaces is to
be avoided wherever possible by obtaining the utmost protection from the


airframe skin and structure without crowding the wiring at dangerous
points.
5A-3.04 Junction Boxes and Conduit. The use of ordinary junction boxes is
considered undesirable for technical, operational and maintenance reasons
in many cases and therefore entirely unjustified from the weight aspect.
Similar considerations apply to the use of conduit, except in front of
engine fire walls, or in the nacelles where damage from oil or abrasion
might occur. The objections to junction boxes are that the more closely
terminals and connections are brought together the greater is the risk of
military damage and electrical defects through condensation, leakage,
corrosion, etc.
From the maintenance aspect the American view is that the connection
points should be as open as possible to facilitate inspection, disconnec-
tion and restoration of circuits, and to avoid the disturbance which
would be necessary for these purposes in junction boxes, particularly if
the latter are part of a fully enclosed system with multi-pin connectors.
A technical preference is also felt for bolted or other mechanical type
of connection with the fewest possible joints.
Xn regard to the use of conduit, this is regarded as unnecessary in the
great majority of cable runs, which could thereby be the more closely tucked
away into the airframe construction at a very early stage in the fabrication.
5A-3*05 Multi—pin connectors. The American aim to eliminate multi—pin connectors
follows on similar lines, namely to avoid concentration of connections to a
vulnerable degree and to eliminate or greatly reduce the possibility of
leakage and corrosion troubles, and the number of electrical joints in
the circuits. Moreover, the supply difficulty, both in production and
maintenance, associated in large aircraft with the use of great numbers
of multi-pin connectors is thereby eliminated.
5A-3.06 Elimination of Soldering. This restriction of multi-pin connectors
also assists greatly in the elimination, as far as possible, of the
soldering of cable connections, the main objects of which are to achieve
a high standard of uniform clean work which can be carried on by relatively
unskilled labour with the minimum of supervision and testing, and the
ability to simplify and speed up the training of workers in order that new
designs and modifications can be put into production quickly.
CHAPTER 4 - AMERICAN WIRING PRACTICE.
5A-4.01 High Degree of Uniformity. In spite of the widely separated locations
of American aircraft firms and their usual tendency for independent ideas
and methods, it was found that as regards the practice of wiring aircraft
there is a very considerable degree of uniformity throughout the aircraft
industry.
In the past, the requirements of the Army and Navy authorities have
not been identical, but in a universal desire for simplicity with all its
advantages in production and in service, their policies in regard to
methods of wiring, the replacement of fuses by circuit breakers and so
on, are now being brought closely into a common line.
5A-4» 02 General Description. The application of the above principles has
resulted in a universal system of open wiring, comprising assemblies or
bunches of single core cables, tucked away wherever possible into the
airframe construction, and connected to well spaced terminals at instrument
panels or transport joints. The bundles of single core cables are
usually corded together at intervals varying from one to several inches and
are secured to the airframe by one of several "Speed clamps" at selected points,
which are not too frequent. These clamps are usually lined with felt, sponge
rubber or soft plastic material, as illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2, and in
Tinnerman’s catalogues included at Item No. 1 of the Appendix.


FIG. 1. SUPPORTING CLAMPS.
FIG. 2. SUPPORTING CLAMPS.
In Amy aircraft the use of conduit has for some time been dispensed
with, although this practice has been continued until quite recently in
IT aval aircraft, including the use of metal junction boxes with gland nuts
for the incoming tubes. It has now, however, been decided by the ITavy
authorities to discontinue this practice, since it has been found to
accentuate rather than to diminish difficulties with condensation and
corrosion, thereby rendering the weight of these fittings unwarrantable.
This decision is being applied both in landplanes and flying boats, and
in the case of Consolidated aircraft it was estimated that in the two-
engined flying boat TCP4YI, about 80$ or more of the conduit system will
be eliminated in the hull and flight deck, with a saving of 80 lbs. to
90 lbs., and that from 100 to 120 lbs. was previously saved in the 3.24
(Liberator).
Identification of individual cables is effected by adhesive rings
or sleeves provided at the ends and, in the case of some firms, at
selected points along the man. The completed wiring assemblies are
taken coiled up to the airframe sub assembly lines, in some cases already
attached to the instrument panels at one end, and there built in to the
airframe sub-part, usually into the side panels before the top portion
of the bay is put on, and therefore with the highest degree of accessibi-
lity, which is of great assistance in quick production. As seen in the
aircraft factories, some of the fuselage portions of large aircraft appear
in the early stages to be fairly bristling with the coils of partly
attached wiring assemblies, but it was noticed that after a very few
initial ope orations had been carried out under the supervisory guidance of
the head man with a full scale blueprint, the use of the drawing is not
further required until some substantial modification is introduced.
The ends of the wiring assemblies are splayed out on the assembly
boards to take up the positions corresponding to the pillar terminals on
which they are required to register in the airframe. In many cases the
individual cables are stiff enough for this purpose, but when necessary


are provided with a spacing card to ensure correct positioning; terminals
at connecting points are frequently carried on light skeleton moulded bars
cut to the required length and designed to stand off at the back for air
spacing of the live parts. Alternatively bake Used panels are cut to
requirements from sheet, where several rows with indent if icat ion markings
are required. Similar identification marks are arranged on the wiring
assembly boards. These terminal panels take the place of junction boxes
as used in conduit systems and almost entirely eliminate the necessity
for local connecting looms and the additional number of joints thereby
involved* In some cases where it is judged permissible these arrangements
of terminals are left uncovered, but more frequently canvas flaps with
quick fasteners are arranged to give the necessary protection against
accidental damage through contact with crews’ harness, etc., and at the
same time provide the most ready form of access for inspection and testing,
as well as the complete freedom of air circulation to avoid condensation.
A number of spare terminals, usually 10$, are provided to take care of
additional services.
SA-4*03. Manufacture in Aircraft Factories. The cable assemblies are invariably
made up in the aircraft plants by young female labour with a small amount
of experienced supervision and check testing. As shown in Pig. 3, the
assemblies are laid out on boards made up from the original assembly of
each type for prototype installation, and duiray terminals are arranged in
the correct positions for splaying the. ends. Each cable is cut to length
on a measuring bench and the ends prepared by stripping tools, either before
or after the collection of cables for each assembly are brought together
on to the assembly board.
FIG. 3. METHOD OF ASSEMBLY AND TESTING OF WIRING BY DOUGLAS.


FIG. 4. BURNDY TOOLING CABLE TERMINALS.
FIG. 5.
FIG. 6.
FIG. 7.
FIG. 8.
FIG. 9.
LARGER PORTABLE TOOLS ARE WORKED BY HAND
OR FOOT PUMPS OR SCREW.


SA-4*04 Type of Cable* The smaller cables at present in use, usually known as
General Electric Deltabeston, or Packard " Flame proof*' aircraft cables, are
of small overall diameter and finished with what appears to be a "mercerised"
braiding, somewhat lighter than the varnished cambric finish formerly used#
This cable would not appear to have great properties of durability against
excessive abrasion, but is very easy to handle in making up the wiring
assemblies and installing them in the airframe sub-parts in the system
adopted# No rubber appears to be used and only the smallest amount of
synthetic insulant, with cellulose tape and two coverings of braid.
SA-4* 05 Attachment of Lugs, The cable lugs are crimped on to the ends as
illustrated in Pigs# 4, 5* 6,7, 8 and 9by indenting press tools# In
production routine,bench presses of the compressed air rivet closing type
are fitted with a range of three or four sizes of indenting dies for the
cables and lugs being used, and thework is simplier, cleaner and quicker
than in the case of soldering and entirely reliable# There are two prin-
cipal manufacturing sources of these non-soldering cable lugs and tools,
namely the Burndy Corporation and the Thomas and Betts Company, whose
catalogues are included at Items No3# 2 and 3 of the Appendix# Each of
these firms have, in the course of time, developed several systems for non-
soldering cable attachments, of which the methods now in common use by
aircraft manufacturers are the simplest.
The Burndy method is used principally by Consolidated, and the Thomas and
Betts "Stakon" method by most other aircraft firms. In the Burndy method a
specially shaped transparent plastic identification sleeve, previously slipped
over the cable, is used to cover the tubular portion of the cable lug, thereby
providing insulation as well as identification and securing of the cambric
braid. Correspondingly marked identification sleeves are also slipped over
the cables at the stage of laying out the bundles on the assembly boards, and
are retained by the last knotting of cord near the end of the bundle. This
method is illustrated in Pig. 4«
The Thomas and Betts "Stakon" method is illustrated in Pig#s, 6,7,
8 and 9 and is undoubtedly the easiest and quickest to apply with
consistently good results# The illustrations show the design and construc-
tion of the two piece lugs, in which a bronze sleeve surrounds a copper
tongue, having a crimping shank, and the latest design of termination
includes a pair of extensions on the outer sleeve to be closed round the
braid of the cable in the smaller sizes. Various samples of these lugs
are available, and inspection shows that the pressing process completely
fills the lug with cable strands by swaging, but even on small cables
the strands are not impaired by the crimping they receive. Several of
the smaller cable sizes commonly used can be fitted with one size of lug,
either by the hand or power tools, and the method can be readily carried
out, with application to all sizes of cables and appropriate lugs 5 in the
assembled aircraft if necessary# A list of the samples of this method
is given at Item No. sof the Appendix# The application of this method
to bonding jumpers is illustrated in Figs. 10 and 11.
FIG. 10. BONDING JUMPERS CAN BE
ALL ALUMINIUM WITHOUT SOLDERING.
FIG. 11. DISCONNECTING BONDING JUMPER FOR
SEPARATING AIRFRAME COMPONENTS.
SA-4*06 Testing* Prom observation of the process of making up cable assemblies
in the aircraft factories, the chances of mistakes in 'bringing out the
end connections appeared very slight. The amount of stage by stage
testing varies with different firms, and although bench rig continuity
testing is in general application, chief reliance seems to be placed on
fairly close visual inspection of the completed assemblies before being
taken off the assembly boards* Overall continuity tests are carried out


in the airframe sub-assembly, but insulation tests after installation are
practically unknown, the .American point of view being that leakages are
guarded against by the method of terminal] mounting, and that the insula-
tion of cable runs is up to the standard set by the quality of the cables*
provided these are not damaged during installation, which factor is
normally controlled by the fairly close visual inspection to which all
sub-assembly work is subjected during the continuous production process.
There are, however, a number of instances in which functional tests of
the shorter and more complicated wiring assemblies associated with
instrument or bomb control panels are carried out, since in these cases
the wiring is usually attached permanently at one end to these panels
for building into the airframe sub-assembly.
CHAPTER 5 - MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR ASPECT.
5A-5*01 Occurrence of Faults. It is generally agreed that faults in the wiring
itself seldom occur except through combat damage, and the open character
of American wiring is calculated to confirm this condition. Cases may
occur in large aircraft where damage might result from improper treatment
by inexperienced personnel using exposed portions of wiring assemblies as
footholds or handholds, in spite of the steps taken to tuck the wiring
away in the structure as far as possible. Such cases can only be regarded
as evidence of the lack of suitable hand grips, etc., and should not be
held as a demerit of the wiring method, since similar cases have occurred
with Breeze conduits in the Stirling. It is virtually inpossible to pull
out cable assemblies thus secured, or in many cases even to get any
slack on individual cables which may be shot through or otherwise damaged,
and up to the present, the repair of such damage in American wiring has
been extremely difficult. This aspect has been receiving considerable
attention with two main results, namely the greater dispersal of the runs
of cables and positions of terminals, and the provision of suitable means
for rapidly connecting severed ends.
5A-5*02 Methods oi Repair. Two methods of effecting such repairs were brought
to light during the Mission* s tour and these will shortly come into use.
Each method is an application of the attachment of cable terminations
by the non-soldering methods previously described, and capable of ready
application in the aircraft by hand tools. That being introduced by
Bumdy Corporation is a form of separable connector illustrated in Rig. 12,
in the form of double prongs
which fit and register together
with an overall diameter slight-
ly greater than that of the
cable. These connectors prov-
ide the requisite additional
length of about to 3/4” on
the severed ends, and before
being fitted together
an insulating sleeve is passed
FIG. 12. BURNDY CONNECTOR
over one end and subsequently adjusted over the coupling. An interesting
feature of this connector is that the three standard sizes proposed for
production, roughly equivalent to 4,7, and 19 amp" capacities, will fit
together in odd pairs.
The Thomas and Betts method of "Stakon" splicing illustrated in
Eig. 13 is equally effective and somewhat neater. It comprises a pair of
FIG. 13. THOMAS AND BETTS CONNECTOR.
cable ends designed for splicing
together in a spring sleeve. The
latter is split along its length
and so arranged that only the
end portions are ever opened out
to register by a shoulder on the
splicing connectors, leaving the
central portion of the spring sleeve
always capable of maintaining pres-
sure on the spliced coupling.


The spring sleeve is made of beryllium copper alloy and all the parts
are silver plated.
In addition to these splicing connectors, this film's standard range
of products includes one piece permanent connecting attachments of two
way, three way and four way varieties. It is apparent that the adoption
of these methods of repair to damaged cables will get over the chief
difficulty previously associated with American wiring methods. It would
also be possible to adopt a form of cable end similar to the Thomas and
Betts splicing connector as a standard termination, as an alternative to
the bolted eyelet lug type now favoured in American practice. This
point is referred to in recommendations regarding British wiring practice.
giAPTER 6 - COMPARATIVE APPRAISEMENT OF BRITISH AND AMERICAN PRACTICE
Brief Review of British Practice. The principal large aircraft at
present in production are equipped with a detachable system of conduit
assemblies, using a large number of multi-pin sockets connected to
corresponding plugs in junction boxes distributed throughout the aircraft.
This method was adopted during 1938 and 1939 for the following reasons:-
(a) The early expansion of aircraft production led the manufacturers
to seek a method of sub-contracting the electrical wiring in order to
save time in assembly as compared with the earlier loose wiring method
generally in vogue, to reduce the number of skilled electricians who
would have been required with the previous practice, and to obtain
assistance in the engineering of the circuit arrangements, for which
there has always been a shortage of electrical engineers and draughtsmen
in the British aircraft industry.
(b) At the time in question it was considered desirable that all
electrical wiring should be screened to avoid radio interference either
directly or indirectly and to prevent short portions of the wiring
acting as short wave antennae or reflectors.
(c) Prom the repair and maintenance point of view it was considered
that a completely detachable system of wiring assemblies and junction
boxes was most satisfactory for easy replacement in service, the damaged
components being removed for repair in workshops.
(d) The manufacture of conduit assemblies and junction boxes by
subcontracting enabled the fullest possible use to be made of female
labour in factories distant from the aircraft plants.
The drawbacks to this system are that the still greater demandr of
aircraft production led to difficulties in the supply'"of the large
numbers of multi-pin connector plugs and sockets required, but this
difficulty was largely overcome by resort to die casting of zinc alloy
shells, coupling nuts etc., and the press-forming of contacts in place
of the original machine turning to a high degree of accuracy.
Later experience has also shown that the complete screening of
electrical wiring is neither necessaiy nor practicable, and use is now
being made of non-metallic tubing for wiring assemblies. Alternative
systems have also been put forward to avoid the use of multi-pin plugs
and sockets, while at the same time retaining the convenience of detachable
sections of wiring. One of these systems, sponsored by the Ministry as
an emergency war production measure, is known as the "strip" system from
the use of contacts formed from light gauge strip metal bent over the
edge of bakelised fabric wafers to which groups of 10 cable cores
are connected by soldering.
Connections in junction boxes are made by assembling these wafer
connectors one upon another in a non—reversible manner. Special
connectors are used for very large conductors and mounted in separate
boxes outside the main junction boxes. The smaller cables enter the
junction boxes in groups of 10 carried in poly-vynilchloride tubes.


An alternative system which has recently been under development by
the S.B.A.C. is based upon the use of light pressed hollow spills, attached
to the cable ends by spot soldering and forming individual plug contacts
"which fit into spring loaded split sockets on the lines originated by
Messrs. Crabtree. These connections are quickly detachable and require
suitable identification.
Hitherto all wiring has been carried out as double pole, fully
insulated from the airframe; the point of view being that an earth fault
on both poles would be necessary to produce a short circuit and if one side
is already earthed the liability is therefore increased. Moreover, advan-
tage had been taken of this system in the development of complicated bomb
circuits for the use of switching arrangements in both lines. Bomb circuits
have since been simplified, however, and a policy decision has been taken in
favour of the use, in the future, of single pole wiring and return through
the airframe.
The arrangement of wiring in one way or another as outlined above has
an effect on the distribution of fuses throughout the airframe. Originally
it was the Air Staff policy for all fuses to be centralised under the control
of the wireless operator, but at a later date -dispersal of fuses was agreed
to, to suit the better layout of wiring on a tree system to facilitate fault
finding and maintenance. The change over to single pole wiring may however
result in a reversion to a higher degree of centralised fuses or other pro-
tecting devices, the alternative being a branching system in which two or
more fuses would necessarily be in series.
5A-6.02 Production Aspect. The American practice is obviously aimed chiefly at
facilitating aircraft production, particularly in the extensive types of
aircraft plant operating on a mainly self supporting basis as far as the
installation equipment is concerned, these factories being free from consider-
ations such as dispersal which have had to be taken into account in Britain.
It has not been possible in either country to arrive at any degree of
approximation as to the total man hours involved, either in the manufacture
of complete wiring sets or their installation in the aircraft, but there can
be no doubt that the manufacture of a complete American system of wiring is
much less costly than the British methods for aircraft of comparable size.
The overall difference might be estimated at as much as two to one and it is
thought that the ratio of female labour to skilled male labour would be
about equal in the two cases.
Very considerable benefit is obtained in the American practice by the
almost entire elimination of soldering, not only as regards production time,
but also in the uniform quality of the work turned out and the cleanness and
simplicity of the job in all stages. It was felt however, that in one or two
cases too much reliance may be placed on the intelligence and doncentration of
the operatives, which might be a source of difficulty from the turnover of
labour to lower standards as the war proceeds. However, the system of close
visual inspection appears to meet this criticism under present conditions.
In this connection there is also an important psychological effect on the
electrical wiring workers in seeing the aircraft grow side by side with their
own work and this contributes to the team spirit throughout the plant. In
Britain on the other hand, there might be the necessity of shifting some of
the labour now employed at sub-contractors into main contractors* plants, and
thereby increasing slightly the concentration of workers in the vicinity of
those plants. It would be necessary for a careful review to be made on the
supply of insulating materials before any drastic change of policy involving
the production of more single cored cable could be made.
In Britain the organisation necessary to ensure the provision, production
and timely delivery to the aircraft works of the separately manufactured
wiring equipment is of considerable magnitude, of which there is no counterpart
in the American system in spite of the greater production. It is considered
that the American firms responsibility for the progress of their wiring
equipment, in synchronism with the other items of the airframe sub-assembly,
results in less delay than is likely to occur through the separate supply of
wiring equipment for incorporation into the airframe at a later stage.


The material to be kept in stock at the aircraft plants at main-
tenance depots and in operational units in connection with -American
methods is obviously of the simplest possible kind compared with the
fomidable range of wiring assemblies at present required for British
types. The effect of this must be of considerable proportion as war
operations spread to more and distant parts, sinoe as noted above a
large part of the Air Ministry Equipment organisation and the M.A.P.
organisation is taken up with the requirements of electrical wiring*
A greater number of sizes of aircraft cables are used in American
practice than in British, and the total quantity manufactured for the
whole industry justifies to some extent this greater divergence, and at
the same time allows slight savings of weight to be achieved but from
the British standpoint it is undoubtedly preferable to minimise the numbers
of different cables being manufactured, in accordance with present policy*
5A-6*03 Technical Aspect* The use in British two pole wiring of multi-pin
connectors, which originated in America for single pole wiring, is a
potential source of weakness, both from electrical faults and vulner-
ability through the crowding together of a large number of pins having
opposite polarities* The advantage of open wiring and terminals, in
the avoidance of enclosed moisture and the reduction of multiple
joints, are individually apparent, but these are also cumulative, sinoe
the cpncentration of many points of volt drop contributes greatly to the
evils of condensation and leakage*
Apart from the saving of important strategic materials the reductions
in weight possible in large British bombers would be of great operational
benefit* It is estimated that these might reach 300 lbs* in the Stirling
or Halifax, whereas attempts to over cane condensation by complete enclos-
ure and sealing would add weight, as well as increase the burden on
production and maintenance through the introduction of more elaborate
equipment.
The need for maintaining upwards of a month’s stock of wiring
assemblies in the British system increases the difficulty of introducing
important modifications quickly, compared with the manufacture of wiring
side by side with the other airframe sub-assembly parts as in American
practice. There is now a realisation among the principal American aircraft
f ims of the necessity to introduce such modifications in electrical
circuits from time to time, to keep in step with changes in operational
requirements, and their method of manufacturing the wiring assemblies, and
particularly the restricted use of multi-pin connectors, enable such
changes to be easily accommodated in spite of the low average grade of
labour employed on the work.
5A-6.04 Maintenance Aspect. Based upon inspection of completed American air-
craft as previously seen in Britain, the greatest doubts •'were fomerly
entertained as to the feasibility of maintaining their electrical wiring
under the difficult conditions of operational service. This was chiefly
due to the difficulty of access to much of the wiring in a completed
aircraft, arising from its being built into the airframe at an early stags
in production* Since, however, the conditions to be met are almost
entirely those due to damage in service rather than incidental defects,
the methods of repair previously described, together with the possibility
of running additional temporary or permanent cables, should entirely meet
these objections.
The identification of individual cables in the run of long assemblies
is at present somewhat difficult, since all cables are marked only with a
reference to their size, but in the case of some firms identification
markers are incorporated at various intervals to facilitate testing back
to a terminal point when cables are broken. Consideration is now being
given by the firms generally, in conjunction with the Wright field
authorities, to suitable means for marking circuit identifications
continuously along tberun, such as by passing each cable through a printing
machine on the bench when the assemblies are made up<> If these arrangements
can be kept simple enough they will undoubtedly be of great assistance in


repair and maintenance, observing that in British practice the extent
to which identification markings are employed throughout a run is
usually inadequate. 2?oint to point testing is very greatly facilitated by
the accessibility of terminals in the latest American arrangements compared
with any form of multiple connectors in junction boxes etc., and the ready
access to connection points through the use of cover flaps gets over the
inescapable tendency to open up every form of box or enclosure whenever
fault finding is being carried out. Frequent inspection is thereby
encouraged and facilitated, without pre judical effects which such
examination would have on systems depending on complete enclosure or
sealing for the maintenance of their efficiency. The problems of stocking
of complete spare assemblies for the British and American methods of
wiring would be about equal, but this is almost entirely unnecessary in the
American case, since the use of single core cables, a supply of the various
cable lugs and splicers and one or two hand tools, would suffice for any
repairs to be carried out in the field. It is realised that the adaption
of such a means for dealing with broken wires in service might involve
a physical departure from the condition and disposition of the
wiring, compared with the original as recorded on drawings, but such a
repair would get the aircraft into operational condition and would be
perfectly sound for the completion of its military life. Moreover, this
form of repair would be equally applicable in British types already wired
on older methods and to American aircraft, and it is felt that this would
be a substantial contribution in the repair of aircraft wiring all over
the world.
The following preliminary test data on Burndy separable connectors
relates to hand made samples.
Preliminary Test Data on Burndy Separable Connectors.
ran
8-H
ranA-H
No. 20
Cable
No. 18
Cable
No. 16
Cable
No. 14
Cable
Rated Current, Amps
0.8
7.0
11.0
16.0
Distance Across Joint, Inches.
1.500
1.500
1.875
1.875
Resistance Across Joint, Microhms
at 20°C - After Initial Assembly
832.0
498.0
455.0
324.0
Ditto, after 100 Separations
864.0
515.0
459.0
284.0
Relative Conductivity of Joint
(to cable) after Initial Assembly,
Percent
153.9
152.0
163.4
144.1
Potential Drop Across Joint at
Rated Current, Millivolt, After
Initial Assembly
6. 66
3.41
5.33
5.60
Ditto, after 100 Separations
6.91
3.69
5.37
4.91
The conductivity of the coupling is of the order of greater than
the cable* Results with the "Stakon” splicing connector are expected
to he at least as good*
CHAPTER 7 ~ DEVELOPMENTS IN RELATION TO ALTERNATING CURRENT.
5A-7.01 Use of Single Core Cable* In connection with the introduction of
alternating current there is no intention of departing from the use of
single core cables* For the 3 phase circuits it is proposed to lay up
3 cables together, with a slight twist, when the bunches of cables are
assembled.
5A-7*02 Checking of Phases. It will of course be necessary to check most care-
fully the identification of leads and terminals to ensure correct operation,
but in principle this is not different from individual identification
as at present.


5A-7* 03 Standard of Insulation. The grading of cable insulation will require
consideration* It had been generally supposed that a pressure of 115
volts between phase lines would present no difficulty with present
American aircraft cables, but in view of the probable adoption of 200 volts
for the pressure between lines some changes may be necessary* In this
respect however the use of single core cables will enable full benefit
to be obtained of the insulation properties of the complete covering*
CHAPTER 8 - APPLICATION TO BRITISH DEVELORENT MD PRODUCTION*
5A-3*01 Short Term Production Aspect and Concurrent Benefits* A close approach
to the American practice of open wiring is recommended principally as a
means of assisting British aircraft production during the next two years,
but at the same time it is the Mission’s opinion that other benefits will
accrue, particularly through providing an earlier opportunity of changing
over to single core wiring with tbs return through the airframe* These
benefits are briefly:
(a) Production* The saving of critical materials and man hours*
(b) Aircraft Performance* Improvements through the saving of weight
and spaoe*
(c) Serviceability* The reduction of vulnerability, defects and
other damage through better spacing*
(d) Maintenance and Repair* Inspection facilitated and simple
means of repair available*
(e) Stocking of Supplies. Simplification of the material to be
carried in production and in service*
(f) Modifications* Greater ease of changes in production and for
additions retrospectively.
5A-8.02 Hew Official Requirements* More stringent British requirements have
recently been formulated in regard to insulation resistance values, with
the object of ensuring that the design of wiring installation equipment
shall withstand all possible conditions of humidity in relation to creeping
distances, corrosion, etc* Associated with these requirements are
proposals from the R*A*E* for a new system of wiring of completely enclosed
type, with provision for sealing of boxes, desiccating, and pressure
equalising for altitude. These proposals are being considered as a long
term technical policy and are obviously diametrically opposite to the
theory and practice of open wiring as discussed in this report*
5A- 8* 03 S*B*A*C* Proposals* Considering that the time had arrived when the
whole question of the method of wiring aircraft should be reviewed, the
Society set up a committee to formulate the industry’s proposals for a
simplified standard system, discussions on which have proceeded for several
months with the electrical firms and M.A.P. The Mission has had an
opportunity of examining these proposals and an installation as at present
developed.
The conclusion has been reached that these proposals could be accepted
as a basis for a new standard system of open wiring, provided that the out-
standing advantages of American practice are incorporated, namely the use
of mechanically pressed cable ends instead of soldering, and the develop-
ment of a universal type to suit both normal connecting points and splicing
of cable ends with this connecting facility*
If the Mission’s recommendation is adopted as a means of assisting
production, it will also afford the necessary opportunity to confirm or
otherwise the ultimate suitability of the open system for the future*
From discussions which have taken place since the Mission’s return, it is
believed this course would be supported by the industry*


SA-8004 Specific Application* A system of open wiring with single core cables
could be most readily applied to the Lancaster and Mosquito as probably
the most effective beginning to ease production, particularly if the
splicing method of connections with good identification marking and
cables i 3 used extensively in the latter. The fact that both these
aircraft are coming into production in Canada, and possibly elsewhere
overseas, lends increased importance and practicability to this applica-
tion. The engineering of these aircraft for this method should therefore
be agreed forthwith while British supplies of single core cable is being
gone into, based on minimum war time requirements as regards weight of
coverings to reduce the quantities of rubber and p.v. c. at present called
for.
The re-engineering of Halifax and Stirling should also be put in
hand as soon as possible; considerable data already exists which would be
of material assistance. In these aircraft the savings in weight and
space taken up by conduit and wiring would be considerable.
Application to other aircraft types would naturally follow.
SA-B*os Use of Sockets and Plugs without soldering. Although it is desirable
to avoid the use of multi-pin connectors wherever possible, there will
still be some places where this type of connection is necessary or
expedient, such as in nacelles and at some wing breaks. In these cases
it will be of benefit to eliminate soldering when the use of the
mechanical pressure method is adopted. Socket connectors for cable
assemblies normally have loose inserts, and could be adapted in design
and manufacture for the use of the indenting sleeve, as in the Thomas
and Betts "Stakon” permanent splicing-. A possible slight increase in
diameter of these modified inserts would not be troublesome when used on
the single pole system. A great advantage would be that the stranded
cable cores would not lose their flexibility at this important point
as with soldering, and there would be no deposit of metal or flux vapour
to lead to corrosion or the occlusion of foreign matter.
This improvement should not hold up the general scheme where
soldering is already in use for such connectors, but should be introduced
to establish uniformity of practice, with the increased facility for
any necessary work on such connectors to be carried out on the aircraft.


APPENDIX - Particulars of Documents, etc. brought back from America.
1. Tinnerman Catalogue Leaflets showing attachment of wiring by
Speed Clamps*
2* Bumdy Catalogue A-43 Electrical Connectors for Aircraft*
3* A Thomas & Betts Catalogue
Stakon Pressure Terminals Bulletin
B Thomas & Betts Handbook -
The Modem Pressure Solderless Terminals
C Thomas & Betts
Electrioal Connectors for Aircraft Wiring
D Thomas & Betts Catalogue 44
4* Bumdy Corporation - letter, drawing, and Laboratory Report•
"Preliminary Test Data on Bumdy separable connectors*"
3* Samples of Solderless Connections:
A Stakon Hand Tool WP 110 for size A and B terminals.
B ” Disconnecting Splicer on cable
C " Permanent Splicer
D Various sizes of Stakon 'terminals
E Progression stamping strip showing manufacture of
Stakon copper eyelet and tongue.
3? Cut up sainples of used Stakons showing absence of
damage to cable strands.
G Section of large connector showing swaging of cable
strands in terminal.
H Bonding jumpers (a) tinned copper cable in aluminium ends
(yellow mark) (b) tinned copper cable in tinned copper
ends (red mark) (c) aluminium cable in aluminium ends
(no mark) (d) Disconnecting type jumper with silver plated
beryllium copper spring socket*
6* Sample of cable with identification printing.
7# Samples (two pairs) of Bumdy separable connectors.
8* Samples (one size) of Stakon Disconnecting Splicers.
9© Samples (about 1000) of Stakon terminal size B.


ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PART B AIRCRAFT ELECTRICS
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item 1.01 Wider application of electrics
" 1.02 Larger generators
” 1.03 Hydraulic services
" 1.04. Alternating current
" 1.05 Project installations
w 1.06 Co-ordination of installation development
** 1.07 Electrical liaison with America
" 1.08 Engine starting
M 1.09 Action
CHAPTER 2 - CONCLUSIONS
Item 2.01 Present American practice
" 2.02 Electrical equipment available in America
H 2.03 Projected use of alternating current
n 2.04 Auxiliary power units
" 2.05 Trend of development in electrics
M 2.06 Electrical services in relation to hydraulics
w 2.07 Co-ordination of installation development
” 2.08 Liaison with America on electrics
CHAPTER 3 - PRESENT USE OP LOW PRESSURE DIRECT CURRENT
Item 3»01 General
" 3*02 Voltage definition
M 3.03 Outline of British practice
w 3*04- American generators
n 3-05 Parallel operation
" 3*06 Voltage regulators
M 3.07 Inverters and dynamotors
" 3»08 Dual purpose generators
" 3*09 Load schedules
" 3«10 Power supply
" 3«11 Electric auxiliary services
CHAPTER A - EFFECT OP OPERATING CONDITIONS ON CHOICE OF SISTEM
Item 4701 Limiting factors on present 24/26 volts D.C. system
" 4*02 Power requirements
M 4«03 The effect of high altitude
" 4-04. Generator drives from main or auxiliary engines
" 4-05 Engine starting requirements
" 4*06 Relative merits of D.C. and A.C. at medium pressure
CHAPTER 5 - REVIEW OF ELECTRICAL SERVICES IN RELATION TO HYDRAULICS
I tan 5»01 Present practice
" 5*02 Relative advantages of electrics and hydraulics
w 5*03 Electric control of hydraulics
** 5*04 Method of operation of various services
M 5*05 Weights of landing gear
" 5*06 Brakes
” 5*07 Developments in hydraulics
CHAPTER 6 - MANUALS ON INSTALLATIONS


CHAPTER 7 DESIGN AND PRODUCTION OP ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
Item 7* 01 General
" 7*02 Screw actuator for landing gear
tt 7-03 Motors and drives
" 7*04 Circuit breakers
” 7*05 Motor thermal protectors
" 7-06 Contactors and relays
M 7.07 Speed riut fittings
w 7*oB Standard specifications
CHAPTER 8 - NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN AIRCRAFT ELECTRICS
Item 8.01 Generators
” 8.02 Endurance of brushes
" 8.03 Operation of alternators and development
of A.C. system
M 8.04 Auxiliary power units
w 8.05 Engine starting
w 8.06 Follow-up systems for temperature control,
flap operation, autopilots, turrets and fire control
n 8.07 Developments in restriction of radio interference
CHAPTER 9 - APPROVAL AND STANDARDISATION OF EQUIPMENT
Item 9-01 Official approval of equipment
” 9*02 Standardisation of equipment
M 9*03 Standard specifications
■ .. 1
CHAPTER 10 - LIAISON WITH AMERICA ON ELECTRICS
APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS ETC. , BROUGHT BACK FROM AMERICA


CHAPTER 1 -- BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
5B-1.01 Wider Application of Electrics* In view of the experience
gained with aircraft electrics in America, there is considerable
scope for development in British types. Steps recently taken
e.g. to design electric landing gear for Lancaster, will probably
lead to wider application, and to the decline of hydraulics for
this type of service.
5B-1.02 Larger Generators. Generators of large capacity to supply
such services and increased electrical loads for turrets etc.,
should be pressed forward.
5B-1.03 Hydraulic Services. The extension of aircraft electrics
should include motor pumps and remote control of hydraulic
installations to simplify the aircraft and reduce vulnerability
and maintenance.
5B-1.04 Alternating Current. American policy on high altitude
operation will almost certainly bring forward the use of
alternating current. It would appear wise, since our high
altitude experiences parallel those of America, that British
development should be pushed forward and efforts made to
achieve common practice.
5B-1.05 Project Installations. Tentative installations should be
worked out for each new project of large aircraft and the necess-
ary A.G. equipment designed as soon as possible. The design of
additional D.C. equipment is unnecessary, as all types are in
production in America and could be produced for British aircraft.
5B-1.06 Go-ordination of Installation Development. Closer co-
ordination of the technical development of electrical installa-
tions with hydraulics, radio and turrets is needed to improve
the efficiency of aircraft generally.
5B-1.07 Electrical Liaison with America. Strengthened liaison with
America on aircraft electrics is needed in view of present and
forthcoming wide developments in both countries.
5B-1.08 Engine Starting. The Americans are not more advanced in their
ideas than ourselves on the question of engine starting.
In order to relieve the current discharge and weight situa-
tion their latest type 4-5 Bendix inertia-cum-cranking system will
be adopted for engines round about 2,000 h.p. and probably larger.
It was agreed that the starting problem for 4. >000 - 5,000 h.p.
engines would be rather a serious one and there should be no delay
in tackling it. The Americans do not seem to be working on a
small petrol motor for starting, and we explained to them what
was being done over here. It seems that the matter of starting
should be tackled energetically in this country and in close
collaboration with the Americans as our problems are similar.
5B-1.09 Action.
(i) larger generators should be pressed forward.
(ii) A.C. system should be considered for future large
aircraft and an early decision reached in order to
allow the development of the necessary equipment.




CHAPTER 2 - CONCLUSIONS
5B-2.01 Present American Practice* The use of electrics is extensive and increas-
ing, with large generators for power supply. Increases in armament electri-
cal loads are notable. Small circuit breakers are widely used in substitu-
tion for fuses and switches. In the largest American aircraft, now being
built, there are continuous loads of nearly 1,000 amps and peak loads over
1,300 amps.
5B-2.02 Electrical equipment available in America. Considerable design and
production capacity exists and a wide range of electric motors complete with
mechanical actuation fittings and control devices is available. No diffi-
culty is anticipated in obtaining this sort of equipment for use in British
aircraft, to save additional design effort at the present time and to achieve
a measure of standardisation.
5B-2.03 Projected Use of Alternating Current. Larger aircraft and increased
electrical loads will require higher voltage, and high altitude operation
will dictate the elimination of commutator brushes as far as possible, hence
alternating current systems will be introduced for the large aircraft in the
near future. The design of interchangeable British and American A. C. equip-
ment should begin forthwith. The American system will be three phase ifOO
cycles at 115/200 volts.
5B-2.04- Auxiliary Power Units. American practice is to fit a large generator on
each main motor and one on the auxiliary for emergency use at take-off or
on the ground. A.P.U.S are not used at altitude and will not be super-
charged for this purpose. The future of A.P.U.s will probably be affected
by the development of turbo drives, using either exhaust gas or separate
fuel combustion.
5B-2.05 Trend of Development in Electrics. The increasing use of electrical
operation for aircraft services and ancillary equipment will include various
applications of remote and automatic control on simple ”follow-up" systems.
Generators will be Improved and present efforts continued to increase the
endurance of brushes for sustained operation at high altitude. Alternating
current systems will be developed for large aircraft, with constant speed
mechanical and exhaust turbo drives for alternators, and the design of very
high speed machines is to be expected for light weight units. A policy-
decision on the power balance sheet for large aircraft is required to
dtermine the best use of exhaust gas energy in relation to supply of electric
power, de-icing, etc.
5B-2.06 Electrical services in relation to hydraulics. A few firms retain prefer-
ence for hydraulics but the majority are going to electrics for various
ancillary aircraft services. Electric equipment is easier to obtain, instal
and maintain and less vulnerable. In some cases electrical remote control '
of hydraulics is favoured and electric pumps used for boosting, standby and
main operations. Developments in hydraulic installations will include
pressures up to 3 >000 lbs., often with electric pumps. Design and production
of hydraulics in America is rather behind that in Britain.
5B-2.07 Co-ordination of Installation Development. Much benefit is seen in American
aircraft of the close technical co-ordination of electrical installations with
hydraulics, radio, etc. Similar benefit might be obtained for British aircraft
by a special branch to co-ordinate technical development of electrical power
installations apart from the design of equipment, to work in close collabora-
tion with other branches, such as AD/EDI. The growth of armament electrical
loads will increase this need. Projected installations should be worked out
now for large landplanes and flying boats to determine the types of equipment
to be designed, for early manufacture on an interchangeable basis.
5B-2.08 Liaison with America on Electrics. The need for considerable strengthen-
ing of electrical liaison with America is indicated.


CHAPTER 3 - PRESENT USE OF LOW PRESSURE DIRECT CURRENT.
5B-3*01 General. The present use of low pressure direct current in aircraft can
best be judged against a brief historical review, particularly in relation to
British aircraft practice.
5B-3.02 Voltage Definition. It is necessary in the first place to clarify the
references to the system voltages. With a few British exceptions such as
the Spitfire, Hurricane, Whitley, Blenheim and Swordfish, all current British
and American combat aircraft now have volts installations. This range
of volts indicates the pressures assumed to be respectively available from
the aircraft accumulator and the engine driven generator when "cut-in” at
normal operational speeds. In Britain the lower value is adopted as the
nominal pressure of the system and in America the higher figure is generally
quoted, although generators are frequently rated at 30 volts. To avoid
confusion in comparing generator outputs, it is therefore convenient to
refer to their current ratings in amperes rather than power in watts. This
system will be referred to as "low pressure" and systems operating at 100
and 200 volts will be referred to as "medium pressure."
5B-3*03 Outline of British Practice. Up to 1938, British generators were limited
to 20 amp. size,and increases of power requirements, mainly for radio, made
necessary the introduction of larger types with carbon pile regulators,
designed to approach more nearly the ideal of constant pressure on the system
in place of the old accumulator control system based on constant chaining
current•
In multi-engine aircraft, generators have since been operated in para-
llel, but there has never been any margin of power supply over demand to cater
adequately for additional requirements or to enable all services to function
with one or more generators out of action.
The present 60 amp. generators have only been available for upwards of
a year and any appreciable extension of electrical services has been virtually
denied to aircraft designers by the absence of suitable aircraft equipment.
This point is in fact frequently made by British designers.
5B-3*Q4 American Generators. In America, the electrical operation of aircraft
services and the provision of larger generators have received more attention.
100 amp. and 200 amp. sizes are those principally now in use,with a 300 amp.
size coming along. American generators are, however, less conservatively
rated than British types and consequently they have rather limited overload
capacities. There have been a number of failures under test and in service,
which are being rectified.
The Army type P. 1. for 200 amps. * operating at 2500 to 4500 r.p.m. and
weighing 43i lbs.> is fairly comparable with the new British type 0 for 120
amps.
58-3.05 Parallel Operation, The operation
of generators in parallel in American
aircraft follows standard electrical
engineering practice with regu-
lators, reverse current relays and
remote control battery contactors as
coiiEjared with the British use of the
so-called ”accumulator cut-out” deve-
loped from automobile technique. The
operating characteristics of the re-
verse current relays are such that it
is generally necessary to include a
” limitor" (Fig. 1) in the circuit, this
being a fuseable cut-out which limits
the duration of a heavy reverse cur-
rent (not its magnitude) into a "dead"
generator. This arrangement enables a
more robust type of reverse current
relay to be used, with consequent less
critical adjustment being required than
LIMITER LINK
AND ENCLOSURE
FIG. 1. BURNDY “LIMITER”


usually experienced with our cut-outs, and, it is believed, with less main-
tenance trouble*
The present use of the relatively small capacity generators in British
aircraft is not regarded as satisfactory even when these are operated in
parallel, since if one or two were put out of action, e.g. in the Halifax,
the remainder of the system would probably be unable to cope with the loads
of all the turrets attempting to maintain defence, and might prevent the
most effective use of those turrets which could be brought to bear on the
enemy at any time. In other words, parallel operation of generators is not
regarded as a substitute for adequate individual capacity.
5B-3«06 Voltage Regulators. Improved models of vibrating contact regulators
are now coming into use,having the equivalent of rocking contacts,giving less
electrical radio noise and less wear and tear at the sparking contacts.
Carbon pile regulators similar to the British Newton type are also being
introduced,but with improvements in cooling enabling higher current ratings
to be introduced for the excitation of larger generators.
5B-3.07 Inverters and Lynaootors. For the operation of comnunication equipment,
the .American installations include various dynamotors giving the required
supplies for the electronic valves. These correspond to the power units
which invariably form part of the signals installations in British aircraft.
There is usually also an inverter for supplying alternating current at 2*00
cycles per second for autosyn instruments, which are not used in British
installations, where the practice is mainly to use direct current operated
transmission instruments or direct connected types.
5B-3.08 Dual purpose Generators. For special radio equipment, there is a Navy
type dual generator KEA3 with outputs of 60 amps. D.C. and 1200 watts A.C.
at 80 volts i.e. similar to the British new UKX type. A larger machine, the
MEA5 is being introduced with 3200 watts A.C. output and 200 amps. D.C. A
review of power supplies for radio is given at Item No.8 of the Appendix
on Instrument and Radio Installations in Part C.
5B-3.09 Load Schedules. The extent of the present use .of 28 volts D.C. in typi-
cal American aircraft is illustrated by the electrical load schedules
included in the appendices to the report as under.
Aircraft Electrical Load Schedules.
Aircraft
Firm
Drawing
No.
Generators
No. Amps.
Appendix
Item No.
FB2Y3 Flying Boat
Consolidated
29-R-A8OO
4
200
1
SB2D-1 " ”
Douglas
-
1
300
2
B2AD Bomber
Consolidated
32-R-3478
4
200
3
B25 Bomber
North American
62-95407
2
200
4
P51A Fighter
North American
99-95 10
1
100
5
P39 Fighter
Bell
**
1
50
6
These schedules show the estimated aggregate loads under various conditions
of operation and a number of similar items fitted and in use simultaneously.
Notable items among the electrical loads in these aircraft are as
follows:-


(a) Consolidated P 8213: (66000 lbs.)
Motors
Bomb
Hoist
Wing
Float
Wing
Flap
Bow
Turret
Deck
Turret
Tail
Turret
Cowl
Flaps
(4)
Refuel
and
Bilge
Heating
Fan
Ammn.
Booster
Amps.
75
67.5
W
35/87
30/75
100
7.5
20
1.5
8
Motors
Screen
Wiper
Prop.
Feather
Amps.
8.6
110
Other
Items
Cooking
Grill(2)
Heater
Glow Plug
Inverter
(2*00 c/s)
Heated
Suits (6)
Amps.
41.6
10
20
5
(b) Douglas SB2D-1. (19,500 lbs.)
Motors
Wing
Plap
Fuel
Booster
Turret
Ampli-
dynes(2)
Turret
Ampli-
dynes(2)
Turret
Ityna-
motor
Ammn.
Booster
Oil
Cooler
Engine
Scavenge
Amps.
100/395
7.8
10/24
17/47
25
10
V 8.8
34
Other Items
Cockpit
Heater
Primer
Solenoid
Dilution
Solenoid
Oil
Diverter
Turret
Relays
De-icing
Heat
Amps.
mJmm
10.5
1.8
1.5
7
11
28/65
(c) Consolidated 824 D. (56,000 lbs.)
Motors
Heating
Pans(3)
Heating
Pans(3)
Fuel
Transfer(2)
Anti-
Icer^)
Auxilliaiy
Booster
Tail
Turret
Upper
Turret
AH£S.
2.5
1.5
9
2
95
95
55
Motors
Lower
Turret
Cowl
Flap (4)
Fuel
Booster(4)
Prop.
Feather
Amps.
55
7
5
90
Other Items
Igniters
(6) ..
Heated
Suits(9)
Auto
Control
Inverter
400 c/s
Primer
Solenoid
Dilution
Solenoid
Amps.
. 10
15.5
10
25
2.5
2.5
(d) North American 825. (26,000 lbs.)
Motors
Fuel
Booster
(2)
Fuel
Transfer
(4) _
Carbr.
Antice
Propr.
Antice
Aerial
Reel
Turrets
(2)
Screen
Wiper
Defrost
(2)
Prop.(2)
Feather
Amps.
5.0
5.0
0.8
1.2
5.0
90
8.0
8.0
300
0tiier items
Primer
Solenoid(2) £
Dilution
3olenoid(2)
Camera
Heater
Fire
Control
Cabin
Heater
Cabin
Heater
Heated
Suits (5)
Amps.
1.0
o.5
10
4.2
1/11
11/21
13.0
(e) North American PSLA (8000 lbs.)
Motors
Fuel *
Booster
Propr.
De-Ice.
Propr.
Controls
Other Items
Dilution
Solenoid
Firing
Solenoid
Gun
Beater
Amos.
5.0
0.8
10
Amps.
0.5
20.6
1.5/u
(f) Bell P.39. (7,600 lbs.) Bell P.63 will be similar
Motors
Landing
Gear
Wing
Flaps
Fuel
Punip
Anti
Icing
Propr.
Controls
Other
Items
Dilution
Solenoid
Gunfire
Relays(3)
Amps.
40
15
5
1.3
16
Amps.
6.8
.75
ac New submerged type will take 6-8 amps*


Radio loads and the usual lighting and instrument items have been omitted
from the above summaries. It will be noted that armament loads are substan-
tial; it would seem that practically all turrets are powered either
by the electro-hydraulic method (Sperry-Vickers) or the electric
method of General Electric.
In the case of the new bombers, Boeing 8.29 and Consolidated 8.32, pro-
visional electric load schedules are given below; -
Provisional Electrical Load Schedules
Boeing B-29
Consolidated B-32
Service
Amps.
No. in
Amps.
No. in
per unit
operation
per unit
operation
Heating & Ventilating
1+0,000 B.Th.U.Heater Pans,
G-low Plugs
5
2
0.5
4 \
»» it »t n
12.0
4 )
8,000 B.Th.U.Heater Fans,
14
2
3.5
4)
G-low Plugs
14.5
4 )
Cabin Supercharger Heat
18
2
unknown
Control Pan
Heated Flying Suits
15.6
12
15.6
11
Bomb Release
Bomb Door Control
50
2
10.0
2
R.S-2 Relays
2.5
4
2.5
4
Intervalometer
1.8
1
1.8
1
Release Units A-2
7.12
1 per opn.
7.12
1 per opn.
Indicator lights at Bomb
Stns.
-
-
Bomb Hoist Type C-3 2,000
20.0
2
2.0
2
1,100
10.0
2
1.0
2
Bomb Sight (S-1) Start
7
7
Normal
2
1
2
1
Bomb Formation Light
2.5
1
2.5
1
Bomb Fusing Control^Tjpe
.45
80
.45
80
Propeller Control
Pitch Control
6.5
4
6.5
4
Feathering Pump
90.0
1 per
90.0
1 per
(starting 170 Amps*)
operation.
operation
Ice Elimination & Pumps
De-icer System
2.0
1
1.5
1
Anti-Icer Pump
1.4
2
1.4
2
Pilot Heaters
5.65
2
5.65
2
Aux. Hydraulic Pump
120.0
1
95
1
Brake Hydraulic Pump
95
1
Exterior Lights
.
Landing Lights
27.0
2
25.0
2
Navigation Lights
2.5
2.5
Total
Formation Lights
1.05
Total
1.05
Total
Recognition
2.7
Total
2.7
Total
Instruments
■
Autosyns,Thermometer Free}
Air, Oil Temp.Carb. )
Air Temp.Position Indica-)
5.0
Total
5.0
Total
tors Flap,Landing gear, )
Trim Tab. )
A.5 Automatic Pilot
Servo Heaters
4.0
3
4.0
3
Servo Units (Cold Start)
70.0
3
70.0
3
H " Normal
15.0
3
15.0
3
Amplifier Rack
5.0
1
.5.0
1
Elevator Trim Tab
2.0
2
2.0
2
Vertical Gyro
2.0 ,
1
2.0
1
Rudder Tab. Motor
2.0
2
2.0
2
Aileron Tab .Motor
2.0
2
2.0
2


Boeing B-29
Consolidated B-32
Service
Amps.
No. in
Amps.
No. in
. ■
per unit
operation
per unit
operation
Interior Lighting
Dome Lights
15.0
i Total
15.0
\ Total
Table Lights
4.3
Total
3.5
Extension Lights
1.0
Total
1.0
Auxiliary Services
Flap Valve Solenoid
10
2
M Operation
25
2
Landing Gear Hain Wheels
115
2
H ” Nose Wheel
70
1
w H Valve Solenoid
10
1
tt M Warning Horn
5
1
5
1
Wheel Doors
4.5
3
400 Cycle Inverter
50.0
1
Radio
Liaison Receiver )S.C.R.
4.0
1
4.0
1
" Transmitter) 287
31.5
1
31.5
1
Command Receiver )S.C.R.
1.5
1
1.5
1
" Transmitter; 274.
Standby
3.0
1
3.0
1
tt ” Transmit
10.0
1
10.0
1
Radio Compass S.C.R. 269
3.0
1
3.0
1
Absolute Altimeter,S.C.R.518 20.0
1
20.0
1
Special Equipment
-
-
-
-
Beam Approach S.C.R.915
16.0
1
16.0
1
R.3003 S.C.R.535
15.0
1
15.0
1
Sperry Fire Control
Wing - Left Hand Nacelle
Power Unit
50.0
1
50.0
1 )
tt « n n
25.0
1
25.0
1 )
Wing - Left Hand Firing
22.0
Total
22.0
Total
or Charge
M Left Hand Leading
50.0
1
50.0
1
Edge Power Unit
« tt tt tt
25.0
1
25.0
1
tt Left Hand Leading
6.0
1
6.0
1
Edge Firing or
Charge
" Right Hand Nacelle
50.0
1
50.0
1
Power Unit
tt tt n tt
25.0
1
25.0
1
” Right Hand Nacelle
22.0
Total
22.0
Total
Firing or Charge
" Leading Edge Power
50.0
1
50.0
1
Unit
" Leading Edge Power
25.0
1
25.0
1
Unit
Leading Edge Power
6.0
1
6.0
1
Firing or Charge
Body Turret Upper Azm.
50.0
3
50.0
1
Power Unit
tt h tt tt
25.0
3
25.0
1
Body Turret Upper Eleva-
50.0
3
50.0
1
tion Power Unit
n tt tt tt
25.0
3
25.0
1
Body Turret Upper Firing
6.0
10
6.0
4
or Charge
♦
Body Turret Upper Ammuni-
8.0
3
8.0
1
tion Booster
Body Turret Lower Azm.
50.0
2
50.0
1
Power Unit
n *» t» tt
\
25.0
2
25.0
1


Boeing B-29
Consolidated B-32
Service
Amps.
No. in
Amps.
No. in
per unit
operation
per unit
operation
Body Turret Lower
50.0
2
50.0
1
Elevation Power Unit
tt h m n
25.0
2
25.0
1
Body Turret Lower
6.0
8
6.0
4
Firing or Charge
60.0
60.0
Fire Control Inverter
2
1
Computers fNormal)
Computers (slewing)
100.0
2
58.0
Total
20.0
Total
8.0
«i
Engine Controls
200.0
Starter
200.0
1
1 per opn.
Cowl Flaps
7.5
4
7.5
4
Intercooler Shutter
5.0
4
5.0
4
Fuel Transfer Pump
7.0
2
-
-
Fuel Booster Pump
4.5
6
4.5
6
Primer
2.0
1
2.0
1 per opn.
Oil Dilute Valve
2.5
4
2.5
4
Miscellaneous
Camera
15.0
1
15.0
1
Alarm Bell
2.0
1
2.0
Total
Cabin Pressure Alarm
-
5.0
1
A sumraaiy of loads under various operational conditions has been worked
out by Consolidated for the 8.32,and the case for the 8.29 would be gener-
ally similar in spite of the additional services in respect of landing gear,
wing flaps and bomb doors. These estimated loads are as follows
Hoist Bombs
Warm up
Engir
Stand By
le start
Fire control
Warm up
Total
Continuous
75
142
106
360
165
Peak Load
122
360
310
734
518
(No heated suits)
Take off
Climb
Cruise
Start Heatins
Warm Up
Start Gun Heat
Start Cabin Heat
368
929
928
958
958
5 66
1272
1336
1026
1016
Combat •
Feather
(1)Prop.
A-djust
Pitch
Swing
Turrets
Fire
Turrets
W.T.
Trans.
Total
Continuous
968
968
968
968
968
Peak Load
1109
1045
1177
1119
1050
It will be noted that the maximum load of over 1300 amps, will occur
during warming up under climbing conditions and that continuous loads
approaching 1,000 amps, have to be catered for,
58-3,10 Power Supply. In the first few machines (8.32) the generators will be
the Army type P 1 rated at 200 amps, at 2500 to 4500 r.p.m. of which seven
will be fitted, two on each outer engine, one on each inner and one on the
auxiliary power unit. A change to four 300 amp, generators type RI, also
for 2500 to 4500 r.p.m, ,will be made as these generators become available,
and they will be fitted one on each main engine.
The 8.29 is laid out for six 200 aup. type P 2 generators for 4400 to


10,000 r.p.m. on main engines and one on the auxiliary power unit.
5B-3*11 Electric Auxiliary Services. In regard to the general use of electrics
for aircraft auxiliary services, it did not prove possible to collect all
the detailed information,which was desired to permit of close analysis of
American aircraft designs in this respect. A lengthy questionnaire,which
had been prepared by M.A.P. (R.D.Inst.1) for action by the B.A.G., was
taken to Washington by the Mission and it was apparent that this would take
some months to answer. In the meantime a shorter and more comprehensive
list of points for discussion in America had been prepared by the Mission
and even this proved difficult to clothe with a full covering of factual
informat ion, because such information does not exist in comparative form in
America any more than in Britain. However, the broad impressions gained
form the basis of this section of the report. For reference purposes M.A.P.
letter RD.Inst, 1 (d) of 12.12.42. (file Research/Elec./452) and the Mission*s
list of points for discussion are given at Appendices Items Nos.7 and 8
respectively.
• ... v .. ....
The items of concrete individual data which were collected on a few
specific installations of electric auxiliary services are given here.
Bell P39 (Airacobra).
Undercarriage.
Performance
Weight of legs: Two at 122 lbs. (main) One at 48 lbs. (nose)
Motor output: 50-55 -inch pounds torque
Operating tine: Up in 25 seconds, down in 18 seconds
No gravity operation because of non-reversible drive.
Motor and Drive
Make and type: Electrical Speciality Go: Series
Rating: Intermittent 3/4 h.p. 37 amps
Weight: 1QJ: lbs. with thermal protecter (O/L)
Clutch: Spring loaded cone to slip on overload
Limit Switch: Microswitch operated by left leg
Mechanical Stop: Being superseded by lynamic 3raking
Position Indicator: Independent of drive
Drawings: Installation, No.26-500-001 at Appendix Item No.9
(also see Fig.2) Landing G-ear Retracting System (unnuntoered)
at Appendix Item No.10.
FIG. 2. ARRANGEMENT OF BELL ELECTRIC LANDING GEAR.


Emergency Operation.
Manual device:
Hand cranking of motor
Time required:
2 to 4 minutes.
Duplication of cable:
None.
Wing Flaps.
Performance.
Weight of Flap:
13 lbs.
Motor output:
8 inch pounds torque
Stroke of Actuator:
inches
Operation Times:
Up in 5-10 seconds, down
in 10-15 seconds.
No Gravity operation
because of non-reversible
drives.
Motor and Drive
FIG. 3. ARRANGEMENT OF BELL ELECTRIC WING FLAP GEAR.
Make and Type: Electrical Speciality Go: Series
Rating: Intermittent 1/4 h.p. 15 amps
Weight: 20 lbs. with clutch and gear hox
Clutch: Built in motor reduction gear
Limit Switch: Micro Switch
Reduction Gear: 40/1 on motor and 1/4- inch lead screw
Position Indicator: Independent of drive
Drawings: Bell Nos.26-728-009 Appendix Item No. 11
(Also see Pig.3) 14-726-002 " w ”
K 14-726-501 " " " 13
Emergency Operation: No provision.
Curtiss P40 (Kittyhawk)
Aileron Trim Tab
Performance.
Torque: 10 inch pounds at end of drive
Motor: Gilbert, Series, Intermittent, 2 amps.
Weight: 3/4 lb. without gear
Gear: 600/1 and 20 turns/inch screw
Note: This service as designed is considered too heavy and will
probably be replaced by a motor with self contained gear and
limit switch by General Elec*
Cooling Flaps.
Performance.
Torque: 200 inch pounds at end of drive
Air Load: 960 lbs. (maximum) at 450 m.p.h. in closed position
Motor: Eastman Machine & Tool Co. Series Intermittent
7 amps, giving 0.154 h.p. at 9800 r.p.m.
Weight: lbs. with gear and limit switch.
Gear: 12.5/1 and 30/1 worm and 8 tum/inch screw
Note: This service is fitted only in a few P.i+OF and was deleted
to save weight. General Electric Temperature Control on the
"follow-up” system is being applied as described in Chapter 8.


Landing Gear and Y/ing Flaps.
This aircraft (P.40) is provided with a Bendix motor driven
hydraulic pump for landing gear and flap services. The pump
delivers 0.3 gallons per minute with the relief valve set at 1,000
lbs., the motor being rated for 60 amps.,and the combination weighs
14 lbs.
CHAPTER 4 - EFFECT OF OPERATING CONDITIONS ON CHOICE OF SYSTEM
5B-4*01 Limiting Factors on Present volts D.C. System. Considerable
thought has been given to this subject in America and it is generally felt
that the larger aircraft now being built in America mark the limit in the use
of low pressure installations. As shown in Chapter 2 we are now faced with
seven 200 amp. generators or five 300 amp. generators working on a common
system. This is not too difficult to arrange in the American method with
reverse current protection and quick acting regulators, as already described,
but would probably present more difficulty in British installations.
More important are the considerations of cable weight, pressure drop
and maintenance.
5B-4*02 Power Requirements. The schedules of loads included in Chapter 2 for the
B.29 and B#32 give a good indication of the development of power requirements
and the wide distribution in location of the armament loads. Duplicate
supply cables are usually run by separate routes to the turrets. No specific
data is available at present on the weights of all the cables involved in
these large installations, but there was evidence of serious efforts to save
weight wherever possible in installations as at present being developed,
particularly in view of the tendency to add to the electrical loads in
preference to or for a saving on other services. Consolidated estimate a
saving of 800 lbs. for medium pressure in the B.36.
These considerations necessitate the early adoption of higher electrical
pressures.
5B-4.03 The Effect of High Altitude. As is well known the Americans are anxious
to exploit to the full the advantages of high altitude operation#both militaiy
and for transport. The effect on the electrical requirements will be consi-
derable. Electrical operation and remote control of aircraft services,
armament, instruments, etc., to reduce human effort, is regarded as pre-
eminently suitable for the cold and low pressure conditions, as well as in
conditioned cabins, and can be provided with slip ring connections into
turrets, etc.
A major problem has arisen in regard to the wear of commutator brushes
at high altitude ,and the present position seems to be that ordinaiy brushes
will only last a few hours in operation at 30,000 ft. and the various means
tried up to the present have given working life up to 20 hours or so. The
endurance of brushes is discussed further in Chapter 8 on new developments,
but it is necessary here to record that the present situation regarding brush
wear,and the need for the utmost simplicity and reliability of all equipment
used at high altitude, have concentrated attention on the prospects of intro-
ducing alternating current installations.
These considerations will no doubt have to be allowed for in deciding
the type of turret operation for the highest flying bombers, and in this field
there should be application for the electro hydraulic operated type with an
A.C. motor providing the local power.
5B-4»04 Generator Drives from Main or Auxiliary engines. The factors to be consi-
dered are reliability, vulnerability, weight (and space) and efficiency. As
the source of power, the main aircraft engine has reached a higher state of
development from the reliability and efficiency standpoint than any smaller
engine such as would be used for a power unit. Further, since a generator
can be driven on each engine, overall reliability of supply is greatly increa-
sed. Similar considerations apply to vulnerability, and the risk of complete


shut down through military damage to the aircraft general power unit, if gen-
erators are not carried on the main engines, would be too great to accept,
and it would not be feasible to provide sufficient armour protection for
this unit.
In regard to weight and space, there would be no appreciable saving of
weight on the main power units if all the generating power were put into the
auxiliary engine and, although the space occupied in the fuselage would not
be proportional to the output of the unit, there is undoubtedly some saving of
space by driving generators on the main engines. Accordingly for the land
types of military aircraft it is the general opinion and policy in America
that a generator must be fitted on each main engine, since this arrangement
gives the maximum assurance of continuity of supply in all conditions of com-
bat damage or accident. Moreover the main engines are not subject to loss of
generator power at high altitude.
For use on the ground, emergency, or stand-by at take off or moderate
altitude, the practice is to provide an auxiliary unit with generators of
similar size to those on the main units and in the latest aircraft a common
type of generator is used. The view is held at Wright Field that the size
of auxiliary power unit should be that suitable for operating the largest
motor fitted in the aircraft.
It is not the intention of the Any to provide for supercharging of
auxiliary engines for use above 20,000', and they also require the auxiliary
power unit to be readily detachable so that it can be left behind on certain
operational missions when desired to utilise the space for other purposes.
It will be noted that this is made possible by the provision of adequate
generators on the main engines.
Navy aircraft, including flying boats, do not have to operate for long
periods at high altitude (over 25,000') and in the case of flying boats will
generally require more power to be available when on the water than in the
case of land planes on the ground. There is therefore a case for larger
auxiliary power units,or the possible use of two in parallel for waterborne
conditions, to enable a degree of standardisation of sizes to be based on the
set for land planes using the largest type of generator as designed for main
engine drive.
5B-4.05 Engine Starting Requirements. American practice is exclusively electric
for engine starting, either by the inertia type or direct cranking, and with
engine sizes to be dealt with in the next 2 years no special difficulty is
anticipated. Probable developments are considered in Chapter 8.
5B-4.06 Relative Merits of DC and AC at Medium Pressure. In view of the limita-
tions of the present low voltage DC systems there is general agreement in
America that higher pressures must be adopted for large aircraft, and
various discussions have taken place on this subject. Some notes on a
conference of several aircraft films held by Douglas at Santa Monica on
24th December, 1942, are given at Item No.15 of the Appendix. Advantages
and disadvantages of the following systems are discussed:
fa) 28 volts DC
fb} 110 volts DC
(c) 110 AC at 300/500 cycles
(d) 110 AC at 400 cycles
(e) AC at higher volts at 400 cycles.
from the standpoint of commutation, arcing on faults, ionisation effects,
paralleling of generators, radio interference, availability of stored
power in accumulators, weight of cables, availability of equipment,
ease of transformation and conversion.
An important point is brought out that the full range of equipment
must be made available for any preferred system to be introduced, and
the aircraft industry looks to the electrical industry for these
accessories.
It is clear that a multiplicity of systems should be avoided, and in


going to medium pressure it is preferable to adopt alternating current at
the same time. Prom discussions with the various firms visited and the
Amy authorities at Wright Field there is a consensus of opinion in favour
of 3 phase alternating current at medium pressure and 2*jOO cycles nominal
frequency for the future large aircraft. In fact, 2 new bombers of
advanced type, namely, B35 and. B36 of approximately 155,000 lbs.
265,OCX) lbs. respectively, are now being designed with this system, -which
is further discussed under new developments in Chapter 8 . At the time
the Mission was leaving America a conference was to be held at Wright
Field, following upon a preliminary one between aircraft and equipment
firms including Consolidated, Northrop and General Electric Co., to
determine the voltage to be adopted for these aircraft.
In the Navy Department there is still a preference for direct current
with which Mr. J. Allen is closely identified. Mr. Allen was formerly
with Bendix, which firm has in the past been foremost in the design and
manufacture of aircraft electrical equipment of DC type. The need for
higher pressure has been recognised and the small number of flying boats
of the Mars type now on order are having separate DC systems at 28 volts
and 110 volts, but the Service is already complaining of difficulties in
the division of loads. This was referred to at the final Washington
conference and is an inevitable consequence of the use of both medium and
low pressure DC on the same aircraft.
From the foregoing observations, the American decision to adopt
alternating current at medium pressure for large aircraft in the near
future mist be regarded as well founded. It will of course call for the
immediate development of all the necessary equipment and accessories,
including engine starters, but the possibility will not be overlooked of
using selenium rectifiers to supply apy direct current found to be
essential for special purposes. Such rectifiers are alreaty available up
to 6 k.w. ratings.
CHAPTER 3 - REVIEW OF ELECTRICAL SERVICES IN RELATION TO HYDRAULICS
5B-5.01 Present Practice. American practice on hydraulics appears to be
generally aind-larto British but somewhat backward in production, and the
pressures in present use are usually quite moderate, 800 lbs per sq. in.
being common. Higher, but not extreme ere found in the latest
installations, for example 1,500 lbs. B29, with isolated cases up to
3,000 lbs., such as tne Douglas B19, which is not in production.
There is a general desire to supplant hydraulic services by electrics,
although there are a number of engineers well satisfied with the perform-
ance of their lydraulic installations.
5B-5.02 Relative advantages of Electrics and Hydraulics. The principal.
advantages found for extending the use of electrics in American aircraft
production are:-
Electrical equipment is bought out and is suitable for mass
production with adequate capacity to meet all needs, whereas
hydraulic gear and fittings have mostly to be made up in the air-
craft plants with a high degree of skill and more man hours both in
production and installation. The manufacture of hydraulics is
regarded as highly specialised in America.
Electrical installations involve less congestion of cockpits and the
runs through nacelles, wings, and wing roots. It is easier to make
sharp bends in run of cables than in pressure pipe lines, of which
lead and return are generally required
Maintenance and replacement of fittings or parts is easier, quicker
and less highly skilled with electrics.
Vulnerability and risk of ordinary defect or damage are less with
electrics. Continuity of supply for other essential services is


already provided for electrically, and where standby on hydraulics
is required it is usually dependent on the electrical system.
Faults on hydraulics, such as leaks, may cause trouble to other
installations or fittings but may not be prevented or cleared by the
hydraulic maintenance staff.
The number of hydraulic services is relatively few in comparison with
the electrics in the larger aircraft and they are usually of very
infrequent operation, so that their replacement by electrics will be
a notable contribution to simplifying the aeroplane overall, saving
weight and improving the load factor of the necessary electrical
equipment. Moreover, with the larger electrical installations now
coming into operation there is increased ability to cater for these
infrequent loads without appreciable further addition of generators
for this specific purpose. This factor will have some bearing on
the ability to achieve reasonably quick times of operation without
incurring weight penalties in extra accumulators.
Most of these advantages are equally applicable to the small
aircraft of the single seater fighter type and have in fact been accepted
in practice by Bell and Curtiss Wright.
In general it may be said that extending the use of electrics for
aircraft auxiliary services is in accord with American ideas of design for
production and also with the increasing recognition of the importance of
the maintenance of serviceability.
5B-5*03 Electric Control of Hydraulics. It is also recognised that several of
the above benefits may be achieved by electrical remote control of local
hydraulic operation, a notable case being the Consolidated B32 in which
landing gear, wing flaps and bomb doors are treated in this way. These
services employ solenoid valves made for 1,300 lbs. pressure by Electrical
Development Co., of Los Angeles, particulars of which have now been
received from America, having a 40 lbs. pull for a stroke of + 5/32 in.
with a short time rated pull-on current of 20 amps, and a continuously
rated hold-on coil taking 1 amp. and tripped by limit switch. The
solenoid is double-acting without springs and weighs 4- lbs. Another type
has a pull of 15 lbs. with a stroke of + 3/8 in. Particulars are given
at Item No.l6 of the Appendix.
As a sign of this transition being gradual in a firm long accustomed
to hydraulic operation, the usual lever handles and quadrants are being
retained in the cockpit but arranged to operate small electric switches
below the floor.
In connection with the B29 project, Boeings reviewed their practice
and experience with electrics on the B17 and decided to continue their
use for landing gear, wing flaps and bomb doors in the new machine,with
whatever improvements could be introduced. It is of interest here also to
note that the hydraulic services for brakes, surface controls and cowl
flaps in the B17 are fed from an electric motor pump with oil reservoir;
the set is mounted on a unit panel for ease of installation and removal
for servicing, this panel being fitted in a heated compartment.
The chin turret of the B29 is an exception to the general use of
electrically powered types, in being supplied from the aircraft hydraulic
installation. It is supplied through a solenoid valve controlled by the
gunners M dead man 11 switch for isolation in the event of damage • This
valve will be supplied by General Control Co. of Glen Dale, Los Angeles,
and is stated to weigh 1.14 lbs. with a continuously rated coil taking
10 watts. The valve is designed for 2,500 lbs. proof pressure and has
been tested by Boeing up to 3,800 lbs., working pressure being 1,500 lbs.
For gun charging in this turret a Bendix system of solenoid valve
and micro switch is to be used, the coil taking 3*1 amps for short
periods. If left in circuit it reaches a temperature of 150°C. in nine
minutes.


Among other equipment
of interest to which refer-
ence was made during the
visit to Boeings was the
Bell-Sunstrand electro-
hydraulic gun turret con-
trol which might have other
useful applications. Pig. 4
shows the motor pump, and
an illustrated description
of the system is given in
Item N 0.17 of the Appendix.
58-5.04 Method of Operation of
Various Services. The
following tabulation shows
the methods of operating
various services in repre-
sentative American aircraft.
FIG. 4. BELL SUNSTRAND MOTOR DRIVEN HYDRAULIC PUMP
AMERICAN AIRCRAFT AUXILIARY SERVICES: METHOD OF OPERATION
Aircraft
Landing Gear
Wing Flaps
Bomb Doors
Cowl Flaps
Fuel Pimps
Engine Start
Turrets
Fighters
Bell P.39 Airacobra
Electric
Electric
None
None
Electrio
Electrio
None
P.63
Electrio
Electrio
None
None
Electric
Eleotric
None
C. Wright P.40
Hydraulic (with Electric
None
Electrio
Electrio
Electrio
None
North American Avian.
P.51 Mustang
P
Hydraulic
imps)
Hydraulic
None
None
Electrio
Electrio
None
Medium Bombers
North Aaerloan Avian.
B.25 Mitchell
Hydraulic
Hydraulic
Hydraulic
Hydraulic
Electric
Electric
Electro-Hydr.
Martin
B.26 Marauder
Hydraulic
Hydraulic
Hydraulic
Hydraulic
Electrio
Electric
Electric
Douglas A.26
Hydraulic
Hydraulic
Hydraulic
Electric
Electric
Electric
Electric
Heavy Bombers
donsolidate3"
B.24 Liberator
Hydraulic (Engine and Electric Pumps)
Electric
Electrio
Electrio
Electro-Hydr.
B.32
Hydraulic wit
h Electric Coni
trol
Electric
Electric
Electric
Electric
Boeing B.17 Fortress
Electric
Electric
Electric
Hydraulic
Electrio
Electric
Electro-Hydr.
B.29
Electric
Electrio
Electric
Electric
Electric
Electric
Electrio
Flying Boats
PlSX3 Coronado
None
Electric
Electrio
Electric
Electric
Electric
Electric
SB2D1.
None
Electric
None
Electric
Electrio
Electric
Electrio
58-5.05 Weights of Landing Gear. In view of the interest attaching to the
weights of undercarriage legs from the point of view of ascertaining the
power required for retraction in a specified time, a number of cases are
given below, including the weights in pounds and as a percentage of the
all up weight.
Class of Aircraft
Nose Wheel Types
Tail Wheel Types
lbs
. c /0 AUW
lbs. #AUW
Main
Auxy.
Com-
Main
Auxy.
Com-
Fighters
bined
bined
Bell P.39
393
142
7.0
Curtiss P.40
494
54
6.2
Bell P.63
425
154
7.8
Curtiss P.60
538
51
5.8
N.A.A. P.51
623
83
8.2
Bomber or Attack Bomber
Douglas A. 26
1466
359
5.6
Lockheed B.34
818
103
3.9
Consolidated B.24
2562
353
5.3
Boeing B.17
2250
257
4.7
Heavy Bombers
Boeing B.29
5951
515
6.2
Consolidated B.32
6039
6.1


It will be appreciated that a close comparison between electric and
hydraulic types cannot be made since it is not known whether any design
has bees made for either method os tiie same aircraft.
58-5.06 Brakes. Hydraulic brakes are favoured in America, e.g. self-contained
system in the Bell fighters P. 39 (Airacobra) and P. 63, this being the
only hydraulic service in the aircraft and operated without pump or
accumulator; 8.24 (Liberator) operated from the main accumulators; and
the 8.17 (Portress), 8.29 and 8.32 all with electric pumps supplying both
the main and emergency service.
The operation of brakes is considered particularly well suited to
hydraulics, which will no doubt continue in favour, generally in conjunc-
tion with electric pumps. It is, however, of interest to note that
Chrysler are reported to be developing an alternative electric motor
operated system.
58-5.07 Developments in Hydraulics. The capabilities of hydraulic operations
are clearly not exhausted, and where this service will be used in new
aircraft of the near future, pressures up to 3000 lbs. will be adopted
with bought out pumps, most of the other main parts being made specially
in the aircraft factories, provided the skilled labour required is avail-
able. The use of electric drives for pumps is generally appreciated for
the saving of wear under the very low load factor conditions and reducing
the vulnerability of the installation,but there is a reluctance on the
part of some hydraulic engineers to mix hydraulics and electrics. This
reluctance is not usually shared by the project engineer whose function is
to ensure the most efficient all-round combination, and such cases are
usually decided on a basis of the inclusive weights, in vfoich also the
Army and Navy authorities are primarily interested. The speeds contemplated
for 3,000 lb. pumps is of the order of 4,000 r.p.m. which will be suitable
for a six pole motor for 400 cycles A.G. with a 2:1 gear.
In the case of North American Aviation, who are hydraulically minded,
they are contemplating the use of hydraulic "switches” and "fuses",
respectively for remote control by finger operated tappet valves
connected by 3/16 in. pilot pipes to the local services, and the isolation
of a damaged pipe system by a cut-off valve normally kept open by the
balance of the return against flow. These devices, while no doubt achiev-
ing satisfactory operation, appear to increase the complexity and there-
fore vulnerability of the hydraulic installation without realising many of
the benefits associated with electrics.
Regarding the operation of turrets, the use of the hydraulic main
service will be veiy exceptional and the aircraft firms are not much
interested in whether turrets are electro-hydraulic or all-electric, since
they are free issue items. For aircraft designed to operate at high
altitude, there will probably be balancing merits and de-merits in the
two systems, but if the electro-hydraulic type is found to meet conditions
of cold and remote control requirements, it should not be difficult to
arrange for alternating current motor versions giving the maxinum
simplicity for these conditions. The Sperxy Conpany were of the opinion
that some such allocation as electro-hydraulic type for high altitude
aircraft and all-electric for aircraft with normal operating heights
might be found practical policy to fit in production capacity with
operational needs.
In connection with servo operation of control surfaces, which will
be needed in larger aircraft, the choice of electric or hydraulic method
will no doubt follow the general practice of each firm, but where hydraulic
operation is adopted it will almost certainly be provided with an electric
pump or connected to a service already so provided and thereby improve the
load factor for a given installation weight.
Similar considerations would apply to steerable nose wheels.


CHAPTER 6 - MANUALS ON INSTALLATIONS
5B-6.01 Reference should be made to some of the excellent aircraft installation
manuals produced by American films and in particular to those volumes on
"Flight", "Electricity" and "Hydraulics" for the Consolidated B24D (Liberator).
These service handbooks give much information on the installations and
the firms’ practice and, through the humorous but telling warnings included,
draw attention to those points in operation and maintenance which mean so much
in the life of a military aircraft.
CHAPTER 7 ~ DESIGN AND PRODUCTION OF ELECTRICAL EQUIEMSNT
5B-7.01 General. The electrical industry of America includes many sources of light
equipment items as usually met with in domestic, automobile and light industry
fields and is therefore, well placed to meet the growing needs of the aircraft
industry for small motors, control devices and instruments. It is believed
that a number of such firms have expanded rapidly in recent years and special-
ised in aircraft equipment. They have in many cases anticipated new
accessories needed and been in a position to offer them for aircraft rather
than having to develop same after the need has became apparent and possibly
urgent. There is therefore, considerable capacity both in design and prod-
uction for such equipment, the more important varieties of which are briefly
reviewed in the following articles.
5B-7«02 Screw Actuator for Landing Gear. In view of the great interest attaching
to the development of electric undercarriages, a device designed by the Delco
Division of General Motors is considered of some importance. Reference was
first made to the device at Wright Field,where a model had been under a
preliminary this was later seen on a test rig at the Delco Dayton
Works. Fig. 5 shows a general view of the actuator and a photograph and
preliminary drawings are given at Item No. 22 of the Appendix.
The two main parts of the actuator between which the thrust occurs,
comprise the body housing a 50/1 high efficiency reduction gear for the
motor and a body housing a special nut, these two being connected by a
leading screw. A special feature is that a high efficiency reversible screw
operation is obtained by the use of approximately two convolutions of ball
bearings between the screw and the nut, the balls re-entering the trade
through a U tube outside the nut. Emergency hand cranking gearing is
provided between the nut and its housing, the ratio being chosen for the
desired manual effort. The motor is carried on the end of the gear housing
and drives through a clutch designed to slip at 59$ over the calculated peak
load. The clutch is energised by a shunt coil connected across the armature,
and when released forms a brake on the gear leaving the motor free. It is
therefore possible to arrange gravity lowering by a release on the brake.
The portions of the screw outside the nut housing are covered by concertina
bellows of suitably treated cotton fabric. In the experimental model tested
at Dayton, the motor was a Delco 1/4 h.p. 6,500 r.p.m. fuel pump motor fitted
with a thermal overload protector, and it was stated that 75 cycles of
operations were carried out in quick succession before tripping the protector.
In these operations a load of 1,000 lbs. was hoisted over a stroke of 14 inches
in 8 seconds and lowered in 5 seconds. Higher speeds are readily obtainable,
hoisting time of less than 5 seconds and a lowering time of less than 4 seconds
being seen on the test rig. Normal series connection is used for lifting,but
for lowering, the field is switched into shunt and a resistance included in
circuit to limit the rate of descent. The experimental model weighs 20 lbs.
and has been loaded up to 15,000 lbs. and 25)000 lbs. crushing loads.
Brinnell marks of the balls on the track were obtained at the latter load.
An actuator of this size with a 1 inch diameter screw would be suitable for
operating the oleo leg of a light or medium bomber with leg loads of the order
of 10,000 lbs. each, assuming the thruster was acting as a class 5 lever exert-
ing a force approximately twice that of the weight of the leg.


FIG. 5 DELCO U/C SCREW ACTUATOR


The development of high efficiency gearing is a matter to which Delco
has given considerable attention* and by correct design of profiles on
enlarged scale an efficiency of 70$ is claimed for the 50/\ planetary gear,
while that of the screw with ball bearings is 90$ and the motor 65$- That
is, the overall mechanical efficiency of the gear is 63$ giving reversibility,
and only a moderate rating is required for the motor. The current taken by
the motor was about 15 amps, at 24 volts for lifting 1,000 lbs. in approxim-
ately 5 seconds.
The importance of this item is probably not confined to its application
for landing gear in view of the compactness and high efficiency combined
with simple adaptability for hand and gravity emergency operation. In the
model seen, about 1 minute was required for manual retraction with reasonably
small effort. In application to some types of landing gear it might be
preferable to extend the nut housing into a cylinder surrounding the screw
and pick up the thrust at the end of the cylinder.
The representative of General Motors in England is W.W.Constantine, Esq.,
"Staplands", Oatlands Chase, Weybridge, Surrey, (Walton on Thames 2424) who
is aware of the development of these types and has enabled the R.A.E. to
obtain an experimental model of similar type.
58-7.03 Motors and Drives. A comprehensive range of compact light weight aircraft
motors with various combinations of spur and worm gears, limit switches and
flexible drives as well as Angle, Tee and H gear boxes and small screw
actuators for application to bomb doors, cowl gills, wing flaps and so on,
are made by Lear Avia Inc., of
Piqua, Ohio. These items are
an improvement on the firm’s
original manufactures and are
coming into wide use by air-
craft constructors,who natural-
ly require a complete mechanism
rather than a motor only. The
designs have been developed so
that there is no superfluous
space or material, whether mag-
netic, structural, conductor
or casing, resulting in
machines of somewhat unconven-
tional shape, but of consider-
able adaptability. Complete
particulars for installation
and performances are being
supplied but have not yet been
received from America. These
will be included at Item No. 23
FIG. 6. GENERAL ELECTRIC AIRCRAFT MOTORS.
of the Appendix and it will be possible to provide prints when the positives
are received.
The firm were producing about 700 motors per day of various sizes and
are now opening an additional plant with capacity for a further 60$. The
firm will be represented in England by the Ultra Electric Co., London, N.W.
Another range of aircraft motors is made by General Electric, of which
representative types are shown in Figs. 6 and 7 and particulars of the full
range are given at Item No. 24 of the Appendix.
Principal construction features are:-
(a) Circular yokes with bolted-in poles.
ib) Aluminium frames with alternative magnesium castings,
c) Standard U.S.A.A.F. flange mountings.
d) Glass insulation for high temperature operation,
e) Plain or splined shaft ends,
f) Brush gear adequate for heavy current,
g) American standard plug connector (could be replaced by
British types).
(h) Arranged for earth return or all insulated.


FIG. 7. GENERAL ELECTRIC TURRET MOTOR
The following are standard types and frame sizes available, and
typical applications:
Type BA, Frame 25: Outside Diameter: 2 5/l6 inches.
Application: Operation of cowl flap, oil coolers, landing lights,
trim tab, de-icer pump, small blowers, and antenna reels.
Ratings: From 1/200 h.p. at 7500 r.p.m. to 1/8 h.p. at 7500 r.p.m.
in open construction: 1/200 h.p. to 1/8 h.p. in totally enclosed
constructionj and 1/3 h.p. to 1 h.p. in totally enclosed,
no-air-over construction (one minute intermittent duty).
Type BA, Frame 40: Outside Diameter: 3 1/32 inches
Application: Operation of fuel pumps, booster pumps, wing flaps,
small bomb hoists, and nose gear.
Ratings: From 1/6 h.p. to 1/2 h.p. in open construction; 1/6 h.p.
to 1/3 h.p. in totally enclosed construction; and 1/3 to 1 h.p.
in totally enclosed, no-air-over construction (one minute
intermittent duty).


Type BA, Prame 50; Outside Diameter: if inches*
Application: Operation of bomb hoists, feathering pumps, landing
gears, float retraction and turrets*
Eatings: Prom 3/4 h*p* to 1 h*p* in open construction; 1/2 h»p. to
3/4 h*p* in totally enclosed construction; and 1 1/4 h.p. to 1 1/2
h*p* in totally enclosed, no-air-over construction (one minute
intermittent duty).
Type BO, Prame 21: Outside Diameter: 4 13/16 inches.
Application: Operation of motor alternators, landing gear
mechanisms, turrets, and cabin superchargers*
Ratings: Prom 1 1/4 h*p* to 2 1/2 h.p* in open construction; 1 h.p.
to 1 1/4 h.p. in totally enclosed construction; and 3 h.p. to
4 h*p* in totally enclosed, no-air-over construction (one minute
intermittent duty)*
Type BO, Frame 31: Outside Diameter: 5 1l/l6 inches.
Application: Operation of bomb hoists, motor alternators,
pumps and turrets.
Eatings: Prom 2 h*p. to 4 h*p. open oonstruction; 1 1/2 h.p. to
3 h*p* in totally enclosed construction; and 5 h.p* to 7 h*p* in
totally enclosed, no-air-over construction (one minute intermittent
duty)*
All the above ratings are for operation at 7500 r*p*m*


FIG. 8. KLIXON P.M. THERMAL CIRCUIT BREAKERS FOR REPLACING FUSES AS APPROVED BY
NAVAL AIRCRAFT FACTORY AND CIVIL AERONAUTICS BOARD. (5 to 40 Amps.)
FIG. 9. KLIXON P.L.M. AND P.L.A. BREAKERS FOR REPLACING FUSES FOR 30 TO 120 AMPS.


58-7.04 Circuit Breakers. The introduction of circuit breakers in substitution
for fuses and in some cases for switches is having first been
approved by the Navy Department and later by the Amy Air Porce. All the
aircraft firms are in favour of their use and they will be included in
practically all new marks of aircraft. Some types are designed to
replace the toggle switches commonly used in American aircraft, while
others include free handle or non free handle types with alternatively
manual or automatic reset after operation on overload* The latter
are generally a push button type and thermally operated by a bimetallic
disc or strip. The Klixon range,made by the Spencer Thermostat Co.,
is the most comprehensive and widely used. Particulars of sizes,
performance and mode of operation are given in Pigs. 8,9, 10 and 11,
and a catalogue of this make is included at Item No. 25 of the Appendix.
The Salford Instrument Co., Manchester, are licensees of the Spencer
Thermostat Co., but have not hitherto made these devices.
FIG. 10. KLIXON P.S.M. "TRIP-FREE” BREAKERS REPLACING SWITCHES.


FIG. 11. KLIXON SWITCH TYPE CIRCUIT BREAKERS FOR "TRIP FREE," "NON TRIP FREE" OR
MOMENTARY CONTACT ACTION.
Other circuit breakers similar in shape to the toggle switches for
instrument panels are made by the Square D# Co., and Cutler Hammer Co#,
and particulars are given in Figs# 12, 13 and 14# Catalogues of these
items are enclosed at Items No# 26 and 27 of the Appendix#
A range of magnetic circuit breakers with inverse time characteristics
is made by the Heinemann Breaker Co#, and known as Aero-Magnelle. This
type is considerably heavier than the thermal types# The action is
illustrated in Fig. 15 and dimensions and performance curves in Figs# 16 and
17 and other particulars are given in Item No# 28 of the Appendix. They
appear to be of similar size to breakers of this type recently under
development in Britain# Wright Field naturally prefer the thermal type
on the score of weight, but there are objections in certain
cases, e#g# generators, to the delay fbr cooling before resetting. This
delay is recognised as an essential safeguard in the protection of
motors without a built in overload device# For generators, the magnetic
type would meet this objection at some cost in weight, but more often
it is thought unnecessary to provide any circuit breaker for generators.


FIG. 12. ACTION OF SQUARE D. THERMAL BREAKER
FIG. 13. DIMENSIONS OF HEAVY CURRENT
SQUARE D. BREAKERS.
FIG. 14. DIMENSIONS OF CUTLER
HAMMER BREAKERS


FIG. 15. ACTION OF AERO MAGNETIC BREAKER.
FIG. 16. DIMENSIONS OF
SMALLER MAGNETIC BREAKER
(WEIGHT 5½ OZS.)
FIG. 17. PERFORMANCE OF MAGNETIC BREAKER AND DIMENSIONS OF LARGER TYPE (WEIGHT 8 OZS.)
FIG. 18. KLIXON THERMAL OVERLOAD DEVICES FOR BUILDING IN MOTORS.
58-7«05 Mat;or Thermal Protectors* Bimetallic disc overload trips suitable
for building into motors are supplied by the Spencer Thermostat Go.,
and are included in their Klixon catalogue referred to above and shown in
Figs. 18 and 19. These are favoured by aircraft firms as likely to
be the best way of preventing complete failure of the motor and associated
mechanism *even under the worst conditions of damage from enemy or accident,
and allow further attempts to operate to be made when the overload is
removed or the motor temperature dropped to a safe value.


58-7* 06 Contactors and Relays* A
wide variety of equipment for
remote control is in production
notably by General Electric,
Square D and Cutler & Hammer
whose catalogues are included
at Items 29, 2 6 & Z] of the
Appendix. Typical items are
illustrated in Pigs. 20, 21
& 22. Particular reference
should be made to contactors
for reversing of motors with
dynamic braking which forms
an essential part of "follow-
up’ 1 systems of control.
FIG. 20. SQUARE D. TAB MOTOR RELAY.
FIG. 21. ARRANGEMENT OF 2-POLE CONTACTOR.
FIG. 19. DIMENSIONS OF THERMAL PROTECTORS.
FIG. 22. TYPICAL CONTACTOR.
The following description is of the operation of the General Electric
contactor of this type as illustrated in Fig* 23* Circuit diagrams
are given in Pig. 24* This piece of equipment is the equivalent of
three single purpose relays together with electrical interconnections
and mechanical interlocks which would be required for starting,
reversing and dynamic braking of a motor* Por starting in the forward
direction one coil of the contactor is energised by closing the forward
switch and picks up the forward contacts, establishing a circuit from
the forward field coil and armature to the negative line* While the


forward contacts are being ||i
closed,a mechanical finger closesB
the contacts PDB for forward
dynamic braking, which remain
closed after the forward coil
is de-energised by the action of
a small permanent magnet*
Although contacts FDB thus set
up a circuit for dynamic braking -- J
this circuit is not effective
while the forward coil is ener-
gised because contacts 2 and 3
are open* The motor is stopped
by opening the forward switch
which de-energises the coil and
opens the forward contacts, at
the same time closing contacts
2 and 3 by which the dynamic
braking circuit is then comple- |
ted, causing the motor to stop
rapidly* The actionfbr reverse |j
running is similar using the
other relay coil, contacts, and
field coil*
Apart from the great
number of switches available for
various purposes, the smallest
form of micro switch is worthy
of note* This General Electric
switch is shown in Pig*25 and
Item No. 29 of the Appendix. A
sample is available for inspec-
tion of a single pole push on
or off type with back contact
(i.e. single pole 2 way). The
veiy small size is reflected
in the weight not only of the
switch itself but also of any
fittings required for it, and
multiple use for ganging etc*,
require little space.
5B-7*07 Speed Nut Fittings* Several of
the American aircraft firms are
making good use of a range of
composite or individual speed
nut fittings, clamps etc., supplied
by the Tinnerman Co., represented
FIG. 23. G.E. REVERSING DYNAMIC BRAKING RELAY
FIG. 24. CIRCUITS DIAGRAMS FOR FORWARD AND REVERSE
RUNNING AND DYNAMIC BRAKING.
FIG. 25. G.E. MIDGET "SWITCHETTE.”


in Britain by Simmonds Aerocessories.
These include circular and stream-
line shaped rings for lamps, Fig.26,
and other fittings with speed nuts
attached, handy clips for "box lids
and miscellaneous fittings, Fig.27.
These items save individual produc-
tion of parts and use parkerised
carbon steel instead of more highly
strategic materials, cadmium plating
etc. A comprehensive catalogue is
included at Item No. 30 of the
Appendix.
5B-7-08 Standard Specifications. A number
of Army-Navy specifications, some of
recent issue, including AN-C-77j on
circuit breakers, are included in the
Appendix, a list of the items being
given at the end of this part of the
report.
CHAPTER 8 - NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN
AIRCRAFT ELECTRICS
5B-8.01 Generators. The 30 volt DC gener-
ator type R1 for 300 amps at 2500-
4500 r.p.m. is \just being introduced,
and will probably be followed by a
type R2 for 4400-10000 r.p.m. and
weighing about 46 lbs. Improved
forms of existing types are also
undergoing test including an 0.1
Above FIG. 26. TINNERMAN "SPEED NUT” FITTINGS.
Below FIG. 27. TINNERMAN "SPEED CLAMPS.”
type by the Leece Neville Co. This machine, which weighs 33 lbs. and is
rated at 100 amps at 2500-4500 r.p.m. with blast cooling, appears to be
particularly good on commutation when loaded up to 150 amps at 4500 r.p.m.
and is capable of maintaining this load for 15 minutes. It has eight
main and eight interpoles and is stated to be run at 130 circular mils
per ampere in the armature (about 11,000 amps per square inch). In spite
of the high current density, pressure drop has been kept low by special
attention to very short connections.
Other improved models seen on test were an Eclipse 50 amp size for
4400-10,000 r.p.m. weighing 18 lbs. 10 ozs; an Eclipse 100 amp type 0.2
for this speed weighing 26 lbs; a Westinghouse type D 1 for 200 amps at
2500-4500 r.p.m. weighing 45 lbs; and an Eclipse Dual type N.E.A.3
giving 60 amps at 30 volts DC and 10 amps at 120 volts AC for 2500-4500
r.p.m. weighing about 45 lbs.
A new dual type N.E.A.5 weighing only 43 lbs. is being introduced
for 4400-10,000 r.p.m. and gives 200 amps DC in addition to 1200 watts
AC. This machine would be of special value for replacing two of the
generators in large aircraft. Suitable drives or adaptors would be
needed if not already fitted with high speed generators. This machine
being of Navy type is not at present fitted in Amy aircraft.
There is also a projected 800 amp 4400-10,000 r.p.m. generator for
flexible drive to the engine wall. This machine is expected to weigh
80 lbs.
58-8.02 Endurance of Brushes. Considerable work is going on to extend the
short life obtained on brushes, particularly in generators, under high
altitude conditions. At Paterson Field adjoining the Wright Field,
Dayton, a 8.17 is entirely equipped as a laboratory for this one purpose
and a great number of generators and other machines were seen in completely
unserviceable states after endurance tests, which are carried out to


verify the results obtained by the various firms* Research Departments*
This work was discussed with Mr* E*R# Summers of the General Electric
at Schenectady, and a copy of his report on the ground covered by some
700 tests in about 9 months was requested but not yet received from
America*
The lines of research originated in the use of lubricating pad brushes
mounted between the commutating brushes,which were soon abandoned owing
to practical difficulty of space and poor results* Attempts were then
made to introduce lubricants into the brushes,chiefly comprising various
types of petroleum oils. This method left bad films on the commutator and
has been abandoned (it is understood this method has lately been under
consideration in England)* Various types of organic oils were then tried
and tests on G>E* amplidyne generator give a life increased from 2 hours to
a maximum of 100 hours with an average of 50, fluid on engine driven gener-
ators an increase from 1 or 2 hours up to about 10 hours. The best results
so far obtained on this line has been 25 hours on a loaded generator. General
Electric are now trying inorganic compounds embodied in the brush materials*
These consist of metal sulphides with melting points of the order of 450°C
and therefore stable over the range of operating temperatures* The
difficulties now being encountered with this type are too high a contact
drop or too low a life at sea level when a suitable composition is
obtained for endurance at high altitude, it being found that oxidation
rapidly occurs with pressure drops of 1 to 3 volts when free air is
admitted for a few minutes* The latest experiments were using various new
bronzes for either commutators or brushes with zinc content,and although
certain hopes were entertained it was too soon (end of February) to
anticipate results* Altogether work is continuing along a number of
different avenues by 9 separate teams, apart from what other firms are doing*
The principal lines of attack include various alternative designs of
commutators, brush holders, brush materials with organic and inorganic
constituents, vapour enclosures and spring pressure with special reference
to the effects of vibration, and it could not be said that as yet there
was any very definite picture of the real nature of the problem* The
indication is mainly one of the effects of aggravated arcing under elevated
ionisation conditions,since it had been shown that the abnormal brush wear
could be reduced by surrounding the commutator and brush gear with an
atmosphere of any one of a number of gases or vapours of sufficient pressure
to keep down this ionisation* The American authorities will greatly
welcome any fresh contributions from England to the knowledge on this
subject when sufficient experience has been obtained*
58-B*o3 Operation of Alternators and Development of AC system* In view of the
brush wear problem, particularly in generators, the use of alternators has
been considered both from the aspect of an AC system and for supply of
DC through metal rectifiers* One project is for alternators rated up to
800 amps at' 30 volts for use with rectifiers which have been developed by
International Telephone & Telegraph, weighing approximately 1 lb* per kilo
watt of output* Tests of these rectifiers are at present being made in a
B* 24* From what has already been said on brush gear it is clear that
alternators should be developed with excitation independent of commutators,
such as permanent magnet exciter with suitable small rectifier for the
field circuit* It was therefore surprising to find a new design on test
at Bendix with an integral exciter of commutator type. Particulars of
alternators being designed by General Electric, Westinghouse and Chrysler
were not available.
The drives for alternators are also receiving considerable attention
and it was first proposed to use the form of hydraulic slip coupling
with which it was anticipated that parallel operation of alternators
would be possible. It is understood that the Chrysler laboratory is
developing a mechanical constant speed drive for alternators or super-
charger, the present experimental size being suitable for 30 h*p* and weigh-
ing about 35 lbs. This firm is also believed to be developing a light
weight alternator of a six pole design for 400 cycles at 8,000 r.p*m*
Also under development by the General Electric is an exhaust turbo drive
for alternator which is expected to permit of speed control by governor
to enable alternators to work in parallel* A system is being tried out


in the 8.24* The use of a thermionic speed regulator has been considered
but is thought to be unnecessary. Wright Field considered that it may
be necessary to include regulators for both volts and frequency to take
care of load fluctuations which might otherwise affect the operation
of compass and autopilot. It will have to be decided whether such
regulators will be applied to main alternators or special converters. The
ultimate solution will probably be some form of speed regulator which
will take care of frequency with parallel operation, and separate voltage
regulators probably of carbon pile type, but it is contemplated that the
first large aircraft installations of alternating current will work with
independent turret supplies from more than one alternator and that the
other principal services will be divided among several alternators not
connected in parallel. Since it is general in the later American aircraft
to provide duplicate power supply to turrets no extra is involved by
separate working of alternators.
It is the opinion of the Sperry Co., that provision should be made
for supply of single phase alternating current up to say 2,000 watts,
for various controls and selsyn devices, remote control of turrets etc.,
and so as to eliminate possibility of beat feed back through common
electrical circuits either with AC or DC installations.
Wright Field have decided to adopt a three phase 400 cycle AC system
for the future bombers 8.35 (four engine 155>000 lbs.) and the 8.3&
(six engine 265,000 lbs.). It is understood that the pressure will
probably be 200 volts between phases which is 115 volts between each line
and the airframe (neutral). This pressure is advocated by the electrical
firms, in particular General Electric, and discussions on this point were
proceeding about the time of the Mission's return. The alternative to
this pressure would be 115 volts between phases.
This system is the combined choice of the Army, the aircraft firms
and the equipment makers and although no complete case has been set out
it is believed that the main points on which the choice is based are:-
Three phase gives the simplest, lightest and smallest motors,
generators, etc., as well as the best use of cables for power circuits.
A comparatively high frequency is required for the use of speed
alternators, light weight motors, and suitability for radio and other
equipment at present requiring invertors. In this respect, 800 cycles
desired by radio departments is considered too high for motors including
direct coupled hydraulic pumps, and would involve additional reduction
gears, where the increase of weight would offset any advantage in the
motor. The amount of re-designing of radio power packs would not be
excessive. A good deal of work is already going on at 400 cycles, e.g.
autopilots, autosyn instruments and fire control, hence this frequency is
the natural choice for the standard AC system. The choice appears there-
fore one of expediency rather than nice calculation, but if a long
distance view is permitted as indicated in the next article on Auxiliary
Power Units this frequency, 400 cycles, will probably be found more
suitable than a lower value, say 250 cycles, for light weight alternators
of high speed, without being impracticable for motors.
58-8.04 Auxiliary Power Units. There is no immediate sign of any important
change of policy in America regarding the use of auxiliary power units,
(see chapter 3.04), but this will need to be studied in relation to the
developments of alternating current installations. In the event of
high speed turbo drives being introduced for alternators, consideration
may well be given to the operation of these on the ground and in the
air by suitable combustion of fuel independently of the main engines. It
would seem necessary for the whole subject of power balance sheet for
the aircraft to be closely reviewed, to determine whether waste power
is best used for generator drives or other services, e.g. de-icing, etc.,
and the possibility of adopting turbo alternators driven alternatively
from independent combustion or main engine exhaust, This will probably
give the lightest form of electric power supply, since the alternator for
400 cycles could be designed either for 8,000, 12,000, or 24*000 r.p.m.
with six, four or two poles respectively. Such units would be
needed in a suitable number of the engine nacelles to provide the
required reliability of several sources of supply and would


avoid the need for a power unit to be carried in the fuselage. Pending
these developments, an A.P.U. as at present understood will be required
with large DC and AC installations and particulars of those now in
production or under development are given in Chapter 5 of Section 4,
Part B. When it is realised that the present weights are of the
order of 10 lbs. per h.p. the development of the high speed turbo drive
is clearly very desirable.
58-8.05 Engine Starting. The most recent development is the Bendix DC type 45
which uses the kinetic energy of a flywheel for the initial movement of
the engine followed by direct cranking by the motor to maintain engine
rotation for a short period until firing occurs. This starter is already
known in England and is understood to draw a large peak current at the
moment of reversal to disengage the motor from the flywheel gear. Seen
on a test rig this machine gives promise of meeting the present needs for
starting large engines. An AC version would seem to be necessary to
provide for this service on a 400 cycle system, for which this type of
starter is likely to be the most suitable.
There is as yet no sign of the development of new electric starters
for future engines of very large power. It is understood that a s>ooo
h.p. or 8,000 h.p. motor may require up to 60 h.p. for cranking.
If such starter powers are found necessary, either for interceptor
fighters with DC installations or for large aircraft with AC installations,
it is doubtful whether electric starting would be justified. Assuming
operational requirements to include each of these aircraft types being
capable of starting its own engines, the battery and starter weights
would be unduly great for the fighter and in the large aircraft the
conversion of power from fuel through an auxiliary power unit system of
engine, generator and starter would be inefficient compared with the
direct cranking of the main motor by an auxiliary engine as recently
proposed. There is at present in America no development of very large
electric starters and this in itself avoids the principal, if not the
only difficulty associated with 400 cycles AC. Consideration might
however be given to the use of the high speed alternator or its engine
as a starter for the engine in the same nacelle, either by electric
supply from the remaining units or by fuel combustion.
58-8.06 Follow-up systems for temperature control, flap operation, autopilots,
turrets and fire control. The need for remote or automatic control
of services with stopping at any required position is now engaging atten-
tion. A typical scheme is the General Electric temperature control
described in the bulletin at Item N 0.33 of the Appendix.
This particular class of application depends on the use of a therao-
sensitive element of negative temperature characteristic similar to
thyrite, placed at the point whose temperature is to be controlled.
This device converts temperature changes into variations of electrical
resistance which determine the current passing through one of the pair
of operating coils of a balanced relay in the controller, the other coil
of which carries current, regulated by a follow-up rheostat such that
when the required position of the operating gear has been reached the
coils are balanced. The directional relay controls the operating
motor of split series type through a reversing and dynamic braking
contactor as described previously at 58-7-06, or if a shunt motor is
needed the contactor is arranged accordingly, so that the operation
stops as soon as the required balance is reached and starts again
in whichever direction is determined by the control and follow-up
resistances. Limit switches are introduced to take care of the extremes
of travel. See Fig.2B.
Cases for which the equipment as designed are suitable are engine
liquid coolant, engine oil, cylinder air cooling, and carburettor air
temperatures, and it may be adapted for skin temperature in wing de-
icing, cabin temperature control, etc. The basic circuit diagram is given
in Fig. 29 and this may be developed as described in the bulletin to cater
for an additional motor or heater for particular application.


FIGS. 28. AND 29. G.E. FOLLOW-UP SYSTEM FOR CARVE
FLAP AUTOMATIC CONTROL.
FIG. 30. ELEMENTARY DIAGRAM OF G.E. AMPLIDYNE FOLLOW-UP SYSTEM.


It will be appreciated that this system is applicable also to manual
remote control such as for wing flaps, trim tabs, etc., the pilot*s
control for which would be a rheostat marked for position of the flap
or tab. In such a case it is unlikely that separate electrical position
indication would be necessary, so that the circuit now used for this
purpose could be replaced by the operating circuit with a saving in
respect of the existing mechanical operating gear against the motor unit
required for effortless actuation.
These principles are elaborated for application to autopilots and
the operation of turrets by fire control methods involving the use of
electronic amplifiers, as in Fig. 30* A simple instruction manual
dealing with the Sperry A.5 pilot is referred to in Section 3, Part C
and a General Electric manual on Armament is given at Item No. 34 of
the Appendix. This deals with the amplidyne generator system con-
trolled by electronic signal amplifiers coupled to the fixe control
sighting station. Other copies of this publication are held by
D.D.Arm.D.(G)*
5B-8.07 Developments in Restriction of Radio Interference. Increasing attention
is being paid to achieve the requisite freedom from interference with
radio by the operation of the electrical system, ignition, propellers,
etc. The object is to reduce the penalties of weight and vulner-
ability and to save man-hours and critical materials at present used
in suppressing or filtering interference, or the screening of wiring.
Copy of a new Navy Department specification SR-125 included at Item
No.31 of the Appendix giving guidance on the principles aimed at, and
reference may also be made to reports on treatment of radio interference
dealt with in Section 5, Part C, on Radio Installations, which give seme
indication of the improvements obtainable in carefully co-ordinated
installations.
In general it may be said that there is no escape from the necessity
for the most complete screening of ignition circuits; that modulation
interference from propeller blades, one of the most difficult problems,
cannot be cured by ordinary screening but only by careful layout; and
that interference from electrical equipment can often be considerably
attenuated by the natural properties of the installation, advantage
being taken of the screening afforded by the aircraft skin and
structures.
It will be appreciated that the policy of dealing with every source
of electrical interference by complete suppression at the source is
calculated to save weight when the alternative is the full screening of
all apparatus and wiring, but when the screening and conduits have largely
been discarded, as in the latest American practice, the further savings
can be looked for only by examining the extent of which filtering is
necessary, and the possibility of using simple shunting condensers in
place of the more elaborate standard suppressors.
The .Americans believe that the testing of prototype aircraft, with cali-
brated radio receivers as prescribed in the new U.S.N. specification, will
determine the actual minimum needs for the attenuation of interference
to the required practical limits, and in most cases would be expected to
show a saving, compared with the incorporation of standard suppressors
on each source of interference on the principle of playing safe.
Such a matter is covered by the function of the project engineer
system in America to give the closest co-ordination of the various
engineering design sections and to ensure that anything put into the
aircraft is really essential and its weight and space requirements
justified.
CHAPTER 9 - APPROVAL AND STANDARDISATION OF EQUIBffiNT.
5B-9.01 Official Approval of Equipment. The aircraft firms exercise considerable


initiative in the selection and adoption of electrical equipment for
their aircraft and there does not seem to be any complete list of
officially approved items. The Array and Navy authorities in some
cases have granted equipment makers an acknowledgement that particular
items meet their requirements, but generally they require the apparatus
to be sponsored by the aircraft fira, whose proposals to use certain
apparatus are then the subject of agreement with the authorities for
the particular aircraft concerned. For instance, General Electric
control devices have been tested by the makers under conditions
simulating 40,000* and recognised as such by the Army, and the use of
circuit breakers is now covered by a Joint Army-Navy specification but
has to be sanctioned for a given mark of aircraft, while the use of a
motor thermal protector has to be proposed by the motor makers and not
the maker of the protector, A distinction is thus made between quali-
fication tests for general approval and inspection tests for a particular
contract*
5B-9.02 Standardisation of Equipment. It is readily appreciated that the
wide variety of aircraft electrical equipment, already designed and
in production in America, renders the desirable degree of standardisation
somewhat difficult to achieve. To extend the range further by designing
fresh equipment to meet increasing British needs would seem to involve
unnecessary time and effort at the present time, when there are signs
of a desire to use more electrics, as well as the need to employ British
design effort on alternating current equipment without delay if
standardisation with America is to be achieved. It therefore appears
desirable to consider what sort of items are likely to oe needed in
the near future, e.g. geared motors, reversing and braking contactors,
and to make provisional selections from types already found acceptable
by the American authorities for early reproduction in Britain, and to
meet interim needs by advance supplies of American manufacture. In
many cases no doubt existing relationships between America and British
firms would facilitate the furtherance of standardisation on these lines.
5B-9.03 Standard Specifications. In America, attempts are being made to
achieve a measure of standardisation through the medium of inter-services
committees and the issue of Joint Army-Navy specifications,' but the
inherent difficulty of combining the requirements of differing operational
conditions is apt to delay the issue of some specifications. In this
matter it is believed that the British technical staff in Washington
have been able to perform a useful part in the formulation of Joint
requirements.
Indexes of Joint Army-Navy specifications and a number of recent
issues are referred to in the list of Appendix items at the end of this
part of the report.
CHAPTER 10 - LIAISON WITH AMERICA ON ELECTRICS.
5B-10.01 It will be apparent from the preceding chapters that the scope of
developments in aircraft electrics will continue to be considerable in
America, and in view of similar developments in Britain, close liaison
would be of great value to both countries.
For this purpose it will be necessary to keep abreast of the work
going on in America at equipment firms in the East, Middle West and W e st,
at aircraft firms both in the East and West, and at Wright Field,
luring the Mission's tour it was not possible to deal as fully as
desired with some matters of importance.
There is at present only one technical representative for electrics
on the B. A. C. staff, Mr. Carter, who is doing good work at Washington.
If it were possible for this staff to be increased, particularly for greater
liaison with Wright Field and the West Coast firms, it is felt that greater
efficiency in this particular field would result.


APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS ETC. BROUGHT BACK FROM AMERICA.
1* Electrical Load Schedule Drawirig 29-R-4800 for Consolidated Flying
Boat P.B.2T3*
2* Electrical. Load Schedule Drawing for Douglas SB2D1 Flying Boat*
3* Electrical Load Schedule Drawing No* 32-R-3478 B24D.
4* Electrical. Load Schedule Drawing No* 82—95407 for North American
Bomber B*23*
5* Electrical Load Schedule Drawing No* 99*954010 North American
Fighter P.51 A*
6* Schedule of Electrical Loads P.39*
7* Letter dated Dd.c* 12th from R.D.Inst®1.
8* Mission Lists (Points for Discussion)*
9* Installation Landing Gear Drawing 26-500-001 P*39 Bell Aircraft*
10. Drawing P*39 Retracting System*
11* Drawing No*27-728-009 P*39 Flap Operating Mechanism*
12* Drawing No. 14-726-002 - P.39 Flap Mechanism.
13* Drawing No* 14-726-501 P*39 n M
14* Reports from R.T.0* on Electrical Systems.
15* Report on Conference Electrical System for Large Aircraft*
16. Particulars of Solenoids for Hydraulic Valves* Electronic Development Co.
17* Bell Aircraft Corporation Illust rat ions and drawings Electro Hydraulic
Armament Equipment.
18. Instruction Manual b 24D Electricity.
19* Instruction Manual B24D Hydraulics.
20. Instruction Manual B24D Flight.
21. Installation Manual B17.
22. Two Drawings and Photo Delco Screw Actuator*
23* Particulars of Lear Avia Geared Motors, Actuator etc.
24* Particulars of General Electric Aircraft Motors.
25* Spencer Thermostat Circuit Breakers (Klixon).
26. Square D Company Catalogue 9300 Series Circuit Breakers etc.
27. Cutler Hammer Catalogue K.S.P.25, Switches Contactors and Circuit
Breakers.
28. Particulars of Heinemann Circuit Breakers*
29* General Electric Aircraft 3821A Catalogue Control Devices for
Electrical Systems.
30. Catalogue and leaflets of Tinnerman Products, Speed Fittings etc*
31* Amy Navy Aeronautical - Index of Standards including Specifications
Drawings and Bulletins*
(a) Alphabetical Index Specification.
(b) AN-C-77 Amy Navy Aeronautical Specification Circuit Breakers
Single Pole, Non Trip Free*
(c) AN-WW-C-561A Army Navy Aeronautical Spec* Conduit, Flexible.
Shielded.
(d) ANJ-C-48A Amy Navy Aeronautical Specification Cable, Electric
Low Tension Aircraft.
(e) AN-J-C-56 Amy Navy Aeronautical Specification, Cable, Ignition
and High Tension.
(f) C-60 Navy Aeronautical Specification Cable, High Voltage Radio.
(g) AN-W-0591. A.NA Specification Connectors, electrical, aircraft, to
accompany the following drawing sheets showing internal arrange-
ments of Pins*
(h) (i) Drawing AND. 10425 Insert Arrangements - Electrical connector
shell sizes 8s, 10s, and 10sL*
(ii) Drawing AND.10426 Insert, Electrical Connectors Arrangement,
shell sizes 12s and 12.
(iii) Drawing AND* 10427 Insert Electrical Connectors, Arrangement,
shell sizes 14s and 14.


3l(h)cont.
(iv) Drawing AND* 10428 Insert Electrical Connectors, Arrangement,
shell sizes 16s and 16*
(v) Drawing AND. 10429 Insert Electrical Connectors, Arrangement,
shell size 18.
(vi) Drawing AND. 10430 Insert Electrical M
(vii; Drawing AND* 10431 " " " ”
shell size 22*
(viii) Drawing AND. 10432 Insert Electrical Connectors, Arrangement,
shell size 24*
(ix) Drawing AND. 10433 Insert * " H
shell size 28.
(x) Drawing AND. 10434 " M ” shell size 32
(xi) Drawing AND. 10435 " " ” shell size 36
(i) Navy Aeronautical Specification 3.R.16F. Electrical Bonding of
Aircraft.
(j) Navy Aeronautical Specification S.RJ2S. Covering Radio Inter-
ference Limits for Naval Aircraft.
(k) U.S. Army Specification NQ.94-32159A for Motor, Aircraft, Direct
Current (24 volt).
(i) U.S. Amy Specification No. 94-32314 Motor, Electric, Aircraft
(1/8 h*p. 24 Volt D.C. Splined Drive Geared).
(m) Air Force Specification No. 32315 Motor Electric Aircraft
(1/8 h*p. 12 Volt D.C. Splined Drive Geared).
(n) U.S. Amy Specification No. 94-32316 Motor Electric Aircraft
(1/10 h*p. 24 Volt D.C. Splined Drive Geared).
(o) U.S. Army Specification N 0.94-32278.94-32278 Relay Generator Current
Control Switch.
(p) Amy Air Force Specification No.X-32299-A Power Plant Aircraft
Accessory Electric Type D-2 (3K.W. D.C.)
(q) U.S. Army Specification No. 95-32275 Generator Engine Driven Type P.l
(Aircraft - 24 Volts D.C.)
(r) U.S. Army Specification N 0.95-32297 Generator Engine Driven Type P. 2
(Aircraft 24 Volt sD.C. ) •
(s) Arny Navy Aeronautical Specification AN-R-1 Regulators, Generator
Voltage.
(t) Drawing C-72 (Naval Air Station) Ignition Noise Suppression Bushing
for J**att and Whitney R. 2800 Engine.
32. General Electric Report on experiments on Brush Life
33- General Electric Co. Bulletin on modulating Temperature Controller.
34* G.E.To 1032 Instructional publication on armament equipment for aircraft
35* Blueprint General Electric Co. W-8258858 Elementary Diagram 2 upper
turrets and upper ring sight.
36. Boeing Aircraft Drawing 15-9061 Gun Turrets Model B. 29


ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PART C INSTRUMENTS AND RADIO INSTALLATIONS
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD BOLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item 1,01 Instruments
” I*o2 Radio installations
CHAPTER 2 - AIRCRAFT INSTRUMENTS
Item 2,01 General
” 2.02 Dash board layout
H 2.03 Use of electrical transmission instruments
" 2.04 New types of pressure instruments
H 2.05 Capicatance fuel level meter
" 2.06 Sperry A. 5 pilot
" 2,07 Floodlight for fluorescent instruments
" 2.08 N.A.F. proposed limiting system
" 2.09 G-.E. pilot and compass
H 2.10 Strip camera and printer
CHAPTER 3 - RADIO INSTALLATIONS
Item 3*ol Power supply
” 3*02 Electrical interference
APPENDIX - List of documents etc. brought from America.




CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
5C-1.01 Instruments. There is wide development of instruments in
.America, much of which is outside the scope of this report.
Installations are orderly and well carried out, with
considerable and increasing use of 400 cycles 3 phase A.C.
In view of the future use of this system for electrical
power, more attention should be paid to this type of trans-
mission instrument in Britain.
Instrument lighting is receiving further attention and a
new small ultra-violet flood light is now in use.
50-1*02 Radio Installations. A review of power supplies indicates
that future radio equipment should be designed for operation
on 400 cycles A.C.
To secure a reduction of overall weight, vulnerability,
critical materials and man hours, there should be closer
co-ordination of radio and electrical installations to limit
electrical interference without the need for full suppression
at every source.




CHAPTER 2 - AIRCRAFT INSTRUMENTS.
5C-2.01 General* This section of the report is not intended to be a detailed
review of the state of design, development and application of aircraft
instruments, since this subject has been covered by individual British
technical representatives, notably Mr .Gardner, who visited America in June
July 1942 and has fully reported an his observations.
5C-2.02 Dash Board layout. In general it may be recorded that the American air-
craft dash boards and oookpit layout of instruments invariably present an
orderly, convenient, and therefore easily read arrangement of instrunents,
with a large measure of standardisation of fitting. The chief difference
between British and American practice is the absence in American aircraft of
a standard "flying instrument panel" which in British aircraft undoubtedly
makes for uniformity in flying technique and more rapid adaptation of pilots.
The incorporation of this panel in the middle of the dash board constitutes
a restriction on the freedom of the aircraft designer in laying out the
necessarily large collection of instruments, the variety and complexity of
which are still tending to increase owing to -the introduction of more special
equipment,e.g. exhaust turbos requiring more tachometers.
Typical illustrations of a layout of instruments will be seen in the
flight manual included in the Appendix of Section 5 Part B.
It is believed however that the American authorities are contemplating
the introduction of same sort af standard arrangement for the principal
flying instruments.
In small fighter aircraft the desirability of fitting a standard flying
instrument panel is open to question, particularly for new aircraft of very
high performance, and it is most probable that both the designers and pilots
of these aircraft would greatly welcome the utmost possible reduction in the
number of instruments, with the abandonment of the P.I.P* to enable the best
and most compact layout to be obtained.
5C-2.03 Use of electrical transmission instruments* Considerable use is n&de in
American aircraft of electrical transmission instruments, of which the D.C.
Selsyn and the Autosyn are common, the latter type working on 110 volts, 400
cycles A.C* supplied ffom the inverters. Interest was expressed in the
British Dessyn type as regards the small dimensions of indicators, but these
instruments are believed to be somewhat heavier than the American D.C.Selayns*
The latest catalogue of General Electric D.C. Selsyn instruments is included
at Item 1 of the Appendix, comprising landing gear, flap and general position
indicating types, temperature and pressure and liquid level indicating
instruments and magnetic drag type tachometer and synchroscope, and an
instruction manual of these types is included at Item 2 of the Appendix.
Lists of instruments fitted in the B.25 (Mitchell) and P51B (Mustang), as
typical of American arrangements, are included at Items 3 and 4 of the Appendix.
5C-2.04 New types of pressure instruments. British enquiries have been received
regarding new types of remote indicating pressure instruments and 2 types
were found to be under development. General Electric are adapting for this
purpose the principle of the remote indicat compass, of which the circuit
diagram is shewn in
Fig.l; the pressure
transmitter will he
arranged so that the
magnet aystem is
moved axially about
l/32" by a form of
pressure bellows to
produce the same
effect in the
indicator as is
normally obtained
by rotation at the
transmitter.
Bendix are also
developing an
FIG. 1.


instrument for the purpose in which the pressure bellows, in the form of a
cylinder of length double its diameter, works a small bar magnet with
consequent poles inside a straight tubular coil connected in 3 phase.
Both these instruments are intended for use on 400 cycles A.C.
50-2.05 Capacitance fuel level meter. This instrument is being developed by
General Electric on the principle described by Goroniti in the journal
Scientific Instruments” of November, 1942. A tubular condenser is varied
in capacitance by the level of fuel forming the dielectric between the inner
and outer tubes, and is used to tune the grid circuit of a back coupled 6C4
valve, having one winding of a ratio coil indicator in its anode circuit and
the other windings provided with zero and full scale adjusting resistances.
The transmitter capacitance is 200-400 ppF and the grid and anode inductances
are .2mH and .4 mH respectively.
50-2.06 Sperry A. 5 Pilot. It was noted that this autopilot is being included in the
installations for the 8.29 and 8.32, but nothing can be said of the develop-
ment of this instrument in relation to Mr. Gardner’s report on the same. A
copy of the manual prepared for use in the Company’s instruction school for
their engineers is included at Item No. sof the Appendix. This manual,
while not being an official publication, includes a good deal of basic and
particular interest in the functioning of this pilot.
SC-2.07 Flood light for fluorescent instruments.
made by Electronic Laboratories and also
by Grimes is being introduced in various
types of aircraft. This fitting is
illustrated in Fig. 2 and uses a lamp
similar in dimensions to an automobile
head lamp bulb, having a starting element
controlled by a combined starting and
dimming rheostat, as described in
Electronic Laboratories hand book of
instructions, included at Item N 0.6 of
the Appendix. This flood light is
designed for both visible and ultra-
violet illumination of instruments,
A new cockp it type flood light
FIG. 2.
and the filters are adjusted by a masking cap with 90° movement. The
installation is very simple, and although the lamp was not seen in operation
at night, a good general impression was gained from the lighting of a test
fligrt instrumentation panel at the flight engineer*s station in one of the
aircraft inspected.
SC-2.08 N.A.F. Proposed lighting system. The Naval Aircraft Factory, Philadelphia,
have continued experiments in coloured lighting for dash panels with and
without fluorescent effect. It was shown that the use of a form of red
lighting is effective and avoids the loss of acuity of vision for outside
objects. The lighting is obtained from a number of small filament lamps
concealed in the bezel panels, as common in American practice, and when
compared with fluorescent dials gives a much better definition of pointers
and markings, and is also less tiring. A scheme for a combination of this
form of lighting and fluoresoent marking of only a few points on the dials is
considered by the N.A.F. to be the best solution for «n requirements.
SC-2.09 G.E. Pilot and Compass. Among new projects under development by the General
Electric acre a new electric autopilot, which it was stated was likely to begin
production towards the end of 1943, with probable application in new Grumman
TBF and TBU aircraft. The consumption is expected to be about 80 watts and
the instrument is arranged to operate transfer valves through solenoids
controlled by electronic amplifiers. Another design for a distant reading
compass was also stated to have been completed, but no production arrangements
have been made.
SC-2.1D Strip camera and printer. A shutterless camera was seen at the Materiel
Centre exhibition at Wright Field. This type of camera is being developed
mainly for low altitude use, and also for night use, and is used for both
koda-color and panchromatic films of 9” or 18 M width. The speed of film
travel is adjusted for 1” of film far 500* over the ground at 12,000*, when
a 205* roll lasts approximately 3 hours, and a special use advocated is with
a 6" lens using 1” for 30* over the ground far low altitude survey with very


high definition. The camera weighs 90 lbs; overall dimensions being
30" x 23" x 18° deep* Smaller cameras of similar types are under
development including one for 9" film with 12" F 2*5 lens for night use
and an 8" P 4,5 and 6" F 6*3 (metrogun) for general use* This camera
will weigh about 30 lbs. The development of these cameras is being
carried out in conjunction with the Chicago Aerial Survey Co., who also
manufacture continuous printing machines for processing. Illustrations
of these are given at Item No. 7 of the Appendix.
CHAPTER 3 ~ RADIO INSTALLATIONS.
503*01 Power supply. A review of the general position on power supplies for
radio in American aircraft compiled by the B.A.C. is included at Item
No. 8 of the Appendix, from which it will be seen that there are still a
number of points open to discussion. There is no doubt however that,
view of the adoption by the U.S* Army of 3 phase ifOO cycles alternating
current for future large aircraft, there would be an overall saving of
weight by designing the radio equipment power packs for this frequency.
It has been shown that such equipment is also quite suitable for use on
higher frequencies where necessary.
503*02 Electrical Interference. As referred to in Section 5 Part B, Chapter 8,
attention is being given to obtaining the requisite freedom from
electrical interference by improving the layout in electrical and radio
installations, with the objects of reducing weight, man hours, the use
of critical materials involved in the screening and suppressing at
present associated with electrical equipment, and the vulnerability
inherent in such suppressors. A copy of a new Navy Department
specification SR-125 is included at Item No. 9 of the Appendix, giving
guidance on the principles aimed at and stating that experience and
research show that a departure from former construction practices need
not result in sacrificing radio performance, provided sound engineering
is employed. It is the intention that basically only receiver filtering
should be used, and full advantage taken of the inherent attenuation of
wiring, especially at high frequencies, and the screening of the aircraft*s
metallic structure to minimise cross coupling from sources of interference,
and such other natural factors as the known filtering action of batteries,
system capacitance, etc. Copies of report on "Aircraft Radio Noise
Elimination Design Considerations" and "Radio Noise Filters" by the Douglas
Aircraft Co., are included at Items 10 and 11 of the Appendix, and these
show how well known principles may be applied to particular aircraft
installation problems to achieve the desired results.
The Americans believe that the testing of prototype aeroplane installa-
tions with calibrated radio receivers, as prescribed in the new U.S.N. speci-
fication, will determine the minimum needs for the attenuation of inter-
ference to the required practical limits, and in most cases would be ex-
pected to show a saving compared with the incorporation of standard
suppressors at each source of interference, as at present practised.
In this connection it is of interest to
note that the Bell Aircraft Corporation have
shown that no screening is necessary for the
wiring of the 5CR.522 (VHP communication) and
their aircraft will accordingly be fitted with
a wiring assembly without conduits, plugs,
sockets and Junction box.
Pig. 3 shows a new Delco-Remy filter con-
denser for use at sources of interference where
suitable; a sample is included at Item N 0.12
FIG. 3.
of the Appendix. This item is of 4uF capacity and is rated for carrying
55 amps m the circuit being treated. * *


APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS ETC. BROUGHT BACK PROM AMERICA.
Instruments
1* General Electric Aircraft Instrument Catalogue August 1942.
2. General Blectric Instruction Manual on D.C. Selsyns, August 1942.
3. List of Instruments etc. fitted in B.2s(Mitchell).
4* List of Instruments etc* fitted in P. 51 (Mustang).
5* Sperry School Instruction Manual on A. 5 Pilot.
6. Electronic Laboratories Handbook of Instructions on U.V. Lamps.
7« Sonne Continuous Strip Photo Processing Machine: 3 Photos.
Radio
8. B.A.C. Review of Power Supplies for Radio in American Aircraft.
9. Copy of USN Specification SR-125 '‘Radio Interference Limits for
Naval Aircraft'*.
10. Douglas Report N.A.S.C. F-212 "Aircraft Radio Noise Elimination
Design Considerations".
11. Douglas Report SM 3720 "Radio Noise Influence Filter".
12. Sample Delco Remy 4 u? Filter for 55 Amp. line current.
Miscellaneous
13* Circuit Diagram of G.E.Remote Compass (adaptable for transmitting
pressure meter).
14* Circuit Diagram of proposed G.E. Capicatance Fuel Level Meter.
15* Balance Computor (Weight and C.G.).


ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PART D AIRCRAFT VIBRATION TEST INC AND EQUIPMENT
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item I*ol American application
1.02 British needs
1.03 Equipment
1.04 Personnel
1.05 Action
CHAPTER 2 - SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Item 2. QJ General
2.02 Ground tests
2.03 Wind tunnel tests
2.04 Plight tests
2.05 Stress checking
2.06 Engine applications
2.07 Equipment
2.08 Application in Britain
CHAPTER 3 - BTTRODHCTION
Item 3*ol General
3.02 Theoretical approach
3.03 Practical approach
3*04 Dealing with troubles
CHAPTER 4 - EQUIPMENT
Item 2k 01 Oscillographs
4* 02 Description of Miller Oscillograph
2k 03 Vibration pick-ups
4.04 Electrical resistance strain gauges
2f*os Amplifiers
2k 06 Calibrators
CHAPTER 5 - APPLICATION
Item 5. 01 General
5*02 Tests on models
5. 03 Ground tests
5.04 Air tests
5.05 Stress checking
5.06 Miscellaneous
CHAPTER 6 - * SCOPS OF ACTIVITIES
Item £.Ol Finns
6.02 Wright Field
6.03 Laboratories
6.04 Interpretation of records
6. 05 Harmonic analysis
6. 06 Work on engines
CHAPTER 7 - REVIEW OF TECHNIQUE
Item 7.01 Objects and results
7.02 Boeing Aircraft Corporation
7.03 Consolidated Aircraft Corporation
7.04 Douglas Aircraft Company
7.05 Glenn Martin
7* 06 Lockheed
7.07 Wright Field
HHAFTER 8 - EQUIPMENT ORDERED FOR M.A.P.
Item 8.01 Approved list of equipment
' 8.02 Weights
8.03 Delivery


Item B*o4 Equipment previously ordered for R.A.E*
8.05 Services of engineers
CHAPTER 9 - APPLICATION TO BRITISH DEVELQBMT
Item 9*ol Research work
9* 02 Current problems
9«03 Design data
9*04 Use of nucleus equipment
9* 09 Personnel
9*06 Organisation


CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS.
5D-1*01 American application. A great deal of important work is being done
in developing, proving out and checking prototype aircraft by the
use of seismic type oscillographs, wire strain gauges and various
vibration pick-ups, thus obtaining results in design improvement,
saving of development time, advancing knowledge and technique in
the prediction of flutter characteristics and the checking of struct-
ural stresses. Cathode ray oscillographs are also used for certain
special purposes on aircraft, and more particularly on engine vibration
problems.
5D-1.02 British needs. In the application of this technique, to
British aircraft design, it is essential that not only the research
work of the R.A.E. should be built up and strengthened but also
the practical aspect in connection with specific designs by the
aircraft films should be provided for. The latter is also comple-
mentary to the wider instrumentation and flight testing as dealt
with in section part E, and it is proposed that a special branch
at M.A.P. should undertake the whole direction of such work and
ensure the rapid dissemination of this knowledge and technique
throughout the industry.
5I>1.03 Equipment. Orders for nucleus equipment placed in the United
States include the latest types of oscillograph for tests in bomber
or fighter aircraft, in addition to that previously ordered for
R.A.E. The design and manufacture of suitable British oscillographs
for aircraft use is urgent.
5D-1.04 Personnel. The present general lack of aeronautical engineers,
particularly with some electrical training, which are needed for this
work might, for the time being, be relieved by bringing in a number
of those with acoustics or light electrical engineering experience
to undertake vibration work, and lead to the development of this
type of future aeronautical engineer. To allow a wider application
of this technique to be made in British design, arrangements should
be made immediately to send one or two engineers to the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., to take a post graduate
course in oscillograph technique under Professor De Forest, and the
loan of the services of a specialist from the Miller Corporation or
G-lem Martin should be attempted.
5D-1.05 Action.
(i) A branch of M.A.P. should be formed to organise the
application of the vibration technique and the
dissemination of this knowledge throughout the industry.
(ii) The design and manufacture of British oscillograph
equipment should be undertaken forthwith.
(iii) Steps should be taken to bring into this work, personnel
whose training, background or previous experience in
vibration, acoustics, or light electrical engineering
would be valuable to the aircraft industry. Suitable
engineers should also be selected to take a specialist
course at M.I.T.




CHAPTER 2 - SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
5D-2.01 General. The study of aircraft vibration is both preventative and
curative, theoretical and practical, and therefore justifies the utmost
efforts which can be devoted to it in the provision of the necessary
equipment and the training of specialist engineers.
5D-2.02 Ground Tests. Vibrations are set up in aircraft components by a motor
driven vibrator, by striking a blow or by sudden release of a static
deflection, to determine the natural characteristics of the structure in
relation to the various orders of frequency likely to be encountered from
the pcwer plant, the probable resistance to aerodynamic loads, inherent
damping, etc.
5D-2.03 Wind Tunnel Teats. Vibrations and deflections due to aerodynamic effects
are investigated on models to predict flutter characteristics.
53>2.04 Plight Tests. Air tests are made to determine the vibrations and
deflections set up in flight due to excitation from the power plant and
aerodynamic forces, to confirm the results of ground tests, and also
with the application of deliberately controlled vibrations at progressive
air speeds to explore the approach to critical flutter conditions in the
several main parts of the airframe structure.
In cases where troublesome vibrations are experienced, due to some
change in the intended combination of engine, propeller and airframe
design or to other unforeseen causes, tests are made to determine practical
remedial action.
5D-2.05 Stress Checking. In addition to the investigation of vibrations as such
and the prediction of flutter characteristics, the same technique is used
for the practical checking of stresses in structures and important detail
parts, both statically and dynamically, the determination of specification
requirements under conditions otherwise difficult of assessment, and the
accumulation of data for future reference in the progress of design.
5D-2.06 Imagine Applications. Application of vibration investigations in engine
development includes crankcases, cylinder heads, connecting rods and
induction systems.
5D-2.07 Equipment. Vibration detectors or pick-ups comprise electro magnetic and
other electrical devices for measuring the amplitudes and accelerating
forces, and wire resistance strain gauges for determining stresses in
structural members. Wave records are obtained on compact oscillographs,
of which the latest, contributing greatly to this work in aircraft, is the
multi element seismic type as used for geophysical investigations.
Electronic amplifiers are used to couple the various detecting devices to
the oscillograph.
Orders for the latest models of these oscillographs, amplifiers,
accelerometers, etc., from America were arranged by the Mission on behalf
of the M.A.P.
5D-2.08 Application in Britain. It is clear that an intensive study of
vibration and flutter characteristics is now essential to high performance
and that British aircraft design must be put in a position to make use of
the best research and development experience it is possible to obtain.
It will be necessary to manufacture a substantial number of suitable
oscillographs and ancillary equipment and to set up vibration sections at
the aircraft firms. The co-ordination of this work requires a central
branch under D.T.D. which for practical purposes should also be responsible
for promoting the general instrumentation of test flights as covered in
Part E of this Section of the Report.


CHAPTER 3 - INTRODUCTION
5D~3« 01 General* Since investigations into vibration phenomena, mainly in
connection with propellers and engines, were begun both in America and
Britain, a very considerable advance has taken place jbn America in the
technique of conducting vibration tests in aircraft* Several papers have
been written on this subject which are referred to later; tests are
primarily carried out to determine the airframe characteristics for
vibration and also to deal with specific cases of trouble which may arise
from time to time*
5D-3«02 Theoretical Approach. The Materiel Centre aircraft laboratory at Wright
Field has approached the subject with a combination of empirical methods
and of theoretical study of the physical laws underlying the problems
involved* The early criteria were naturally empirical in nature and were
based on dynamic balanced co-efficients of the control surfaces and the
separation between the natural frequencies of the structural components*
Later these criteria were improved along the lines indicated by flutter
theory, wind tunnel flutter model tests and full scale flight tests*
The theoretical approach to the flutter problem has been developed in
the United States by Theodorsen, whose work has been published by the
N*A.C.A. Until recently the value of these theoretical developments was
limited by the fact that no theoretical methods made any provision for the
effects of control surface area forward of the hinge line or for the effects
of the leading or lagging tab. Since control surface balance and movable
tabs usually have a large effect on the static aerodynamic hinge moments of
the control surface, they may be expected to have a large effect on these
moments under vibrating conditions* It was therefore considered that the
time had arrived to make more general use of theoretical methods for com-
puting critical flutter speeds of aircraft, and a United States Army Air
Force technical report hsLS been published on "Application of three
dimentional flutter theory to aircraft structure” which is included at Item
No* 1 of the Appendix, together with a specification on "Fabrication and
Testing of Aircraft Flutter models”, which is included at Item No.2 of the
Appendix.
5D-3*03 Practical Approach. Although the problem of vibration in aircraft is as
old as the Indus tiy7 it has only recently been recognised as one of the
major problems confronting the designer, and it was not until other phases
of design were well under control that vibration problems were recognised
in their true perspective* The aircraft has now reached a stage where
vibration problems must be solved if the present rate of development is to
be maintained*
Aircraft vibration embraces the broad field of structural dynamics
with the problems divided mainly into three groups, the first being those
vibrations which originate in the power plant. These are not normally
dangerous but may excite components of the aircraft structure resulting in
noise, discomfort and fatigue failures. Secondly there is a group comr
prising stability phenomena, such as flutter, wing divergence and aileron
reversal which may be excited aerodynamically, and of which flutter
phenomena are the most important owing to the vicious nature, disastrous
consequences and the limitations thereby set to the performance of a
specific design. The third group includes the behaviour of elastic
structures under dynamic loads, such as the accelerations encountered in
take-off, particular manoeuvres and landing.
A study of these problems in relation to complete aircraft in flight,
as well as to ground tests on components and models, is treated in a P a P® r
on "Experimental investigations in aircraft dynamics" tyW.B. Bergen of the
Glenn Martin Co., which was read at several American centres early in 1943 •
A copy of this paper is included at Item No. 3 of the Appendix.
Rrwt.Qh Dealinz with Troubles. The development of high performance with
higher power engines and metal blade propellers has emphasised the effects
of vibration both on the pilot and the aircraft. Oases of serious failures


cannot be completely accounted for without the aid of special equipment to
measure and record the complex vibrating stresses* In some cases the
inability of the pilot satisfactorily to read his instrument panel, owing
to low frequency vibrations of moderately large amplitude, has been cured
or palliated by flexibly suspending his seat; but this leaves a condition
in which higher frequency vibrations of smaller amplitude are still present
and may lead to premature failure of some part of the airframe through
abnormal fatigue* It is of prime importance that investigations of such
conditions should be carried out in the air to determine the readiest means
of overcoming such troubles*
CHAPTER 4 - EQUIBMT
5D-4*01 Oscillographs* Whereas any form of Duddel or cathode ray oscillograph
could be used for the electrical recording of vibrations, the special needs
of aircraft testing call for the maximum possible number of detecting
channels which can be used simultaneously and which can be mounted in the
aircraft with the necessary power supply and ancillary equipment* The
vibrations, being mainly of low frequency order, are well within the scope
of the electro-magnetic or Duddel type of oscillograph which, for such
purposes, is the most suitable for providing good photographic records.
Earlier forms of Duddel oscillograph used for aircraft work were of the
Sperry and General Electric designs, in which usually four galvanometer
elements were employed with recording on 35 num. film. This type has been
used both in America and Britain since they were introduced here a few years
ago, chiefly in mobile van equipment, but have been found inadequate to
deal with the developing problems requiring use in the air*
Developments have taken place in America with the use of special
compact galvanometer elements of the type used in recent years for seismic
or geophysical investigations, and oscillographs of this type have been
developed by Sperry - M.I.T., William Miller Corporation and Dr.Heiland ’ s
laboratory. Of these, the Miller oscillograph is generally regarded as
being of the most advanced type; it is custom built complete for the
majority of the American aircraft and engine firms and official laboratories.
50-4*02 Description of Miller Oscillograph* An illustration of this instrument,
showing the record drive, etc* is given at Pig* 1 while a sketch of the
special galvanometer ele-
ment and the arrangement
of these in multi-channel
equipment is illustrated
in Fig. 2. This oscillo-
graph, known as model H,
is approximately 22"10ng,
10” high and 10” wide ex-
clusive of handles, con-
trols and shock absorbing
base, and is normally
fitted with 12 elements
of the type illustrated,
arranged together in a
common block of AL - NI
magnet, spaced approxi-
mately four to the inch.
Recording is obtained on
photographic paper approx
im&tely 6” wide and pro-
FIG. 1. MILLER OSCILLOGRAPH.
vision is made for perfor- ...
ating this paper at the end of a record and also for cutting by guillotine*
This paoer is arranged in supply and take-off magazines for daylight
fitting" into the oscillograph, and the subsequent removal to dark room for
development. The oscillograph is adapted to take records approximately
long with automatic shut off. The paper drive is operated by D.C. motor
with governor, working from a 12 volt battery, with four speed ranges


provided by moans of step pulleys with ranges from 4” to 24" per second or
8” to 48" per second as may be desired. Speed variation over a small range
is also obtainable by setting of the governor. Provision is made for in-
cluding a test number on the record.
A simple astigmatic optical system employs a concave cylindrical first
surface mirror on each galvanometer element to focus the lamp filament
image at the paper distance and a cylindrical lens of short focal length
placed with axis normal to the direction of paper travel, at such a distance
from the paper as to focus the spots thereon. By this means a rectangular
light spot is obtained approximately *01 M wide by .002" to #003" long. The
short length in the direction of the paper travel assists in building up
density on fast traces while preserving a fine line width.
Visual scanning simultaneously with recording is provided by means of a
second light path via a supplementary 24 sided drum mirror which reflects
the traces on the observation window.
The galvanometers, as illustrated in Pig. Z are of unique design and
very dimensions* The moving coil is wound on a long narrow bobbin
machined from the solid; the natural frequency of the element is fixed at
FIG. 2. DETAIL AND ASSEMBLY OF GALVANOMETERS.
the time of manufacture by the
stiffness of the suspension ribbon,
which is carried round a small
pulley at the bottom to a tension-
ing spring for correct adjustment.
Damping is provided by back E.M.F.
in the coil and eddy currents in
the bobbin for low frequency type
elements, this damping being
effective up to 200 o/a. Elements
for frequencies of 300 "to 10,000
o/s are provided with fluid damp-
ing, which is so arranged that
the mirror is outside the damping
oil. The practice is to operate
each sort of element over a range
of 70$ of their natural frequency:
a common -type being of 100 c/s
natural frequency with a normal range of o—6o c/s* With a standard coil of
22 ohms, a sensitivity is obtained of 4 x I<H* amps, for 1" deflection on
the chart, the relative sensitivity for this type of coil being inversely
proportional to the square of the frequency. The elements of different
natural frequencies are interchangeable.
Provision is also made for recording timing lines by a vacuum tube
driven tuning fork.
A smaller oscillograph, known as model D, similar to that described
above, lately been developed with net external dimensions approximately
12" x 12" x 8 M which will be of particular use in small aircraft.
There is also a special high sensitivity type of galvanometer element
which has just been developed which will be especially suitable for use
with the model D oscillograph in those cases where direct connection tothe
pick up will be possible for the recording of vibratory deflections. The
sensitivity obtained with 22 ohm coil of 60 c/s natural frequency is esti-
mated at 60 x 10~6 amps tor t M at the chart*
Vibration Pick-ups. Three principal types are in common use besides
s ever alTeveloped by individual firms for special purposes.
Firstly, electro magnetic accelerometers of variable reluctance type
have coils carried on the central tongue of S core stampings arrange!
both sides of a laminated armature carried on flat springs. This moving
system is usually designed for a natural frequency of 60 c/s,
of other frequencies have been made for individual farms requirements.
Thia tyoe of pick-up is usually operated with carrier t ° 2000 °/ a >
Which U modulated by the vibration pick-up to obtain sensitivity at


frequencies down to zero. Improvements in this type of pick-up have en-
abled a new light weight model to be introduced recently.
Secondly a displacement pick-up, of the generator type, suitable for
either vertical or horizontal use, resembles in principle the action of the
moving coil loudspeaker, except that the coil is fixed and the magnet
system is adapted to move on Garden springs with fluid damping in restricted
passages to produce the required natural frequency of less than 10 c/s.
This type is suitable for detecting vibrations between 10 and 1500 c/s.
An alternative type with stiff movement in metal sliding bearings is
available for use with strong vibration movements.
Thirdly a torsional vibration pick-up of generating type is adapted
with slip rings for use on rotating shafts.
Other special types of pick-up are referred to in the review of various
firms* /technique in Chapter 7*
SD-4- 04 Electrical Resistance Strain Gauges. Early work both in America and
Britain involved attaching small electrical resistances to the point at
which the vibrating strain was to be measured. The resistances first used
were the carbon resistor type, arranged on a small strip of light bakelised
material for cementing to the structure, propeller blade, etc. under test.
The limitations in the use of this type of strain gauge arose through
variation of sensitivity with temperature and difficulties associated with
the mechanical nature of the resistor. They have now been virtually super-
seded by wire wound strain gauges in which very fine nickel chrome resistance
wires are wound in the form of a grid and backed by thin rice paper for
cementing to the member in which the strain is to be measured. Following
upon the vise of high resistance values in the carbon strain gauge, British
practice in propeller firms has generally been aimed at obtaining high
sensitivity by the use of high resistance wire of very small diameter and
high specific resistance, use having been made of Brightray, with a rather
large tempsrature co-efficient of resistance.
The size of this wire generally used is .001”, with occasional use of
.0008" and .0006".
In the work which the Mission saw being carried on very widely in
America, wires of the nickel chrome types, of lower specific resistance,
were generally in use, e. g. Advance, Copel and Isolastic, these having the
advantage of much lower, and in some cases negligible, temperature co-
efficients, and being comparable with Constantin or Eureka as known in
this country. The sizes generally used are from .001" to .002” to make strain
of values varying from 50 to 500 ohms. These gauges are usually of
small "coupon** size, frequently about 1" long x wide so that large
numbers can be applied in the investigation. A high degree of uniformity
in the characteristics of these gauges is usually obtained by balancing
the resistance before making off the end of the wire, and an experienced
girl worker can make 40 to 50 gauges per day, using a wire of . 001 5" diameten
In tests of aircraft structures, up to several hundred gauges axe
frequently attached in wings, etc. and up to about 70 on tail units.
Several electrical methods are available for determining the strain as
indicated by wire gauges, a common one being to apply a steady p.d. across
a series combination of the gauge and a similar resistance (which may be
another gauge not used as such) or an adjustable resistance in a multi-
resistor box. In some cases a combination of two similar gauges, one in
tension and the other in compression,is used so that double variation is
obtained. For static measurements the gauges may be connected in a bridge
circuit with a sensitive galvanometer calibrated for static deflection or
strain, and for recording such measurements in aircraft tests, variation
in p,d. across the strain gauge may be used to modulate carrier current.
Publications by certain firms on their work in this connection axe referr
to in Chapter 7*


53>*4»05 Amplifiers* For coupling the pick-ups and strain gauges to the oscillo-
graph suitable amplifiers are employed, of which there are two principal
types* One is a normal voltage amplifier, of suitable type for boosting
the weak vibratory signals produced in the pick-up or strain gauge bridge
circuits, and the other is of the carrier frequency type in which currents
are generated, usually at one thousand or two thousand cycles per second,
and fed to the pick-up circuit to be modulated by the effect of the dis-
placements being recorded* These modulated currents are passed through
the amplifier and demodulated in a detector circuit before being applied to
the oscillograph element* Incorporated in the circuits of these amplifiers
are integrating networks controlled by selector switches so that the pick-
ups may record acceleration, velocity or displacement as required* Adjust-
able attenuators are also provided to enable sensitivity and amplification
to be controlled*
Amplifiers have been designed and constructed by Glenn Martin, Wright
Field, and others for their own purpose or supply to other users, and by
the William Miller Corporation and other oscillograph makers* The Miller
amplifiers designed for use with this oscillograph, are recog-
nised as being of the most advanced design, and are normally made in 6
channel or 12 channel models with separate power pack*
5D-4*06 Calibrators* Dynamic calibrating for accelerometer pick-ups is usually
carried on an accurate vibrating table, types of which, suitable far use
by the aircraft firms and others, are made by the Miller Corporation and
the Consolidated Engineering Corporation* A much more elaborate machine
has been set up at Wright Field* The commercial model, such as the Miller,
is a reaction type with vertical, horizontal and torsional test tables
driven by the reaction of adjustable rotating eccentrics with set constant
amplitude independent of frequency. The natural frequency of the suspended
system is below 5 c/s and intended for use with pick-ups working from 5 to
60 c/s* The maximum table amplitude of the linear vibrating tables is
approximately i”, and by virtue of the reaction drive through rubber band
couplings to pick-up points at the centres of percussion, no vibration is
transmitted to the table base and the horizontal and vertical plates are
mutually independent*
For the calibration of strain gauges, the common method employed is to
cement representative samples to a bar of the material of the member to be
tested, for subjection to extensometer tests, the Huggenberger being
commonly used for comparison* In cases where variations of temperature are
expected to occur during the test, necessitating corrections between strain
as indicated by the strain gauge and stress in the member under test,.
separate calibration runs are generally carried out, the method of which will
depend upon the type of test and the properties of the wire strain gauge
employed.
CHAPTER 5 - APPLICATION
5D-5*01 General* As indicated above, vibration testing is carried out both to pre-
determine the characteristics of components of the airframe structure, and
to find remedies for unexpected vibration troubles, encountered particularly
when combinations of engine, propeller and airframe have had to be changed
for production reasons. Pig. 3 shows typical records obtained.
The Mission were informed during the conference at Wright Field that
the Army authorities now require aircraft firms to submit further calcula-
tions for each type of aircraft using the report and specification already
quoted at Items Nos* 1 and 2 of the Appendix for guidance.
5n-S.02 Tests on Models. Tests on models may be carried out both under static
conditions and in wind tunnels. Under static conditions investigations
may be made of artificially excited vibrations, either continuous or or
nature. In the tunnel tests flutter oonditionsmayteexcite 4
aerodynamic ally- Fig* k illustrates an accelerometer fitted in the iui
of this type is described to the publications previously


FIG. 3. TYPICAL OSCILLOGRAPH RECORDS AS REFERRED TO IN "EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS IN
AIRCRAFT DYNAMICS” BY W. B. BERGEN, OF GLENN MARTIN.


FIG. 4. INSTALLATION OF
ACCELEROMETER IN FIN OF MODEL.
FIG. 5. INSTALLATION OF
ACCELEROMETER AND MECHANICAL
VIBRATOR.
FIG. 6. INSTALLATION OF MOTOR VIBRATOR IN WING.


referred to and included at Items 1,2 and 3 of the Appendix. Pig. 5
illustrates a -typical application.
5D-5* 03 Ground Tests. Continuous and transitory vibrations on full size
components or complete aircraft may be carried out on the ground. For
this purpose vibrations may be excited by a motor driven vibrator,
usually employing revolving eccentric weights and attached either to the
tips of wing or tailplane or to other selected points of the structure
based on the estimated positions of nodal points. In the case of very
large designs the vibrator may be fitted inside the leading edge of the
wing. (Pig. 6) Transitory vibrations may be excited by striking a blow
on the structure.
5D-5.04 Air Tests. Plight tests during the early prototype stages are intended
to verify the predictions already obtained by the ground tests, and may
be carried out with or without artificial excitation of vibration. In
cases where vibration is deliberately set up, with the mechanical vibrator
installed in the leading edge of the wing, the tests are carried out over
a range of progressive air speeds in order to provide all the information
likely to reveal any unexpected approach to critical conditions, and to
enable performances to be pushed up as close as possible to the ultimate
capabilities of the structures as determined by their flutter character-
istics. Pig. 7 shows curves of wing response to forced vibration in flight*
FREQUENCY - CYCLES PER MINUTE
FIG. 7. CURVES OF WING RESPONSE TO FORCED VIBRATIONS IN FLIGHT.
Air tests are also invariably carried out when any undue vibration
is reported by the test pilot, and to record the natural vibrations set up
under various conditions of flight* There exists considerable information
as to the vibrations likely to be set up by known combinations of engines
and propellers which provides a good basis for the interpretation of the
records obtained* When such cases have to be dealt with as a matter of
urgency, the wide experience which most American firms have already ob-
tained in the investigation of vibration phenomena is a great help.
Stress Checking. Apart from the study of vibration as such, the
technique” anTequipment is used for the analysis and resolution of problems
in connection with the stressing of airframe components, thereby not only-
verifying the goodness or otherwise of design in main or detail parts, ou
also building up valuable information on which the development of future
design can be based. In this way not only can much of the effort tesaved
which would be put into the detail calculation and re-checking of stres ing


during development of a new project or modification to an existing design,
but at the same time a much more reliable and practical answer is thereby
obtained which is of greater value for design purposes than recalculation,
and enables the design to be frozen at an early stage.
This particular application also covers the investigation of shock loads
which are otherwise difficult of analysis; as for example landing loads on
nose-wheel structures. Pig* 8 shows the presentation of results obtained in
FIG. 8. RECORDS PREPARED FROM OSCILLOGRAMS OF LANDING LOADS.
suoh a test and Pig* 9 illustrates the installation of strain gauges for
this purpose.
SD-5* 06 Miscellaneous. v Since the
• uses of an oscillograph are
limited only by its frequency
and recording capabilities and
the ingenuity with which suit-
able electrical circuits and
apparatus can be set up to rafc
it, a large variety of applica-
tions are offered to those air-
craft firms using such equip-
ment for checking the per forgl-
ance of various equipment and
operations in the aircraft. A
list of such applications is
given in a letter of the Boeing
Aircraft Co., included at Item
No. 6 of the Appendix.
FIG. 9. SHOWING ATTACHMENT
OF STRAIN GAUGES ON NOSE
LANDING GEAR.


CHAPTER 6 - SCOPE OF ACTIVITIES
SD-6. 01 Firms* In practically every case American aircraft firms have equipped
themselves with the latest type of oscillograph and ancillary equipment,
and have set up vibration engineering sections to specialise in this work.
The degree of application varies to some extent, but in general their
activities are concentrated on acquiring design information and experience
leading to the ability readily to deal with vibration troubles should these
unexpectedly arise#
5D-6.02 Yfright Field. A considerable amount of work is carried out in each of
the aircraft, engine and propeller sections# A complete vibration survey
is carried out on each prototype aircraft submitted by the constructors,
and it was emphasised to the Mission that the work already done has been
fully justified by results as shown in the test pilots* reports and main-
tenance reports#
5D-6.03 Laboratories# Use of strain gauges and oscillographs is here made
primarily to check the various requirements as to safety factors etc#, under
various conditions as laid down in specifications, a typical example being
the checking of gust requirements at Langley Field. Further reference to
this class of activity is made in Section 6 Part D of-the Report#
5D-6.02f Interpretation of Records* In the resolution of day to day problems,
and also the acquiring of basic information, reliance is chiefly placed on
the interpretation of oscillograph records through the accumulated exper-
ience of the vibration engineers, assisted by the information which exists
regarding the main orders of vibration associated with the common combina-
tions of engines and propellers# This aspect marks the essentially prac-
tical nature of most of the work being carried out#
5D-6.05 Harmonic Analysis# In order to build up a sound foundation for the
investigation of the study of harmonic analysis is being pursued
at Wright Field and other laboratories where electronic and mechanical
analysers are in use# Analysing equipment is being developed at Wright
Field, and instruments at present in use include one by the Bell Telephone
Co#, in which 35 mm film records?*obtained with the Sperry Oscillograph,can
be played back through photo electric pick-ups in conjunction with local
heterodyne oscillations to select the various orders of engine and pro-
peller frequencies# Another method of analysis which is used in the air-
craft section employs a mechanical instrument on the Cor&di principle devel-
oped by Wright Field and made by the Mico Instrument Corporation of Cambridge,
Massachusetts# This has 5 elements for selecting harmonics up to the 50th
order in groups which respond to these components through vibrating weights
when the composite wave is traced by a hand operated stylus. Considerable
value is also attached to the use of electrical analogies for the evaluation
of the mechanical properties in analysis of vibration#
3D-6#06 Work on Engines# This section of the report deals mainly with the work
being done in connection with aircraft although much is also proceeding in
regard to engines and propellers, of which the following is a brief outline
from Section 4 Part B.
The Mission was impressed by the amount of static and rig testing of
engine components which was being carried out by all the engine and pro-
peller finis and by the Chrysler and General Motors laboratories, as well
as the Government establishments and factories of the Aluminium Company of
America#
A feature of the engine development work seen in America was the extent
to which electrical and electronic apparatus is employed at very early stages,
whereby even long before an engine reaches the full scale stage, much is
known and recorded of the dynamic characteristics of the components under
operating loads#
For example, the Chrysler laboratory revealed an advanced outlook in
the development of their new 16 cylinder inverted liquid cooled engine.
It was the to produce the engine as free as possible from vibration of


any kind, and therefore, an investigation was made initially into the
layout such an engine should follow. While at the laboratory the Mission
saw the engine on the test bed with pick-ups and strain gauges fitted for
a vibrational analysis of the whole engine motion, both torsional and
translational.
She apparatus in use comprised a Miller oscillograph, Sperry pick-up
for lateral and vertical movements and electronic recording units for
tensile and compressive stresses in the crankcase and scantlings; Chrysler
make full use of a Bell Telephone Co.*s harmonic analyser which automatically
sorts out the components of desired orders from vibrational phenomena. An
interesting gas pressure recorder was seen on a single cylinder Diesel,
using a pick-up consisting of a tube, with a wire strain gauge, screwed into
the cylinder. Another progressive research covered the determination of
turbine blade frequencies with strain gauges fitted on the blades.
An interesting and useful piece of apparatus was a Thyratron inverter
or oscillator for exciting forced vibrations in parts under examination.
It provided a 1 HP energy source of variable frequency alternating current.
An induction pick-up on a rotating shaft was demonstrated very neatly
by a Hookes joint and a toothed gear wheel. A carrier wave was applied to
two opposed pick-ups and the modulated wave recorded on a cathode ray tribe.
This principle has been extended to the phase shift tarsiograph described
in Section k Part B.
Similarly at Kinner Motors the Miller oscillograph and pick-up equip-
ment was in constant use for such jobs as engine mounting vibration
investigation. Cathode ray balancing machines for supercharger impellers
were in evidence at the engine production firms, enabling the operators
rapidly to check the out of balance and correct it by local grinding.
The Lawrance Co., making auxiliary power plants, use piezo crystal
indicators and Sperry M.I.T. vibrational equipment. They consider it in-
valuable in their development work. There is no doubt that the exact
information obtained by such means as those described above, if sufficiently
backed up and co-ordinated with engine endurance and development testing,
will prove of very great value, and it is reconmended that the British
industry should set up special sections with adequate equipment to exploit
this art.
CHAPTER 7 - REVIM OP TECHNIQUE
5D-7.01 Objects and Results. As pointed out in the concluding remarls of W.D.
Bergen* s paper included at Item No. 3 of the Appendix, experimental checks
on the flutter characteristics of a new model have until recently consisted
of ground oscillation tests, the results of which were limited to the
determination of natural frequencies. Investigations now going on are
advancing the test technique so that more complete flutter data may be
measured in flight, particularly in large aircraft. Various instrumentation
difficulties encountered in earlier tests have been eliminated, and in one
instance rudder flutter condition was actually predicted from flight data.
Considerable experience has thus been obtained and is being supplemented
with continued flight and wind tunnel tests. As design speeds approach
estimated flutter speeds it is to be anticipated that flight flutter tests
may become a required acceptance item.
The vibration measuring equipment, developed primarily for flutter
testing, has proved to be suited for measuring accelerations, stresses and
displacements of both static and dynamic character, and the ability of the
equipment to record simultaneously the responses of a large number o
remotely located indicators has resulted in a tremendous saving in flight
time. The economic aspect of this, particularly in the case of large air-
craft, is manifest and the extension of the work being oarried out A
America and the results obtained are contributing materialiytomorerefinea
aircraft design. An outline of the work of several of the firms visited


by the Mission is given below,
SD-7* 02 Boeing Aircraft Corporation, Use is made of a Miller oscillograph, and
a further instrument 'is on order for delivery at an early date. This
oscillograph is used for a wide variety of tests in addition to vibration;
Q*g* performance of electrical equipment such as generator reverse current
cut-outs; a further list is given at Item No, 6of the Appendix. It was
therefore surprising to learn that the equipment is not yet used for actual
flight vibration tests but confined to ground tests with mechanical
vibrators. This has apparently been sufficient to verify the predicted
static stresses as well as to determine the vibration characteristics of
principal airframe structures.
Pick-ups. Types of pick-up used comprise:
(a) Miller type 604 displacement electro magnetic type, employing
the moving iron mass, with natural frequency of 5 c/s, suitable
for measuring vibrations of 10 c/s and upward, (strong motion
type), and also type 102 far weaker vibrations.
(b) Miller type 402 accelerometer pick-up for higher frequencies.
(c) Pressure type of condenser pick-up designed by Boeing for
hydraulic system, particularly for investigating operation
of braJkes. The condenser is used to modulate a5O Kc/e carrier
current, or an audio frequency of s>ooo c/s or 10,000 c/s.
One of these pick-ups has been completed and a further 4 were
in course of completion.
(d) Wire strain gauges for static or vibratory stresses. These are
made in the works, usually to standard values of 60, 120 or
480 ohms according to requirements. "Copel" wire is used which
hft.q a covering apparently of dull enamel. For static measure-
ments each gauge is connected up in a bridge circuit in balance
with multi-way resistance box and galvo, and for vibration they
are connected via the 6 channel amplifier to the Miller oscillo-
graph.
Ground Tests on principal structures, e.g. wings; up to 300 gauges are
attached and in cases where crinkling of surface is expected gauges are
applied on both surfaces so that a mean can be taken. Similarly 50 to. 70
would be used for tailplane and fin. Visual monitoring on the amplifier
instruments is used over the whole series in order to select suitable
groups for recording through the oscillograph. For usual application
cellulose nitrate cement is employed but for special high temperature
positions (e. g. engine nose cases) a glyptal cement has been found more
durable against embrittlement.
Acoustic Recorder. A Western Electric Sound Meter is also in use for
vibration measurements. This normally comprises a moving coil microphone
with a variable heterodyne frequency selector for measuring the amplitudes
at selected frequencies. The microphone is replaced by a Brush piezo
crystal unit used as a stethoscope on a rod which can be pressed against
the member under test. The recorder uses a stylus and waxed paper chart.
The crystal pick-up acts as an accelerometer and velocity and displacement
are given by successive integrating networks connected between pick-up and
amplifiers.
SD-7.03 Consolidated Aircraft Corporation. No use has been made up to the present
of vibration equipment for flight test investigations, and the principal
ground use is for static tests on wing structures, fins and rudders, and
research into the behaviour of various forms of beam construction, for
which a hydraulic loading machine has been set up to give smooth and close
control of bending forces applied up to about 10 ft. apart.
The test laboratories have also set up vibrating machines for use in
the development of aircraft pressure cabins and fittings, and tests were
seen in progress on a perspex window fitting and a^ radl ° **** J?®/ . .
name "Celstrain" has been given to the variety of Consolidated Electric


strain gauge standardised by this firm and a general description of their
methods is given in their Report No. SG-609 at Item No. 7 of the Appendix
(including the use of wire gauges for torsional and hinge moments in tests
on models) and at page 232 of reprint Chapter XIV on Test and Research
from "Introduction to Aircraft Design" by T. P. Faulconer (Director of
Education, Consolidated) (Me Graw Hill) which is given at Item No. 8 of the
Appendix. Consolidated propose to use a Heiland 6 element oscillograph
when this is available, and at present use a Leeds and Northrop sensitive
light spot galvo for bench tests.
SD-7* 04 Douglas Aircraft Company. Much work has been done in connection with the
A.2C principally on ground flutter tests for measurement of deflections
against frequency with vibration excited by motor driven vibrator, similar
to A.A.P. (Wright Field) design. This appliance is used by attachment to
a wing tip. Other instruments in general use are the Miller oscillograph,
Leeds and Northrop precision galvo and Brown potentiometer recorder used as
a self balancing bridge for static tests.
Wire gauges for static and dynamic tests are made to 200 ohms with .001”
Advance or Copel, and a winding machine has been developed based on hosiery
knitting technique to employ a weaving method of drawing the turns of wire
taut over the backing paper. Good uniformity results and an output of 50
per day is easily maintained with one operator. This winder is illustrated
in Figs* 10 and 11 and details are shown in Figs. 12, 13> 14 and 15*
Higher resistance gauges up to several thousand ohms are made for wind
tunnel test 3 on vibration and flutter, and 1000 c/s carrier current is used
FIG. 10. DOUGLAS
GAUGE WINDING
MACHINE.
FIG. 12. HOSIERY
WEAVING NEEDLE
ADAPTED FOR
WIRE GAUGE
WINDER.
FIG. 13. METHOD
OF WINDING.
FIG. 14. RELEASE
OF WIRE LOOPS
FROM WEAVING
HOOKS.
FIG. 15. METHOD
OF MAKING OFF
WIRE ENDS.
FIG. 11. METHOD OF DRAWING LOOPS OF WIRE IN DOUGLAS GAUGE WINDER.
for modulating in static stress measurements, and in connection. with.
variable reluctance accelerometers supplied by Consolidated Engineering
Corporation of Pasadena, California.
are carried out as far as practicable, and a large number
of wire gauges are fitted, about 15 runs of 12 each from which 2or 3 per


group are selected by preliminary tests so that the most useful data can
be obtained from the selected points on the main test* Simplicity is
regarded as the keynote for reliable results.
Some work has also been done on the transient effects of gun blast
using a cathode ray oscillograph fitted in a trailer van and provided with
a dark room (camera obscura) in which a pull-through film device (35 mm*)
and short focus lens are arranged.
A staff of 6 engineers and from 2 to 6 mechanics cover this work on
vibration, and after full preparation of the test equipment, the installa-
tion in the aircraft (a.26) was carried out in 3 days. Two engineers flew
with the pilot as observers on the test flights and subsequently two made
the measurements from the records and two more were employed on calcula-
tions, about one week being spent in working out the results.
5D~7« 05 Glenn Martin. Much original and development work has been done, as
described in Item No. 3 of the Appendix already referred to, including the
design and development and manufacture of amplifiers, pick-ups, etc. for
use with the types of oscillograph already described. This equipment is
illustrated in Pig* 16 and its installation in a flying boat is shown
diagramatically in Nig. 17« A descriptive pamphlet entitled ’’Electrical
Yibration and Strain Measuring Equipment” is included at Item No. 4 of the
FIG. 16. GLENN MARTIN VIBRATION
EQUIPMENT COMPRISING THREE FOUR-WAY
AMPLIFIERS, AND POWER PACK WITH
ACCELEROMETERS AND OSCILLOGRAPH.
FIG. 17. SCHEME FOR INSTALLATION OF
VIBRATION EQUIPMENT IN A FLYING BOAT.
Appendix. This work is being carried on in a large way in the j.lying
boat "Mars" and part of the installation was seen by the Mission at the
visit paid to Baltimore. It was hoped to see the full equipment in use
in flight in this aircraft before the Mission returned but this O PP° r ~
tunity was narrowly missed owing to shortness of time available. At the
time in question most of the work on main structures had been completed
and the further programme of tests in connection with tail unit was then


being prepared. A graphic three-dimensional method of presenting
vibration data is illustrated in Fig. 18.
FIG. 18. THREE DIMENSION CURVES SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF VIBRATIONAL FORCES.
SD-7* 06 Lockheed. Although no details of this firm*s work are available it is
known that considerable application of vibration testing technique has
been applied in connection with the Constellation, chiefly from the stand
point of specific design verification.
SD-7.07 Weight Field. Apart from the development of research equipment for the
systematic analysis of vibration data, considerable work is proceeding in
the aircraft, propeller and engine sections. Two types of wire strain
gauges are obtained from the Baldwin Southwick Co., of Riiladelphia:
(a) for static tests of relatively high sensitivity and
(b) of the lower sensitivity low temperature co-efficient type
using isolastic wire.
For the calibration of strain gauges a massive vibration machine has
been developed in which samples, e.g. of propeller blade material, are
used, in the form of a slab 18" x 6" with ends shaped to suit the hydraulic
grips; the wire strain gauges are attached to the sample and vibration
applied by a flywheel with out of balance weights. Deflection of the metal
sample is measured with a Tuckerman optical gauge and the whole machine
is flexibly mounted to avoid transmission of vibration througih the floor.
Equipment of the types previously described is in use, and the opinion
of the engine section is that amplitudes up to .01" are not usually comr-
plained of but those between .015" and 025” indicates a bad vibration.
The vibrations concerned are associated with the lower orders of engine
frequencies, and those being experienced are usually due to substitution
of different engine-propeller combinations for production reasons. In this
section the principal use of the equipment is for comparison of engine
mounts and for investigation of reported troublesome cases rather than for
the prediction of aircraft vibration characteristics, but ground tests are
made using the electro-mechanical vibrator over a range of controlled
amplitudes and frequencies in conjunction with strain gauges at selected
points. The Criterion of engine mounts is covered by a requirement that
the 6 principal natural frequencies of the engine as mounted on its


isolators should have values less than 55/ of the engine r.p.m., or ~fffo
of the propeller r.p.nu, whichever is the smaller, the aim being to give
the engine the recognised six degrees of freedom (3 linear and 3 rotational)
within the foregoing limits* It was stated that the Mustang is now
regarded as having the best mounts for an in-line engine.
For this sort of test, pick-ups are arranged in pairs mounted on a
comnon axis and their outputs connected to a 4 armed resistance bridge so
that their sum and difference can be taken off the bridge corner points*
In this way both the couple and up and down indications are obtained*
The work of the aircraft section is reflected in the publications
already referred to at Items 1 and 2 of the Appendix and a complete
vibration survey is carried out on each prototype aircraft submitted.
Tests of this sort have also been applied to the Spitfire said Hurricane.
The conclusions reached had been that the Hurricane wing, having been
produced in metal from basically and earlier fabric covered design, is
therefore of considerable stiffness and permitted the mounting of cannon
etc., without any flutter trouble* The Spitfire wing is found to be much
. more flexible with very little in hand to take any additions to cut-outs,
etc.
CHAPTER 8 - EQUIPMENT ORDERED FOR M.A.P.
5D-8.01 Approved List of Equipment. Before the Mission returned from America
approval was communicated from London for orders to be placed for oscillo-
graph and ancillary equipment selected by the Mission* After reviewing
the equipment in use at the various aircraft firms it was decided to obtain
the latest forms of oscillograph, amplifiers, pick-ups, etc., as developed
by the Wm*Miller Corporation, comprising suitable combinations for carrying
out tests in both large and small aircraft together with a calibrating
table for the accelerometers at a total cost of $ 23»370* 00* The following
wing items are included
1. Model H. Twelve Element Recording Oscillograph with isolated
galvanometer elements, remote control unit, two spare take-up
magazines, and one spare supply magazine.
1 Model D Six Element Recording Oscillograph with isolated
galvanometer elements, remote control unit, two spare take-up
magazines, and one spare supply magazine.
2 Six Channel Type "C-2" Oscillograph Amplifiers.
12 Model 402 Accelerometers.
2 Six Channel Type "A-2 M Oscillograph Amplifiers.
12 Model 102 Generating Type Displacement Pick-ups for horizontal or
vertical use.
2 Model 1003 Torsional Vibration Piok-ups (Generating Type).
1 Model 9B Calibrator.
6 Spare galvo elements electrically damped for 60 - 200 c/s.
6 Spare galvo elements oil damped for 3®® — 300® c/s*
6 Spare galvo elements high sensitivity type for Model D.
25 Pick-up cable s 25 feet long.
25 Pick-up cables 5® feet long.
These items are described in outline in the Corporation's quotation at
Item No. 6 of the Appendix.


5I>8*02 Weights. The approximate weights of the principal items are as follows:-
Model H Oscillograph 65 lbs.
M D " 30 lbs.
Type A-2 Amplifier complete with
Power Unit 60 lbs.
Type 02 Amplifier complete with
Power Unit 60 lbs.
Model 9B Calibrator (for bench
only) 300 lbs.
50-8.03 Delivery* It was estimated that the foregoing apparatus, which i3 custom
built to individual order, would take not less than 4 months from the
receipt of order if given the highest possible priority (AA-1).
5D-8.04 Equipment Previously Ordered for R.A.E. In addition to the above equipment,
a request for the procurement of a Sperry-M.I.T. oscillograph, as made by the
Consolidated Engineering Co., of Pasadena and certain ancillary items, had
been made in connection with requirements at the R.A.E. Considerable delay
had occurred owing to changes in the equipment specified, and the Mission
confirmed to the B.A.C. that this equipment would still be required for its
original purposes in addition to the apparatus covered in 8.01, the latter
being intended to inaugurate systematic work on present and future designs
of aircraft, in parallel with the research and development work at Famborough*
5D-8.03 Services of Engineers. It was stated by Mr.Miller that the firm’s
acoustics engineer who has been responsible for the design of amplifiers, etc.,
was temporarily on loan to the United States Navy Radio laboratory at San Diego,
but that the C onto any would be willing for him to come to England for a short
tour, if required to assist British engineers in the operation of the equip-
ment. Mr. Downs had been present on the first visit paid to the Corporation,
and there is no doubt that he is an extremely competent and versatile
engineer and designer of this particular type of electronic equipment,
and his services for a short period would be valuable when the apparatus is
received and the organisation for carrying on this work in British aircraft
has been decided upon.
It would also be of the highest value to 3ritish aircraft firms and
establishments if a visit could be paid to this country by a leading aircraft
vibration engineer, such as Mr.W.B.Bergen of the Glenn Martin Company.
CHAPTER 9 - APPLICATION TO BRITISH DEVELOPMENT
5D-9. 01 Research Work. It will be clear from the foregoing review that research
work on aerodynamic design performance and requirements will be greatly
assisted by the use of more modern vibration testing equipment and the means
thereby of the practical verification of theoretical work.
5D-9.02 Current Problems. It is of prime Importance that the ability to deal
promptly and effectively with any serious vibration trouble which. may arise
unexpectedly should be acquired both by the individual aircraft firms and the
official establishments, and that a complete vibration survey on all important
types of aircraft should be undertaken as soon as possible. In this way
information and experience will be gained for immediate application whenever
the need may arise.
5D-9.03 Design Data. Equally important among the use of vibration testing equipment
is the accumulation of data leading to the improvement of design. As seen in
America, this follows automatically, from the subjecting of current design to
experimental checking in order that such designs may either be confirmed or
modified, -before any appreciable amount of production is. undertaissn vn- -
out causing delay in starting production. But, on addition, the acoumlatxon
of this design information will obviously pay a large dividend in regard


future work.
SD-9* 04 Use of Nucleus Equipment. In considering how the utmost and earliest
benefit can be obtained from the use of the equipment being obtained from
America the needs of long term research and development at the R.A.E. will
be, to some extent at any rate, met by the equipment being procured on the
first requisition, for which no doubt specific plans have been made. It
is therefore the opinion of the Mission that the aircraft firms should be
encouraged and assisted to undertake and develop individual resources for
dealing with current problems affecting present performance, and the build-
ing up of design information related to their several styles of aerodynamic
design* It will obviously be impossible for some time to come to provide
suitable and sufficient equipment for this purpose on anything like the
scale that we have seen in use in America. Hence it would appear to be
necessary that Miller equipment being obtained should be regarded as a
nucleus, for the purpose of meeting the most urgent needs for dealing with
present problems and at the same time educating the aircraft firms in its
use and application to the widest degree, and also for encouraging the
earliest possible development and manufacture of suitable oscillograph and
ancillary apparatus in this country.
SD-9.05 Personnel. Owing to the virtual absence of a class of vibration engineers
in the British aircraft industry, the most energetic steps are called for
to recruit such a body of specialists, who would be in a position to under-
take these essential investigations in the vibration and flutter character-
istics of aircraft design. Considering moreover that, apart from vibration
engineers, there is a general lack of aerodynamic and electrical engineering
specialists, it is clearly desirable that a further number, of engineers with
the basic electrical training should be brought into the aircraft industry
to take up this work in connection with vibration, and at the same time
acquire that contact with and knowledge of aircraft which would materially
assist in the building up of a type of aeronautical engineer at present so
lacking.
In the early stages it would be desirable for each of the principal
aircraft firms to contribute a representative to a joint practical study of
the work immediately involved, so that these engineers could then act as
leaders with their respective firms in developing a vibration section in
relation to their particular design practice.
53>9.06 Organisation. In order effectively to secure the necessary correlation of
research with development and practical application at the aircraft firms
as well as at official establishments, and also to make the best use of the
limited equipment which will be available in the near future, a central
branch under D.T.D. should be charged with the general co-ordination of
these activities, the allocation of the equipment at present on order,
development and manufacture of suitable British equipment and the determina-
tion of appropriate priorities in dealing with the most important current
problems.
This organisation should preferably be undertaken in conjunction with
similar proposals which the Mission is putting forward, in relation to the
fuller instrumentation of test flights in Part E of this Section of the
Report, since the work on vibration may be regarded as complementary to that
on the fuller instrumentation of test flying.


APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS ETC. BROUGHT BACK FROM AMERICA
I. A.A.F. Test Report No* 4796, "Application of 3 Dimensional
Flutter Theory to Aircraft Structures %
2* A.A.F. Specification 40460, "Fabrication and Design,
Aircraft Flutter Models"*
3* Glenn Martin publication, "Experimental Investigation in
Aircraft Dynamics".
4. Glenn Martin publication, "Electrical Vibration and Strain
Measuring Equipment".
3* (a) Descriptive Leaflet, Miller Oscillograph, Dec. 24,1941 •
fbj Sketch of Oscillograph Element.
(c) Photograph Assembly of Elements in Miller Oscillograph.
(d) Wright Field Dg. S43G- 10209 Wiring for Miller Oscillograph.
6. Description of Miller Oscillograph (quotation dated Jan. 14,1943)
with copy of Boeing letter Jan. 6,1943, citing typical uses.
7. (a) Consolidated Aircraft Report 5.G.609, "Use of Cels train
Indicators".
(b) Samples of 50 ohm "Celstrain" Gauges.
8. Reprint on Test and Research, Chapter 14, from "Introduction
to Aircraft Design", by Director of Education, Consolidated
Aircraft. (T. P. Faulconer: McGraw-Hill) •
9. Douglas Report No. ES. 1532 "Electrical Strain Gauges".
10* Douglas Report No. ES. 6040 Electronic Strain Gauge Balance
System.
11. "Methods of Stress Determination in Engine Barts"
3.A.E.Journal, April 1943*
12. Wright Field Dg. AL-VF-15 Wiring for General Radio Wave
Analyser.
13. photos (six) of Wright Field Coradi Wave Analyser.


EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES
PART E INSTRUMENTATION OF TEST FLIGHTS
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item 1.01 American application
n 1,02 British needs
" I*o3 Organisation
" 1.04 Equipment
H I*os Action
CHAPTER 2 - SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Item 2.01 Introduction
w 2.02 Application in America
n 2.03 Application in Britain
" 2.04 Organisation
CHAPTER 3 - INTRODUCTION
Item 3# 01 General
n 3»02 Scale of undertaking
CHAPTER if - OUTLINE OF INSTALLATIONS
Item t. 01 Aerodynamic Group
n 4«02 Power Plant group
n 4.03 Vibrations and stress group
CHAPTER 5 - ORGANISATION
Item "5." bl General
n 5*02 Co-ordination
" 5*03 Test flight crew
n 5*04 Personnel
CHAPTER 6 - EQUIPMENT
Item 6.01 Brown temperature recorder
n 6.02 Manometers
" 6.03 Photo Recorders
CHAPTER 7 - REVIEW OF TECHNIQUE
iiem 7*ol Boeing Aircraft Corporation
w 7*02 Consolidated Aircraft Corporation
** 7*03 Douglas Aircraft Company, Inc.
tt 7.04 Lockheed Aircraft
M 7*05 North American Aviation Inc.
" 7.06 Bell Aircraft Corporation
CHAPTER 8 - APPLICATION TO BRITISH DEVELOPMENT
Item 8.01 General
" 8.02 Future types
" 8.03 Present types
** 8.04 Equipment from America
n 3.05 Organisation
APPENDIX - List of documents brought back from America




CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
5E-1.01 American application. During the past year or so great deve-
lopment in the full instrumentation of test flights has taken
place. This is chiefly due to the efforts of some of the more
important aircraft contractors, the results being applied mainly
to the design of their own products. Comprehensive data by
photo recording of power plant, aerodynamic and flight conditions
are obtained with special engineering test crews, and in large
aircraft up to 2 tons of installation equipment has been used
for this purpose. The work is complementary to that on vibra-
tion testing, enables much time to be saved in checking performances,
completing and refining of design and accelerating production. It
also establishes a wealth of data for future design and supplements
the work of the highly experienced test pilot.
5E-1.02 British needs. British aircraft firms should be encouraged to
make the fullest possible use of these methods of obtaining prac-
tical check on design and performance. Operational policy would
no doubt be assisted by a more complete knowledge of the capabi-
lities of existing important types, and the complete testing of
such aircraft as soon as practicable might be of immediate
utility as well as future assistance in design.
5E-1.03 Organisation. Pending a sufficiency of apparatus and trained
engineers being available on a wide enough scale, a central group
under M.A.P. direction should be set up to co-ordinate the
development of this work and assist films in planning and exe-
cuting full instrumentation tests so that the earliest possible
benefit may be obtained. The necessary co-ordination of the
work on vibration and strain gauging, covered in Section 5 Part D,
should be included in this organisation for practical purposes.
5E-1.04 Equipment. Orders placed in America on the Mission*s recom-
mendations include the latest type of recording potentiometer
and also indicating potentiometers for this work.
5E-1.05 Action. A branch of M.A.P. should be formed to foster the
wider instrumentation of test flying and the dissemination of
knowledge of the technique throughout the industry. This could
conveniently be done in conjunction with similar work on vibra-
tion testing, as proposed in




CHAPTER 2 - SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS.
5&-2.01 Introduction. American aircraft expansion has been on such a scale that it
would not have been possible to have a sufficient number of highly trained
specialised test pilots to go round. In America prior to the war, this type
of pilot was not usually attached to a constructor’s organisation, as the proto-
type flight testing of all civil machines was undertaken by specialists of the
Airlines, and military experimental testing was the special duty of the project
Engineers of the Army and Navy Experimental Stations. The practice of carrying
out fully instrumented test flights has therefore grown to wide proportions in
America during the past year or so, superseding the former limited amount of
photo recording of the normal aircraft instruments which was used to augment the
test pilots* observations. The Mission's attention was drawn to this aspect
of American development by Wing Commander Maurice Summers, who was greatly
impressed by its importance and potentialities.
5E-2.02 Application in America. In the case of large aircraft it is found worth
while spending several thousand man hours on the installation of test equip-
ment during the fitting out of the early models of each type, which are really
hand made production machines to the complete specification, rather than the
bare flying prototypes as generally submitted for handling and power plant
trials in this country. In this way all the early development processes are
progressed in parallel, as far as possible* with the object of minimising the
period required to complete a satisfactory design and get it in production.
In the case of small aircraft, the difference is merely one of magnitude
and added difficulty in accommodating the special recorders. There is no
lack in America either of personnel or material to carry out the work with
expedition, and this work is continued on inportant types to increase the data
available for future design.
5E-2.03 Application in Britain. Hitherto no such large scale instrumentation of
test flights, as seen in America, has been attempted in this country, although
in recent months steps have been taken to gather recorded information on the
Typhoon. The personnel and equipment available to aircraft firms for this
purpose are at present profoundly inadequate. Nevertheless it is evident
that every important new type of aircraft should be flight tested with a full
kit of special instruments for the purpose, to obtain all the necessary data
for the best possible performance, to check the design and stability in the
shortest time, and similar work should also be carried out in existing types
which will continue in production. The Lancaster, for example, would no
doubt benefit if such work could be carried out to establish with certainty
its limiting capabilities for all-out operation and to provide verified data
on which later design work could be based.
52-2.04. Organisation. The scale on which such work can be carried out will depend
on the equipment and personnel which can be made available. The Mission con-
siders that the most effective means of encouraging the development of instru-
mentation by the aircraft firms would be to establish a central group of suit-
able engineers and technicians (which might be selected from all possible
sources including firms, R.A.F. and official establishments) under M.A.P.
direction. Detachments of this staff might be made to assist aircraft firms
planning the work and installations involved for completely testing aircraft,
including the special needs of vibration investigation. The detachment
would thereby be made familiar with the aircraft, and should contribute to
the test crew at the firms* aerodrome or Boscombe Down as required; they would
also be associated with the preparation of the test results. Tackled in this
way it is felt that the work would develop on sound lines, with the added value
that the engineering staffs would assist in the recruitment and training of
future aeronautical engineers.
CHAPTER 3 - INTRODUCTION
5E-3.01 General. As seen in America, flight testing of aircraft is becoming a
matter of exact measurement rather than the mainly qualitative study it has
hitherto been. The Pilot’s personal reaction is undoubtedly still of great
importance in assessing the flying qualities of an aircraft, but it is row
found possible to augment very greatly his qualitative report by a mass of
observational data mechanically recorded and monitored by flight engineers


53-3*02 Scale of Undertalcing. The technique involves the installation of equip-
ment, pipes and cables, aggregating several thousand pounds in the latest
large types of aircraft, and the provision of a test crew of twelve in some
cases, preferably all engineers including the pilots. This is obviously
a formidable undertaking and may require upwards of 5,000 man hours for
installation, the most careful organisation to ensure the utmost value
being obtained from every hour of test flying and the readiest means of
plotting and assessing the data secured.
CHAPTER 4 - OUTLINE OF INSTALLATIONS
53-4*01 Aerodynamic Group. This group includes duplication and supplementing of
normal flying instruments
together with special means of
measuring control column and
rudder bar forces, accurate
position indication of all
oontrol surfaces, additional
gyros for pitch and roll,
vacuum gauges, and outside
air thermometer. See
Fig.l.
SS-4.02 Power Plant Group. This
group includes every
possible cylinder (head and
base), oil, air and
exhaust gas temperature,
fuel, oil, air, manifold and
exhaust pressures, position
FIG. 1. SPECIAL INSTRUMENT PANEL BETWEEN PITOTS.
indication of all flaps for cowls, oil cooler, intercooler and waste gates,
airspeed, altitude, fuel consumption, engine and supercharger speeds and
engine torque measurements. This group is generally sub-divided so that
all temperatures except for exhaust gas are grouped on to one or more
potentiometer recorders supplemented by manual potentiometers for moni-
toring, All pressures capable of being indicated by manometers, e, g,
many points in the ducting system, are grouped on to special manometer boards
arranged for photo recording and visual observation. The remaining instru-
ments are grouped in panels for photo recording and visual observation.
See Figs.2, 3, 4 and 3-
FIG. 2. PITOT HEADS FITTED NEAR SPARK
PLUGS AND CYLINDER FINS.
FIG. 3. COMBINED PITOTS AND THERMO
COUPLES IN CARBURETTOR INTAKE


FIG. 4. INSTALLATION OF THERMO
COUPLE CIRCUITS AT POTENTIOMETERS
RECORDER STATION, WITH BROWN
RECORDER AND STATION CO-ORDINATING
INSTRUMENT.
FIG. 5. TYPICAL DIAGRAM OF THERMO COUPLE CIRCUITS.


SE-4.03 Vibration and Stress Group. This group includes accelerometers and
strain gauges connected to an oscillograph, generally with multi-channel
amplifiers, and adapted as the case may require to record vibrations in
power plant or airframe members. This subject is treated in Part Dof
this Section. This equipment is also used to determine static stress in
members of the airframe, in relation to forces applied to flying controls,
and the aerodynamic conditions recorded. See Figs. 6 and 7«
FIG. 6. USE OF STRAIN GUAGES FOR TORSION MEASUREMENT IN FLAP SHAFT.
FIG. 7. STRAIN GAUGES FITTED TO CHECK STRESSES IN HINGES.
CHAPTER 5 - ORGANISATION
5E-5.01 general. The practical relationship of fully instrumented test flight
on a prototype aircraft of new design to wind tunnel work was discussed by
Mr. E.T. Allen of Boeing Aircraft in his Sixth Annual Wright Brothers
Lecture under the auspices of the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences,
New York City, on 17th December, 1942. A copy of this paper is at Item
No.l of the Appendix and a copy of a paper by Mr. A.C.Reed of Boeing
Aircraft cm ’’Airplane Performance Testing at Altitude”, J. A. S. February,
1941, referred to by Mr. Allen, is given at Item No. 2 of the .Appendix.
A brief talk on the subject was also given to the Mission by Mr. Allen.
5E-5.02 Co-ordination. An essential feature of the installation in a large air-
craft is provision of means for co-ordinating the recording apparatus
fitted in various parts of the aircraft. Normal intercommunication is
found to be unsatisfactory for this purpose except for emergency contacts
and reports. Special signalling equipment is, therefore, used for
directing the several observation stations, synchronising counters and
receiving notification that observations have been effected. See
Figs.8 and 9. A descriptive bulletin is included at Item No.3 of the
Appendix.


FIG. 8 and 9. TEST FLIGHT CREW IN PRESSURE CABIN,
SHOWING OPERATION OF CO-ORDINATING SYSTEM.
MASTER. STATION COORDINATOR.
a Lights for indicating'whether station has completed task.
® Clock.
© Counter for indicating'coordination count.
A Main station signalling' switch.
© Transmitters for signalling- flight plan part or section.
© Iwo transmitters geared to bar knob.
© Transmitters for signalling flight plan part condition
© Jeweled light in parallel with main switch..
CD Main power switch
<3> Station selector switches.
53-5*03 Test Flight Crew. For the latest type of large aircraft the optimum
crew for instrumented test flight would comprise (l) First pilot, prefer-
ably a test engineer, (2) Second pilot, preferably a test engineer,
(3) Test Flight engineer usually located between the pilots, in charge of
the flight, co-ordinating the observations and supervising the execution of
flight plans, (4) Flight Mechanic, replacing normal flight engineer in
control of power plant and watching the limiting conditions of engine
performance, (5) Assistant engineer for technical observation, (6) Tem-
perature observer operating recording and visual potentiometers, (7) Radio
operator for normal watch keeping and ground communication, (8) and (9) ob-
servers operating and monitoring photo recorders and also keeping lookout
on external control surfaces, (10) and (ll) observers in charge of mano-
meter boards, also taking visual observations, (12) Instrument specialist
responsible for operation of all recording apparatus.
Of these the first seven would usually be in the front cockpit and the
remainder at the instrument stations in other parts of the aircraft.
Provision for recording vibrations would also be made, and if necessary,
additional engineers carried, but this work is mostly carried out separately.


5E*”5• 04- Personnel. Apert from the test crew of* from two to twelve engineers,
according to the type of aircraft, a large staff is required to plan in’
detail the arrangement of apparatus and its installation, to present the
test results in reasonably quick time for maximum benefit to be obtained,
and later to proceed with more detailed plotting and assessment to build up
the fund of knowledge flowing from this development of full scale testing.
In order to obtain in a few hours of test flying the mass of data
sought, five or six months of technical preparation by a staff of twenty or
thirty engineers has been carried out, and after the data has been recorded
about two weeks is required to assess the results, with two or three
engineers working on each aspect, such as performance, stability, engines
vibration.
CHAPTER 6 - EQUIPMENT
5E-6.01 Brown Temperature Recorder. This instrument is in general use for rapid-
ly recording on one chart up to 144- selected thermo couple readings, and is
FIG. 10. BROWN POTENTIOMETER.
FIG. 11. SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM.
supplied by the Minneapolis Honeywell Regulator Co. ,of Philadelphia. The
type developed for recent application to aircraft tests is shown in Pig. 10
and described in the Brown Instrument Co. * s catalogue and manuals at Item
N 0.6 of the Appendix.
The recorder is fundamentally a self-balancing potentiometer having a
straight slide wire with a motor driven sliding contact, as shown in Pig.ll,
moving over a scale calibrated from -60°P. to + 560°P. The potentiometer
is connected to the multiplicity of thermo couple circuits in rotation in
series of twelve, so that each is in turn associated with an internal cold
junction and the thermo e.m.f. is compared with a standard cell, also in-
corporated.
An electronic amplifier is used to supply control current to the slide
motor causing it to move until the point of balance is established, when a
disc with printing numerals 1 to 12 on its edge, marks the number of the
circuit in the series on the record chart at the position of the slide
contact, thereby recording the temperature indicated by that particular
thermo couple. Pour of these discs, each associated with twelve circuits,
are actuated at about 1 a second, and the operation is facilitated if the
circuits can be so arranged that their temperature indications are in
ascending or descending values so as to reduce the time required for the
slide to reach its position of balance. This is of great importance in
running the test flight, particularly during conditions of climb when the
time element is critical.
SE-6.02 Manometers. The number of pressure points for which records are requir-
ed may be between two and three hundred, the majority of readings beihg in
inches of water but an appreciable number in terms of mercury. Miniature
pitot tubes are set up in all important points of air ducts, carburettor and


FIG. 12. ARRANGEMENT OF PITOTS AND THERMOCOUPLES IN OIL COOLER AIR SYSTEM.
FIG. 13. ARRANGEMENT OF PITOTS AND STATIC HEADS
IN ENGINE COOLING AIR SYSTEM.


FIG. 14 MANOMETER BOARD ARRANGED FOR PHOTO RECORDING.
manifold systems, in front of cylinders, as in Fig*l2 and 13, and also
Figs. 2 and 3, and connected by 1/8 M or l/4 M copper tubes to manometer
boards installed at the instrument stations, 40 or 50 per board usually
being found convenient for grouping, installing and photographing, as in
Fig. 14* Water tube manometers are generally worked with common wells which
may be located in the bomb bay together with static reference heads. In
some cases preference is shown for a water-alcohol mixture of about 0*95 s.g.
and suitable for working over the required temperature range, while in
others carbon tetrachloride or acetylene tetrachloride may be used, having
a higher specific gravity to enable the dimensions of the manometers to be
reduced. It is usually found necessary to mark, say, every tenth tube
specially to facilitate ready identification both on the photo records and
for visual observation, and it is often convenient to arrange static
reference tubes at such points on the boards. Marking of such tubes may
be effected by sticking intermittent bits of paper along them to produce
dotted lines on the record and water tubes have dye added to give good
records. Mercury tubes work independently to minimise the quantity
spilled in the event of a breakage.
53-6*03 Photo Recorders. Owing to *the difficulty of photographing the normal
aircraft instruments and the inadequate data obtainable in that way for full
analysis of flight tests, various arrangements have been set up for ob-
taining records on cine film of all the necessary instrument dials and
manometer tubes. The arrangements differ from firm to firm and are review-
ed in Chapter 7«
Cameras generally are standard 16 or 35 mm.cine type, with provision
for single shot working and electrical remote control; lighting of the
instruments may vary from firm to firm according to the technique adopted.
Dial instruments fitted in the several recorders are grouped in separate
panels, up to 30 meters being usually fitted per panel covered by one camera,
which is generally integral with the photo recorder installation. Records
obtained from the Douglas A* 26 are shown in Figs *ls, 16 and 17* Cameras
for recording the manometer boards are usually mounted separately. Whereas


FIG. 15. MAIN PHOTO RECORDER OF DOUGLAS A. 26 INSTRUMENTATION.
FIG. 16. PHOTO RECORDER SHOWING MILLIAMMETERS USED IN STRAIN GAUGE CIRCUITS.


FIG. 17. MANOMETER BOARD FOR DOUGLAS A.26 INSTRUMENTATION.
it is practicable for the test engineer in charge of the flight to choose
the moment of operation for the dial instrument recorders, it is desirable
for local discretion to rest with the observers stationed at the manometer
boards, since a momentary effect of "g" or the attitude of the aircraft
may dictate the best moment to operate the cameras for these instruments.
In certain cases this is taken care of in the co-ordinating system employed.
CHAPTER 7 ~ RKVIM OF TECHNIQUE
53-7«01 Boeing Aircraft Corporation. The installation in the B.29 represents
the culmination of this firm's ideas on the subject, and is in the fore-
front of such work, particularly as applied to high altitudes.
Arrangements are described in a section of their report, copy of which is
given at Item No,4 of the Appendix. A continuous day to day record is
kept of all changes and developments in the apparatus, installation and
calibrations for reference by all departments concerned in the firm.
Considerable work has also been and still is being done on the B.17 (Plying
Portress) and it is of the greatest interest to note that no less than five
aircraft of this type had been, at the time of the Mission's visit, assigned
by the U.S. Army Air Force for flight testing on various specific develop-
ment purposes, and a further B.29 was expected to be allotted, very shortly.
Much of the work is connected with improvement of ceiling and a considerable
number of flights have been made of four hours at 35,000 ft. and some up to
7 hours between 29,000 and 35,000 ft. for testing various equipnent for high
altitude operation. In spite of all the hazards of high flying there had
been no serious accident or loss of life, which says much for the organisa-
tion, and it was emphasised by Mr. Allen that each test was expected to


contribute something definite of practical value to a combat aircraft,
apart from any academic interest, e.g. in improving fuel consumption, power
plant cooling, turbo blowers, and operation of equipment, particularly
ignition, for which alone one aircraft has been assigned and flight has
been made to 42,900 ft. with special ignition system. During last year
960 crew man hours of high flying had been done, representing an average
of two 4 hour flights per month.
The instrumentation of the 8«29 involved approximately 6,000 man hours
of which about half is accounted for by engine circuits including the
turbos, say 1,500 for temperature points, 1,000 for pressure points and
500 for tachometers, etc; a further 1,500 is taken by temperature points
in air systems etc., 1,000 for aerodynamic instruments and 500 for vibration
equipment. Some 300 temperature points were connected, of which approxi-
mately 150 were selected for recording, and a total of 1,500 ft. of iron-
constantin thermo couple leads were made up and run through from engines to
FIG. 18.
FIG. 21.
FIG. 19.
FIG. 20. COMBINED
THERMO-COUPLE AND
SHIELDED PITOT HEAD.
instrument stations. It is not considered good enough to introduce twin
copper leads in these circuits as the conditions at the extra joints would
not be under control. Arrangement of thermocouples, pressure heads and a
calibrated fuel flow meter are shown in Pigs.lB, 19, 20 and 21. In
addition to the engine temperature points connected to the Brown potentio-
meter recorder, the exhaust gas temperatures are indicated on a Whelco


potentiometer and separate
galvanometer, the thermo
junctions being of chrome-alumel
and connected to 20-point 2-
bank Yaxley switches. These
observations are recorded.
In accordance with usual prac-
tice a full set of readings are
taken from N 0.2 engine and only
principal points on the others.
The manometers comprise six
boards each fitted with 38 tubes.
The photo recorders have
the cameras looking through a
central opening in the instru-
ment panel, which is lighted by
four low consumption fluorescent
tubular lamps now in common use
in U.S.A. on 115 volts supply.
The glass door of the recorder
box is half silvered and not
backed, so that in addition to
its acting as a satisfactory
mirror for the camera it is
also transparent to the ob-
server for reading the dials.
The installation of photo re-
corders is shown in Pig. 22.
Illustrations of position
transmitters, indicators and
special control column hand
wheel are given at Pigs. 23, 24
and 23.
It is of interest to note
that the training of test
crews for high altitude con-
ditions for the purpose of these
flights is included in the work
of the flight test unit.
Some further notes on
Boeing instrumentation work re-
corded by Mr.Peggs of the B.A.C.
are included at Item N 0.5 of the
Appendix.
SE-7.02 Consolidated Aircraft Corporation.
Copy of Report NO.2A-33-014;
XB-32, Instrumentation, is given
at Item N 0.7.7 of the Appendix.
The work is being undertaken in
a section of the engineering
division which started a year
ago and is now being rehoused
near to the flight test loca-
tion. The 8.32 is the first
aircraft so worked on and the
arrangements are not so complete
as at Boeing, Douglas or Lockheed.
Pull use is made of the ability to
spread the gear in a large air-
craft. Three additional obser-
vers are employed in the test
flight aircrew, (a) one collect-
ing aerody* nic data and checking
the pilots’ flying, (b) one for
FIG. 22.
FIG. 23.
FIG. 24.
FIG. 25. CONTROL WHEEL ADAPTED FOR RECORDING CONTROL FORCES.


power plant operation and manual inspection of selected temperatures
imposing limits on performance, and (c) one operating by remote control the
instruments mounted in the
aft cabin. The layout of
test equipment is shown in
Fig.26.
The Brown temperature
recorder for 144 points is
on navigator*s table between
observers (b) and (c) and a
further manual potentiometer,
with selector for approxi-
mately 40 points where limit-
ing temperatures may be
reached, is fitted in the
drawer of the navigator’s
table for observer (b).
This potentiometer instru-
ment costs $450 at Lewis
Engineering Company,
Naugatuck, Conn, and en-
ables accurate visual
checks to be made at a rate
of one every 4 or 5 seconds.
Consolidated make up their
own thermo couples from
iron-constantin for Army
aircraft and copper-
cons tan tin for Navy air-
craft.
FIG. 26. LAYOUT FOR B.32 INSTRUMENTATION. NUMBERED POSITIONS ARE
THOSE FROM WHICH PRESSURES AND TEMPERATURES ARE RECORDED.
The gear carried in the
aft cabin comprises two* curved instrument panels each with 30 dials, repro-
ducing flying instruments and additional gauges (oil pressures etc.) of
usual dashboard type, but scaled to higher values in some cases such as
fuel pressure at booster pumps etc. These panels are about 2 feet wide by
li ft. high, and are flood lighted by aircraft landing searchlights. In a
number of cases the dials have been changed to white with black figures to
improve visibility, and this high degree of illumination has been adopted
to reduce exposure time to a minimum to overcome the effects of vibration.
The instrument panels are shock mounted but the cameras (one to each panel)
are rigid mounted. The cameras are 35 ram.cine type adapted for single shot
and solenoid operation by remote control and use the largest aperture, f 3.5.
Four manometer boards each approximately 3 feet high x 3 feet wide x
1 foot deep have 50 tubes each working on a common well. Plastic material,
"Saran" or "Tenite" is used for mercury columns and glass tubes for water
columns with aniline dye.
Fuel flow tanks are being constructed from 6" perspex tube of approxi-
mately 3/8" wall about 4 feet long, with a central rod calibrated in half
gallons. Pockets of smaller tube are built in for hydrometer and a support
for a thermometer.
In conducting the tests the fullest possible set of readings are obtain-
ed for one engine, including temperatures at cylinder heads and bases and
temperatures and pressures at all points on intake ducts. The arrangement
of thermocouples and pressure heads at the carburettor intake is shown in
Fig. 27.
Only a few representative points are taken on the other engines.
No strain gauges are included in the flight tests.
For measurement of the forces on the pilot*s control column, use is made
of a method originated by Boeing in which a loose "steering" wheel is
coupled to the column controls through three "sylphon” bronze bellows
connected to pressure gauges which can be calibrated for lbs. of force


FIG. 27. INSTRUMENTATION OF CARBURETTOR INTAKE WITH PRESSURE HEADS AND THERMO-COUPLES.
applied for elevator or aileron control. (See Pig.2s).
In similar manner rudder pedals are arranged to transmit the control
force through a parallelogram linkage with "sylphon” bellows incorporated.
The bellows operates a pressure transmitter of selsyn type connected to the
appropriate indicator on the observation panel.
Other devices in use include a neon stroboscope for calibrating
tachometers, an "Air Speed Bomb" comprising a towed pitot head 100 ft. from
the aircraft with tubes of "Saran" laid up with the tow cable for connecting
to an A.S.I. in the observation panel; and a "Take-off recorder" consist-
ing of a cross-wire telescope with movement in azimuth and elevation coupled
to discs to hold paper records on which frequent timed dots are marked.
The azimuth table is direct driven and the elevation diso is geared 10 : 1
so as to spread the record over a suitable arc. The instrument is mounted
on a theodolite stand whose location close to the take off track is
accurately known, for determination of the take off velocity etc.
For measurement of temperature at many points in connection with
exhaust heat de-icing, six 25-way telephone selector switches are being 3et
up with a dialling controller for consecutive recording or selecting any
point fits required.
SE-7*03 Douglas Aircraft Company, Inc. This firm*s latest work illustrates intense
instrumentation of the medium size aircraft and they were the first to use
the Brown recording potentiometer for this purpose. Very considerable use
is now made of this instrument, not only for temperatures, but also as a self
balancing potentiometer for use with wire strain gauges measuring control
forces, hinge movements etc. In the A*26 (Boston replacement) some 150 tem-
perature points are connected from engines, mainly the right hand unit.
Telephone type selector switches for these are located in the nacelle, with
remote control, so that only 3 main thermo-couple leads have to be run from
the nacelle to the recorder to deal with 75 couples. An improved 25 point
Lewis rotary switch is proposed for future use. A further 150 points are
connected in the Stewart Warner Heating and Ventilating system. The Brown
recorder is installed in front of the test flight engineer beside the pilot
in the alleyway leading to the nose compartment. No readings are taken on
exhaust gases on this aircraft. Ice point and hot point references are
included, the latter being a Honeywell type in which an aluminium block is
electrically heated to 400°p # with thermostat control to half a degree.


Two photo recorders are fitted, (a) the main box 24 M by 32" by 3 feet
deep (for camera) fitted in the bomb bay and (b) the auxiliary box 16" x 24."
arranged with the camera fitted separately and enclosed by dark room
curtains. As far as possible, all instruments are of the direct connected
type, including capilliary pressure gauges, and selsyns are only used where
a full range of position indication is required, indicating lamps being
used where suitable, e.g. for mixture control, blower control, landing gear,
and carburettor hot air intake. Lighting of photo recorders is by the low
consumption fluorescent tube lamps at 110 volts, these being supplied from
a 400 c/s inverter to avoid the stroboscopic variation of intensity
experienced on 60 c/s with the camera speeds. The cameras look through
apertures in the panels to plate glass mirrors in front of the panels. No
visual monitoring is used, the cameras being completely remote controlled
and run continuously at 1 frame in 10 seconds for normal fligjit and at
half second intervals for high speed diving, with provision for 8 frames per
second for special dive tests in which automatic recording can be started
from an air speed indicator.
The flight and engine instruments are included in the main recorder, and
the auxiliary panel accommodates additional instruments such as milliammeters,
12 of which are connected in the wire strain gauge circuits connected to a
Miller oscillograph, (see Pigs*15 end 16}. The latter is used for a number
of strain gauges to check static stresses, separate arrangements being in
hand for vibration tests.
The manometer equipment is arranged in one panel, with two banks of
26 each, of high readings and low readings respectively, using acetylene
tetrachloride (s.g. nearly 4) with common well. The box is 50” high by 30 M
wide by 3 feet deep for camera.
The foregoing equipment,
which is supplied from a total
of twelve 12 volt 150 amp-hour
batteries at 75 lbs,each, has
a total weight of approximately
two tons and required three
weeks to instal. The test
engineering staff on this
section is three engineers and
five mechanics. The crew of
the aircraft is normally
limited to three, comprising
FIG. 28. DIAGRAM OF ELECTRONIC BALANCE SYSTEM
FOR STRAIN GAUGES.
FIG. 29. SCHEMATIC SLIDE WIRE CIRCUIT IN WHICH D.C.
POTENTIALS ARE CHANGED BY COMMUTATION FOR
AMPLIFYING.
FIG. 30. "MAGIC EVE” INDICATOR FOR NULL
POINT OF BALANCE.
the pilot who is experienced in this work but not actually an engineer, the
flight engineer in charge, who operates the recording controls, acts as co-
pilot and watches limiting conditions of engine performance, and the assis-
tant test engineer who looks after strain gauges, oscillograph equipment etc.
The highest possible degree of remote control is obviously necessary and
practically continuous operation of the recording cameras is regarded as
worth while, since, at the small cost of film, etc. expended, valuable infor-
mation on the incidence of any unexpected trouble.


The firm displays considerable originality in the use of the available
test equipment and an interesting example is the use of the oscillograph to
explore variation of pressures in carburettor chambers, manifolds, etc,, in
relation to engine r.p.m. and torque, including the use of a wire strain
gauge formed around a tube to indicate the pressure within. Figs.2B, 29
and 30 show diagrams of this firms method of using strain gauge bridge
circuits which is described in Item Wo.B of the Appendix and Item No.lo of
the Appendix to Part D.
SE-7.04 Lockheed Aircraft. A very complete installation has been made in the
'’Constellation” but it was not possible to make a detailed inspection. The
arrangements, as discussed with their engineer, follow the same general
lines as described above. The automatic observers, of which three are used,
each accommodate some kO instruments in a box about feet by 3i feet by
5 feet fitted with specially built single shot 35 mm. film cameras with
electric control and synchronised counters.
Fluorescent tube lighting is used with F.B lens. The instruments are
generally of standard dash board types, e. g. Kollsman or Pioneer.
Temperatures records are obtained with the Brown potentiometer
connected to 130 engine points. The manometer boards incorporate 64 tubes
using acetylene tetrachloride. The airplane is also fitted with numerous
wire strain gauges for recording stick forces, and stresses in structures,
landing gear and control members, which are connected to an oscillograph.
Vibration tests had not been made in flight but have been effected on the
ground, air tests being contemplated at a later date.
The test instrument arrangements for the Constellation were carried
out, with a staff of five engineers and twenty mechanics, between August
and January during the general fitting up of the aircraft, and the general
planning, detail arrangements, obtaining the gear and installing, all
proceeded in parallel as far as practicable.
Reference was made to the difficulty experienced in rapidly and
accurately synchronising the position indicators of control surfaces to
l/lO of 1 D so as to repeat test conditions exactly from time to time.
The solution was seen at Boeings, who have operated the position trans-
mitter through a pretensioned multiplying drive from the shaft of the aileron
and accurately calibrated the selsyn indicator. Reference was also made
to the use of a micro switch operated by a multiplying lever from a defleo-
tion of .001” in a principal airframe member to give warning of excessive
stress.
Arrangements have also been made for instrumentation of the P. 38 for
flight tests. These follow the same general lines as before but on a
reduced scale. An automatic observer is controlled through relays and
timers to photo record a total of 60 readings, and an oscillograph has been
fitted to record strain gauge readings without an amplifier.
SS-7*05 North American Aviation Inc. This firm has hitherto made use of small
photo recorder boxes, approximately quadrant shaped, of 26” radius and 15”
* deep, two of which can be accommodated behind the pilot in a fighter, one in
the wireless bay at the top of the coupe and one below. Each box is
fitted with 6 or 8 standard dashboard instruments lighted by small bulbs
carried behind a bezel panel. The panel is in the form of an arc and two
mirrors are arranged at angles so that the camera can be placed by the side
of the panel. The sequence and number of the reoord made is indicated on
the film by leaving blank frames 1,2, 3, etc. in between the record shots.
Preparations were seen in the hangar for a test on the cooler scoop in the
Mustang, the top recorder being fitted with 2 temperature indicators (se-
lected out of 8 connected), pressure and static indicators for air speed,
the scoop position indicator and clock, while the bottom recorder was fitted
with pressure indicators for manifolds and several air inlet and outlet
points. This size of recorder, though limited in scope, is easily and
quickly installed.


For pressure recording, pitot tubes are set up in all feasible points
of air inlet and outlet, and for carburettor and coolers etc. The mano-
meters are kept independent and are shaped with the bottom U converted into
nearly a full circle so that the side tubes lie very close together, both
for compactness and to enable the differential to be seen as clearly as
possible. Accuracy to about 1/10 inch is obtained. Water is used for
+ 36" of water and carbon tetrachloride of 1.7 s.g. is used for + 50" of
water. Owing to difficulty in getting sufficient space for the - camera
angle, the manometers are installed in the bomb bay. It is proposed to
use the Brown potentiometer to record the positions of tail control surfaces
by the use of a local cell to set up a p.d. on the position transmitter, for
reference to the potentiometer which would be calibrated for the position
angle. A similar arrangement is being developed for the waste gate of a
turbo blower, and has also been used for the Mustang scoop tests.
An interesting arrangement which is being developed for recording
manometer readings consists of a five sided box 2 ft. in diameter and 40
inches high, containing up to 80 manometers distributed along four of the
sides, with a lamp bulb at the centre. Blue print paper is passed round
the four sides of the box close up to the manometer tubes with feed and
take up rollers in the fifth sector of the bOx. Light from the bulb (which
is run on excess volts) is focused by the tubes into lines on the photo
paper. A sample of this record is included at Item No. 12 of the Appendix.
SE-7.06 Bell Aircraft Corporation. This firm's work is of particular interest
in its treatment of small aircraft. In connection with the development of
the new Airacobra p 63, photo recording is being arranged in the coupe behind
the pilot. The normal "perspex" top is removed and the space filled with a
similarly shaped camera box fitted with a panel for 15 dashboard instruments
at the forward end. These instruments are varied in their combinations to
suit various tests. The camera is a Bell Howel 33 mm. Eyerno, arranged for
solenoid operation by manual control or through an intervalometer, which
can be set for intervals of from 2 to 30 seconds by switching in an elec-
tronic circuit arrangement based on the charging or discharging of a con-
denser. Mechanical intervaloraeters and relays have also been used.
Records are usually taken at 2 second intervals in climb and 10 seconds in
level flights. Pressures are read by an ingenious switching device.
Owing to lack of space for manometer boards a number of tubes are connected
to Schrader valves in a small manifold, to which a sensitive pressure gauge
is connected on the panel. An electrical step by step drive is used to
operate a cam plate, which opens the valves one at a time in step with the
camera exposures.
Temperatures are recorded on a Brown potentiometer located in place of
nose cannons (mock-up projections being fitted to simulate the aerodynamic
effect of guns). In each of the four groups of pyrometer circuits on the
recorder, one is used for outside air temperature and arranged to form a
convenient group marker on the chart. One or more other spare circuits are
used to record a series of code readings, set by rheostats to correspond to
600°, 500°, 400° etc. to serve as indicators of the serial numbers of the
group of records,by which they can be linked up with the photo recorders.
Stick forces are measured by incorporating a spring pressure pad in the
hand grip, with an armature movable in relation to a reactance coil fed
with 400 c/s A.G. from an autosyn inverter and connected to a rectifier and
milliameter calibrated in force required to depress the grip.
Rudder pedal forces are measured by a self-contained hydraulic system
similar to the automobile brake. The pedal is arranged to operate a
1 sq.inch piston and a pressure indicator scaled in Ibs./sq.in. therefore
reads, in pounds, the force applied.
Further investigations planned include a wake survey over the wing of
P 63 to determine if possible whether laminar flow conditions are being
achieved. Approximately 40 pitot tubes are to be fitted for this purpose
and a sensitive A.S.I. A recent N.A.C.A. momentum method of determining
drag is also being investigated, with indicated speeds of 300 m.p.h. and
full throttle shallow dives, to check the onset of compressibility. In this


connection true airspeed is being checked with a special pitot head carried
on a projection in front of the cannons, calibrated by flying at constant
height past a tower.
Plans are also being made for photo recording in an acrobatic test.
A report on a spinning test is included at Item N 0.13 of the Appendix.
Staff engaged on flight research comprise 5 or 6 engineers for planning,
5 mechanicians building apparatus, 12 for installations, and 6 engineers
for reduction of data and
records who prepare pre-
liminary results in about
two days, several weeks
being required to examine
completely and report.
Theodolite Space-Time
Recorder for Take-Off
Bells propose to use
this instrument in the
form developed at Vega
Aircraft Corporation,
Burbank. A description
is given at Item N 0.14
of the Appendix and a
photograph at Pig.3l.
Little work has yet
been done with the oscillo-
graph, but a four element
type is on order from
Consolidated Engineering
Corporation.
Certain vibration
troubles met with in P 39
were found to be due to
change of engine and
propeller combination, and
were cured (as already
learned at Wright Field)
FIG. 31. VEGA THEODOLITE TAKE-OFF RECORDER.
by use of suitable rubber engine mounts. The Firm's engineers consider
the use of vibration equipment will be of great value for checking design
stressing.
CHAPTER 8 - APPLICATION TO BRITISH DEVBL0EM3NT
5E-8.01 General. Fully instrumented test flight carried out on the American
scale provides a wealth of exact information, to show the possible per-
formance and limitations of the aircraft under any condition of load and
flight. This information is of incalculable value from the operational
aspect, as well as to check design and service operation, prevent defects,
avoid many design modifications, so assisting production, and also to
accumulate data for use in future designs. Much of this work has grown
up in America in the past year or so and is complementary to that on
vibration and flutter.
5E-8.02 Future Types. A policy requiring the fullest recording of test flight
instrumentdata on new prototypes should be laid down now, and detailed
plans made to determine the equipment and staff needed and the means of
providing them. These points should be considered in conjunction with
the complementary work on vibration and strain gauges, and in relation to
the importance of such work and the training of future aerodynamicists.


SE-3.03 Present Types. There can be no doubt that the more important British
operational aircraft would reveal information of great value in regard to
their all-out capabilities under completely instrumented tests, and this
information might well have a direct bearing on war operations if obtained
soon enough. Data obtained from present types will be essential for
reference and comparative purposes for the future. Hence arrangements
should be initiated for comprehensive tests as soon as practicable with
due regard to the relative importance of testing those types which will
have the greatest bearing on progress.
SE-8.04 Equipment from America. The orders for the equipment selected by the
Mission for M.A.P. include six Brown self balancing potentiometers and six
potentiometers with galvanometers for visual operations and monitoring. The
manufacture of the Brown recorder is not on a production basis and a batch
will be put in hand during the later months of this year, after which it
will be impossible to obtain any more for an indefinite period. About sixty
are in existence already, a number of which are at the disposal of the Navy
Department. It was hoped that two of these might be released pending
manufacture of the six requisitioned. This matter is in the hands of the
8.A.C., and will no doubt require suitable follow-up action.
SE-8.05 Organisation. Having regard to the limitations of equipment and
personnel of the specialised type for this work, it will be necessary to
plan carefully both the official organisation to promote effective develop-
ment and also to the establishment of facilities in the aircraft firms.
A central branch under D.T.D, will be needed to co-ordinate work on a
priority programme at first, with a nucleus group of technicians who could
be made available for attachment to individual firms to assist in planning
the instrumentation layout, deciding how the special equipment and gadgetry
can be obtained, made up and installed, to take part in the test flights,
at the firms' airfield or A & A.E.E., and finally to be associated with the
assessment and presentation of the flight records and resulting data. As
a matter of practical expediency, this central organisation should embrace
responsibility also for the necessary work on vibration, although the latter
will have an element of research to be considered whereas the general instru-
mentation should be largely a matter of routine development, in which the
firms should ultimately become self supporting or mutually so in groups.
It will, in addition, be necessary to review the availability in this
country of the wide variety of equipment which will be needed and to ensure
the manufacture of special items.


APPENDIX - List of documents brought back from America.
1. E.T. Allen’s Sixth Wright Brothers Lecture, Institute of
Aeronautical Sciences, on Aircraft Test flying.
2. ’’Aeroplane Performing, Testing and Altitude, J.A.S., Feb.l94l*
by A. C. Reed.
3. Leaflet, Boeing Co-ordination System.
4-. Boeing Report D. 3863 Instrumentation of XB-29 (3 parts) together with:-
a. Photo, Boeing Aircraft Photo Recorder.
b. Boeing Aircraft Photo Recorder - Photo
c. Boeing Aircraft Manometer Board, photo
d. Boeing Aircraft Dg.99-6520 Wiring for Test Equipment.
e. Boeing Aircraft Dg.99-6501 Wiring for Test Thennos.
f. Boeing Aircraft Dg.99-6510 Wiring for Cyl.Hd.Thermos.
g. Boeing Aircraft Dg. 99-6516 Tubing for Test Pressures.
5. K.C.Peggs* Notes on Boeing Instrumentation together withj-
a. Sketches of thermocouples (Boeing Instrumentation)
b. Sketch of Direct Residing Flowmeter.
c. Sketch of Pressure Heads.
d. Table showing Organization of Boeing Flight and Aero-Dynamics
Department.
6. Quotation and full particulars of Brown Potentiometer Recorders.
7. Consolidated Aircraft Report No.2A-33-014, X 832 Instrumentation.
8. Douglas Article on ”F3ight Testing Equipment for Large Aircraft”
S.A.3.Journal April *43.
9. Photo Recorder, Douglas Aircraft A-20, Test Flight Instrument Panel.
10. Photo Recorder, Douglas A-26, Test Flight Instrument Panel.
11. 3 Samples of Record Film, Douglas Recorders. (35 mjns. )
12. Sample of Paper Blueprint Record, North American Manometer Recorder.
13. Report N 0.14-923-001,.14-923-001, P-39D Spin Tests.
14. Report N 0.522 Space-Time Recorder for take-off.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




