

AUTHORISED EDITION.
THE THIRD YEAR OF
THE WAR
A SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
THE RIGHT HON.
SIR H. CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN,
G-. C.1E8., imme 3 .,
On OCTOBER 2oth, 1901,
-A.T STIRLING.
PUBLISHED BY
THE LIBERAL PUBLICATION DEPARTMENT
(In connection with the National Liberal Federation
and the Liberal Central Association),
42, PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON, S.W.;
AND BY
THE SCOTTISH LIBERAL ASSOCIATION,
71, Princes Street, Edinburgh, and
3, Dundas Street, Glasgow.
PRICE ONE PENNY.


Copies of this Pamphlet may be obtained at the following
rates :
25 Copies Is. 9d.; Post free, 2s. Id.
3s. Od. ; „ 3s. 6cL
100 „ ... ... 4s. Sd. ; „ ss. 3«
250 £0 10s- 6d carriage
1000 „ .. .„ £1 15s. Od./ Extra.


THE THIRD YEAR OF THE WAR.
Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, G.C.8., M.P., speaking at a
meeting of the Scottish Liberal Association at Stirling on October
25th, 1901, said, —Mr. Chairman, Lord Aberdeen, Ladies and Gentlemen,
—I thank you from the bottom of my heart for your enthusiastic
greeting, and I know all that it means. This is the first occasion on
which it has been my privilege to attend the annual gathering of the
Scottish Liberal Association since you elected me to be your president,
and I feel constrained to renew my warm acknowledgment of your
kindness and the expression of my sincere gratitude for such a proof of
your regard and confidence. I will not discuss, because lam the last
person in the world who can be considered competent to discuss, my
own personal qualifications for the position ; but this I will say—that
if the Scottish Liberal Association desired to find a man who was
perfervidly Scotch, honestly Liberal, and earnestly desirous, seeing that
we call ourselves an association, to make that name something more
than a word, to induce it to show that lively activity and that loyalty
and unity without which no such body as ours can be effective, I am
that Scotchman and that Liberal.
The Liberal Leadership.
As I am speaking of myself perhaps you will allow me to go on to
say that in discharging the duties which fall to me to-night I am
profoundly impressed by the recollection and consideration of another
position, even more eminent and conspicuous, to which I have been
called. Nearly three years ago my comrades in the Liberal party in
the House of Commons did me the honour to invite me to act as their
leader. The months and the years that have since passed—how shall
I say it 1 Ido not wish to pitch it too high—have at least not been
easy and uneventful in politics. In July last circumstances had arisen
which appeared to me to indicate to some minds that I did not enjoy
the full confidence of the party; and I summoned a meeting of the
party, at which I received at their hands unanimously and spon-
taneously a renewal of my trust. This was a singular mark of
confidence and of approval. I would assure you, whatever you may
have heard, that there was nothing about it of organisation or of
hypocrisy. It was entirely genuine and natural. Ido not mention it
in any spirit of egotistical satisfaction, but these being my credentials
to-night, as I stand before you, I feel that they lay upon me a burden
of obligation, they endow me with an authority, they impose upon me
a responsibility, which will be present in every word I utter to you
to-night.
The Alleged “Compact.”
Let me clear up a misconception which appears to prevail. I occa-
sionally see reference to some strange new compact which was sealed
and delivered at the meeting to which I have referred, giving to


members of the Liberal party a new licence to speak and act as they
I know of no such compact. I must have been a party to it
if it had existed. Something, indeed, was said as to the freedom of
individuals to express and to act upon their individual opinions regarding
the origin of this war, but that was nothing new. I had never
observed any indisposition or reluctance or difficulty in doing so before.
There was no new licence granted, because none was required. What
was claimed was renewal of an existing licence, and—this is more in
your line, Mr. Provost, than in mine; but according to the best of my
observation an existing licence is always, or generally, renewed when
the character of the applicant is unexceptionable. The Liberal party has
always been a party of freedom of thought and action, embracing men
of divers opinions on particular questions. We do not suffer; on the
contrary, we immensely gain, by this diversity. It is no part of my
duty as Leader to rebuke or to confute, still less to excommunicate a
member who may hold extreme views on some particular question. My
business is to keep the head of the ship straight, whatever be the theory
of navigation which possesses the mind of some members of the crew.
My business is to see that the views I express, and which the central
body of the party act upon, are views in accord with the old vital prin-
ciples of Liberalism, the fixed, but vivifying and energetic principles of
Liberalism, the enforcement of which is, in my judgment, the sole
purpose for which the party exists. We cannot, however, be effective
in the enforcement of our principles, excellent though they may be,
unless we act with loyal co-operation and unity, and I confidently
appeal to you, and to true Liberals throughout the country, to do
all that you can to restrain any tendency towards the exaggeration of
differences, and even in some cases the manufacture of differences, in
order that the common stock of the intellectual and moral energy of the
party may be brought to bear upon the public duty which our
traditions, as well as our convictions, impose upon us.
The War.
Now, it has become habitual with us at political meetings for some
time past to commence by declaring that at present the war in South
Africa overwhelms all other public questions. It is perfectly true.
However urgent may be the necessity for alterations in our laws, how-
ever distressing may be the condition of large masses of our people,
however interesting and deserving of consideration and examination
may be great social problems, they cannot be adequately examined
and discussed while the heart, the thoughts, the intellectual energy of
the country are concentrated in South Africa; and this absorption,
natural and inevitable as it is, as the days go on increases in a high
ratio. You will not, therefore, be surprised when I tell you that it is
of the war, and of the war almost exclusively, that I shall speak to you
to-night. I well remember the last occasion when I met the members
of this association. It was in Aberdeen in December, 1899. My noble
friend who sits near me (Lord Aberdeen) presided, always in his place,
always ready to throw the great weight of his character and his


intellectual endowments into the cause of any philanthropic movement,
or into the advocacy of any public opinion in which he believes, those
were the darkest hours in the military history of this war. The whole
country was shrouded in grief and disappointment. We in Scotland
especially had been staggered by the catastrophe of Magersfontein,
where the best blood of our kinsfolk was poured out in a vain sacrifice.
But not even incidents such as that could daunt the British nation.
While we recall those dismal moments let us not forget the coui’age
with which the people of this country faced the difficulties they had to
encounter, how they never flinched, never wavered, never doubted,
never despaired, and were ready for any effort in order to bring the
war to a triumphant conclusion.
The Ultimatum and After.
Even those of us—and there were many—who denounced the
culpable mismanagement which had led to the war—even we, when
the Ultimatum was launched, when our colonies were invaded, when
the cause of our country was .involved, were ready, were open-mouthed
in our professions of willingness to give every facility towards the
vigorous prosecution of the campaign. And why ? Because we saw
that it was the shortest way, when war, however horrible and deplorable
it might be, had occurred, not only to vindicate the authority of the
British Crown, but to bring a new era of prosperity and peace to
South Africa. Such was the state of things two years ago. Since
that time no effort has been spared or grudged by this country and,
let me add, no heroism or sacrifice has been wanting on the part of
the Army. If the war was not ended long ago it is not for any lack of
courage or capacity in our soldiers, who, from first to last, whether on
the stricken field under the spur and incitement of a great battle, or
in the miserable, wearying drudgery and obscurity of more desultory
warfare, have always displayed those unequalled qualities which give
them a foremost place among the military forces of the world.
The Third Year of the War.
But now we have entered on the third year of the war. Why has
it not ended long ago? And when will it end ? And why is the end
delayed ? These are the questions that now every man is asking his neigh-
bour ; and well he may, for they are most grave and serious questions.
Every week that the war lasts brings a huge burden of expenditure
upon the British Treasury, and a sickening tale of sorrow and loss of
life upon our countrymen here and in South Africa. But this is not all.
There is a similar suffering among the men who are in the field against
us; and humanity forbids that we should leave this out of account.
There is loss and distress and ruin to thousands of non-combatants in
South Africa, on whichever side their sympathies may lie. There is
the destruction of property. There is the ever-increasing bitterness of
feeling and alienation of races. There is weakness to our Empire and
its interests in every part of the world. There is confusion and injury,
and even the growth of paralysis, in our trade and commerce and


industries at home. What wonder, then, that the nation, however
resolute and courageous it may have been, is losing patience, and is
beginning to ask whether everything is being done to accelerate the
conclusion of the war, and that men who see what the present con-
dition of affairs in South Africa is are now wondering what future can
be in store for us in that country !
The Cause of the War’s Slow Progress.
I will state in very plain terms my opinion of the cause of the slow
progress of the war. It is that the whole tone and spirit underlying
the policy of his Majesty’s Government, the tone and spirit in which
not only the war but the negotiations before the war have been con-
ducted, have been essentially wrong ; have made for inevitable discord
instead of making for peace ; and have been such as cannot but have a
calamitous influence on our power and position in South Africa.
A Perfect Epitome of Wholesome Doctrine.
Now, as I am discoursing on this subject perhaps it would be well
that I should put myself in order by furnishing a text upon which to
discourse. It is the usual thing. A text of Scripture on which a
sermon is founded is a passage in which the preacher, of course, agrees,
and which he finds capable of exposition, of illustration and of practical
application, I have a text of high authority, words that you are
familiar with, words that have been often quoted, stale and well-worn
words uttered solemnly by the Colonial Secretary in May, 1896, when
he was inspired by the wise advisers who then surrounded him. What
he then said was this :
“A war in South Africa would be one of the most serious wars that
could possibly be waged. It would be in the nature of civil war.” (Mark
these words.) “It would be a long war, a bitter war, and a costly war. It
would leave behind it the embers of a strife which, I believe, generations
would hardly be long enough to extinguish. To go to war with President
Kruger in order to force upon him reforms in the internal affairs of his
State, with which successive Secretaries of State standing in this place have-
repudiated all right of interference, would have been a course of action as
immoral as it would have been unwise.”
A perfect epitome of wholesome doctrine on the subject of South Africa.
You will observe thei’e are two parts in it—first of all, a warning—
how well-founded a warning we can all judge for ourselves—a warning
as to the nature of the war; secondly, the denunciation as unwise, im-
proper, and even immoral, of any attempted interference in the internal
affairs of the Transvaal Republic.
A Flagrant Inconsistency.
On the second point I cannot improve upon what he says. I have
often thought, and have often said, that there was a great deal of
bullying and a hectoring tone which inspired suspicion, and which
frustrated the success of peaceful negotiations ; but what is the use of
these subordinate objections ? The greater includes the less. We have


here the denouncing of interference as unwise and immoral, lam not
going into that question just now, but I cannot refrain from pointing
out what we see so clearly now—the flagrant inconsistency which the
world outside these shores sees, the flagrant inconsistency and the
ground which exists for the accusation of hypocrisy in the course which
has been followed. Ought we not to blush ? You and I need not blush,
because, thank goodness, we have no complicity in the matter. But
still our country's character is at stake, and in that sense we may blush.
Ought not, at all events, those who have complicity to blush when they
think of our insistency to the very point of war on the sovereign virtue
of free representative institutions, of our intolerance of even a year’s
delay in establishing them in another man’s State, while in our own
States, old and new, all rights of voting, or speaking, or writing, and
almost of thinking, are at this moment abolished ? We are told,
although I never agreed to it, that we ought to defer the consideration
of all these matters until after the war is ended ; so I will content
myself with repeating this unqualified condemnation of what was done
by its own author. The fact, at all events, is that the Government
failed to maintain peace, which they professed to be their object, and
war ensued.
The Mismanagement of the War.
Now I come to an important matter. What are we to say of the
conduct of the war? We are told, mainly by the same persons who
think that we should put off all consideration of the previous negotiations
—I say we are told by them that we ought to concentrate our criticism
and condemnation, if we find reason to form it, upon the incompetence
of the Government in their military administration of the war, their
misjudgments, their blindness, their helplessness. Certainly I
admit there is here a large field of criticism and ample ground of
condemnation, and I am quite willing to take my part in it. • They
carried their negotiations to the point of war, ignoring the formidable
armaments which the Boers had accumulated, of which they had in
their War Office ample and sufficient information. They had so
misread the character of their antagonists that they thought to bluff
the Boers, and that the Boers would not fight. One Minister was
astonished to find that they could shoot, and another was surprised to
hear that they could ride, while a third expected Switzerland to
declare war against us as soon as the Free State. They declined
mounted men, preferring foot soldiers. I observe that now one of the
great reasons given by them for the long delay in a satisfactory con-
clusion of the war is that the country is so vast; it is so extensive,
equal to France and Spain combined ; and also there are natural
advantages of which these dreadful men who are opposed to us take the
benefit. These all existed three years ago, and lam not aware that a
mile has grown any longer in South Africa during these two years. They
sent out two large forces of Imperial Yeomanry, as they call them, one
which did excellent service, but which apparently they are unable to
pay ; the other, to the members of which they promised pay exceeding


by four or five times what they give to the hard-worked cavalry
soldier, but the greater number of whom had to be returned to England
as useless and unfit. And so we might go on. If these things had
been fiction instead of sober and saddening fact we should have looked
for their author in Mr. Gilbert, for outside opera bouffe no such tissue
of absurdities has ever been presented to the world. But no, sir, I
decline the invitation. I decline to concentrate myself upon these and
other blunders which may deserve censure, but which are not of first
importance. That which is of prime moment is the total inability the
Government has shown to discern and keep in view the political aspect
of the war.
The Political Aspect of the War,
In a war there is something besides the military conduct of a
campaign and the provisioning of troops and the furnishing of supplies
and the strategy which is to be used —these are matters which military
men are much better fitted to judge of than you and I—there is the
political conduct of the war. War is not a mere game, a trial of
strength and skill between two players to be continued by them until
the board is cleared of pieces on one side or the other. It is an
instrument, an odious and horrible instrument; but in this imperfect
world it seems to be a necessary instrument in some cases for the
accomplishment of some political object. What is the political object
here? It is the peace, the harmony, the contentment of South Africa
under the predominant power of Great Britain. Now, the cardinal
fact upon which the whole problem turns is that which is stated in the
text which I have chosen—that this is of the nature of a civil war.
We are not fighting with a foreign foe whom we are to thrash and
overcome and vanquish and punish, and then abandon him and turn
our back upon him. These men are to be our neighbouis—nay, they
are tb be our fellow-citizens. Whatever be their faults, whatever be
their offences in the present or in the past against us, if we are to stay
in South Africa at all they will be there ; and not only so, but they
are undistinguishable from the great majority of our own citizens in
our own colonies. They are so interwoven with them by sympathies
and by blood relationship that it is practically one community from
end to end.
Our Objects in the War.
Now any one who rightly appreciates these facts—and they are
not deniable or disputable facts—what will he say ought to be our
objects in a war like that which we have undertaken in South Africa ?
The first ought to be to impress upon our antagonsts our military
superiority, and I have always held this to be our first object. But
the second is to impress upon them our ultimate and essential friendli-
ness towards them ; and this would have been no false representation
of our feelings. It would have been founded upon truth, because the
large-hearted British people, whatever may be their anger, indignation,
and prejudice at the moment, have no animosity or antipathy against
the Boers, and no desire for their subjection. When I think of these


things some words echo in my recollection; words which appear in one
of the lyrics which Henry Lushington wrote at the commencement of
the Crimean war. How different from the sort of war lyrics with
which we are supplied to-day ! In this lyric he describes the departure
of the' Grenadier Guards for the Jsast, where they are to fight side by
side with our old traditional e*mies, the French. On their way to
the station they march over Waterloo-bridge, and he breaks out: —
“ Bridge of Waterloo,
Name of happy omen,
For the staunchest friends are wrought
Out of the bravest foemen.”
There is an object, a worthy object, for a great and far-seeing states-
man, or for a large-hearted statesman, to turn brave foemen into
staunch friends. Why can we not do it in South Africa ? Because
our Ministers have barred the way, and have prevented the dream from
being realised. Instead of arguing about what they have done, and
what they might have done, perhaps I should better attain my end by
inviting you to consider the result of their policy.
The Future Outlook.
Take a glance at the present condition of affairs, and see what it
promises for future amity and prosperity. I see that some people with
placid countenance invite us to take the war now as nearly concluded,
and to turn our attention entirely to the pleasing subject of the settle-
ment which is to occur after the war—elaborating a quiet and Arcadian
Constitution which will bring a sort of millennium into South Africa.
We are to exercise our minds as to the degree and nature of the self-
government which should be granted, and I admit and agree, and have
always claimed, that if we are at all to retain our position in South
Africa it is only by self-governing institutions that this country can
ever maintain its authority over citizens of European race. But
where are the elements to be found for a settlement in the condition to
which you have now reduced South Africa ? The whole country in the
two belligerent States outside the mining towns is a howling wilderness.
The farms are burned, the country is wasted. The flocks and herds are
either butchered or driven off; the mills are destroyed, furniture and
implements of agriculture are smashed. These things are what I have
termed methods of barbarism. I adhere to the phrase. I cannot im-
prove upon it. If these are not the methods of barbarism, what
methods did barbarism employ? No, sir. Of course, in particular
cases, where some offence has been committed against right dealing, let
punishment be enforced, and in time of war things are not done in a
rosewater sort of way; but the universal treatment of a whole country
in this manner, and the sweeping of women and children into camps, is
a process for which I venture to say nothing can furnish justification.
The Constitution of Arcadia.
When the war is happily ended and we set about the constitution
of Arcadia, the 50,000 prisoners of war will of course return to what


by some sort of irony we may perhaps be permitted to call their home.
These are the materials for your new self-government. They will meet
the 100,000 women and cliildren from the camps, or the survivors
of them—there will not be many children at the present rate—
and in what sort of mind towards the British Empire will these men
be when the husband meets the hears her story, when the
brother meets the sister, when the father looks in vain for his child ?
But here let me interpolate by way of relief to the picture—not that
it affords much relief, I admit, but it is a little change—let me inter-
polate another aspect of this picture which may not have occurred to
you. Even in Arcadia before men vote they must eat. How are
these people to be fed ? You have not only destroyed the stores and
the crops, but the means of recreating the stores and producing the
crops. Therefore, of course, as you have done this in the majesty of your
power, by those up-to-date, twentieth-century methods—oh, but they are
the twentieth-century methods, because we are told on the highest
authority that the old Victorian methods—how long it seems since we
parted with the good old Queen —what are called the Victorian
methods are out of date altogether, either in politics or in morals, and
we have started upon a new career altogether. Well, at any rate,
what are we to do with these people? We must support them, of
course. We cannot leave them to starve, and this may goon for many
years ; and what with this and the large army of occupation that must
be maintained I begin to think that the end of the war, however
desirable, will bring no end to the outpouring of money. Ah, two
years ago, when we were getting on so nicely with our negotiations
and our conferences, and were writing such clever despatches, and
making such telling speeches, and such nice jibes against President
Kruger, and giving forth such elegant threats—then it was that the
sluice was opened; and who shall say when the flood shall be stayed ?
Thankful I am to remember that there were at least some among us
who raised a voice in protest at the time.
A Fatal Error.
Now if we can realise in this way what the present state of affairs
is, and what the future conditions must be, do you suppose fora moment
that the fighting Boer on the veldt does not see it as well as you and
I ? And what is the effect upon brave men ? Of course, it can only
be to harden their hearts and drive them to desperation. Our desire, the
desire of all of us, is to see the Boers lay down their arms and give in.
The plan of the Government for this purpose is to create before them
that prospect of ruin which I have described, to treat them as outlaws,
to issue proclamations threatening them with punishment and confisca-
tion, to demand unconditional surrender—a plan which for the purpose
of ending the war is senseless and imbecile, and which, if persisted in,
will leave no ray of hope for South Africa. What more fatal error can
be made, when you want a man to surrender, than to take away from
him everything that can be gained by surrender ? The other course,
which I have again and again advocated, is to associate the energetic


prosecution of the campaign with the publication of reasonable and
honourable terms of settlement, and to take every opportunity of mani-
festing our disposition to treat. Chance after chance has occurred, and
whether by carelessness it has been neglected, or whether by arrogance
it has been ruined, it has, at all events, been lost. My belief is that
the mass of the British people have not in heart or mind any animosity
whatever towards'the Boers, that they wish to see the British power
at the Cape vindicated, and that they wish to see our colonies protected
against any future danger of this kind; but they do not desire to see
a brave people subjugated or annihilated.
A Policy of Subjugation and Annihilation.
But mark this—and this is what is being done—now the policy is a
process not of defeat, but of subjugation and annihilation. I saw the
other day a speech which I thought somewhat illustrated this fact.
It was a speech by perhaps the most obscure member of His Majesty’s
Government, by the Civil Lord of the Admiralty (Captain Pretyman).
I always read the speeches made by the subordinate members of the
Government, because they are not restrained by any sense of responsi-
bility, and they give to you, at any rate, the tone of conversation among
those in a higher position. He is not yet the twenty-first member of the
Cabinet, but he may get there by-and-by. He says it is not wonderful
that operations have not ceased; “to finish a war was one thing, to
subdue a race was another.” These were his words—“a race,” mark
you, not even the Boers, but the Dutch, the whole race is to be subdued.
This gentleman will not be satisfied until he has his heel on the neck of
the Dutch. That is the object avowed in these words, and then he
says, naturally, that this will take some time. And in the meantime
give him only time enough, and above all do not hamper the Govern-
ment with your unpatriotic criticism, and the thing will be done.
Sir M. Hicks-Beach and our Terms of Peace.
But this is a most singular Government. By way of contrast
here are some words used by a very much more important person
—namely, the Chancellor of the Exchequer. The other day he
was able to take his eye from the polariscope by which he is
endeavouring to control his new sugar duties, and he went to
Oldham and made a speech. There may have been something
exciting in the locality or in the society in which he found himself,
and he made certainly a very remarkable speech. He said, “We have
offered to the inhabitants of the Transvaal and the Orange River
Colony greater liberties than I believe are enjoyed by the subjects of
any European State. We have offered them”—not “we are willing
to give them” but “we have offered them the position which has made
French Canadians loyal and devoted subjects of the Crown. We have
offered them the position of self-governing colonies of the British
Empire.” I ask Sir Michael Hicks-Beach to be good enough the next
time he speaks—whether he goes to Oldham to say it or not—to say
when and where this offer has been made, because we poor British


public did not hear of these things. We were under the impression
that this was precisely what had not been offered to the Boers. But
he says it has, and he goes further and says, “ The offer made was
refused with contumely.” I invite Sir Michael Hicks-Beach to state
where, when, by whom, and in what circumstances this offer was made.
All I can say is the sooner it is made the better. The moment it was
done, the moment a thing such as he describes was done, the tension
would slacken, and more would be done then for the conclusion of the
war than by all the forces you can send from this country, and by all
the threatening and blackmailing proclamations that your ingenuity
can invent.
The Condition of Cape Colony.
Hitherto I have spoken of the belligerent States. Now, what of
the old colony of the Cape ? To what condition has the statesmanship
of the Government brought it? A year or two ago the High Commis-
sioner himself vouched for its perfect loyalty. A spontaneous offer of
assistance towards our naval expenditure was made by a Government
which rested upon the support of the Bond—that is to say, the Dutch
party. In the early days of the war, in those black days to which 1
have referred, when, if any evil intention existed, a golden opportunity
of striking a blow was presented, they remained quiet. Their sympathies
were naturally on the side of the men of their own race, but they
did not approve of the policy and action of President Kruger, and,
having no grievance against us, they remained quiet. Contrast the
position now. I invite your attention to the position now. The
Constitution is suspended—the Constitution which has stood between
the Dutch and us as a bond of allegiance is suspended—and the suspen-
sion of the Constitution, with the consent of the Imperial Government,
is a very grave and serious fact. The Cape Parliament is not summoned
this month, and the Colonial Secretary told us no farther back than
July last that, if this occurred and it was not summoned in October, a
breach of the law would take place. _ Martial law, which is, in other
words, no law, nothing but the arbitrary rule of soldiers who know
nothing of law, prevails from end to end of the country. We have
reason to fear that martial law is but a form of undeclared war upon
the Dutch population. All the ordinary guarantees of civil rights are
suspended. No man is safe in property, in liberty, or in life. The
independent Press is silenced. So severe are the restrictions on news
that we have only partial information, but we have enough to know
that hundreds of men, not Dutch only, but many British, have been
arrested, thrown into gaol, deported to a distance from their homes,
tried and condemned by these military tribunals on the evidence, it
may be, of spiteful neighbours or political opponents. Why, gentlemen,
with what indignation should we denounce such proceedings in other
countries ?
A New Ireland.
I had a letter yesterday morning from one of the oldest and most
robust Liberals I know, a man of high experience and acquaintance


with this very subject, and he says, speaking to me of —“lt
seems to be thought that freedom is a fair-weather kind of thing, very
pleasant when the sun shines, but to be cast aside at once when the
storm blows.” Have these Ministers of ours not learned that it is not
by suppression of civil rights, not by harshness, not by coercion and
force in any form that a free people can be kept quiet and contented ?
How has their policy worked in the Colony ? It has alienated
thousands of both races, it has sapped loyalty, it has turned
friends into rebels, and it has filled the ranks of the men in
the field against us. And yet they wonder why it is that the
war is not concluded! I have always felt that the key of this
South African problem lay, not in Bloemfontein or in Pretoria, but
in Cape Colony. If our affairs are so managed that our fellow-citizens
in Cape Colony, British and Dutch, are kept on level terras, neither
being given an advantage over the other, neither taking advantage of
the other, if by free institutions and generous treatment they are
made happy and prosperous, our power in South Africa will right
itself. But the blindness—or is it the indifference, or is it the
recklessness I —of these Ministers has succeeded in reducing society in
the old prosperous colony to a quagmire. They have revived old
enmities and created new ones, they have sown the seeds of lasting
discord, and when they, by and by, lay down in discredit their respon-
sibilities, they will leave a new Ireland in the Southern Seas to be a
weakness and a difficulty to the Empire.
Burke and Conciliation.
You may end, of course, however discouraging the prospect may be
—you may end in preserving your power in South Africa, but how
true are the words of Mr. Burke in his famous speech on the con-
ciliation of the American colonies. Read that speech. There is a
most extraordinary resemblance between the two cases. The attitude
of the Ministry at home, the attitude of the colonists abroad, the
denouncement as traitors and almost rebels of all who raised their
voices against the Ministers at home—the whole thing is as a picture
of what is happening just now. May heaven avert the omen ! Mr.
Burke in this g-eat speech says, “ a further objection to force ” —he
was objecting to applying force in any case of this kind—“is that you
impair the object by your very endeavour to preserve it. The thing
you fought for is not the thing that you recover, but depreciated, small,
wasted, and consumed in the contest.” as I say, preserve
your authority in South Africa, but it will be depreciated, and
lessened, and wasted, and consumed. Is it too late even now to hope
for counsels of moderation, and a statesmanship which shall revert to
the great traditions which have bound Great Britain and her colonies
together ?
The Irish Question.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have detained you too long, but I have
not much more to say. I hark back to words which I have just uttered.
I spoke of a “new Ireland.” Was not one Ireland enough ? These


methods, this policy, this spirit which have worked such havoc in
South Africa, what are they but the very spirit and policy and methods
which England has applied to Ireland through many generations with
the result that we now see before us. How shocking it was to us all
to hear words spoken by leading Irishmen expressive of active enmity
against England and open desire for her discomfiture. To listen to
such sentiments is abhorrent to our inmost feelings. You and I who
see something, some in greater degree and some in less, to find fault
with in the policy of the Government in South Africa, we do not take
this view because we wish ill to our country. It is because we wish
well to our country, and because we honestly believe that harm is being
done both to the country and the Empire by what is going on. But
these are men who express another sentiment. They wish harm to our
country and Empire. Is there not something here that should make
us think 1 Is there not something that should shock us besides the
mere sentiment and the mere words 1 It is the thought surely that
the antipathy to this country which these men, who, after all, be it
remembered, represent and speak for the great majority of the Irish
people—the antipathy which they disclose is what remains in their
minds after generations and centuries of close relations with England,
and after one whole century of legislative union. What such a dis-
closure should do is to urge us to search out the causes of a state of
feeling so discreditable to us, so humiliating to us, so full of danger to
the mo»al and material strength of our country, and to remove these
causes if we can. Now, you will never remove them by any amount
of forcing and driving or of bribing and wheedling. You will only do
so by generous confidence, and therefore, for this reason, among others,
I am as strongly as ever in favour of giving self-government to Ireland.
Co-operation not Alliance.
I fully appreciate the fact that such utterances as 1 have re-
ferred to set back the acceptance of this idea by the English people.
If I deplore them it is not only on account of the merits of the
sentiment, or rather of the demerits of the sentiment, but on this
very account. But I have a thorough belief in the wisdom and
righteousness of the policy, and I believe also in the virtue of patience
and the logic of events bringing us to the day of final accomplishment.
In the meantime, as to the question which has been a good deal
discussed—the relations between the Liberal party and the Irish party
—it seems to me quite cKfer. There is no actual alliance. There can
be no alliance, for neither party desires it, and both have renounced
it. But on all questions on which we agree—and there are many—
there will, I hope, be cordial co-operation. Liberal measures have
always received a large amount of support from Irish Liberals, as much
as from English and Scotch, and I see no reason in the world why this
should not continue.
The Demand for an Alternative Government.
In holiday time, which has just come, I am sorry to say, to a
conclusion, one has leisure to study the newspapers, and I have seen


that there is a good deal said of the demand, as if it was a great
public want, for an alternative Government. Some time ago it was a
strong Opposition that was wanted, to help the Government, I
suppose, to keep straight. Even they themselves demanded it, and,
with a modesty which we must all admire, regretted that they were
not opposed by foemen worthy of their steel. But that appears to be
dropped, and what is wanted is not a strong Opposition but an alter-
native Government. Ido not know very well what they mean. This
demand comes chiefly from the slavish followers of the Government in
the Press—l cannot say from itheir admirers, because I do not find
any. The desire appears to be to establish a sort of shift, one gang to
come on when the other goes off ; or perhaps it is more like a second
eleven to play for the county in junior matches or when the first eleven
for some reason cannot play ; or perhaps I shall find a better metaphor
if Igo to the theatrical world. I believe a great actress always has
among her company some lady who studies her part and is prepared to
take it if she is prevented from acting. This is called an understudy.
Or again, when a great play' is running in London some admirable
actors go about the country and play the same piece to the admiration
of provincial audiences. I lose myself in analogies for this alternative
Ministry. But I see no reason why it should not be easily
arranged. On the Government benches behind the Treasury bench there
are any number of capable men, and I am sure that Lord Salisbury,
who so admirably controls the deliberations of the Cabinet of twenty
over which he presides, would have no difficulty in being equally
successful with another twenty.
The Need of an Alternative Policy.
But I observe that if new actors are said to be necessary, the
condition is that there shall be no change in the piece. I greatly doubt
if the country endorses any such demand. When a change is called for
by-and-by—it may not be so distant as it may appear —it will not be
for an alternative Government having X, Y, and Z, instead of A, B, and
C ; it will be for an alternative policy—for an altered spirit in domestic
legislation, an altered tone in our relations with States and com-
munities beyond our shores. We who represent the doctrines which
have given our country peace and liberty, and contentment and
prosperity, the doctrines by which the Empire has been created and by
which alone it can be preserved, we may be weak in numbers at present
and unable to effect much, but we have perfect confidence in two
things, in the truth and right of these doctrines, and in the sound
sense and judgment of our country ; and having that confidence, what-
ever the momentary majority against us be, we remain of good cheer.
By the strenuous advocacy of our principles and opinions we must seek
to influence the minds of men, and I look to you to throw your energy
into the*task of ridding our county of a Ministry which is helpless for
good at home, and which is heaping trouble upon trouble on us abroad.
Printed by the National Press Agency, Limited, Whitefriars House, London, E.C.


NEW & REGENT PAMPHLETS
GOVERNMENTS AND TRADE,
A Summary of the Nation's Account from 1846 to 1900.
By H. S. MUNDAHL, b.a., 11. b., Barrister-at-Law.
With 5 Diagrams. Price is., post free is. 2d.
Authorised Editions of Speeches.
THE THIRD YEAR OF THE WAR: Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman.
at Edinburgh, October 25th, 1901.
THE MISSION OF LIBERALISM: Mr. Asquith at the Hotel Cecil,
July 19th, 1901.
THE FINANCE OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN SITUATION: Sir William
Harcourt in the House of Commons, July 17th, 1901.
THE TORY PROGRAMME AND POLICY: Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman
at Edinburgh, May 31st, 1901.
LIBERAL POLICY ABROAD AND AT HOME : Sir H. Campbell-Banner-
man at Bradford, May 15th, 1901.
MILITARISM, IMPERIALISM AND TAXATION: Mr. John Morley in
the House of Commons, May 23rd, 1901. (National Reform Union.)
THREE SPEECHES: Mr. John Morley at Montrose, Brechin and Bervie,
June 4th, sth and 6th, 1901. (National Reform Union.)
NATIONAL REFORM UNION BANQUET SPEECHES : Sir William Har-
court, Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, and Mr. John Morley at the
King’s Hall, June 14th, 1901. (National Reform Union.)
Price id. each, post free i£d.
THE RENEWAL OF THE DOLES.
A Handbook for Political Speakers, containing a Brief History of
The Agricultural Rates Acts and the Clerical Tithes Act, the Text of the Acts
and Comments thereupon, by
CHARLES TREVELYAN, M.P., and F. W. HIRST.
1 Copy, 3d., post free, 3id. ; 6 Copies, Is. 3d., post free, Is. 6d. ; 12 Copies, 2s. 3d., post
free, 2s. 6d.
The Expenditure and Taxation of
the United Kingdom, 1875-1300.
Price 2d., post free 2|d. By W. M. J. WILLIAMS.
LIBERAL PUBLICATION DEPARTMENT,
43, Parliament Street, London, S.W.
