

1929.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
THE ABORIGINALS AND HALF-CASTES
OF
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA AND NORTH
AUSTRALIA.
REPORT
BY
J. W. BLEAKLEY.
CHIEF PROTECTOR OF ABORIGINALS, QUEENSLAND.
1928.
Presented by Command; ordered to be printed , 8th February, 1929.
[Co st of Paper.—Preparation not given; 900 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £145.]
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by H. J. Green, Government
Printer for the State of Victoria.
No. 21.—F.1882 —Price 3s. 6D.




INDEX TO REPORT.
PAGE
Aboriginal Population .. .. .. .. .. 5
Condition of Aboriginals and Half-castes—
Employment—
Wages .. .. .. .. .. .. (>
Living conditions .. .. .. .. G
Food, clothes, tobacco, medicines, treatment .. 7
System of payment .. .. .. .. 7
Control of wages —casual employment .. .. 8
Education of camp children .. .. .. 8
Recommendation .. .. .. .. .. 9
Camp dependants on cattle stations—
Means of subsistence, prostitution of women .. .. 9
Difficulty in checking prostitution .. .. 9
Measures for relief and protection .. .. .. 9
Moral laws—amendment and enforcement of .. .. 10
Indigent camps—other than on stations —
Relief issues .. .. .. .. 10
Abuses—construction camps, prohibited area .. 10
Telegraph officers as protectors .. .. 10
Mission relief camps .. .. .. ..11
Sickness—treatment at police stations .. .. 11
Recommendations .. .. ... .. ..11
Natives in Aboriginal Institutions—Statistics—
Compound at Darwin—
Domestic labour —indigent relief .. .. .. 12
Objections to compound site —clinic .. .. 12
Proposals re new clinic—organization of compound .. 10
Supervision—control, religion, and education .. 10
Recreations —retail can-teen .. .. 14
Recommendations .. .. .. 14
Half-caste home—Darwin—
Particulars of inmates—present accommodation .. 14
Proposed new home .. .. .. 15
Suggested mission home .. .. .. 15
Maintenance costs—present home .. .. 10
Saving on suggested mission home .. .. 10
Mission co-operation—anticipated opposition .. 10
Recommendations .. .. .. 10
Half-caste bungalow—Alice Springs—
Unsuitability of present buildings .. .. 17
Proposed half-caste colony—reasons against .. 17
Suggested mission home .. .. .. 17
Quadroons and octoroons—reception home .. .. 17
Removal of present bungalow .. .. 18
Aboriginal camp—Alice Springs— «
Removal of .. .. .. .. is
Holiday camp for workers .. .. 13
Suitability of Hermannsburg for half-caste home .. IS
Recommendation', re half-caste homo .. ..19
Leper lazarette—Darwin .. .. .. ..19
Mission stations—
Bathurst Island .. .. .. .. .. 19
Oenpelli .. .. .. .. .. 20
Goulburn Island .. .. .. ..21
Millingirabi .. .. .. .. .. 22
Roper River .. .. .. .. .. 22
Groote Eylandt .. .. .. .. .. 2.‘!
Mission system—objeations to—need for institutions .. 24
Advantage of mission system—training native labour .. 24
Developing marine industries .. .. .. 25
Other values of missions .. .. .. .. 25
PAGE
Allocation of assistance to aboriginal missions—
Increased subsidy—present system —Government responsi-
bility .. .. •. .. • - 25
System recommended—departmental supervision .. 25
Return of mission relief operations .. .. 26
Subsidies recommended .. .. .. .. 27
Half-castes—
Position re .. .. .. .. .. 27
Need for white women—evasion of law .. .. 27
Married men as protectors—policy necessary .. .. 27
Departmental control—measures for future —marriage to
aboriginals .. .. .. .. .. 28
Object of training—exemptions—marriage to Europeans.. 28
Suitable missions .. .. .. .. .. 28
Quadroons and octoroons .. .. .. .. 29
Recommended policy .. .. •. 29
Proposals put forward for future administration—
Native state .. .. .. .. .. 30
Complete segregation of wandering natives .. 30
Establishment of cattle station for aboriginals .. .. 30
Compulsory education of aboriginal children .. .. 31
Education in citizenship .. .. .. .. 31
Formation of Aborigines Advisory Board .. .. 31
Employment of trained anthropologist - .. 31
Nomadic tribes—
Station myalls—conflict over waters .. .. .. 31
Reservation in pastoral leases—disregard of .. .. 32
Cattle spearing .. .. .. .. .. 32
Difficulty of punishment—control inadequate .. .. 32
Sickness and disease amongst nomads .. .. 33
Blacks on unalienated country—
Protection necessary—reduction of food supplies .. 33
Benevolent supervision .. .. .. .. 33
Arnhem I.and Reserve .. .. .. 34
Melville Island Reserve .. .. .. 34
Mission coast patrols—trading .. .. .. 34
Advantages of trading .. .. .. 34
Suggested missions—
Daly River .. .. .. .. .. 34
Lake Am adeus .. .. .. . - .. 35
Recommendations .. .. .. .. .. 35
Survey of administration —
Present machinery—
North Australia .. .. .. .. .. 35
Central Australia .. .. .. .. 30
Machinery inadequate—close control essentia! .. 36
Appointments necessary .. .. .. .. 37
Additional protectors—motor conveyance for patrol .. 37
Police as protectors .. .. .. .. 37
Medical assistance .. .. • ■ • • .. 38
Blankets and relief .. .. .. .. ’ .. 38
Management of institutions —schools on missions .. 38
Marriage of aboriginals .. .. .. ..38
Punishment of native offenders —trial of .. 38
Recommendation .. .. .. .. 39
Examination of existing law .. .. .. .. 39
Synopsis of suggested general policy .. .. .. 39
Suggested amendment of ordinances .. .. 41
Explanation of .. .. • ■ .. 43
Photographic illustrations .. .. ■ - .. 45
Plan of proposed half-caste home —Darwin .. .. 65
Map of present and proposed aboriginal relief operations —■
North Australia and Central Australia .. - - CO




Brisbane,
16th January, 1929.
The Eight Honorable The Prime Minister,
Commonwealth of Australia,
Canberra, F.C.T.
Sir,
I have the honour to report that, in accordance with the instructions in your letter of
31st May, 1928, I proceeded to Central Australia and North Australia to inquire into the present
status and conditions of aboriginals, including half-castes, in those Territories.
On 11th June I reported at the Home and Territories Department in Canberra and spent
some days there, extracting from the files the information required for the task before me,
arranging for the attendance of witnesses, and generally as regards future movements.
Interviews were held on 25th and 26th June in Sydney, on 28th and 29th in Melbourne,
and on 2nd, 3rd, and 4th July in Adelaide, with representatives of various religious,
philanthropic, and scientific bodies, as well as persons who were able to furnish information on
the subject of the inquiry.
By the courtesy of the Attorney-General’s Department, the assistance of the Court
Keporting Staff was made available in these capitals, Avhich greatly facilitated the work of
recording the information supplied. Great assistance was also rendered by the Aborigines
Departments of the Southern States, by providing accommodation and all conveniences for
the holding of the inquiry and arranging for the attendance of the witnesses. On sth July,
I left by train for Oodnadatta, and from there, on 7th, by road for the Central Territory to
commence the inspection.
The arrangements for my conveyance through the Territories were entrusted to the
Government residents at Alice Springs and Darwin, and I cannot speak too highly of the
kindness received from these officers and the Chief Protectors, Protectors, and officers under
them, who all rendered me every assistance in their power.
As pointed out in the preliminary reports from Central Australia, it was not possible to
dp much in the way of personal inspection of the wild native in his natural state, owing to the
limited time allowed me for the desired inquiries, though some wandering bands were seen
while inspecting the Northern Missions and Western cattle runs. The myall’s country in
Central Australia could only be visited by travelling over vast areas of desert-like country,
accessible only by use of camels, and, even if time would have allowed, the results would have
been hardly likely to justify the trouble and expense, as a strange party might spend weeks
searching for these scattered tribes and then see very few of them. Consequently, while
visiting the semi-civilized camps in the vicinity of police and cattle stations, along main stock
routes, or accessible by car, and the various mission stations, every opportunity was taken to
collect information from station owners, stockmen, drovers, police, missionaries, and others,
including civilized half-castes and aboriginals, who in their travels had become acquainted with
the conditions as regards water, native foods, prevalence of disease, any abuses, estimated
numbers, and location of the primitive' natives, and were able to afford information on such
questions as their alleged depredations on station cattle, and opinions, born of experience, on
many of the measures suggested for the betterment of these people.
As the lack of clerical assistance and the conditions under which this information was
mostly collected, in the camps, on the plains, or in the bush, in station huts, &c., made the
taking of formal evidence or statements often impracticable, this was not attempted, the
particulars being recorded from notes taken.
ABORIGINAL POPULATION.
The estimated aboriginal population of North and Central Australia is 21,000, including
800 half-castes. It is proposed to divide them into classes, showing the approximate number
of each, as under: —
(1) The able bodied in regular or casual employment in towns or on stations 2,500
(2) Camp dependants of (1), usually old, indigent, and young .. .. 1,500
(3) Indigent camps—general (included in “ nomadic tribes ”)
(4) Inmates of Aboriginal Institutions—
Full bloods .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,450
Half-castes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 200
(5) Natives visiting or under the influence of Aboriginal Institutions
(approximately) .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,350
(6) Nomadic tribes (approximately) .. .. .. .. .. 14,000
21,000


CONDITION OF ABORIGINALS AND HALF-CASTES.
Employment Conditions.
Wages. —With regard to the first class, the principal avenues of employment open to
those fit for work are :
(1) Domestic and labouring employment in town;
(2) Domestic and stock work on cattle stations ;
(3) Labouring work with sleeper cutters, buffalo hunters, teamsters, &c. ;
(4) Boat or shore work with trepang fishers ;
but quite 80 per cent, of the labour is absorbed by the cattle stations. Those in domestic
service m town, being under more direct supervision, enjoy better conditions than their
countrymen in bush employment, receiving food, clothes, and a wage of, usually, ss. per week,
of which 3s. is paid to them as pocket money and 2s. is banked in Trust Account for them.
Where the contract to supply food and clothing is fairly fulfilled, the wage of ss. per week may
be regarded as reasonable remuneration for the average servant, especially where, as in Darwin,
the native returns at night to the compound to sleep. But some of these servants, especially
the half-castes, are worth more than the average, and the regulation rate of ss. per week should
be used as a minimum and not a fixed rate, the more capable servants being paid according to
their real value.
A few bush labourers, such as sleeper cutters’ assistants, employed near the railway line,
receive 10s. per week, but in the country, by payment of a license fee of 10s. per annum, the
employer is entitled to employ an unlimited number of aboriginals without payment, on
condition that those employed arc clothed and fed, and reasonable shelter is provided for
them. The licence stipulates that any permanently employed shall be paid a wage of ss. per
week, of which the Protector may collect 10s. per month to be banked in the Trust Account
to each native’s credit. As employers on pastoral holdings have claimed that many more
natives have to be fed than are employed by them, the payment of wages has not been insisted
upon, at any rate in North Australia.
In Central Australia, a number of the stations claim that in place of the licence rates of
ss. per week, with food and clothes for permanent employees, they pay from 10s. to £1 per week
to men, and ss. per week to women, supplying food only, the natives buying their own clothes,
tobacco, &c., either at the station store or from hawkers or local storekeepers. A few stations
on the Barkly Tableland also pay higher rates to their more capable employees, who receive
and handle their earnings in a similar manner.
As one result of this system they frequently waste their money, leaving their dependants
to seek Government relief. It was urged that there should be more official control of their
earnings.
Living Conditions .— -Although it is one of the conditions of employment that reasonable
shelter shall be provided for all natives employed, at very few places* inspected was there
found any evidence of a real attempt to fulfil this condition. The excuse advanced was that
the natives preferred to live near their ■ relatives in the camp, and in the same primitive
conditions, and, in one or two places, abandoned tin huts were pointed to as confirmation.
Without exception, these huts were of galvanized iron, without ventilation or light, and, when
questioned as to their reasons for not occupying these shelters, the natives complained that
they were too hot. In a climate where, for most of the year, the whites seek the open air
and even sleep out of doors, there is little wonder that such huts were not popular. There
was ample evidence that the young natives, at any rate, will occupy civilized shelters of a
comfortable type if provided. At one station, where separate roomy huts of the semi-mission
type, with shutters for light and ventilation, were provided for single men and women, they
were regularly used and proved satisfactory. As further evidence of the desire on the part
of the intelligent for better living conditions and of the generally admitted fact that, in the
wet and cold weather, decent shelters were necessary, at many of the places the natives had
tried to provide shelters for themselves, by using waste material given to them, bid tents,
bags, &c. In a few cases the huts erected were very creditable attempts to copy white man’s
style of living, even to simple beds, tables, &c., but, usually, for lack of material they were
mere kennels and most insanitary.
While fully recognizing the impossibility of lifting the native worker in one step to the
social plane of the whites, it is fairly generally admitted that his present condition could be
greatly improved. This is not only due to him, as a right, for his own comfort and health
while confined to the place of employment, but is highly desirable in the interests of the health
of the employer, his family, and white staffs, who depend entirely upon the people from these
camps for the domestic services of the homestead.


Food, Clothes, and Tobacco. —The part of the coiitiact to supply food, clothes, and
tobacco to the workers appears generally to he satisfactorily observed. At some places the
employees are fed from the kitchen, generally where a cook is kept; at others dry rations are
issued. Those'on special work at a distance, such as stock-watering from wells, receive weekly
or fortnightly issues. It is sometimes complained that wandering myalls sponge upon these
isolated well attendants for their rations. In most places inspected the working natives
seemed to be well nourished and decently clothed. A practice, however, obtains with one
large firm of making the natives who have been supplied with clothes return them to the store
before going on their “ walkabout,” alleging as excuse that they throw them away or give
them to others. As these clothes are part of the working native’s remuneration it seems like
a breach of contract to make him return them as they are actually his own property.
Medicines. —Practically all employers keep supplies of simple medicines for the treatment
of their workers when sick, and supplies are issued by the Department to District Protectors
for relief of the camp people, who are very susceptible to such epidemics as influenza.
Treatment. —No evidence of serious' ill-treatment was seen. It had been alleged that
the natives on stations were practically in a state nf-peoTtage, but employers all held that if a
native does not want to work it is useless trying to coerce him into doing so. The only redress
possible is to stop his rations. The fact, however, is apparent that, with the loss of their only
other means of subsistence, the tribe may become too dependent upon the station to be able
to do anything else but yield to circumstances.
One fact, n niyersa.ll y admitted, that the pastoral industry in the Territories
is absolutely dependent upon the blacks for field, necessary to
successfullycarry on. If they were removed, most of the holdings, especially” thcT" smaller
ongs, would have to be abandoned. One opinion was expressed that the lubra is one of the
greatest of the’ pioneers of the Territories, for without her it would have been impossible for
the white man to have carried on, especially where conditions were practically impossible for
a white woman, and even where, as in the towns or in places in touch with civilization, the
white woman has braved the climate and other discomforts, the lubra has still been indispensable
to make life possible for her.
It is remarkable that, although recognizing their absolute dependence upon the natives,
there has been no attempt made by the people on these holdings to elevate or educate
them, though this should enhance their value as machinery. It seems to be the
conveniently accepted notion that they are beyond redemption, that education spoils
them, so there is no encouragement for ambition and the blackfellow, naturally lacking
initiative and given no opportunity, has a hopeless outlook. Is it any wonder that
he sometimes has little heart in his work and is branded 1 as lazy and unreliable ?
Though any suggestion of improving the living conditions and wages of the young
working natives is met by the objection that the industry cannot stand any increase in
the cost of production, it is noted that, while some stations pay only with food and clothes,
and others pay permanent hands the regulation ss. a week, several seen in Central Australia
claim to be paying from 10s. to £1 a week with food only. While one fairly generous employer
supplied all his workers and their families with food, clothes, tobacco, and reasonable extras,
and also fed all the camp people, his neighbour, not so kindly disposed, fed and clothed the
workers only and took the clothes away from them when leaving. Yet these places were
similarly situated as regards industry conditions.
An instance also came under notice of a trepang fisher, employing a number of x natives
under a licence, who, for weeks, had stayed in the town while the natives at his camp faithfully
worked on, though run out of “ tucker,” catching and curing the fish, and forwarding it to
him at the port to sell. Cases were quoted also of sleeper cutters, whose aboriginal labourers
did practically all the cutting, carting, and stacking of the sleepers without any supervision by
the employer. And these are the people often counted as unreliable and useless. This will
be sufficient to show that the system which leaves the matter of reward for the labour entirely
in the hands of the employer is not an equitable one.
System of Payment. —The most satisfactory arrangement would he one in which a definite
scale of payment is fixed for permanent workers, according to the value of their respective
services. This is the rule followed in Queensland, where competent stockmen are paid as high
as £2 per week. Queensland stations visited near the border of the Territory expressed
themselves as quite satisfied with these conditions, although suffering the same drought,
transport, and to a less degree, market difficulties as their neighbours on the Tableland, hair
comparison might also be made between the Gulf country in Queensland and the western part
of the Territory as regards cattle breeding conditions and type of native labour, allowing, of
course, for the difference in transport costs and access to markets. Yet in the Gulf country the
Queensland rates and conditions are operating satisfactorily.


As, however, owing to lack of transport facilities, in the Territories, the cost of
provisioning is higher and cattle much less profitable, it is not suggested that Queensland rates
should be adopted, but a sliding scale, up to £1 per week, with the present regulation rate of
ss. as a minimum, would appear to be reasonable, especially as several stations claim to be
already paying equal rates.
Control of Wages. —Although it is the practice, in town districts and on a few stations
near the towns, to give weekly pocket money, it is generally condemned, as the native invariably
uses it foolishly, often viciously, for the presence of the money is blamed for the prevalence of
the opium and drink vices. Very few natives understand the use of money or values of
articles and are easily defrauded by the unscrupulous trader. The simple people of the
Territories want more education before they can be safely trusted to handle even a part of
the earnings in cash without benevolent supervision. It is important that they should be
able to obtain the food, clothing, and simple comforts for themselves and their dependants
conveniently when required. As very few of the places of employment are near a business
centre, these goods can only be obtained from the station store or from visiting hawkers. If a
suitable stock of merchandise at reasonable prices is kept by the employer there should be no
occasion for the hawkers, who usually tempt them to spend foolishly and often defraud
them.
A system by which the native is credited with the wages earned and allowed to draw
against this credit to a certain limit for the assistance of his family and relatives, the accounts
being, as frequently as possible, examined and verified by the Protector, and a deduction of
20 per cent, treated as reserve pay and remitted to the Protector for banking to his credit in
trust account, would be the most suitable in his present circumstances.
Casual Employment. —The casual employment of old people from the camp, in light work,
such as watering the garden, &c., for food and tobacco, might with advantage be allowed to
continue, but any so employed should be rationed on a definite scale.
An honest attempt to improve living conditions of the younger generation, from which
all the permanent labour is drawn, should be made. With but one or two exceptions, past
attempts of the kind claimed appeared to have been but half-hearted and failed for lack of a
little human sympathy. It was pointed out that, while the single men would usually occupy
quarters if provided for them, the married couples preferred to live in or near the camp. Now
the blackfellow, like his brother of any other colour, prefers to live amongst or near his own
friends and especially, when married, likes some privacy. The few tin huts pointed to as
examples of quarters provided offered none of these comforts.
There is ample evidence that most of the young people, especially those born and
trained on the place, would gladly adapt themselves to better conditions if provided, or even
if given the means to, provide them for themselves. .One far western station, with the courage
of its convictions, has provided simple but comfortable and hygienic huts for its married couples
in a separate village, and, it is said, finds no difficulty in inducing them to occupy them and
keep them clean and , tidy. Reasonable arrangements for such necessary matters as water
supply and sanitary services can be made. The natives may, in the hot dry weather, prefer
to live outside, but they will be glad of the shelter in the cold or wet weather, and to store
their clothes, provisions, &c. They will want, as usual, to go on their “ walkabout ”or holiday,
even to leave the building at times for superstitious reasons, but the greater comfort of the
more civilized hut will gradually make its influence felt, particularly with the young mothers
accustomed to' service in civilized homes. The discouragements usual in any similar reforms
are sure to be met with at first, but firmness, mixed with human sympathy, will tide over the
difficulties. The improvement in the health and mentality of the people and the lessening of
the present serious risks of infection in the employer’s household will doubtless soon manifest
themselves and repay the trouble and expense.
Education of Gamp Children. —One question, difficult to offer a solution of, is that of
education of the young children —the stockmen and servants of the future. Few employers
display any sympathy or interest in the question, notwithstanding that education of the right
sort should enhance the natives’ value, making them more intelligent and useful, besides
enabling them to protect themselves in their simple business dealings. It is argued that
education spoils them, making them cunning and cheeky. The trouble probably is that they
become enlightened, and, as a result, dissatisfied with conditions. The right education, with
improved working and living conditions, should make for better service, but it would be useless


attempting to supply the first without the other. These children often run wild and, for want
of healthy mental occupation, grow up in a low vicious atmosphere and are a moral menace to
the children of the white residents.
As the white residents in these distant places find it impossible to obtain means of
education for their own children, unless at great expense by hiring private tutors or sending
the children to the cities, there could be no suggestion of compulsory education of the aboriginal
children at present. To separate them from their parents and send to institutions would not
be advisable.
Recommendation.
With regard, therefore, to the employed class, it is recommended that amended
regulations be framed, providing :
(1) For a definite scale of wages for permanent workers according to value of
services ;
(2) That, as far as possible, cash payments direct to natives be discontinued, and
wages be drawn in goods, as required, through the employers or the local
Protector;
(3) For the deduction of a percentage of the native’s earnings for compulsory
saving ;
(4) For the provision of better living conditions for permanent employees.
Necessary amendments of the ordinances have been prepared and submitted herein.
Camp Dependants on Cattle Stations, etc.
Means of Subsistence. —A few stations, with a humane recognition of some measure of
obligation to relieve the old natives of the camp, who have been deprived of their natural means
of subsistence by the usurpation of their tribal hunting grounds, and the employment of their
foodwinners, supply the old people with rations. These old people have, many of them, been
the hands that helped in the earlier days to establish the business, and could fairly expect to
be treated as pensioners. But, unfortunately for some of these camps, numbers of the stations
have changed hands, and the new owners disclaim any responsibility for such dependants.
Generally, therefore, the only food received is the offal of the beasts on killing day and whatever
is contributed by the working natives from their own food or an occasional marsupial caught
by them. Where the camp is near a river, conditions are sometimes better, as they can
supplement their meagre larder by fishing.
Prostitution of the Women. —Frequently, in accordance with tribal custom, the old men
have young lubras as wives, so there is usually a number of young children about the camps.
One deplorable result of the semi-starvation that often exists is, that the women find the
temptation to supplement their meagre resources by trading in prostitution too strong to
withstand. As practically all public roads lead through the stations, and the camps are of
necessity in the vicinity, these simple women are an easy prey to passing travellers, who, at
times, are low enough to cheat them by paying them with bogus money, in the way of painted
coins, advertisement coupons, and worthless cheque forms.
Difficulty in Checking Prostitution. —Employers with some sense of responsibility for the
care of the camp, and also for the health of their own community, have attempted to check
this evil, but, lacking the authority to take firm action, have simply been defied, and at times
threatened with violence for not “ minding their own business.” It was complained that
motor car loads of men from bush townships or construction camps bent on “ ginsprees,” in
other words drink and prostitution orgies, had given trouble on stations even 100 miles
distant. The manager on one station complained that he had even been compelled to display
firearms to protect himself from such a party, who resented his interference.
Measures for Relief and Protection. —The question as to what would be most effective
measures to adopt for relief and protection of these old people is a difficult one. The simplest
course would be to remove them to aboriginal institutions, where they could be properly cared
for and protected from abuse. But to do so, except as a last resource, would be a hardship.
Their whole life is bound up in the totemic associations of their tribal habitat and the strange
country has unnamed terrors for them. Nor would the younger members, now in employment,
be contented if their old relatives were taken away. The employers of the able-bodied, with
a few exceptions, are evidently not inclined to shoulder the burden; in fact the small holders
claim that they cannot afford to do so. It was suggested that the possibility of such a burden
had been taken into consideration in fixing the rentals for the holdings, and the fairest procedure
would be to review these rentals, and the Government then relieve them of the implied
responsibility. If such is the position, this suggestion might be given consideration.


The proposed improvement in the wages of permanent workers should result in increased
and more regular assistance from that quarter, though it may cause some of the few generous
employers to proportionately reduce their benevolence. Where disproportionate numbers of
indigents justified it, supplementary relief might be granted through the local Protector, who
could arrange for the regular supply from the station store.
Moral Laws — Amendment and Enforcement of. —To assist to deal with the moral abuse of
these people, certain amendments of the present law are recommended, extending the penalties
for those prostituting with aboriginal females, and also providing for punishment and deportation
of aboriginals soliciting and trading females in prostitution. To be able to effectively enforce
these measures the co-operation of the employers will be essential. The sense of responsibility
for the welfare of the people from whom they draw their labour will doubtless influence most
employers to afford this assistance, but the mere reporting of the delinquencies of passing
travellers to the police, perhaps 100 miles away, will not alone be very useful. It is not only
from passing strangers that this trouble is experienced. In places where competent white
labour is difficult to get, it will require more strength than many would possess to carry the
co-operation to the length of firmly applying the prohibition to offenders on the station staffs.
Whatever evil of this nature exists, and there is no doubt in many places it does, is the fault
of the policy followed by most employers of preferring single men, whose labour is less expensive
in housing and rationing, and who can be sent anywhere. If employers, as a body, would agree
to give encouragement and facilities to white employees to have their wives with them, it
would do more to eliminate or reduce the moral abuses than all the laws. The existing and
suggested laws, however, will provide the necessary whip for those honestly desiring to suppress
these abuses, and it may only need one or two drastic steps, such as the deportation of the
whole camp, to emphasize the Department’s intentions in the matter.
Indigent Camps—Other than on Stations.
Relief Issues— From most police stations, telegraph offices, and a feAV approved cattle
runs, relief, in the way of rations, clothing material, and medicine, is issued to the indigent,
but it is frequently quite insufficient even for those fairly entitled to it, especially when drought
has denuded the country around of native game. Owing to the tribal practice of sharing all
food, instead of this relief benefiting the really needy, it frequently is the inducement for a
lot of lazy ones to loaf around the camp, in a half-starved state, waiting for this dole instead
of going farther afield and hunting their food in the bush. As a result, the week’s supply of
rations for the recipients entitled to it is usually eaten up in the first couple of days.
A few of the able-bodied men are-employed by either the police or Telegraph Department
as trackers or horseboys, and some of the women earn food and some clothes by domestic and
yard work for the officers.
Abuses. —The majority of the inmates of these camps are in an emaciated miserable
condition, and, like those of the station indigent camps, are an easy prey to the unscrupulous.
The officers in charge of telegraph stations also complain that their efforts to'prevent travellers
from tampering with the women are met with defiance and abuse, as they have no power to
take any action.
Construction Camps—Prohibited Area. —The proclamation of all country within 5 miles of
construction camps as a prohibited area was a wise move. There does not seem to be sufficient
advantage in doing so to justify increasing the distance to 10 miles, as it would inflict some
hardship on the blacks, and assist very little in reducing the abuse of them, for the men on
“ ginsprees,” as already stated, travel to even more distant camps by motor car. The
prohibition does have some effect in keeping the blacks away from the camps, or, at least, from
hanging around openly whilst the police are there, and, as these camps are “ dry areas ” the
drink evil is reduced, but, as many Asiatics follow the construction camps, there is still some
complaint of traffic in opium. It is essential, however, that the police supervision be not
relaxed, as aboriginals quickly hear when the police are away on distant duty. Frequent,
patrol is essential.
Telegraph Officers as Protectors. —The appointment of officers in charge of telegraph
stations as protectors at a small salary of, say, £2O per annum, would be of assistance. This
would give the administration authority to call upon them to distribute rations and medicine,
report cases of sickness or distress, furnish information and returns, and take necessary action
to check abuses. Much valuable help is already given by these men, voluntarily, in the
issuing of rations and medicine, but a definite status and responsibility would be an incentive to


increase their interest in the people. The real need in most of these relief camps is for a good
motherly person to look after them. Where, at police stations, the officer is married, kindly
interest is often taken in them hy the woman, and several of these women have nursing
knowledge. The difference in the appearance of the people in those .circumstances was very
noticeable.
•
Mission Relief Camps. —There would seem to be an opportunity here for some of the
philanthropic or mission bodies, anxious to do social work amongst the blacks, to help. Some
of these relief camps are large enough to provide full occupation for a good missionary mother
with common sense and medical knowledge. For the relief and medical treatment to achieve
the benefit desired there must be daily and intelligent supervision of the issue. Besides seeing
that the rations were properly used, that only those entitled to shared in them, and medical
treatment was followed out and persevered in, according to instructions, there would be some
moral protection and control. Casual relief or medical treatment by travelling missionaries
is of very little benefit. The food may be an inducement to natives to gather and listen to
religious preaching, but it is immediately afterwards consumed by others than those intended.
Natives will not take medicine nor persevere with treatment unless under supervision.
Sickness in Camps. —A good deal of sickness exists in these indigent camps, both on the
overland line and back in the bush. Children were seen with yaws and, in the Central Territory,
with a somewhat similar affection called larakinya. Several cases of blindness and other eye
troubles also were seen. Doubtless a proper medical examination would have shown other diseases.
The natives, owing to their ignorance of the simplest rules of health, are peculiarly
susceptible to infectious or communicable diseases. A regular examination of these camps by a
qualified medical man should be carried out, in the interests of the white community as well as
of the blacks.
Treatment at Police Stations. —Under instructions from the Administration in Darwin,
local medical treatment is given from police stations and obstinate or important cases are sent
to the capital for clinic treatment. The unpleasant work of examining for specific diseases and
administering hypodermic injections is not popular. The natives also are very timid and will
evade the examination and treatment where they can. Where, as fortunately exists at some
police stations, there is a woman with nursing experience or motherly common sense, such treatment
can be much more effectively given.
As many of .the tribes along the overland line or in the near vicinity are on friendly terms
and mix freely, concentration of relief operations could be made at a few suitable centres, other
than police stations, where doubtless many of the destitute, once understanding the benefit to
them of the arrangement, would willingly transfer themselves.
Recommendations.
Summarized, the recommendations with regard to the indigent camps are:—
(1) Station Camps—
(a) Re-consideration, if possible, of the rents of pastoral properties (if, as thought,
that when fixed originally, allowance was made for cost of maintaining
dependent blacks) and assumption by Department of responsibility
for their relief;
{b) Issue of supplementary relief where the able-bodied by their earnings are
not able to support the indigents;
(c) Extend laws for suppressing prostitution and moral abuses;
( d ) Apply pressure where necessary upon employers of labour to compel them
to co-operate in enforcing the moral laws and prefer married employees.
(2) Other Indigent Camps—
(a) Continuous police supervision of construction work areas and patrol of
neighbouring station camps ;
(b) Appointment of telegraph masters as protectors of aboriginals at nominal
salary;
(c) Establishment of relief depots under capable missionaries ;
(i d ) Appointment of married men as police protectors, for preference those
whose wives are experienced in nursing or otherwise suitable;
(c) Periodical examination of all camps by a qualified medical officer.


Government Institutions—•
Aboriginal Compound, Darwin—
Aboriginals.
Half-casjtcs.
Bush.
In employment
.. 120
• • • •
50
Sick and indigent
80
. .
, ,
Half-caste Home, Darwin ..
76
Half-caste Bungalow, Alice Springs
. .
64
Religious Missions—
Hermannsburg, C.A., Lutheran
.. 211
12
, ,
Bathurst Island, N.A., Roman Catholic
.. 150
8
625
Oenpelli, N.A., Church of England ..
91
• • • .
100
Goulburn Island, N.A., Methodist ..
.. 153
5
50
Millingimbi, N.A., Methodist
.. 290
. . . ,
250
Roper River, N.A., Church of England
51
1
75
Groote Eylandt, N.A., Church of England
4
34
200
Number permanently cared for
.. 1,150
200
Number receiving benefit as visitors
. .
. .
1,350
Natives in Aboriginal Institutions.
Statistics. —The following table shows the number of aboriginals and half-castes cared
for on, or under the influence of, aboriginal institutions, distinguishing between those entirely
maintained and managed by the Administration and those managed by the various religious
bodies Avith some financial assistance from the Government.
Compound at Darwin. —The Aboriginal Compound at Darwin, though usually confused
with, is a quite distinct institution from, the Half-caste Home, but each has suffered public
criticism, some of which has been justified, but a great deal has been unfair to the officers doing
their best under great difficulties.
Domestic Labour. —The presence of the compound at Darwin has been made necessary
by the fact that, owing to climatic and other conditions, life in Darwin, for many of the white
families would be almost impossible without some cheap domestic labour, and the aboriginal
is the only suitable labour of the kind procurable. This fact is admitted by all shades of opinion.
But for this demand, the last place to be selected for an aboriginal institution would be a town
where the presence of a large number of aliens and, until recently, a big meatworks, employing
hundreds of men, presented so many of the dangers from which it is desired to protect these simple
people. As the introduction of aboriginals as domestic labour was unavoidable, it therefore became
necessary to provide effective protection while so employed, and a home for them when idle.
As many employers proved unable to control and protect them at night, the rule now is that these
servants, male and female, must return to the compound before dark and stay there until morning.
No native is allowed in the towns of Darwin and Parap between sunset and sunrise, without a
permit, and, by regulation, is liable to arrest and punishment if disobeying this order. Though
drastic, it is a wise practice in the interests of the welfare of the native, as also is a rule forbidding
them admittance to moving picture shows except at such times as the Chief Protector may consider
the films suitable for showing to natives and not likely to lower their respect for the whites.
Indigent Relief. —Rations are issued to a few old indigents, relics of local tribes, and to
natives from other districts sent to the compound clinic for medical treatment. The necessity
for this clinic being in a convenient position for the attentions of the medical officer has been
another reason advanced in favour of the Darwin site.
Objections to Site. —The institution stands on about six acres of ground, on Kahlin Beach,
about two miles from the centre of the town and near the suburb called Myilly Point. When
this site was selected by Sir Baldwin Spencer about the year 1913, there was no sign of suburban
extension in that direction, and it was considered sufficiently isolated and yet convenient for
administration. As there is no other site equally suitable and convenient for the purpose, the
present one should not be changed.
Aboriginal Clinic. —The chief cause of dissatisfaction amongst the white neighbours is
the presence of the clinic in the compound. Some fear exists that there is danger of infection
from the venereal and other diseases under treatment there, perhaps per the agency of the
aboriginals going backwards and forwards to employment. Whether such danger is real or not,
there would appear to be serious objections to the presence of the clinic in the compound under
present conditions. The buildings are all of galvanized iron, the larger huts used as the wards
having concrete floors, many of which are cracked and uneven in surface. Though these buildings
are kept as clean as their condition makes possible, they are in the same block as, and quite close


to, the huts of the working natives. The patients are locked in the wards at night, the verandahs
being enclosed with “ K ” wire, but, as the Superintendent and the Matron do not sleep on the
premises and there is no night patrol, there is nothing to prevent contact between the diseased and
healthy ones.
Proposed New Clinic. —Though creditable medical work has been done, the conditions
are not favorable to the best results. The amount of work put through, for the number of
in-patients regularly under treatment varies from 50 to 70, justifies a properly equipped hospital
on a site apart from the compound. The most suitable position, and the most convenient for
medical supervision, would be on a block next to the Darwin General Hospital, where land on
either side is vacant. As both hospitals are under the one Medical Superintendent and, even
under present arrangements, serious cases and operations have to be sent to the General Institution,
the advantage of having both together will be apparent. It may also be possible for the Matron
of the General Hospital to direct the nursing staff of the Aboriginal Hospital, thus effecting some
economy and greater efficiency. Economy in the nursing staffs could also be effected by training
intelligent aboriginals or half-castes for service as wardsmen, wardsmaids and kitchen staff.
The mission stations would doubtless gladly send picked natives to undergo such a course of
training to fit them for use afterwards in their institutions.
Proposed New General Hospital, Darwin. —An alternative suggestion is that a new and
up-to-date General Hospital be built for Darwin and the present buildings, which are certainly
not modern, be taken over for the aboriginals. As the in-patient roll at the native institution
is more than double that for the whites, the buildings would not be any too large. Unfortunately
for this proposal, large expenditure has been incurred recently in a new maternity ward.
Re-organization of Compound. —With the removal of the clinic, the way would be open
for a re-organization of the compound on attractive village lines. At present the accommodation
consists of a number of small galvanized iron huts with ground floor, the occupants sleeping on
the ground on their blankets. There are no separate quarters for single females. As the girls
live in the huts with their “ sweethearts ” it has not been deemed necessary to place them in
separate quarters under control. Where they are genuinely the tribal wives of the men it is quite
natural and right they should live together, but this should be carefully ascertained and any loose
system of “ pairing ” discouraged. It may happen that the woman sent up for service for a spell
has left a native husband behind.
Supervision. —Though confined to the compound between sunset and daylight, there is not
continuous supervision. The Superintendent and the Matron, who act in those capacities also
for the Half-caste Home, which at present is in a house about one hundred yards from the
compound, live in quarters between the two places, so there is only the fear of arrest and
punishment to prevent the natives from breaking bounds or to check immorality with the
women. Statements were made that such immorality was common, but the Superintendent
advised that, although at one time there had been considerable trouble in that way, he was
satisfied it did not exist to any extent now.
As, however, nothing is done to relieve the monotony of the hours at night, it would not
be surprising if the native, having once tasted the pleasures of the town, and unable, like his
educated white brother, to occupy bis leisure time with reading or music, did break bounds
occasionally. The native corroboree, though indulged in nightly, would not be sufficient for
all, as a recent tally showed thirteen different tribes to be represented amongst the inmates.
It seems only fair, if these people are to be confined to their compound, that life there
should be made at least comfortable and attractive for them. Encouragement could be given
to them to improve their little homes, better the living conditions in them, and cultivate habits
of cleanliness and neatness. The women, having opportunity to observe the living conditions
of their places of employment, will be keen enough to emulate them, if given the chance, and take
a pride in doing so.
Control of Compound. —The control of this compound justifies a separate Superintendent
and Matron, to devote their whole time to the care and uplift of their charges. To assist
in the work of policing the institution, a squad of native police could be formed, properly uniformed
and paid a small salary, doing day and night duty alternately. Male inmates, not in employment,
could be profitably occupied in growing vegetables, fishing &c., and the females in sewing, laundry
work, &c.
Religion and Education. —Some local religious body might be given the opportunity to
interest itself in the social life of the people by arranging religious services and entertainments.
Simple night school instruction might also be imparted, and many of the natives would eagerly
avail themselves of it. Their absolute ignorance places them at great disadvantage in their simple
trading transactions.


The breed of these children is as under
Strain.
Half-cast©.
Quarter-caste.
Octoroon.
Aboriginal-European
56
5
1
,, -Chinese
4
1
„ -Maori
2
2
, ,
,, -Asiatic
..
5
62
13
1
15 m., 47 f.
5 m., 8 f.
1 1
1 r—d I
It is certain that the majority of employers would approve of anything done, as suggested,
to improve the social conditions at the compound and educate the natives, as it would do much
towards improving them as servants.
Recreations. —A building for use as a recreation hall would be necessary, but the transfer
of the clinic would leave ample material suitable for this. The inmates could have their own
moving picture show, for which suitable picture films only could be selected,, thus obviating the
present soreness over the ban from the town pictures.
The men could be encouraged to form their own brass band, a form of music to which the
aboriginal takes very keenly.
The present grounds and sea front offer good facilities for such outdoor sports as football,
cricket, tennis, boating, swimming, &c., all of which, under sympathetic management, could be
organized with profit and pleasure to the people. Occasional matches with European teams and,
perhaps, a public sports day would do much to cultivate a better understanding and feeling
towards them by the whites, many of whom will not allow that they are any better than marsupials.
Retail Store or Canteen. —-As a good deal of money is earned by these workers and spent
in local stores, often foolishly, as they are unable to properly protect themselves in business
dealings, a retail store or canteen could with advantage be installed in the compound. This
would not only be a great convenience, but would enable better control to be exercised over their
purchases, besides ensuring better value often for their money. The profits, after paying manage-
ment expenses, might be devoted to benefit of the institution.
Recommendations.
Summarized, the recommendations are that: —
(1) The present site for the compound on Kahlin Beach be retained ;
(2) The rule that aboriginal servants return to the compound at night and be prohibited
from the town area and attendance at picture shows without permit be adhered
to;
(3) The aboriginal clinic be transferred from the compound to a site near the General
Hospital and a properly equipped hospital be built. Natives to be trained
and used as assistants to nursing staff;
(4) The compound be te-organized on attractive village lines and action taken to—
(a) encourage inmates to improve their homes and living conditions;
( b) build separate dormitory for unattached women;
(c) cultivate profitable occupations for the idle ;
(i d ) organize night occupations and recreations (night school, religious
services, entertainments, picture show, brass band), also outdoor
sports for holidays;
(e) establish a canteen or retail store.
(5) A separate whole-time superintendent and matron be appointed, with uniformed
native police for night watch duties.
Hale-Caste Home, Darwin.
Particulars of Inmates. —As a result of the policy in the past of rescuing half-caste children
from the camps and sending them to a home for care and education, there are now 76 of these
people in the home at Darwin. Of these, 9 are adults, 3 are between the ages of 16 and 19, and
the remaining 64 are children of ages from 11 years down to four months. Of these children,
only three are being paid for by their fathers.
Females number 56 and males 20, as a result, apparently, of the practice of not removing
the young males if the Protector is satisfied they are being looked after on the stations. As these
young half-castes make useful station labour at an early age, the employers are reluctant to part
with them.
In addition to the above, eleven ex-inmates of the home are in domestic service in Darwin
and one in a country situation.


Present Accommodation. —For some years these children—the number of whom has been
increasing yearly—have been accommodated in a house next door to the residence of the
Superintendent and Matron and about one hundred yards away from the Aboriginal Compound.
While the conditions are vastly better than in the compound dwellings and clinic, it is freely
admitted that the housing of 76 children, of different sexes, in a house large enough only for one
family, is not satisfactory.
Proposed New Home. —The proposal now under consideration is to build a large home on
a site in the Aboriginal Compound, which will provide the necessary accommodation for comfortable
living, care and training, and afford security from outside interference. No information is available
as to probable cost of this building (copy of plan of which is attached), but, in view of the high
price of such work in the Territory, it would probably not be less than £5,000, and furniture, fittings
and utensils another £6OO.
If such a proposal is proceeded with, the increase in the number of children will make it
necessary to revise the present plan, as only 46 beds are provided for and there seems to be no
provision for a school-room. These additions will add to the cost.
Object of Proposed Home. —The object of the home is to save these half-castes from the
degradation of the blacks’ 'camp, properly care for and educate them, and fit them to take a useful
part in the development of the Territory.
As already pointed out, nearly three-fourths of the present inmates are females, the males
that should have made up the balance, and should be the future husbands of these girls, having
presumably been left on the stations, where they are, in most cases, growing up Avithout education
and in association with blacks.
As the proposed site for the new home is in a portion of the Aboriginal Compound, it may
be taken that the policy for the future of the inmates does not aim at entire segregation from
the aboriginal element. Following past practice, the girls, when sufficiently educated, at the age
of, say, 14 years, will be hired out in domestic service, principally in Darwin, \\diere a number
are already employed.
Disadvantages. —While- alloAving that the object is in every Avay commendable, it would
appear that the same result could be achieved on the neighbouring aboriginal mission stations
and in conditions far more suitable and congenial to the children. A home in Darwin will labour
under several disadvantages, as, for instance :
(a) To ensure efficient protection, the home Avould have to be practically a prison
and the officials live on the premises. Night Avatching Avould also probably
be necessary;
( b ) Trouble Avould probably be experienced with men trying to induce the girls to
break out;
(c) Proximity of the toAvn Avould be a temptation and create fretting at restrictions ;
{d) There Avould be no advantages for vocational training of the boys in stockwork,
bush carpentering or any field Avork ;
(e) Management and instructional expenses Avould be heavy;
{: f ) The burden of management Avould be on the administration.
Suggested Mission Homes.— On the other hand the advantages of a home on the mission
Avould be; —
{a) The institution being on an island, the children Avould be in a safer environment,
removed from the influence of the loav alien population of Danvin;
(6) The conditions Avould be freer and happier for the children. As competent teachers
are attached to the missions, they Avould receive equally good education and
domestic training and also religious teaching;
(c) The cost of management, instructional staff and feeding Avould be much loAver;
(d) There Avould be opportunities for training the boys in field, bush and sea Avork;
(e) The Administration in Darwin Avould be relieved of the Avorry and burden of
management.
To past suggestions of a similar nature, certain objections have been raised, viz., that—
(l) The half-castes in Darwin Home were the only source of domestic labour for the
residents of Darwin and their removal Avould cause hardship ;
(2) The half-castes, if removed to a mission, Avould be deprived of their liberty and
all chances of future citizenship;
(3) Being out of touch with the commercial activities of the Territory would reduce
their prospects of securing employment;
(4) The advantages of medical attention and expert nursing, noAV available in Darwin,
would be lost to them:


and can be answered as follows ;
(1) Eleven half-caste ex-inmates are now in service in Darwin, and ample full-blood
domestic labour, male and female, is obtained from the compound. In any
case, none of the children now in the home will be old enough for employment
for at least three years, the oldest being 11 years of age;
(2) Conditions in Darwin make close segregation of the home, and strict control of
the girls when in service, imperative. As the mission homes will send the
half-caste trainees of good moral character to be placed in service by the Chief
Protector, there would be no reduction of liberty or chances of future citizenship ;
(3) As in (2) the close segregation of the Darwin Home would allow no opportunities
for keeping in touch with the commercial activities of the Territory;
(4) The missions all have motherly women as Matrons, a well-stocked dispensary,
and means of quickly conveying serious cases to Darwin for attention. White
people on stations are much less favourably placed as regards medical attention.
Maintenance Costs — present Home. —The cost of upkeep of the Home in Darwin, under
present conditions, could not accurately be calculated, as it was maintained in conjunction with
the Aboriginal Clinic and indigent relief at the compound, all three institutions being under the
one management. The total expenditure was £2,035, averaging 6s. per week per head of the
inmates, or 4s. Id. per head for food and clothing only. This has been reduced, indirectly, by
saving to the Administration on sewing done, at the home, for the hospital. If the proposed new
home is built the overhead costs may be increased.
Saving on Suggested, Mission Homes. —lf the suggestion to transfer these children to the
two neighbouring missions for care and training is adopted, there will be no need to expend between
£5,000 and £6,000 on a special home in Darwin. Some financial assistance, however, would need
to be granted to each Mission to enable it to provide the additional accommodation, furniture,
school requisites, vocational instruction plant, &c., but possibly £5OO each would meet this outlay.
Based on the cost per head in Darwin, 4s. Id. per head per week, a fair allowance to the
missions, which raise their own beef, vegetables, &c., for cost of feeding and clothing the children,
would be 3s. 6d. per week.
Mission Co-operation. —At an informal conference held with representatives of the missions
concerned, the Government Resident and Chief Protector of Aboriginals in Darwin, the Mission-
aries strongly supported this proposal, expressing their concurrence in the views advanced and
their willingness to undertake the work on whatever lines were approved by the Administration.
Unfortunately, the Chief Protector, Dr. Cook, was not in favour of the idea, arguing (1) that it
would mean retrogression and (2) that the missions could not give them better training then they
would receive in a home in Darwin.
The explanations already given would appear to effectively answer these objections.
Anticipated Opposition. —There will probably be some opposition from certain sections
of the public—for instance, the servant hunters and putative fathers. The former have already
been answered and, as only in three cases have the children been acknowledged and are being
paid for by the fathers, the latter need not be considered. The two fathers, one European and
one Asiatic, could be given the opportunity of arranging for the care of the children elsewhere,
if desired.
Recommendations.
It is therefore recommended that—
(l) The proposed establishment of an Industrial Home for half-castes in Darwin be not
proceeded with;
(2) The half-caste children in Darwin Home, with 50 per cent, or more aboriginal
blood or a preponderance of other dark blood, be divided between Bathurst
Island and Goulburn Island Aboriginal Missions, to be trained with the civilized
aboriginal children in rural school subjects, (where possible) in stock work,
saddlery, blacksmithing, carpentering and use of bush tools;
(3) The object of the training be to fit them to take a useful place in the development
of the Territory industries;
(4) Those with preponderance of European or Chinese blood be placed in some European
institution, such as the Convent at Darwin ;
(5) The Government grant a sum, say £5OO, to each of above missions, towards cost
of necessary additional accommodation and plant for vocational training;
(6) The Government allow a sustentation grant to each mission of 3s. 6d. per week
per head of these industrial school children;
(7) The Administration supervise the working of these industrial schools and the
eventual disposal of the trainees in employment.


Half-caste Bungalow, Alice Springs.
After inspection of the above institution on 17th July, 1928, the following interim
report was furnished from Alice Springs, by request, to the Secretary for Home and Territories :
“ Unsuitability of present buildings. —l have the honour to report having inspected
the ‘ Bungalow ’ Home for half-castes at Alice Springs and inquired into the proposal
to erect another more suitable building for the inmates elsewhere. No comment by
me is necessary as regards the present buildings, as I have already gathered that your
Department is convinced—
(a) the buildings are unsuitable ;
( h) the present site is also unsuitable ;
(c) immediate removal is highly desirable.
Proposed Half-caste Colony.- —The important question first to be considered is
whether the establishment of an institution on the lines suggested, viz., a separate mission
or colony for all crossbreeds of aboriginal blood, who are to be segregated from both
whites and blacks, is a sound proposition. From my past experience of these people,
lam of the opinion it is not. There is every probability that it will fail to achieve the
object aimed at and, in any case, will create a second colour problem likely to prove
troublesome in later years. Before giving the grounds for the above opinion, I would
point out that the inmates of the present home are composed of four classes, viz.—
(a) three-quarter-caste aboriginals;
(b) half-caste aboriginals;
(c) quadroons;
{d) octoroons.
Reasons against separate colony. —lnquiries from all classes of persons with
experience of dealing with aboriginal half-castes, such as station owners, missionaries,
police, &c., only confirm my own opinion that, without appreciable exception, the half-
caste of 50 per cent, or more aboriginal blood, no matter how carefully brought up and
educated, will drift back to the aboriginal, where naturally he finds the atmosphere
most congenial to him. Educated aboriginals and half-castes, who have married back
amongst the full-bloods on missions and settlements, when questioned, were emphatic
in the opinion that these people were happier amongst their own race.
The above is sufficient at this stage to indicate my reasons for recommending
that action be not taken to establish an expensive institution.
Suggested Mission Home. —The Hermannsburg Mission, within easy reach of this
centre, is willing to receive all half-caste childreil of 50 per cent, or more aboriginal blood,
provided a reasonable extra allowance is made for the expense of feeding, clothing,
housing and educating them. I think an allowance of 3s. 6d. a week per head would
be acceptable and reasonable.
Quadroons and Octoroons. —Quadroons and octoroons, under 10 or 12 years of
age, should, where such can be done without inflicting cruelty on the half-caste mother,
be placed in an European institution, where they can be given a reasonable chance of
.absorption into the white community to which they rightly belong. The earlier this
is done the better for them, before they have been irretrievably leavened with the
aboriginal influences, which would make themselves felt even in a segregated crossbreed
establishment.
There will be sure to be some little difficulties of adjustment in connexion with
the present inmates, but they can confidently be left to the discretion of the Administrator
here, who possesses all the necessary qualities of sympathy and tact to deal with them.
The above suggestion will not immediately deal with all the 64 cases at present
in the home, but about half can be so disposed of, and perhaps 12 or 14 more, if the
mothers can be persuaded to agree to parting with their quadroon and octoroon infants.
It was not deemed advisable at this stage to approach them on the matter.
With regard to such children, from a discussion of the matter with the Director
of the Child Welfare Department in Adelaide, it was learnt that there would be no
difficulty in arranging the admission of such children to suitable orphanages there, under
the Salvation Army or some other religious body, at the expense of the Federal Govern-
meilt, and his department would be willing to assist with the necessary inspections of
the children. Of the balance of the children in the home, suitable employment could,
without difficulty, be found with carefully selected employers, in this Territory or in
South Australia, for another 12 between the ages of 13 and 30.
F. 1882. —2


Reception Home suggested.—- For some time, and probably permanently, a suitable
borne will be necessary for the section that cannot be happily provided for otherwise.
Borne such institution will be required to receive half-castes rescued from the bush and,
by reports obtained, there is still a number to reckon with and, doubtless, always will
be whilst present conditions exist in this territory, where the vast station areas make
the employment of white married stockmen impossible.
The Home, as now proposed, would be in the nature of a Reception Home for
half-castes until they can be suitably provided for.
The original building plan could be greatly modified and accommodation for
80 inmates should meet all needs. One good middle-aged married couple, able to manage
the home with the aid of the adult half-caste women, and impart simple instruction
in general, manual and domestic subjects to the inmates awaiting employment, should
be ample. If a satisfactory water supply is obtained, the boys could be employed raising
fruit and vegetables for home consumption and attending the necessary dairy stock
for milk and butter needs. In a good season, stock fodder could perhaps be grown and
conserved, but agriculture on any large scale would be hardly practicable, owing to
the poor rainfall. The girls, if provided with sewing machines, could be profitably
occupied in making garments for themselves and for issue to the indigent camp natives
through the Protector’s office.”
It has since been recommended that this Home be placed under the management of a
mission body, on condition that—
(a) Half-castes sent by the Government Resident for temporary shelter be received;
(/>) The mission co-operate with the Government Resident as regards suitable
employment for or marriage of the inmates as opportunity arises ;
(c) Suitable education and domestic training be provided.
“ Removal of Present Bungaloio, —ln the meantime action should be taken, without
delay, to remove the inmates of the present home to a safer place. If water can be
obtained at the site now suggested, about seven miles away, I would unhesitatingly
recommend the immediate erection of temporary dwellings (which would afterwards
serve as workshops, laundries, storesheds, &c.) and the transfer of the ‘ Bungalow ’
inmates as soon as these are ready. I understand that the Administrator estimates he
has sufficient material for all the buildings required, temporary and permanent, including
accommodation for the officer placed in charge, and the only important expense will
be the cost of erection. Advice of the Works Department is being obtained by him as
to the possibility ®f recovering and using some of the material now at Jay’s Creek site.
Aboriginal Camp, Alice Springs. —Another matter, to a certain extent linked
with the ' Bungalow ’ question, is the existence of a fairly large camp of aboriginals,
about half a mile from the town, where about 60 indigent natives are regularly supplied
with relief. Although this camp is in a creditably clean and sanitary condition, it is
obvious that its proximity to what, shortly, will be a fairly busy centre with the coming
railway construction camps, makes it a certain source of trouble. As the inmates of this
camp are all members of the same tribe as the natives on Hermannsburg Mission, it
would be no hardship to them if all were removed to that institution to receive their
relief with the other inmates. The Missionaries are willing to receive them if allowed
the necessary rations or equivalent value. They would be in much safer and healthier
surroundings. Some of them also are parents of half-caste children in the Bungalow.
Holiday Camp for Worldng Natives. —As in the past, natives employed on
outlying stations have used this camp, when in town on holiday or awaiting fresh
employment (and incidentally helped the old indigents to eat their rations). Suitable
provision could be made for them by utilizing some of the material of the present
bungalow for the erection of a hut, with fireplace and sanitary convenience, where they
could be ordered to camp and be out of the town, while near enough for police control.
The foregoing proposals have been considered in conference with, and with the
assistance of, His Honour the Government Resident, and he authorizes me to say that
■ they have his full concurrence.”
Suitability of Mission. —Subsequent inquiries, of a similar nature, in regard to the sister
mslltution in the north, have only confirmed the opinions expressed in the above. Hermannsburg
Mission is favourably placed for giving these young half-castes the vocational training, especially
the stock and bush work, to fit them for employment as skilled station hands in their own territory.
Financial assistance, however, would be required to enable them to provide the additional
accommodation, furniture for the children, and the plant to give the required manual and domestic
training.


Recommendations.
It is therefore recommended that—
(l) The original proposal for a Half-caste Home at Jay’s Creek or other site be not
proceeded with;
(2) All the children in Alice Springs Bungalow of 50 per cent, or more aboriginal blood,
or with a preponderance of other dark blood, be transferred to Hermannsburg
Mission;
(3) Quadroons and octoroons, where such can be done without hardship to the mother,
be placed in an European institution, such as the Salvation Army Homes in
Adelaide, and arrangements be made with the Child Welfare Department there
for their inspection;
(4) As many as possible of those remaining be placed in suitable employment locally,
under supervision of the Chief Protector;
(5) An industrial home, with provision for 30 inmates, be established at a site selected
about 7 miles from Alice Springs, if water can be found there, for cases not
eligible for (2), (3) and (4), and to receive half-castes rescued from the bush,
until they can be otherwise arranged for ;
(6) Temporary buildings be erected at (5) to enable early removal of the bungalow
children to be effected, owing to approaching Railway Construction Works;
(7) The whole of the aboriginal camp at Alice Springs be removed to Hermannsburg
Mission for reason given in (6) ;
(8) A special grant of £5OO be made to Hermannsburg Mission, to provide the necessary
additional accommodation, furniture and plant, for care and training of the
half-caste children;
(9) The industrial school be supervised by the Administration, and likewise the eventual
hiring of the trainees to employment.
Leper Lazarette, Darwin. —Much public criticism has been levelled at this institution,
which is situated about 2 miles from Darwin on the other side of the harbour. Though under
the control of the Health Department, the inmates are practically all aboriginals and half-castes.
There is no proper accommodation for these patients, who have erected rough bush huts for
themselves. Neither is there any competent nursing supervision, an intelligent quadroon, himself
a patient, gives what attention he can, under the direction of the Health Officer. The sexes are
not divided, one young female patient “ living ” with the quadroon attendant.
Everything possible and reasonable is provided for the patients in the way of food, clothing
and amusements.
The condition is very unsatisfactory, but apparently nothing can be done to improve
matters until the proposal, submitted some time ago, that the old Quarantine Station be given
for use as a Lazarette, is decided upon. This should be dealt with as early as possible.
MISSION STATIONS.
All mission stations, with the exception of Millingimbi at the Crocodile Islands were
visited. Unfavorable weather necessitated abandonment of the journey to that place, but the
Superintendent subsequently supplied the necessary information.
Notes of the inspections are given hereunder:—
Bathurst Island Mission —North Australia.
Mission Body—Roman Catholic Church.
Superintendent—Rev. Father E. X. Gsell.
The native population varies between 100 and 300, as native foods in the bush are plentiful.
The natives of Melville Island, estimated at 500, also occasionally visit the mission.' Of the 98
children maintained, eight are half-castes. Particulars of dependants are given in Mission Relief
Operations Return.
About 100 acres of land is cleared and, of this, 50 acres is under cultivation with coco-nuts,
peanuts, sweet potatoes, yarns, and various tropical fruits and grains, most of which are used
for home consumption. Some revenue has been made from sale of peanuts and sawn timber and
from carriage of goods down the coast with the mission ketch.
The institution has its own saw-milling plant and several substantial buildings have been
erected for use as church, mission dormitories, convent, school, See.
The general appearance of the place is pleasing and uplifting. The mission control appears
to be kindly, commanding affection and respect. The inmates all seem to be well nourished and
contented. The children in dormitory are comfortably housed on the ground floor of buildings
(the upstairs portions of which are occupied by the Missionaries themselves), and sleep on
stretcher cots covered with blankets. The adult inmates of the mission are housed in huts with
ground floor, living otherwise in the native style.


All field work was practically at a stand-still, owing to dry weather, and numbers of the men
were away hunting. Some samples of very fine needle-work, done by the girls, were seen. The
inmates have not been encouraged to adopt European dress more than is necessary. The men
and boys wear trunks only; the girls and women a print dress or loincloth.
The school children seemed bright and intelligent. The aim in training is to fit them for
the settled life and, as they mature and marry, place the couples in small plots, with a view to
maintaining themselves by food raising and other productive work. The first of these couples
has been so placed and seem to be making satisfactory progress.
This station is excellently situated for receiving and training young half-castes, as now
suggested, for future employment in territory industries ; in fact there are eight of such children
already receiving education with the aboriginal children. The island is within a day’s sail of
Darwin, the general environment is suitable, and, with some financial assistance, the plant and
staff for vocational training can be brought to an efficient standard.
The mission are very anxious to undertake this work and also to extend their ministrations
to Melville Island, if they can be given control of that area. This could be effectively done from
Bathurst Island.
With the means to do so, several suitable industries could be profitably undertaken, offering
prospects, not only of vocational training, but of self-support, viz.:—
Saw-milling for sale of timber in Darwin, as well as mission needs.
Trepang fishing, shark fishing, turtle shelling, always a good market.
Marsupial skins—the carcasses are also of value as food.
Buffalo hunting—the hides are worth £2 each and the carcasses of food value.
Coco-nut growing for copra.
Peanuts, bananas and other tropical fruits for sale;
Vegetables for mission consumption and sale in Darwin.
The Mission are proposing to get a tractor to enable them to extend their farming operations.
Oenpelli Mission (Alligator River) —North Australia.
Mission Body —Church Mission Society.
Superintendent—Eev. A. J. Dyer.
The native population is about 190, of which 90 are permanent residents, including school
children and working natives with their dependants. Particulars are given in the Mission Relief
Operations Return.
Ten acres of ground, on the shores of a beautiful lagoon, are under cultivation with maize,
potatoes, cassava, pumpkins and other tropical fruits and foods, all for home consumption.
Native game and fish are fairly plentiful.
Like all other stations, the prolonged dry weather has practically brought all important
agricultural operations to a stand-still. The country in this reserve offers good possibilities for
successful industrial development of the mission by cattle raising and agriculture.
The stock number 1,800 cattle, 80 horses and over 200 goats. The cattle, seen in a day’s
ride around the beautiful well-watered plains, were in good condition, but were mostly of a poor
type and should, as soon as possible, be improved by the introduction of some good breed bulls
and heifers, such as Herefords, and a general culling of the herd.
A question worth considering is whether some useful experimental farming could not
profitably be carried on at this station. There would be practically no expense beyond that of an
occasional visit by the Territory’s Agricultural Director and the purchase of the necessary plants
and seeds. The mission would willingly undertake the work for the benefit of the knowledge
and experience gained and the use of the surplus products. The large flats around the billabong,
being well covered at wet season, should profitably grow rice. Tobacco, coffee, maize, sugar cane,
coco-nuts, peanuts, bananas, pineapples and other crops, all suitable for native foods and some
which would find ready sale in Darwin, can be grown profitably.
Sheep-breeding could be tried on a small scale, after advice had been obtained as to the
effect of the wet season upon them. Besides their value for staff food, there would be a ready
sale in Darwin for mutton.
Mr. Dyer’s dream of the whole of the native population of Arnhem Land eventually gathering
at Oenpelli is hardly likely to be realized for many years to come, but this station, with its central
position and natural resources, offers every promise of playing an important part in the work
of the betterment of the natives of this part of the Territory.
The one valuable asset lacking is millable timber, but there is an abundance of ti-tree or
paper bark, so useful in this country for roofing and walling purposes.


The officers of the mission are of the right type, combining the missionary spirit with
practical ability and an understanding of the character and limitations of the native. The teaching
of the children in school is on right lines, aiming at cultivating their thinking powers. Their
knowledge of English was fairly good and they seemed bright and intelligent.
Though somewhat early to commence any definite vocational training, the young boys
are learning garden work and to be generally useful, and the girls household duties, sewing, cooking,
gardening, &c.
A number of houses of bush timber, bark walls and iron roof have been erected for staff
accommodation, and five cottages of similar construction for use of young aboriginal married
couples, the first of a properly planned village, the plan being to establish the educated children,
as they mature and marry, in settled homes on small garden plots. Those already settled appear
to be successfully adapting themselves to the new life.
Discipline is good, the control is kindly, the people, especially the children, seem to be well
nourished and happy, and there is evidence of good organization.
Goulburn Island Mission —North Australia.
Mission Body—Methodist Church.
Superintendent—Mr. H. E. Read.
The general appearance of the station is pleasing, everything being orderly and well kept.
The natives seem healthy, well nourished and happy. The children are well housed in dormitories,
with cots, the young men in separate quarters, with bunks, and several married couples in small
homes of their own. There is also a native camp for the nomads and visitihg natives, who have
not yet adopted civilized conditions. /
The area under cultivation is about 8 acres. All industrial operations, however, were
at a stand-still, the explanation being that the mission were contemplating abandoning the work
at this place and seeking a fresh position elsewhere. There was a general feeling of dissatisfaction
amongst the officers left to carry on, as all working plant had been taken to the new mission at
Crocodile Island, and there were no horses or implements with which agricultural work could be
carried on.
In a subsequent conversation with the Rev. Webb, the Chairman of the Mission Committee,
he explained that Goulburn Island offered little possibility of successful development in agricul-
tural or stock work, but the Board were very reluctant to abandon the place and would continue
if they could see a real sphere of usefulness for it.
The Rev. Read claimed that there was good garden soil around the billabongs and, by
provision of pumping plant for irrigation and by damming the swamp water in the wet season,
vegetables could be grown all around. Certainly the mission garden, though not large, showed
healthy growth of tropical fruits, such as mangoes, bananas, custard apples, pawpaws, &c., as
well as peanuts and cassava. Citrus fruits are also in evidence. Doubtless, with irrigation,
sufficient vegetables and fruit for the institution’s needs could be grown. The station, however,
seems to be favorably situated for successful working of the fishing industry. Already the people
have earned a little by fishing around their own shores, with their canoes, for trepang, which is of
good quality, but very small and immature. A trial trip to the reefs 20 or 30 miles away, with
the Mission’s sailing ketch and dinghies, would probably show that trepang of good size, quality
and payable quantity, as well as trochus shell, for all of which there is constant market in the
east, would be procurable. This is an occupation congenial to natives of coastal districts. Sponge
gathering, shark fishing, turtle fishing for shell and cured turtle meat, fish smoking and probably
pearl shelling when the market has recovered, could be profitably engaged in. These occupations
also enable favorite foods to be caught for the use of the station.
The school teaching is on good lines, the children speak English well and are bright and
intelligent. Simple manual and domestic training is given. The men receive some training by
assisting in building, blacksmithing, fish-curing, fencing, gardening, boatwork, &c.
The station seems to be suitably situated, and provides the right environment for the
proposed care and vocational training of young half-castes and aboriginals. There are already
several young half-castes in the station, and quite creditable social progress has been made.
This station is also favorably situated in the proposed system of coastguard patrol for
the protection of the natives in the coastal camps along the shores of Arnhem Land.
Unless a better site can be found in the vicinity, I do not think Goulburn Island should be
abandoned,


Millingimbi Mission (Crocodile Islands) —North Australia.
Mission Body—Methodist Church.
Superintendent—Eev. T. T. Webb.
The aboriginal population is 290, and about 250 bush natives, in addition, visit the station.
Particulars are given in Mission Relief Operations Return.
About 45 acres are now under cultivation with maize, cotton, peanuts, rice, coco-nuts,
millet, citrus and other fruits. Owing to the unfavorable season some crops were not successful.
Millingimbi did not provide a perfect site for a mission station. The only good building
site was a low ridge, between a big swamp at the back and the seafront. However, there is good
water from wells, good soil and millablc timber, also sheltered anchorage for boats.
The station is as yet only in the early development stage. Considerable building develop-
ment has been achieved, including mission houses, dormitories, store, dispensary, native assistants’
cottages, workshop, machinery sheds, &c. The plant includes an auxiliary ketch, ten canoes, usual
farm implements, wagon, scoop, saw-mill plant, &c. There are also fourteen horses and a number
of goats.
The children attending school number 25 and, although no definite vocational training
has been undertaken as yet, owing to the fact that the station is still in developmental stage,
the men are receiving some practical training in farm work, and some of the more intelligent boys
assist in carpentering, blacksmithing, painting, and boatwork. The women on their part are
learning sewing, fancy-work, and simple domestic duties.
The main revenue earning industry is trepang fishing.
The Millingimbi natives are a distinct type, coming from the Liverpool River on one side,
and as far as the English Company and Wcssell Islands on the other. They do not mix
unrestrainedly with the neighbouring natives. A general improvement is reported as apparent
amongst those who have become attached to the mission. They are becoming more orderly in
their conduct, more industrious and cleaner in their habits and mode of living, and more amenable
to discipline.
Spoon-feeding is studiously guarded against, the native customs and ceremonials are
interfered with as little as possible, and the general tone is good. Additional members for the
mission staff are being obtained, to enable the technical, educational, and medical branches to be
properly undertaken. It is considered that it will take two years to build the station up to the
state of efficiency 1 intended.
Roper River Mission—North Australia.
Mission Body—Church Mission Society.
Superintendent—Rev. N. I). Joynt.
The Superintendent was absent on leave and, at the time of the visit, most of the inmates
and staff were ill with influenza. There were about 45 natives on the station, including 15 children
in school. A number were said to be down the river, in a camp, suffering from influenza ; in fact,
a boat-load were brought back by a neighbouring farmer during the inspection. The usual
attendance is 75, including 52 children.
Although there are said to be about 200 natives in the district, apparently not more than
one-third of the number avail themselves of the mission. There is evidence that this institution
has been at a stand-still; in fact, has deteriorated for some time for lack of energetic management.
The prolonged drought has, of course, seriously impeded both farming and cattle-breeding
operations, but with the plant, soil, and water resources, it should, under competent management,
be showing better results. The buildings have a neglected appearance. The cattle, it is
understood —they were not seen —are not showing the results they should. The number on the
run was 300. There were also 48 horses and over 300 goats.
An area of 3 acres on the river-bank is under cultivation with vegetables, tropical fruits,
&c., irrigated from the river by a pumping plant. The crops, however, suffered from the
depredations of marsupials, crows, and white ants.
The school children seemed bright and intelligent. There were three young half-castes,
children of a half-caste married couple acting as mission assistants.
This institution is suitably placed and fitted for giving vocational instruction to young
aboriginals in stock work and the usual trades and domestic accomplishments in demand in station
work. Half-castes could also be received there if necessary. It would also make an admirable
centre for medical work on the Gulf side, as it is connected by road with the railway line.
The Superintendent, before going on leave, had been in poor health for some time, and the
Mission Board had not been able to obtain suitable staff for the proper conduct of the work. A
married couple with two children, sent up a few weeks previously, refused to stay, and had to be
returned to Sydney.


Owing to complaints from certain of tlxe staff, an officer of tfie Church Mission Society had
recently visited this mission, and held an inquiry into the whole question of management.
Meantime the station was being carried on by two young men, temporary assistants, and an
intelligent half-caste married couple.
This station is worked in conjunction with that at Groote Eylandt, under the direction of
Rev. H. E. Warren, whose head-quarters is at the latter place, and this arrangement does not seem
to work satisfactorily. As Mr. Warren had been absent in the south and on business visits to
Thursday Island a great deal during the last year, and Mr. Joynt, besides being run down in health,
had been practically alone at Roper River, matters consequently drifted. One complaint has
been that Mr. Warren is too autocratic and will insist on carrying everything on his own shoulders.
He is plainly a man of great enthusiasm and energy, and apparently makes the mistake of expecting
that all the others should keep pace with him and take their lead only from him.
As an outcome of the recent inquiry by the Church Mission Society, an alteration has been
made in staffing and organization, which should residt in a more satisfactory system of management
and renewed progress.
Groote Eylandt Mission —North Australia.
Mission Body—Church Mission Society.
Superintendent—Rev. H. B. Warren.
The inmates of this station are all half-castes, of from three-quarter black to three-quarter
white strain, including 2 Chinese and 1 Afghan crossbreeds. The number is 34, being 15 males
and 19 females, of which 16 are children still attending school.
The island also carries a full-blood population of 200, who visit the mission for medical
treatment and for purposes of trade and religious instruction, but are not allowed intercourse
with the half-castes. The mission intends, however, to open a second station in the northern
portion of the island for the care of these people.
The general appearance of the station is pleasing and uplifting. It has been laid out on
attractive village plan, and undoubtedly a great deal of hard work has been done, on methodical
lines. Although demolished by a cyclone four years ago, the work done since in restoration and
development is most creditable. The fact that the only labour available, besides that of the white
officers, was the young half-caste boys and girls, makes it doubly praiseworthy.
The discipline seems to be excellent and tlie ..control firm, but just and paternal. The
management is orderlyjmd systenfatia Work starts at 6.30 a.m. tdli definite programme, which
is p'uiictillbuHyWdiservcd. Encouragement is given by a system of rewards, or payments by
piece-work, paid direct, in imitation coins, and worked on the Savings Bank system, the earners
being allowed to draw and spend in the store as desired. This encourages industry and thrift,
gives some interest in the work, and results in contentment.
The staff of this institution appear to be admirably suited for thn-work. The children at
school are evidently taug'ht to use their own mental powers, and are well advanced, keen, and
intelligent. The elder girls display creditable proficiency in domestic accomplishments. The
boys receive some vocational training in carpentry, engineering, mechanics, saw-milling, house-
building, bush work, seamanship, and gardening. The institution can also boast of a smart
company of girl guides, whqjseem very keen on their training. About 12 acres of land arc under
cultivation, and a water-driven plant. This farm produces a plentiful supply of
vegetables and fruits for the whole station.
The whole of the timber for building work, principally cypress pine, is cut on the place.
Considerable energy, resourcefulness, and ingenuity have been shown in the development
of the station. A small waterfafHn'the creek has been used to drive an hydraulic ram, which
pumps water to storage tanks for village use and garden irrigation. The saw-mill has been erected
beside the stream, and a large salvaged steamer paddle wheel installed as a water wheel. The
plan is to dam the stream to increase the water power and, by this means, drive the saw-mill and
an electric light plant.
The resources of this reserve, in beautiful water supply, good soil, timber, river anchorage,
and its security from outside white interference, make it an ideal site for a mission.
The wisdom of its selection as a purely half-caste home, however, is open to some question.
The missionaries give as their reason for its choice that, when on the mainland at Roper River,
considerable trouble was experienced through attempts on the part of whites to induce the girls
to run away.
In its present situation there is.always some danger of trouble with the primitive full-blood
inhabitants of the island, especially if they begin to cast covetous eyes on the girls. As they are
kept strictly away from the home, no serious indication of trouble in that direction has arisen.
Two girls some time ago absconded into the bush, but the primitive natives did not molest them,
but assisted in their recapture when promised a reward. The danger, if any, lies in the fact that,
like most natives, once having met white men, these people have acquired an appetite for white
man’sHuxuries, especially tobacco. At present they trade such things as turtle shell, turtle eggs,


native made rope, spears, fish, &c., to the mission for tobacco, knives, wire, iron, print, &c., hut have
on one or two occasions shown irritation when, as punishment for raiding the gardens, the trading
has been stopped. There is a large enough number of them on the island to be nasty if they ever
got the idea into their heads. The missionaries, however, are confident that once the proposed
outstation on the northern part of the island, for full bloods only, has been established, any risk
that may now exist will disappear.
The aim of the mission is to give these half-castes vocational training, encourage them to
marry amongst themselves, and then, if they wish, go to employment on stations as married
couples or remain on the reserve and maintain themselves by farming small plots. At present
there is an excess of females, and, unless more males can be collected, the problem of the future
of some of these girls will have to be faced.
The mission’s present policy, of segregating the half-castes from both white and black
and confining them to marriage amongst themselves, is not regarded as a correct one, nor likely
to be successful, for reasons already outlined in the general report. The institution at Grootc
Eylandt is, however, an interesting experiment and, provided the wider policy as regards the
future of the trainees is recognized, might be well given a fair trial.
Mission System.
These missions are all working on right lines ; the officers making themselves conversant
with the native language and customs and endeavouring, without unduly pressing the white
man’s civilization upon them, to induce them, by the education of the young, to see the
advantages of the settled and industrious fife.
Although the evangelization of the people is their basic object, its true relationship to,
and dependence upon, the social and industrial education of the race is wisely recognized. None
but the old, the sick, and the young are fed without doing some productive work to earn it.
Objections to Missions. —Objections are frequently voiced against the establishment of
mission stations as a measure for the protection of the primitive aboriginal. Anthropologists
have expressed the view that such institutions, by encouraging them to leave their tribal grounds
for the reserve, cause disintegration of their tribal life and eventual extinction. That, where
men, even with practical ideas, but without the essential sympathetic understanding of natives,
are placed in control, they do harm by allowing religious enthusiasm to over-ride the native culture.
Another objection is that, in the eagerness for spiritual results, harm is done by gathering natives
together for purely religious teaching and bringing them up as pensioners. Also that, unless
such work is adequately supported, once commenced, an injustice can be done to the children
by drawing them away from the bush life and its training in bush-craft and then, having to abandon
the work, leaving them stranded. The contention of the objectors is that, beyond reserving for
their use suitable and sufficient country and protecting them from outside interference, nothing
should be done .to interfere with their living their own life in their own way.
Necessity for Institutions. —These views, though born of sincere desire for the welfare of the
natives and worthy of earnest consideration in any measures for the betterment of the race,
apparently overlook certain important facts. The native, once having come into contact with
the white man or alien and acquired a taste for his foods and luxuries, is not likely to longer remain
a contented savage. There are few places now left of which it can be said that the natives are
absolutely uncontaminated, and it is doubtful if any exist where they do not need protection
from the unscrupulous, waiting to exploit their hunger for such luxuries. The disintegration
of tribal life, already encompassed by the encroachment of the white man, has created the need
for something more, in the way of protection and relief, than can be afforded by a Protector they
seldom see and very often are afraid of. And this need can best be served by an institution,
conducted by experienced men, with benevolent motives, who, while avoiding the dangers feared
by the sceptics, can win the confidence and trust of the people, by ministering to them in sickness
or distress and generally exercising a watchful eye on their welfare.
Advantage of Mission System. —ln conditions such as exist in the Territories, this work,
though recognized as the responsibility of the State, should as far as possible be placed in the
hands of subsidized missionary organizations.
In the first place, the cost of management is less, and the missions can obtain the type of
worker who undertakes the work from missionary, and not mercenary, motives and is likely to have
more sympathy with the people.
The Government, with its tremendous task of developing the country, would be unwise
to burden itself, and its already overtaxed machinery, with the worry of management of a number
of charitable institutions. Far more effective work can be done by the Administration if it can
confine itself to the direction of the work required.
The mission bodies now operating are keen to undertake such work and co-operate with the
Government for the betterment of the people.


Training Native Labour. —Recognizing the almost absolute dependence of the Territory
on its aboriginal population for the necessary labour for development of its industries, the
institutions, more particularly those dealing with what has been called the detribalized blacks,
should aim, as far as possibly can be done without detriment to the work of upliftment of the
race, at educating the young and able-bodied to take a useful part in the development of the country.
Some of the missions already furnish selected labour for employment on stations and at
other industries. With facilities for giving training in skilled work, such as saddlery, blacksmithing,
wheelwright work, carpentering, bush building, fencing, besides stock work, the labour furnished
would be more valuable.
Developing Marine Industries. —Apart from the training of skilled station labour, the
men could be trained in other equally congenial sea coast industries, such as fishing for and curing
trepang, trochus shell, turtle shell, sponges, shark oil and fins &c., for all of which there is a ready
market.
Other Values of Missions. —The religious mission has a value in the outback apart from
its aboriginal work. The necessary transport, mail, medical and religious facilities established
are a benefit usually appreciated by the people in the district and, in isolated places, where white
women are not known, the presence of the lady missionaries is admitted to be a restraining and
refining influence.
Though the present missions are admirably located for an effective scheme of protection
on these lines, there are several suitable fields for further work. These will be indicated in that
portion of the report dealing with measures for care of nomadic tribes.
Allocation op Assistance to Aboriginal Missions.
Increased subsidy needed. —Whilst the missions express themselves as anxious to conduct
their institutions on the lines desired by the Government and welcome its co-operation in the
direction of them, they point out that the work cannot be effectively done without increased
financial assistance. It is felt that it is hardly fair for the missions to be expected to carry on a
work that is really the duty of the State, and have to beg from the public and their church supporters
for the means with which to do it. The time and labour expended in the begging could be more
profitably used, and the uncertainty of their income often seriously retards progress.
Present system. —Under the present system, a fiat rate of subsidy is paid, which, besides
being insufficient for the work, is not satisfactory, as it penalizes the progressive institutions.
The per capita system suggested by them is equally unsatisfactory, from the departmental point
of view, as only likely to encourage pauperization.
Government responsibility. —The first important question to consider is what proportion
of the total cost of upkeep should be fairly regarded as the Government’s responsibility. The
upkeep cost must to a great extent be governed by :
(a) the possibilities of local production;
(b) the cost of transport of stores;
(c) the indigent relief necessary ;
(d) the business ability of the management.
Missions in the early years of their growth would need more assistance than those longer
established, owing to the outlay for material for development and need to wait for returns from
the productive operations.
It would be essential, from the Government’s point of view, that the institution staff and
plant should be efficient, and its operations wide enough, to enable it to achieve the purpose for
which it existed.
It will therefore be evident that any form of per capita subsidy, even on a scale graduated
according to conditions, would be likely to be unsatisfactory, as conditions would be always
changing. A per capita rate might, however, be applied to the industrial schools to which half-
castes will be sent for vocational training and paid for on the quarterly return.
System recommended. —The most satisfactory system would be a fixed annual rate, based,
at the beginning of each year, on the progress returns from the mission and the annual inspection
report by the Administrator, taking the following factors into consideration ;
(a) Number of old and infirm totally dependent.
(b) Others, not able-bodied, partially dependent.
(c) Children, orphans, &c., entirely maintained in dormitory.
(d) Number receiving vocational training, not otherwise paid for.


Mission Relief Operations.
Dependants.
Station and
Locality.
Distance
Controlling
_ s
bo .
from
Centre.
Denomina-
tion.
— tn
Ct q
to 3
.5 ft
as*
da i
►0 4
U
Remarks.
Ch. .Ad. Infirm.
V) ’5J
3 fl
Otf O
6.3 P
<! p.ft
£
£
£
Bathurst Island,
00 miles by
Roman
98 100 —
700
500
£2 Is. 6d.
650
£3 5s. 8d.
Cattle breeding for beef. Ex-
tensive farming of food
north of Bar-
sea from
Catholic
win
Danvin
Total—108
9|d. per
week
Is. 3d. per
week
crops. Fertile area.
Native food plentiful.
Some inmates go to outside
Methodist
employment.
Goulburn, north
350 miles
49 129 —
51
600
£3 6s.
867
£4 17s. 6d.
507
Country poor for cattle breed-
ing or farming. Tropical
of Arnheim
by sea
Land
from Bar-
win
Total — 178
Is. 3d. per
week
Is. I0id.
per wk.
fruits grown at homestead.
Tropang fishing engaged in
and hunting for native game
and fopd.
Millingimbi,
450 miles
Methodist
88 177 25
250
1,563
£5 8s.
1,856
£6 8s.
910
Good soil for food growing.
Crocodile
by sea
Tropang fishing for revenue.
Island, north
from Bar-
Total—290
2s. Id. per
2s. 51 d.
Native game and food
of Arnheim
win
week
per wk.
plentiful. Very primitive
Land
tribes to deal with.
Oenpelli, Alii-
300 miles
Church of
43 33 15
100
570
£6 5s.
784
£8 I2s. 6d.
531
Good country for cattle breed-
gator River,'
by sea
England
ing, well watered. New
Van Diemen’s
from Bar-
Total—91
2s. 5d. per
3s. 3|d.
station in process of de-
Gulf
win
week
per wk.
velopmont. Soil also suit-
able for good growing.
Native game and food
1
plentiful.
Roper River,
445 miles
Church of
32 18 2
75
f
Previously worked under one
Gulf of Car-
by land
England
1
management. Roper suit-
pentaria
from Bar-
Total—52
1
able cattle breeding. Food
win
1
f
growing soil fair—irrigation
541
used. Native game scarce.
Grooto Eylandt,
610 miles
Church of
16 19 3
200
£6
780
£8 13s. 4d.
558',
Grooto Eylandt segregated
Gulf of Car-
by land
England
1
I
half-caste colony. New
pentaria
and sea
Total—38
1
2s. 3£d.
3s. 4d. per
station. Good water, soil,
from Bar-
(
per wk.
week
and timber resources.
win
1
Making good progress.
Hermannsburg,
400 miles
Lutheran
93 100 26
2
888
£4
1,538*
£7
480
Cattle breeding only profitable
Finke Fiver,
by camel
industry. Agriculture
Central Aus-
transport
Total—210
Is. Old.
2s. 8Jd.
beyond small irrigated vege-
tralia
from Ood-
nadatta
per wk.
per wk.
table garden impracticable.
Very little useful timber.
4 Native game scarce owing
to drought.
(c) Sick treatment being given.
(/) Cost of transport of stores.
(</) Possibilities of raising food, timber, or other requirements.
(A) Native foods, game, &c., available.
( j) Development work being carried on.
Special encouragement should be given to genuine effort to successfully develop the
industrial and social side of the work.
In fixing the Government contribution, some margin must be left for efforts towards self-help,
although the fact will be noted that the highest rate per week for food only in these institutions
is 2s. 5d., and for complete upkeep, not including salaries, Us. 4d., which will show that some
degree of self-support must have been achieved. The subsidy should be on a scale generous
enough to avoid throwing an unfair proportion of the burden upon the shoulders of the faithful
few members of the public that support missions.
Departmental Supervision. —lt is equally essential, though, that the administration should
be kept sufficiently in touch to see how the money granted is being utilized. The spur that
frequent inspection and evidence of departmental interest in the work will give, not only to the
mission authorities, but to the blacks also, is just as valuable as the financial assistance.
It is contended that the Government should bear the expense of all food relief, upkeep, and
educational work, the church bearing the cost of its missionaries for the evangelization of the
people. A perusal of the following return will show that these expenses vary, according to the
ability of the station to raise food or the inmates to obtain native game.
• Includes camel freight, £450.


Subsidies recommended
subsidies:—
-Consideration might reasonably be given to the following increased
Station.
Present
Subsidy.
Suggested
Subsidy.
Remarks.
Bathurst Island
£
250
£
550
Including £50 towards upkeep of vessel. This vessel earned £200
in 1927 in private freight.
Oenpelli
f 250 1
L 250(a)/
750
Including the £250 (a) for upkeep of auxiliary ketch for mai'f,
supplies, &c.
Goulburn Island
250
350
This place will receive about £350 per annum from suggested half-
caste industrial school.
Millingimbi
250
750
To include £250 for upkeep of auxiliary ketch to serve this place
and Goulburn Island.
Roper River
250
500
Including £250 for upkeep of auxiliary ketch to serve Roper and
Groote Eylandt.
Grooto Eylandt
350
£306 for 34 half-castes at 3s. 6d. per week each, the balance for sick
relief for full-blood population.
Half-castes.
Perhaps the most difficult problem of all to deal with is that of the half-castes—how to
check the breeding of them and how best to deal with those now with us. The solution of the
first of these questions is just as important, perhaps more so, than the latter. As long as conditions
such as exist now in the Territory continue, so this problem will face us. In a country where
climatic and other conditions discourage the presence of white wqmen, the evils of miscegenation
will be evident.
Position re Half-castes. —Of the estimated native population in Central and North Australia
of 21,000, about 800 are half-castes, the Central Australia quota being 306. Of these, 206 are in
institutions, a few are in employment in the towns, perhaps 400 are employed on stations ; the
remainder, of which probably half are children, being in the camps attached to the stations or in
the bush. These children should be rescued as early as possible. A few of the half-castes born
on stations have been sent by their putative fathers to boarding school for education, and a
percentage of these have proved successful, one winning to the position of an outstation manager.
Another man, seen in Central Australia, worked his own run and was well respected. Probably
not more than 5 per cent, of the half-castes, other than those in the institutions, have received
any education or know any other association than that of the blacks’ camp. The majority are
not even acknowledged by their fathers. Even where this doubtful benefit is accorded them, it
is often only because of their usefulness as labour. On one North Australian run, which boasts
fifteen half-castes of ages from one year to 36 years, seven at least bear the name of the owner,
w ho was quite emphatic that half-castes should not be taken from the stations on which they
were born as they made good labour. A case also came under notice in Central Australia where
a white stockowner lived openly for years with a half-caste woman, who had seven children to him.
Some of the children he sent away and placed in employment. Recently, however, he turned the
woman adrift with a sum of money and married a white woman. This half-caste woman and
two of the younger children are now in the Alice Springs bungalow.
Need for White Women. —Efforts to check the abuse of these defenceless aboriginals and
the breeding of half-castes will have little likelihood of success until conditions can be developed
that will encourage white women to brave the hardships of the outback. One good white woman
in a district will have more restraining influence than alLihe~Ac±s and Regulations:
Evasion of Law. —Though strict laws forbid the employment or harbouring of single females
by unmarried men, they are evaded by employing a “ boy ”to pose as a dummy husband. One
man boasted of having a fresh “ lubra ” every week.
Married Men as Protectors. —lf the officers in these vast outback areas are to be able to
properly perform their difficult task of protecting the natives, they must not be placed in a position
which may leave them in danger of not being able to fearlessly enforce the laws. Facilities should
be provided for all Government officers, stationed in the bush, to be married men and have their
wives living with them. The woman’s influence and help will greatly enhance the value of their
work. The Government then could justly take the stand, so essential for successful aboriginal
administration, that no officer having abused the trust reposed in him should be allowed to continue
in a position of control over natives.
If, in conjunction with this, the stations would provide similar encouragement for their
men to marry, a big stride would be made towards the suppression of the present abuses and the
reduction of the half-caste element.


Policy necessary. —A definite policy, framed upon understanding of tlie peculiar position
and characteristics of the half-castes, and aiming at what is likely to be best for their future
happiness and usefulness, should be formulated. Rescued from the camps and given opportunity
for education and vocational training, they can be made an asset to the Territory. Left in their
present position, they are more likely to be a menace, and, with what is an even more deplorable
result, the increase of the quadroon element. All half-castes of illegitimate birth, whether male
or female, should be rescued from the camps, whether station or bush, and placed in institutions
for care and training. Even where these children are acknowledged and being maintained by the
putative fathers, their admission to an approved institution for education should be insisted upon.
The education should be simple in nature, but aimed at making them intelligent workmen and
fitting them to protect themselves in business dealings. The vocational training for the boys
should be in the trades already mentioned, as necessary for skilled station work, and, for the girls,
the domestic arts to make them not only good servants but capable housewives. On completion
of their training, those recommended as suitable for outside employment should be transferred to
the control of the Chief Protector, who would satisfactorily place them and exercise supervision
as long as might be necessary.
Departmental Control. —The provision in the present ordinances for departmental control
of all half-castes, and even quadroons, where necessary, is a wise one, for these people, especially
when uneducated, arc generally as much in need of protection as the full blood, in fact are
frequently more exposed to temptation and abuse.
Measures for the future of Half-castes. —Opinions vary as to what measure should be adopted
for the future of the half-caste, but most people fail to make any distinction between the different
breeds. The half-caste with 50 per cent, or more aboriginal blood or of alien blood cannot be
fairly classed with the quadroon or octoroon. The latter should be separately considered.
Two suggestions have been put forward, viz.:—
(а) Complete separation of the half-caste from the aboriginals, with a view to their
absorption by the white race ;
(б) Complete segregation from both blacks and whites in colonies of their own and to
marry amongst themselves.
Past experience, however, has shown that the half-caste, Avith few exceptions, does not
want to be separated from the blacks, in fact is happier amongst his mother’s people. He is
not wanted by the whites, nor does he want to be pushed into a society where he is always an
outcast. He should certainly be rescued from the degradation of the camps and given the benefit
of education and training, but Avill be happier if raised to this civilization in company with the
young aboriginals of his own generation.
Marriage of Half-castes and Full Bloods. —-Like every one else, the half-caste prefers to
marry where fancy dictates, and Avhere there is freedom of choice it is frequently made from
amongst the full bloods. Provided the latter have been lifted to an equally civilized plane, these
unions are for the benefit of both sides.
Object of training. —The object of the training of the young half-caste should be to fit him.
to fill a useful place in the development of the Territory, for the industries of the country can
readily absorb all trained labour, either black or brown. As the latter’s associates will always
be his mother’s race, there seems little sense in trying to create a gulf between them.
Exemption of superior type. —Half-castes showing the desire and capacity for raising
themselves can be treated as special cases and given an opportunity to do so. As the superior
type would probably be less than 10 per cent, to legislate for the whole on that small minority
would only be courting certain failure.
Marriage of half-castes to Europeans.- —Some of the superior half-caste or quadroons may
help to solve the sex question, by marrying men in the outback not able to get wives of their own
colour. Though one such marriage of a girl from Groote Eylandt appears to have been successful,
most of the few unions of this sort observed did not seem to be very happy ones. The best type
of white man is not anxious to outcast himself in this way, preferring, if he must, to satisfy his
lust Avith casual lubras until able to return to Avhite societv.
*/
Suitable missions for half-castes. — The tAVo missions, Bathurst Island and Goulburn Island,
could receive children from the Avestern and northern areas of North Australia, Plermannsburg
Mission those collected in Central Australia, and Groote Eylandt those from the Gulf side, the
destination of the children, as rescued, being decided by the Administrator.


Although the last-mentioned mission was established as a purely half-caste establishment,
in view of the excellent progress made so far, there seems no harm in allowing the experiment to
be continued, provided the wider policy, as regards allowing freedom of choice in marriage and
training of the inmates as skilled labour for Territory development, is adopted in place of the
original idea of a strictly segregated half-caste colony.
This establishment could, under those conditions, conveniently absorb whatever of the
quadroon element might, because of exceptional circumstances, be difficult to place in the white
community.
Quadroons and octoroons. —As already indicated, the crossbreed with a preponderance
of white blood should be considered separately. Their blood entitles them to be given a chance
to take their place in the white community and on as favorable a footing as possible. That
this may be successfully accomplished, the children should be removed from aboriginal associations
at the earliest possible age and given all the advantages in education and vocational training
possible to white State children, to minimize as far as possible the handicap of their colour
and friendless circumstances.
To avoid the dangers of the blood call, employment should be found where they will not
come into contact with aboriginals or aboriginal half-castes. In spite of such precautions, however,
a few will doubtless drift back, and it may be found advisable to allow, even encourage, the
marriage of such difficult cases with crossbreeds of darker strain.
Those quadroons and octoroons removed too late to receive the benefits of early separation
and special training, but who have been placed in domestic service in towns beyond the State,
should be given every possible opportunity to improve their condition, if possessing the character.
While official supervision and control is essential in their own interests, any appearance
of branding Avith the aboriginal stamp should be avoided, so as not to hamper unduly their upward
progress. For instance, a rigid application of the regulation rates of wages for aboriginals would
be manifestly unfair, as, Avith equal opportunities for learning, many should prove as useful and
valuable as the average European servant.
The evidence in one southern city, where a number of such crossbreeds have been placed
in service, was that employers Avillingly paid direct, to good servants, the difference betAveen the
aboriginal regulation rate and the ruling wages for similar Avork to State children.
Where suitable official inspection of these servants is available, the fixing of rates of Avages,
supervision of the spending, portion to be banked &c., could be Avell arranged between the inspector
and the employer.
Recommended Policy.
Summarized, the policy should be;—
(1) To check as far as possible the breeding of half-castes by :
(o) strict enforcement of hiws for protection and control of female aboriginals ;
( b ) encouraging immigration of white Avomen into the Territories;
(c) removal of obstacles to having married men in positions of control over,
or on places employing, aboriginals.
(2) Collect all illegitimate half-castes, male and female, under sixteen years of age, not
otherwise being satisfactorily educated, and place in Aboriginal Industrial
Mission Homes for education and vocational training.
(3) Make education of all half-castes under sixteen years of age compulsory.
(4) Education to aim at making them intelligent and able to protect themselves in
business dealing, and the vocational training to fit them to fill a useful place
in the labour for development of the Territories.
(5) Transfer those Avith preponderance of Avhite blood to European institutions at
early age, for absorption into the Avhite population after vocational training.
(6) Keep official control of all crossbreeds in employment, but avoid hampering social
progress of those under (5) by too strict application of aboriginal regulations.
(7) Grant exemption, by certificate, to those who, after education, prove of superior
character and capable of managing their OAvn affairs.
Proposals put Foravard for Future Administration.
Of the numerous suggestions made Avith a vieAV to improvement in future administration,
the following might be separately surveyed : —•
(1) Establishment of a native state Avith self-government;
(2) Complete segregation of all Avandering natives ;
(3) Establishment of cattle stations like Moola Bulla in Western Australia ;
(4) Compulsory general education of aboriginal children ;
(5) Education in citizenship ;
(6) Formation of Aborigines Advisory Board ;
(7) Employment of trained anthropologist for scientific study.


Native State. —The proposal lor the formation of a self-governing Aboriginal State, though
condemned by many as fantastic and impracticable, still has the virtue of having been born of a
sincere and wide-spread desire for the upliftment of a downtrodden race.
In the form put forward, it is, in many directions, impracticable, and shows a lack of
administrative experience of the characteristics and limitations of the natives, as it evidently, to
quote one criticism, proposed to thrust upon them a social machine they cannot understand.
In presenting the scheme, it is claimed that the natives are becoming extinct, because ;
(a) the sources of native food supplies are being encroached upon;
( h) past methods of government have failed —demoralizing instead of uplifting the
people;
(c) mission effort has not been adequately supported.
The proposal therefore is
(a) To reserve country where tribes are still intact.
(b) Include only tribes now occupying the territory to be reserved.
(c) No outside natives to be forcibly included.
(d) Members of State to have perfect freedom of movement.
(e) Government at first to be by native tribunal under benevolent white direction.
( f ) White adviser, teachers, missionaries, and industrial instructors.
(g) Severe laws to safeguard against any contaminating outside interference.
(h) Native tribunal to be empowered to deal with contagious diseases.
(i) Ultimate entire self-government under Native Administrator.
(j) Representation in Parliament.
The above scheme evidently assumes that the natives have, or can be expected to develop,
qualities that they have never so far displayed. They have no conception of democracy as
understood by civilized nations. Their native laws and customs seem to utterly fail to conceive
any idea of combination or federation of tribes for mutual government or protection. Bach
tribe is a separate and distinct group, with its own language, customs, and laws environing its
peculiar totem, and has interest in nothing outside of those associations. Any interference with
the government of the tribe by an elected tribunal, even if such body could be created, would be
bitterly resented.
The educated full-blood native, David Unaipon, indicated by the petitioners as a likely
leader in such a movement, was most decided, in discussion on the question, that his people would
never voluntarily change their tribal customs and laws for any form of national government.
To press such a system upon them would only result in chaos, for the different tribes would not
agree.
The freedom of egress and ingress to be allowed would endanger the security of the State,
by leaving them exposed to temptations or the introduction of diseases and vicious characters
from outside.
Without those ideas of federated self-government, the proposal can, in the main, be melted
into a comprehensive scheme for the greater protection and betterment of the primitive races,
on lines more suited to their present circumstances, but possible of development, by gradual
education, to partial if not whole self-dependence.
Complete Segregation of all Wandering Natives. —This suggestion, though excellent in theory,
cannot be put into practice, except gradually, without committing the error it is desired to avoid—
ruthless disintegration of the tribal life. The shielding of the race from the evils of contact with
the civilized races is urgently necessary, but until, through the education of the growing generation,
the tribes are induced to voluntarily seek the sanctuary of the benevolent institutions established
for their care, it will be better to concentrate effort on the amelioration of the lot of those suffering
from detribalization and the tightening up of the machinery for moral protection.
Any wholesale herding into reserves in strange country would be unwise.
Establishment of Cattle Stations for Aboriginals. —Although this proposal, if properly
managed, is an excellent one from the point of view of revenue raising, it misses most of the
essentials of institutions for the betterment of a primitive people. The raising of cattle only may
provide the beef needs and the revenue for other expenditure, but food, though the most important
item, is not the only essential consideration.
Twenty able-bodied men and half a dozen women would provide all the labour necessary
to run the largest cattle station likely to be established, and, if that was to be the only industry
developed, the remainder of the inmates would be just kept in idleness. Any system that
pauperizes the native, or produces for him without effort on his own part, is not likely to succeed
in uplifting him.


An institution, to be successful, must be able to find profitable occupation for all its able-
bodied inmates in industries productive, as far as possible, of their own needs and that will also
provide practical vocational training for the young ; as for instance—
(a) cattle breeding for beef, milk, butter, and animals for heavy haulage teams ;
(b) cultivation of fodder crops for dairy stock and working animals ;
(c) also of vegetables, fruit, poultry, eggs, &c., for food ;
(i d) saw-milling for material for improvement of living conditions ;
also such useful trades as building, carpentry, blacksmithing, saddlery, plumbing, wheelwright
work, butchering, and numerous others, all in daily need on a large self-contained institution,
and skill in which enhances the value of the labour hired therefrom.
Compulsory General Education of Aboriginal Children. —This would only be practicable
where it had been possible to gather them into institutions. As already explained, the instruction
should only be of a simple nature, and aim chiefly at domestic and manual training. Until the
Territory is further developed and facilities for the education of white children are provided, any
attempt at compulsory education of even the children of station camps would be out of the question.
The rescue of half-castes from the camps and education in institutions should be compulsory.
Education in Citizenship. —The aboriginal of the Territory, though quite equal physically
and mentally to his cousins in the more advanced States, is still in a very primitive condition,
and it would be useless attempting to educate the present generation in the duties and
responsibilities of citizenship as practised by the white man’s civilization. If, by benevolent
dealing, their confidence can be and the young people trained to appreciate the settled family
life, develop the desire for self-dependence and pride in its part in the village betterment, learn
something of the spirit of social service, that will be a great stride in citizenship for one generation.
It is too soon yet to look forward to any higher development in self-government.
Formation of Aborigines Advisory Board. —This suggestion emanates from certain bodies
in South Australia, interested in a similar board in that State, where the different philanthropic
associations have taken an active interest in the aboriginal question. Unless such a board is
composed of persons with expert scientific or administrative knowledge of aboriginal characteristics
and conditions, it would be of little value and only calculated to hamper administration.
Such a board, to be effective, should contain a trained anthropologist, a medical expert in
diseases peculiar to natives, and officers and missionaries experienced in aboriginal administration,
who should all have first hand knowledge of Territory conditions. Their duties should be confined
to advising on matters of policy.
Employment of Trained Anthropologist for Scientific Study of Race. —The Chair of
Anthropology of the University of Sydney has undertaken some work in collection of
anthropological data and has placed several of its students at places in North Australia and
Queensland to study and record the culture of the most primitive tribes. It is certainly important,
from a scientific point of view, that the records of this fast dying race should be saved while the
field for research still exists.
The knowledge obtained would be of important value also in future policy and
administration.
Nomadic Tribes.
These may be divided into two classes, viz., those running on distant parts of station
country and those on unalienated land.
Station Myalls. — Conflict over Waters. —Between the first of these and the stock-owners a
certain conflict is always inevitable, as it is practically impossible to have cattle on country where
blacks are hunting without some disturbance of the stock. During severe drought, such as has
been experienced for some time, the drying up of many of the waterholes renders the situation
more acute, as, naturally, the blacks have to live and the stock-owners are equally anxious to save
their cattle. That the position as regards water has in some places become acute may be seen
from the fact that a large party of 50 Warramulla blacks, a wild desert tribe, were seen at Wave
Hill Station, where they had come, bringing their women and children, which in itself was
significant, because the waterholes had dried up. Information was received that this conflict over
the right to water was causing some distress amongst the natives of the Kaitish tribe in Central
Australia, the scene of the murder of a white man and the unfortunate shooting of a large number
of the tribe, including women, during the arrest of the supposed murderers, into which inquiry
is now being held.


Reservation in Pastoral Leases. —Now it must be noted that, in the Land Ordinances No.
14 of 1927 of both North and Central Australia, Section 34 (h) provides that, in all pastoral leases,
there shall be a reservation in favour of the aboriginal inhabitants, and in Section 21 (e) such
reservation gives to these aboriginal inhabitants and their descendants full and free right of ingress,
egress, and regress into, upon, and over the leased land and any part thereof, and in and to the
springs and natural surface water thereon, and to make and erect thereon such wurlies and other
dwellings as those aboriginal inhabitants have before been accustomed to make and erect, and
to take and use for food birds and animals, ferae naturae, in such manner as they would have been
entitled to if the lease had not been made.
All leases in North Australia contain the reservation, but in a number of those recently
issued in Central Australia the condition has been omitted. Its insertion should be insisted on
where blacks are still roaming over or living on the country.
Disregard of the Reservation. —lt will thus be seen that where, as has been alleged, stock-
owners have driven the natives away from the waterholes to save the water for their stock, it has
been a distinct breach of the above reservation. When the season is good and surface waters are
plentiful there may be no occasion for dispute, though at any time the presence of blacks is a
disturbing influence on stock. On the other hand, the presence of the white man and his herds
has injuriously affected the natural food supplies of the black, for the native game has become
more scarce and Avild, and he must not pollute the waterholes where he has been used to hunting
for fish.
Cattle Spearing. —One unfortunate outcome has been thafc in some places, in retaliation,
the black has given trouble by killing cattle. This seems to occur in the coastal areas, chiefly the
country around the Victoria and hitzmaurice Rivers. It has been complained that stock have
been found running with spears still impaling them, and other carcasses Avith only a small portion
taken. Also that, in consequence of the cheeky attitude of many of the blacks and the fact that
some of the cattle killed had been shot, there was some uneasiness amongst the whites, and station
employees Avent about armed.
Information gathered seemed to indicate that the principal offenders or ringleaders in the
cattle killing were not the Avild blacks, but half-civilized station blacks who had gone “ bush”
and hungered for the beef to which they had been accustomed.
Difficulty of punishment. —ln discussion with the police officers, it was pointed out by
them that arrest and punishment of the offenders was difficult, as there Avere very feAV of the blacks
who Avere not to some extent guilty, and wholesale arrest Avas impossible. At one station, 60
warrants, issued by a predecessor, for the arrest of alleged cattle killers, Avere still on file, as it
had been impossible to execute them. It was the opinion that, in most cases, hunger for beef
and difficulty in getting native game Avas the principal incentive, more than, as those complaining
alleged, pure lust for killing. It was also averred that most station stockmen carried firearms
for the purpose of killing scrub bulls, and as the manager of one station, foremost in its complaint
about the cattle killing and consequent uneasiness, frequently went out on the run for several days
at a time, leaving his wife Avith only a Chinese cook for protection, it hardly seemed to bear out the
statement as to fear in that quarter. Nor had one complaint been made of blacks attacking or
attempting to molest Avhite stockmen.
Control inadequate. —As long as the blacks have reason to labour under a sense of deprivation
or injustice, the trouble AA T ith cattle killing will continue, especially Avhile the machinery for
controlling them is inadequate. The stock-OAvners argue that the Government that granted them
tenure of the country and collects the rental is in duty bound to afford them and their property
the necessary protection. There is no doubt the impossibility, under present conditions, of
effectively patrolling the vast areas assigned to the feAV official Protectors emboldens the offenders.
The above difficult position can be most effectively relieved by: —
(a) Reservation of suitable areas in the vicinity and establishment of aboriginal
institutions thereon, under experienced missionaries, to provide a sanctuary
for the natives, exercise a steadying influence and relieve distress;
(b) Appointment of extra police, and establishment at accessible points, to ensure
regular patrol and prompt action for protection, not only of the stock-OAvners’
cattle, but of the natives when suffering distress.
If it Avere possible for the stations to make a bargain Avith the nomads to make them a gift of
a beast at certain times, on condition that they confine themselves to certain hunting ground and
Avaterholes and refrained from interfering Avith stock, it may have good result. Provision is also
made in suggested amendments of existing luav for greater restriction on use of firearms by natives,
by stopping the traffic in ammunition to bush blacks Avith unlicensed guns.


Sickness and diseases amongst nomads. —As pointed out in interim report after visit to
Central Australia, although inquiries elicit very little information as to the prevalence or otherwise
of venereal, there is not much doubt it exists, for the natives are usually very frightened and
secretive, often hiding the fact until too late for curative treatment. Cases discovered near
civilization in the north are sent to the Darwin Clinic for treatment.
Cases of yaws were seen at Melville Island, others at Powell Creek. Drugs and syringes,
with directions for treatment, are supplied by the department at Darwin to police officers notifying
cases, but there is some nervousness about the use of them.
Leprosy is in evidence on the east coast. Cases were seen in isolation at Roper River and
Groote Eylandt Missions. It is possible that the mission authorities, if assisted financially, could
secure the services of a trained medical missionary for work in this area.
A disease called larakinya, somewhat resembling yaws, is prevalent amongst children in
Central Australia. Children of the Kaitish tribe, seen at Harding’s Soak, were being treated by
a missionary there ; and other cases were reported by settlers 50 miles to the east of that point,
who claimed to be successfully treating the disease with bluestone water. A medical tourist,
who spent some months in this territory, reported numerous cases of advanced granuloma and
syphilis amongst the nomads on the fringe of civilization. Many were young children, the infection
being communicated by flies.
Blindness and eye diseases, doubtless from similar causes, were noticeable in most camps.
Blacks on unalienated country. —The only areas of any extent, where now it can be said
that the natives’ hunting grounds have not been encroached upon, are Arnhem Land, in the north-
east of the North Australian Peninsular, the desert country east of Tanami gold-fields and the
large reserve between the McDonnell and Pietermann Ranges in the south-western corner of
Central Australia.
Although varying estimates were offered as to the number of natives on these areas, it
would appear that they would probably not exceed 5,000 altogether. Men who claim to have
been through Arnhem Land give the probable population as 3,000, most of whom are gathered
around the watered districts near the coast.
Natives from the Liverpool River country were frequently seen at Oenpelli Mission Station,
and those from the Goydir River, and as far east as Wessell and English Company Islands, pay
occasional visits to Millingimbi on the Crocodile Islands. In the same way, the mission at Groote
Eylandt at times has visitors from the tribes at Blue Mud Bay, Bickerton Island and Rose River.
Those seen at Oenpelli and Groote Eylandt, during the inquiries, appeared to be of good physical
type and were said to be generally docile. The desert blacks seen at Wave Hill were of fine
physique, but of different type from the coastal tribes and with a peculiar, crude scheme of tribal
scarring not seen elsewhere.
Information kindly furnished by recent visitors to the McDonnell and Pietermann Range
country in Central Australia showed that the wild blacks there were fine healthy specimens, but
the numbers were not so large as previously believed, probably not more than 1,000 altogether.
The further from the fringe of civilization the better and cleaner was the type.
Protection necessary. —They will not, however, long remain so if not protected. The idea
of establishing special reserves, in good country with ample native game and water, where the
natives are as yet unspoiled, is an excellent one. The suggestion that they should then be left
to live their own life would also be the right one, if the exploiter would equally respect that wish.
The need for some benevolent supervision is exemplified in Arnhem Land, where alien and even
white traders and fishermen have exploited the ignorant coastal natives for many years. The
numerous murderous attacks on some of these alien fishing crews, of recent years, can be shrewdly
taken as evidence that abuses were being attempted, or had been practised, which aroused the
resentment of the natives.
Reduction of native food supplies. —ln the parts of the Territory not richly watered, the
periodical droughts cause serious diminution of the food supplies. As a result, numbers of the
desert blacks drift to the outstation stock wells, sponging upon the native well-attendants for
their rations. Even this contact with the fringe of civilization has an undermining influence, by
cultivating an appetite for the white man’s luxuries, which will gradually draw them away from the
reserves if not under careful supervision.
Benevolent supervision. —This care can best be provided by reserving suitable areas, where
these primitive people are most numerous, and establishing missions from which benevolent
supervision can be exercised. It should be clearly defined that the aim, at the beginning, is not
to draw the people away unnecessarily from their tribal life, but to win their trust by kindly
ministrations, relieving them in distress or sickness and guarding them from abuse.
F. 1882.—3


This trust once established, it soon follows that the people will look to the mission as a
place to which they can come for relief when hungry or sick, especially the old people and the
young children. The experience of the existing missions has been that not only do the parents
send the children in to have them cared for, but the different tribes seem to look upon the mission
as a neutral ground, where they can meet without inter-tribal jealousy.
Arnhem Land Reserve. —The large number of primitive natives in Arnhem Land calls for
effective measures for their protection and supervision. The whole of this country north of a line,
say, from the South Alligator River to the Roper or Phelp Rivers, but omitting or skirting any
existing pastoral holdings, should be reserved for aboriginals. There should be no obstacle to
this, as the country is very poor, no one requires it, and those who previously have taken some
of it up have abandoned it.
The present missions are admirably situated for fitting in with a scheme, for a chain of
institutions around this area, to ensure the necessary supervision. Fresh stations could with
advantage be opened at the English Company Islands and Bradshaw’s Inlet, a site north of Caledon
Bay. The present mission authorities would, it is believed, willingly co-operate in extending
the work. The Methodist Mission could be offered the English Company Islands and the Church
of England the site above Caledon Bay.
Melville Island Reserve. —It is estimated that on Melville Island there are between 500 and
800 natives. Those seen were of a splendid type and worth preserving. This island is said to be
held by Yesteys under lease, but no use whatever is being made of it. If this area could be resumed,
and apparently under the Lands Acquisition Act of 1906 there is power to do so, the Catholic
Mission authorities would immediately commence mission work amongst the natives, numbers of
whom, even now, visit the Bathurst Island institution and are tribally related to the natives
there.
Mission Coast Patrols. —As all these north and east coast missions possess good sailing or
motor vessels, it could be arranged, as part of their work, to carry out inspection patrols along
their own sections of coastline and keep the Administrator regularly informed of conditions.
The superintendents could be appointed Protectors for the purpose, and the mission could be
allowed for such services, in their subsidy, to meet the extra expense incurred. This would ensure
a more thorough supervision of these coastline camps than could possibly be exercised by a
Government vessel from Darwin.
Mission Coastal Trading. —One feature of the activities of the mission at Groote Eylandt
promises to open up a new and important field of work amongst these coastal tribes that could
with advantage be developed and fitted into the proposed coast patrol. Contact with the alien
and white trepangers and traders in the past has bred a desire, on the part of the natives of the
coastal camps in Arnhem Land, for white men’s foods, tobacco, and trade articles, such as wire,
hoop iron, knives, tomahawks, fish hooks, print, &c., and the unscrupulous have exploited them
and abused their women, leading frequently to trouble, as the murders at Caledon Bay and other
places would seem to indicate.
Two officers are now equipping a vessel and intend, as a separate department of the mission
work, to trade with the camps of natives along the coast and, by honest relations and treatment,
supplant those now exploiting them. Even at the present time the natives of some of the
neighbouring camps visit the mission stations, bringing turtle shell, eggs, fish, native made fibre rope,
dillybags, &c., to trade for the goods mentioned. The desire for the trade exists amongst them,
having been planted by others ; if not catered for by those professing the wish for their welfare,
they will look elsewhere. As one of the above officers is a trained medical missionary, it will be
possible to do useful work in this direction. The scheme will be self-supporting, and any profits
will be devoted to the extension of relief work amongst the natives. ■
Advantages of Trading Proposal. —Besides assisting to establish friendly relations, thus
enabling a closer scrutiny to be kept of their condition, to learn at once of any abuses existing, or
any sickness or diseases afflicting them, the natives will be encouraged to develop habits of industry
and thrift. There are fields of marine industries along this unprotected coastline, such as
hurtle-shell, beche-de-mer, trochus-shell, sponges, shark fishing, &c., capable of being profitably
developed, by encouraging the natives to work them for their own benefit, thus doing a not
unimportant part in developing the business of the Territory. Once understanding the
possibilities, these natives would soon own their own sailing boats and dinghies, in fact, could
work any of the above industries with their present dugout canoes.
Suggested Mission, Daly River. —Another mission should be established on the Daly River,
where a large tract of suitable country is already reserved. The Catholic Mission would, if
encouraged, open up work here also. Some years ago this body had a large mission on this area,
but abandoned it, as prospectors were being allowed to invade the reserve, and, when heavy floods


destroyed buildings worth thousands of pounds, they decided to recommence work on Bathurst
Island instead. They would have remained and rebuilt on higher ground but for the invasion
of the institution. It is estimated that there are fully 500 natives on the reserve. |
South of this reserve is the country where the worst of the difficulties with regard to the
cattle killing by natives is experienced. The blacks there number about 500, and a good mission
in the vicinity would help materially to check the trouble.
Suggested Mission, Lake Amadeus Reserve. —An institution should also be established in
the large reserve in the south-western portion of Central Australia, where, it is believed, there are
between 500 and 1,000 natives. A fine type of people were found in the McDonnell Ranges by a
medical tourist, who kindly supplied information and photographs. About 500 were also seen in
the southern portion, near the Musgrave and Mann ranges, by two exploring missionaries. A
report was also received of some distress and sickness amongst the blacks on Lilia Creek, east of
Lake Amadeus. The reserve might with benefit be extended north and east to include these
primitive tribes outside of the present area.
An institution on this area would be able to exercise supervision over the conditions existing
during dry seasons, when it seems very likely some privation is suffered through scarcity of water
and game. The fact that reports showed a surprising decrease in the population of that locality
would also seem to indicate the possible practice of infanticide.
Doubtless the Lutheran authorities would be willing to extend their operations to this
field also.
It would seem advisable to divide the spheres of work as evenly between the interested
denominations as their own willingness to undertake it will allow.
Recommendations.
Summarized, the recommendations are—
(l) Reserve the whole of Arnhem Land for aboriginals.
(2) Establish additional missions at Wessell or English Company Islands and at
Bradshaw’s Inlet near Caledon Bay.
(3) Resume Melville Island (now under lease) and reserve for aboriginals.
(4) Allow the Roman Catholic Mission at Bathurst Island to establish mission at
Melville.
(5) Arrange for the missions on the coast to undertake coastal patrol and report to
Administrator.
(6) Establish a mission on Daly River—to be undertaken by Roman Catholic Mission.
(7) Extend the aboriginal reserve in south-west corner of Central Australia, north and
east to embrace country not alienated containing primitive tribes.
(8) Establish one or more mission stations—Lutheran suggested—to exercise supervision
over the conditions and to relieve where privation is evident.
(9) Appoint extra police at accessible point in the Victoria River area where cattle
spearing is complained of.
Survey of Administration.
Present Machinery. —The machinery for administration of the relief of aboriginals and
half-castes at present comprises :
North Australia —
Chief Protector of Aboriginals, responsible to the Government Resident, stationed
at Darwin ; also holds the additional appointments of —■
Chief Government Medical Officer.
Health Officer.
Medical Superintendent of General Hospital, Aboriginal Compound, and
Leper Lazarette.
Officer in Charge of Government Relief.
Country Protectors of Aboriginals, at the following places, who are also officers
in charge of police and hold subordinate appointments for a number of
other departments:—
On Darwin railway line—Parap, Brock’s Creek, Pine Creek, Katherine,
Marranboy, Mataranka.
In western district —Newcastle Waters, Wave Hill, Timber Creek, Tanami.
In eastern district—Roper River, Borroloola, Anthony Lagoons, Rankine
River.


Aboriginal institutions in the following places;—
Darwin —Compound and Clinic for aboriginals in employment in Darwin,
or sent there for relief or treatment, also a home for half-caste children,
in charge of a Superintendent and Matron, responsible to the Chief
Protector.
Mission stations for, care and training of primitive natives—controlled by
religious denominations and subsidized by the Government (subject to
progress inspection by the Chief Protector) at the following centres :
North coast. —Bathurst Island (Roman Catholic), Oenpelli on the
Alligator River (Church of England), Goulburn Island and
Millingimbi on the Crocodile Islands (Methodist).
East coast. —Roper River and Groote Eylandt (Church of England),
Relief depots are established at the various police stations, from which rations
and medicine are issued to the indigent natives camped in the neighbourhood.
Periodical inspections of the camp natives are made by the Protector and
serious or infectious cases reported to the Chief Protector.
Medical and food relief is also supplied to officers in charge of telegraph stations
for issue to sick and indigent.
Central Australia —
Chief Protector of Aboriginals, responsible to the Government Resident, stationed
at Alice Springs, also holds the additional appointment of—Sergeant of
Police, Alice Springs, with usual subordinate appointments for other Govern-
ment Departments.
Country Protectors of Aboriginals, at the following places, who are also Officers
of Police and hold subordinate appointments for other Government Depart-
ments :
On overland line. —Alice Well, Barrow Creek.
In eastern district.—Arltunga (70 miles), Lake Nash (300 miles).
Western District.—Nil.
Aboriginal institutions in following places ;
Half-caste Home (The Bungalow) in Alice Springs, in charge of a Matron,
responsible to the Chief Protector, who is also school teacher to European
children.
Mission station.—Hermannsburg, Finke River (Lutheran), subject to progress
inspection by the Government Resident.
Relief depots at the above police stations.
Medical and food relief is also issued at the following centres: —
Telegraph Office.—Charlotte Waters.
Cattle Stations.—Andado, Crown Point.
Itinerant Missionary.—E. Kramer.
Administrative machinery inadequate. —ln a territory of over 500,000 square miles, with
an aboriginal population of nearly 21,000, it will be plain that effective supervision and protection
cannot be given to the people with the present administrative machinery.
The duties and responsibilities of the other arduous positions, held, by the Chief Protector
at Darwin, prevent his giving the attention to the aboriginal work that its importance demands.
The Chief Protector at Alice Springs is similarly handicapped. Inspection of distant centres
and aboriginal institutions cannot be undertaken for this reason.
Close control essential. —It will be recognized that it is essential, for the efficient direction
of such an extensive field of work, that the Chief Protectors should be able to keep in close personal
touch with matters. Regular medical inspection is also important in places like these territories,
owing to the lack of skilled medical help outside of the northern capital. The fact that the white
population are so dependent upon, and in daily contact with, the blacks, makes the dangers of
infection so much greater. There are diseases of a granulomatous nature amongst the natives
of the bush camps, which could probably be cleaned up by attention from a qualified medical
man.
The mission stations would welcome regular inspections and be benefited by advice on both
medical and administrative matters.


Appointments necessary. —To enable the field work to receive the attention necessary, and
especially in view of the extensions of operations now being recommended, the appointment of
the following additional staffs would be advisable;—
North Australia —
Deputy Chief Protector of Aboriginals, to relieve the Chief Protector (who is a
medical man) of much of the routine administration, as in matters of
employment, discipline, relief supplies, and assist him with inspections of
the institutions. This officer should have had experience in aboriginal
administration and be able to help the institutions with advice.
Travelling Protector of Aboriginals—to inspect the condition of aboriginals on
stations and in neighbouring camps, inquire into complaints and generally
assist the local Protectors to enforce observance of the Ordinances. This
also should be an experienced officer and able to give first aid treatment*
Central Australia—
Chief Protector of Aboriginals—to be responsible to the Government Resident
and give his whole time to the care of the natives. He should be experienced
in aboriginal administration, and have the means for travelling on inspections
of natives in employment or in camps, and keep in touch with the condition
of the primitive natives in the bush.
The present Chief Protector (Officer-in-charge of Police, Alice Springs) could be
Deputy Chief Protector, to act for the Chief Protector of Aboriginals in his
absence.
Government Medical Officer —to be also Medical Inspector of Aboriginals,
Additional District Protectors. —The districts to which some of the Protectors are assigned
are too vast for proper supervision, at any rate with the present facilities for patrol. Some of
these districts could, with advantage, from the aboriginal department’s point of view, be divided
and additional officers stationed in places closer to troublesome areas. If the suggestions for
improvement of employment and camp conditions are put into operation, more frequent inspection
will be necessary.
Motor conveyance for patrol. —The officers could also, ■with advantage, be supplied with
motor conveyances for patrol, or assistance to provide their own. Although horses could not
entirely be dispensed with, the motor conveyance can save weeks of valuable time in a country
where cattle stations are usually from 60 to 100 miles apart. It would also save some expense
and much wasteful delay in the delivery of stores to the stations.
Police as Protectors. —A good deal of criticism was levelled at the practice of utilizing
police officers as Protectors of Aboriginals. It was pointed out that his duties as a police officer
could not help but clash with the responsibilities of his position as a Protector, and, for this reason,
it was impossible for him to win the whole trust of the natives. He could not be prosecutor as
well as defender without subjecting the ignorant native prisoner to the danger of injustice.
While recognizing the disabilities of the system generally, it has to be admitted that many
police officers are imbued with a genuine desire to help the natives. To maintain a staff of resident
official protectors, instead of the police, would in many ways be more satisfactory, but would
naturally increase the cost of administration and, for this reason, practically all States use the
police in this work.
The appointment of travelling official Protectors as inspectors and the amendments of
legislation suggested should do much to offset the disabilities complained of.
Medical Assistance. —On every side the need for some efficient medical assistance is
apparent, not only for aboriginals, but for the white population also. This is particularly urgent
in Central Australia, where no medical help whatever is available. Although the needs of the
European section of the community do not come within the scope of this inquiry, it is mentioned,
as both blacks and whites are vitally concerned in the matter. The death of an old settler, at
Alice Springs, who was too ill to stand the arduous journey to the railway, but whose life might
have been saved by expert medical help and operation, emphasizes the great need for the establish-
ment of a medical centre in that territory, and especially in the interests of the women folk who
have been brave enough to face life in those regions. Medical officers, stationed at suitable centres,
would be able to organize first aid or simple medical treatment through stations and depots and,
with means of patrol at their command, carry out periodical surveys.
Much more useful first aid or home treatment could be arranged at the relief centres, by
the supply to the distributors of a simple medical guide, with a medicine and surgical chest stocked
to suit the guide book.
P. 1882.—4


The provision of additional aboriginal clinics, at centres where medical help becomes
available, should be considered. This need will be met, to a great extent, by the aboriginal
institutions established.
Blankets and Relief. —When the closer inspection of the tribes on the fringe of civilization
has been inaugurated, it appears certain that increased relief in food and, in cold climates, of
clothing will be found necessary. In the cold climates and in the civilizing institutions blankets
are necessary, especially for the old, the sick and very young. It is not advisable to issue them
to the primitive bush natives, except in special cases of sickness or distress. Blankets and clothing
should be strong, as well as warm, and of heavier material in the southern colder climates. The
issue could fairly be made to all the're ally destitute in or near civilization, where the Protector
was satisfied the covering was needed. Supplies to institutions could be issued annually or every
second year, as found by the Administrator to be necessary.
Management of Institutions. —In view of the difficult conditions in these territories, it would
appear to be the wiser policy for the department to avoid, as far as possible, burdening itself with
cumbersome machinery. The mission bodies are ready and willing to undertake the management
of institutions, if helped financially. They enjoy this advantage, as regards staffing, that they
can obtain the type of person proved most suitable for work amongst primitive races, who takes
it up from missionary, and not mercenary, motives.
It will be, in many ways, the more satisfactory and less expensive system, to encourage
the co-operation of such bodies in the relief and protection work, by generous financial assistance,
and thus free the administration for, what is of first importance, energetic direction of the whole
scheme.
To enable effective supervision to be exercised, it is essential that the Administration
should be able to keep in close personal touch with the work being done and, by advice and
encouragement, keep the wheels of progress moving. Frequent evidence of official interest has
a stimulating influence upon both white workers and blacks and certainly is an aid to discipline.
It also has good effect in deterring the exploiters.
For this purpose, a good seaworthy vessel, with adequate motor power to face the seas
and winds around the north coast and in the Gulf, is required. The present small vessel, the Maskee,
is capable of efficiently performing the work required, being too slow. For want of a proper
vessel, some murders, committed by blacks at Caledon Bay nearly 18 months ago, have not yet
been inquired into. The Administrator should have means of dealing promptly and expeditiously
with any troubles that may arise on the coast.
Aboriginal Schools on Missions. —Whilst at most of the schools on the institutions the
progress made in the education of the young was very creditable, some of the teachers displaying
marked ability in imparting instruction, it would greatly assist and encourage them, in their
difficult task, if the advice of a trained school inspector could occasionally be made available.
The difficulties of transport, however, would probably be too great to permit of the southern
inspector undertaking this duty during his visit.
Aboriginal Marriages. —A question was raised with regard to the legal marriage of
aboriginals. Although, presumably, there is no obstacle to the legal registration of purely
aboriginal marriages, it is not desirable that, through misdirected religious zeal, this state should
be forced upon them until civilized enough to understand the binding nature of the ceremony.
On mission stations, it is doubtless desired that a higher conception of the sanctity of
marriage should be inculcated, and this endeavour should be encouraged, but, while the people
are in the simple stage, it is wiser for the control of their marriage to remain in the hands of the
administration. Provision has been made for this in suggested amendments of the ordinances.
Where the parties have become Christians and desire a religious ceremony, the mission
could keep its own register of such unions and, to avoid abuse, reserve all cases of annulment
found necessary for the Administrator’s approval.
Punishment of Native Offenders. —It was pointed out that some more salutary punishment
than a term in Fanny Bay Gaol, with its regular meals, &c., should be provided for aboriginal
offenders, such as cattle killers. While the sentence imposed may meet the crime, it might often
be highly desirable to prevent the return of the native to the old district. It may also be necessary
to remove a native from undesirable surroundings or as punishment for trading in prostitution.
Where such action becomes necessary, the offender, unless a dangerous criminal, could be deported
to an island mission. There are not at present sufficient cases of the kind to justify a separate
Island Penitentiarv Settlement,


Trial of Native Prisoners. —Although, the ordinances wisely forbid the acceptance of a plea
of guilty by an aboriginal without the sanction of a Protector, there appears to be a need for more
than this. It is plainly unjust that an aboriginal, for a tribal murder, for instance, should be
tried by the white man’s laws and before a Court which cannot appreciate the peculiar tribal.code
influencing his actions. It has been suggested that so-called aboriginal criminals should only be
tried by a special tribunal of experts on aboriginal customs and laws. It may not, however, be
possible always to secure competent persons to form such a tribunal. The most practicable
method would be to try aboriginals, like children, in a special Court, on which experienced
missionaries or trained anthropologists could assist the magistrate or judge. The Chief Protector
should be able to act as defender, with the assistance, if necessary, of counsel. An intelligent
interpreter should always be employed and no previous admissions or pleas of guilty should be
accepted.
Recommendation.
It is therefore recommended that: —
(1) A Deputy Chief Protector and a travelling Protector be appointed in North
Australia.
(2) A whole time Chief Protector and a Government Medical Officer, to be also Medical
Inspector of Aboriginals, be appointed in Central Australia.
(3) Additional Country Protectors (Police Officers) be appointed.
(4) Country Protectors be supplied with motor conveyances for patrol.
(5) Regular medical inspection be provided for bush blacks.
(6) Aboriginal clinics be established where medical assistance is available—also on
mission stations.
(7) First aid medical guides and medicine chests be provided at all relief stations.
(8) Blankets and clothing be supplied to destitute in semi-civilized camps.
(9) Blankets be supplied to all institutions.
(10) Mission management of institutions be adhered to.
(11) Suitable power vessel for coastal patrol be proyided.
(12) Regular inspection of institutions and district operations be carried out.
(13) Native offenders, where more suitable, be deported to island missions.
(14) Special courts for trial of primitive natives for tribal crimes be constituted.
Examination of Existing Law.
Amendments considered necessary in existing law are suggested to make them more
comprehensive, and also to provide for the extensions of work proposed. With these additions,
the ordinances should now be up to date and assist towards more effective administration, if the
necessary machinery for their enforcement is provided. It will be admitted that no matter how
good the laws may be. without the machinery to apply them, they can be of little avail.
The amendments now outlined provide for—
(1) Proposed additional appointments.
(21 Extending application of the ordinances.
(3) Control of the policy of aboriginal institutions (protection of products) maintaining
order and discipline on reserves.
(4) Improving condition of, and protecting natives and crossbreeds in, employment,
protecting their earnings, administering estates, &c.
(5) More effective control of drink, drug and prostitution evils.
(6) Protecting aboriginal prisoners from injustice.
(7) Exemption of superior half-castes.
(8) Correcting a few anomalies.
The proposed amendments and a short explanation of each are appended hereto.
The following brief outline of the general policy advocated in the foregoing report, it
is felt, may be of assistance :
Synopsis of suggested General Policy.
Nomadic Tribes. —Secure them from privation, by protecting their natural hunting grounds
and waters.
Keep under benevolent supervision, by means of mission stations, to guard against
abuses and relieve any distress or sickness.
No unnecessary interference otherwise with tribal life.
Prepare them for the inevitable change by educating the young to desire better social
conditions and the settled industrious life.


Semi-civilized. —Uplift those whose tribal life has already been destroyed by white
civilization.
Foster a more humane public attitude towards the blacks.
Improve the social condition of those in employment. Insist on the employer’s
co-operation in uplift of employees and their dependants.
Fair payment for native labour, to enable workers to support their own friends.
Close supervision of the welfare of indigent camps.
Rigorous suppression of moral abuses.
Energetic medical measures, in interest of health of the community.
Relieve distress of those not supported by the able-bodied.
Preference to married officers in control of aboriginals.
Encourage immigration of white women.
Aboriginal Institutions. —Government to conduct institutional relief work through
religious mission bodies.
Finance sufficiently to ensure successful development.
Subsidize according to local conditions, relief, and social work being done.
Official inspection and direction of industrial and social policy.
Missions to exercise protective supervision of primitive people on the reserves and
along the coasts.
Educate young to develop intelligence in business dealings.
Give vocational instruction, to train skilled labour for use in the development of the
Territory.
Aim at self-dependence, by cultivating industries producing, as far as possible, the
needs of the institution, as well as revenue for development.
Crossbreeds. —Check in every way possible the breeding of half-castes.
Discountenance marriage or interbreeding of whites or Asiatics and blacks.
Rescue all crossbreeds from camps and have educated in institutions, viz.:—
{a) those of aboriginal inclination with aboriginals ;
{b) those with preponderance of white blood with Europeans.
Education to be on rural school lines, to fit them to fill a useful place in development
of the Territory.
Encourage marriage of half-castes and civilized full bloods.
Give half-castes proving superior a chance to better themselves.
Separate the quadroon and octoroon types, at an early age, from the aboriginal, and
give special care to training for future reception into white races.
In conclusion, it is desired to point out that, in the views and suggestions put forward in
the foregoing report, careful consideration has been given to the peculiar conditions existing in
the Territories, and whilst generally past experience in the neighbouring State has been the guide,
only such reforms and measures as, under those conditions, are felt to be reasonable and
practicable have been recommended.
Yours obediently,
J. W. BLEAKLEY.
Special Aboriginal Inquiry, Central and North Australia.


PROPOSED AMENDMENTS OF ABORIGINAL ORDINANCES, NORTHERN
TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA.
Sec. 4 (2). — Add after “ aboriginals ” “ and may appoint a Deputy Chief Protector of Aboriginals
Sec. 7 (1). — Alter “ eighteen ”in fourth line to “ twenty-one ”.
Sec. B. Add—
(l) “ The Ordinance shall for all purposes extend and apply to every vessel lying in any river, harbour,
or other water within a district in the same manner as if it were a house within such district.”
(2) “ The master or other person in charge of such vessel is deemed to be the occupier of such vessel.’ ’
(3) “ This section shall not apply to any ship, vessel or boat which is for the time being in use of the
British Imperial Government or of the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia or
any State thereof.”
Sec. 13. Add—
(7) “ Any institution licensed as an aboriginal institution and subsidized by the Administrator shall
give such vocational and other training as the Administrator may approve and be subject
to his supervision.”
Sec. 15 (1). — Alter “ eighteen ”in third line to “ twenty-one ”to agree with amendment of sec. 3 (d) amended by
Ord. 11/1924.
Add after last word “ removed ” “ and to cover all wages likely to be due to such aboriginal or half-caste
during the period such aboriginal or half-caste is absent. In no case shall such a sum be less than
Ten pounds”.
Sec. 15 (3). — This clause should be repealed.
Sec. 15 (4). — Alter the word “ eighteen ”to “ twenty-one ”to agree with amendment of sec. 3 (d) amended by
Ord. 11/1924.
Sec. 20. — Make this section sub-sec. (1).
Add as sub. sec. (2). —“ Any person who without the authority of the Superintendent or of the
Administrator removes any timber, minerals, or other product of a reserve, or any stock, plant, or
product of an aboriginal institution or trades with the aboriginal or half-caste inmates of an aboriginal
institution shall be guilty of an offence against this Ordinance.”
Sec. 21 (1). — Add after “ reserve ” “ Provided that where a licensed aboriginal institution is established on any reserve,
no such permit shall be issued until the written consent of the Superintendent has been obtained.”
Sec. 21 (2). — Add after “ Protector ”in second and fifth lines “or Superintendent ”.
Sec. 22. Insert sub-sec. (2). —“ A Protector may cause any employer in addition to obtaining a licence to employ
aboriginals to enter into an agreement in the prescribed form with any aboriginal or half-caste to be
employed by him subject to such condition and rates of pay as may be provided by Regulation under
this Ordinance.”
Make sub-sec. (2) sub-sec. (3).
Sec. 23. Add the following sub-sections ;
(7) “ A Protector shall not grant a licence for the employment outside an aboriginal institution
of any inmate of such aboriginal institution without the consent first obtained of the
Superintendent. ’ ’
(8) “ A Protector shall not grant a licence to employ aboriginals to himself nor to any person in the
position of his partner, agent, or employee without the approval of the Chief Protector.”
(9) “ Where any person, licensed to employ aboriginals, by force, intimidation, or other illegal influence
compels an aboriginal to work for him against his will the Protector may forthwith cancel his
licence.
Sec. 24. Add after sub-sec. (5) —
(6) “ In any appeal against the cancellation of a licence to employ aboriginals, the decision of the
Chief Protector shall be final. Such Cancellation shall not entitle any such employer to claim
or recover any compensation for the loss of the services of such aboriginals or half-castes or
to maintain any action in respect of any alleged loss or damage that may be occasioned by
such cancellation.”
Sec. 26. —• Add after sub-sec. (2) —
(3) “ Where an aboriginal or half-caste in a country district is employed under agreement a Protector
may at any time investigate any complaint as to any alleged breach of such agreement.”
(4) “ A Protector may after investigation of any such complaint order the employee to return to
work and/or properly fulfil the conditions of his agree nunt or may cancel the said agreement.”
Sec. 27. Make this sub-sec. (1), and add after the word “ Section ” “ or disobeys an order given by a Protector
after investigation of a complaint into an alleged breach of an agreement ”.
Insert the following sub-sections ;
(2) “ Provided a licence to employ aboriginals has been granted by a Protector, an agreement with an
aboriginal may be made in the presence of a Protector or a Justice of the Peace or an
Officer of Police, who before attesting, shall satisfy himself that the employee is a free and
voluntary agent and physically fit for the work, and that he understands the terms and
conditions of the agreement before signing.
(3) Any person who unlawfully attests any such agreement or makes any fraudulent entry or
certificate on such agreement shall be guilty of an offence against this Ordinance.
(4) A Protector may, by writing under his hand or direction on the agreement, direct any employer
to pay the whole or any portion of the wages of an aboriginal or half-caste to himself as
Protector or to some officer of police or Superintendent named by him, and any employer
who fails to observe such a direction shall be deemed not to have paid such wages ”.
Sec. 29 (2). Correct “ employee ” misprint, should be “ employer ”.
Sec. 32 (2). — Before any aboriginal or half-caste female or half-caste child under the age of twenty-one years is removed
to any place beyond the Northern Territory the employer shall, in addition to obtaining a licence to
employ aboriginals, enter into an agreement with the aboriginal or half-caste female or half caste child
in the prescribed form at the Regulation rate of wages but not less in any case than Five shillings ■
a week. No aboriginal or half-caste female or half-caste child so engaged shall be employed on any
duties or by any person other than indicated in the agreement.


Sec. 32 (2). — Make this sub-sec. (3), and add after “ Protector ” “ nor until a recognizance has been entered into by
the employee in the prescribed form in a sum sufficient to cover the cost of the return of the aboriginal
or half-caste to the place from which he was engaged or such other place as the Chief Protector may
approve and the payment of all wages likely to be due.”
Sec. 34. — Repeal this section and substitute —
Sec. 34 (1). —“ If an aboriginal or half-caste dies while in the service of any person, or deserts his
employment, the employer shall forthwith after his death or desertion, or if the
said aboriginal or half-caste was employed on any ship, vessel, or boat, forthwith after the
arrival of the vessel or boat at any port in the Northern Territory, transmit to the Chief
Protector through the nearest Protector notice in writing of the death or desertion, containing
such particulars as will enable the deceased or deserter to be identified, and shall forward at
the same time to the Chief Protector any wages due to such deceased or deserter and any
moneys or property in the possession of the deceased or left by the deserter.
Sec. 34 (2). — All moneys and properties collected under the preceding sub-section and any money or
property of aboriginals or half-castes whose whereabouts are unknown shall be administered
by the Chief Protector at his discretion for the benefit of the dependants of such deceased
or deserted or missing aboriginals or half-castes, and where such moneys or properties are
unclaimed shall place such unclaimed moneys and the proceeds of the sale of unclaimed
properties to a special Trust Pund to be used in such manner as the Administrator may
direct or approve of for the benefit of aboriginals generally.”
Sec' 38* S^and^lc) 113 j=Add after the word “ gun ” in each clause the words “ or ammunition.”
Sec. 44 (7). —Alter “ Protector ” to read “ Chief Protector.”
Sec. 45 (I).—Substitute for this clause the following;—“ No marriage of aboriginals or half-castes shall be celebrated
without the consent in writing of a Protector and no marriage of an aboriginal or female half-caste
to other than an aboriginal or of an aboriginal or half-caste child under the age of twenty-one years
shall be celebrated without the consent in writing of the Chief Protector.”
Sec. 49 (1) Add after “ opium ” the words “or narcotic drugs ” and after “ half-caste ”“ or having intoxicating
and (2). — liquor or opium or narcotic drugs in his possession knowingly or negligently suffers an aboriginal or
half-caste to obtain such liquor or opium or drugs.”
Sec. 49 (3). —Any aboriginal" or half-caste who knowingly procures, receives, or has in his possession any intoxicating
liquor, or opium or narcotic drugs except for purely medical purposes, proof of which shall lie on
the person charged, shall be guilty of an offence against this Ordinance.
Sec. 53. — Substitute the following :
(1) Any male person other than an aboriginal or half-caste who, not being lawfully married to a
female aboriginal or half-caste, the proof of which shall be upon him —
(a) habitually consorts with a female aboriginal or half-caste, or
(b) keeps a female aboriginal or half-caste as Ms mistress, or
(c) unlawfully has carnal knowledge of a female aboriginal or half-caste, or
{d) attempts to procure or induces a female aboriginal or half-caste for the purpose oPhaving
carnal knowledge of such female aboriginal or half-caste ;
shall be guilty of an offence.
Sec. 53 (4). — Any female aboriginal or half-caste who solicits prostitution and any aboriginal or other person who
trades or attempts to trade a female or half-caste in prostitution or who compels or induces
a female aboriginal or half-caste to solicit prostitution shall be guilty of an offence and may if the
offender is an aboriginal or half-caste in addition to any sentence imposed be removed to and detained
in an aboriginal institution.
Sec. 58. Add after “ Protector ” “ Where a Protector in his capacity as Officer of Police is concerned in the trial
or prosecution of an aboriginal or half-caste he shall not be competent to consent to any plea of guilty
by an aboriginal or half-caste. In such case the consent of the CMef Protector or some other Protector
authorized to act on his behalf shall first be obtained. No plea of guilty shall be allowed where the
aboriginal or half-caste charged does not understand the English language or the nature of the charge
against him.”
Additional section to be inserted as section 64 —
“ The Administrator may issue to any half-caste who is not an aboriginal within the meaning of
section 3 of this Ordinance and who in Ms opinion ought not to be subject to the general provisions
of this Ordinance a certificate in writing under his hand that such half-caste is exempt from the
provisions of this Ordinance, and from and after the issue of such certificate such half-caste shall
be so exempt accordingly.
“ The Administrator may at his discretion except any of the provisions of this Ordinance from such
exemption.”
Sec. 65 Alter to “66”,“66”t0“67”, “ 67 ” to “ 68 ”.J
Sec. 68 (y).— Add after “ licence ” “ fixing the rates of wages and conditions of employment and control of the earnings
of aboriginals and providing for the inspection of them in employment ”,
Sec. 68 (h). — Add after “ reserve ” “ and for imposing the punishment of imprisonment for any term not exceeding
three months upon any aboriginal or half-caste who is guilty of a breach of these Regulations under
this sub-section. Also authorizing a Protector or Superintendent to inflict summary pumshment
by way of imprisonment not exceeding fourteen days upon aboriginals or half-castes living upon a
reserve or within the district under his charge who in his judgment are guilty of any crime, serious
misconduct, neglect or refusal of duty, gross insubordination, or wilful breach of the Regulations ”.
“ ProMbiting any aboriginal rites or customs that in the opimon of the Administrator are injurious to
the welfare of aboriginals living upon a reserve ”.


The following amendments recommended by the Chief Protector at Darwin, on 7th May, 1928, might also be
included:—
Sec. 23 (1). — (a) The fee to be paid for a licence to employ aboriginals may vary according to the number of aboriginals
proposed to be employed and according to the length of time during which the licence will remain
in force, and the amount of the fee shall be calculated in accordance with such provisions as may
be prescribed.
(b) A licence to employ aboriginals shall be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
Sec. 24. Delete the words after “ shall be . . . for a period of one year ” and substitute the words “ in force until
the thirtieth day of June next after the granting of the licence ”.
Add after “ thereunder ” “ or the prescribed conditions ”.
EXPLANATION OF PROPOSED AMENDMENTS OF ORDINANCES.
Sec. 4 (2). — To provide for a recommended additional appointment.
Sec. 7 (1). — To agree with amendment of sec. 3 (d) amended by Ord. 11/1924.
Sec. 8. — To give jurisdiction over vessels, &0., apparently not provided for.
Sec. 13. — To meet recommendation in report for more effective official control of operations of institutions.
Sec. 15 (1). — As in sec. 7 (1), and to safeguard the wages due to such aboriginals employed under agreement.
Sec. 15 (3). — This clause is open to abuse and has been abused. The preceding section should be enforced without
distinction in justice to the aboriginal being removed.
Sec. 15 (4). — See sec. 7 (1).
Sec. 20. To prevent stealing or illegal trading in mission products and the cheating of native inmates by travelling
hawkers or traders in marsupial skins, dingo scalps, &c.
Sec. 21 (1). — As the Superintendent is responsible for the safety of the inmates, the stock, plant, &cf, he should be
consulted before strangers are allowed to invade the reserve.
Sec. 22. — To cover recommendation that certain aboriginal workers be employed on improved conditions and
remuneration.
Sec. 23 (7). — See explanation, sec.2l (1).
Sec. 23 (8). — To obviate abuse of his powers by a Protector where he may have an interest in a business, such as farm,
station, &c., employing aboriginals.
Sec. 23 (9). — It was stated that aboriginals were in places in a state of peonage, being forced to work against their
wills.
Sec. 24 (6). — Self explanatory.
Sec. 26 (3), To give a Protector the power in his own district like than in sec. 26 (2) to meet proposed employment of
Sec. 27 (1) natives in country districts under properly regulated agreement. It will improve control if the
Protector can investigate and settle minor disputes.
Sec. 27 (2) To facilitate completion of agreements in distant districts and save patrols. At present agreements
and (3) can only be signed before a Protector.
Sec. 27 (4). — To prevent an unscrupulous employer agreeing with the aboriginal employee to circumvent the Protector
by paying the wages to the aboriginal direct.
Sec. 32 (2) It was complained that employers of aboriginals under licence only, using them as drovers, lent them to
and (3) friends in the neighbouring State as free labour and sometimes left them stranded there.
Sec. 34. It is desirable that the wages of deserting aboriginals should be collected also in the interests of their
dependants. It is easy to cause an aboriginal, by ill treatment, to desert and thus evade paying the
arrears of wages.
Sec. 34 (2). — Self explanatory. To give the Chief Protector powers to administer the estates of deceased, deserted,
and missing aboriginals if proposed improvement of employment conditions is adopted.
Sec. 36, 38, Travelling aboriginals obtain supplies of cartridges for bush natives having unlicensed firearms. Some
39, 40 of the cattle killing trouble is attributed to that.
Sec. 44 (7). — It is wiser to have the control of such moneys in the hands of the head of the Department.
Sec. 45 (1). — The matter of legal marriages of aboriginals is an important question that should be under control. The
legal marriage should not be urged upon the primitive native who does not understand it. The
marriage of females to other than aboriginals and of those under age is an important matter of policy
that should be controlled by the administrative head.
Sec. 49 (1) To meet cases of supplying morphia, morphine, chlorodine, &c., also to deal with travellers evading the
and (2) law by leaving drink, &c., where aboriginals can get it.
Sec. 49 (3). — Civilized half-castes and aboriginals by scheming with low whites obtain drink, &c., and will not divulge
the source of supply.
Sec. 53 (1). — The present description is vague and apparently erroneous.
Sec. 53 (1) To deal with travellers and others who visit eamps and while keeping outside the prohibited area get the
(d) women to meet them for prostitution.
Sec. 53 (4). — To check the prevalent evil of aboriginals in the bush and station camps soliciting and trading their
women in prostitution for money, tobacco, food, &c.
Sec. 58. — Self explanatory.
Sec. 64. — The certificate enables the exempt man to satisfy police, intending employers, and others that he is free
to manage his own affairs. It may be found advisable to except the drink, opium, or drugs, or marriage
provisions of the Ordinance from any exemption given.
Sec. 67 to be To cover proposed Regulations amendments and give power to missionaries to check infanticide and any
altered to revolting practices.
68( g) and
(k)
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by H. J. Green, Government
Printer for the State of Victoria.




Bathurst Island Mission.
F. 1882.—5


Aboriginal Compound —Darwin.
Native Woman —Melville Island.


School —Bathurst Island Mission.
Group— Oenpelli Mission.


Mission Vessel — Oenpelli, Alligator River.
Ration Recipients—Newcastle Waters Police Station.


ABORIGINAL BUFFALO HUNTERS — OENTELLI
Millingimbi
Mission
Crocodile
Islant
MISSION HOUSE
NAT IVE BOYS
NATIVE FAMILY
CORROBOREE
1.1882.-6


School —Goulburn Island Mission.
Goulburn Island Mission.


Roper River Mission.
Church—Roper River Mission.


Half-caste Mission —Groote Eylandt.
Half-caste Inmates —Groote Eylandt Mission.


Sawmill —Groote Eylandt Mission.
Workshop—Groote Eylandt Mission.


Camel Transport—Central Australia.
Inmates — Hermannsburg Mission.


Alice Springs.


Inmates —Half-caste Home, Darwin.
Inmates —Half-caste Bungalow, Alice Springs.


Typical Camp —Married Native Employees, Cattle Stations.
Type of Hut for Single Native Employees—Brunette Downs Station.


Leper Girl —Isolated at Groote Eylandt.
Indigent Camp —Barrow Creek.


Blind Girl —Banka Banka Station.
Missionary and Children —Harding’s Soak (some suffering from Yaws).


SORES, GRANULOMA, SYPHILIS AND YAWS FROM INFECTION BY FLIES
SEEN BY DR. WALKER IN CENTRAL AUSTRALIA
ADVANCED CASE OF GRANULOMA
FEMALE CHILD
HERMANNSBERSG MISSION
C. A.
LOST AN EYE
GRANULOMATOUS SORES AROUND MOUTH
ULCERS ON WRIST


SPEARING GAME
LUBRA & CHILD
NATIVES — LORITJA TRIBE — BAPOODNA WATERHOLE
200 MILES WEST OF ALICE SPRINGS C.A
HALFCASTE GIRL & QUADROON
CHILD — ALICE SPRINGS.
MISS LOCK — MISSIONARY AND
SICK NATIVES — HARDINGS SOAK.


Powell Creek Blacks —Warramunga Tribe.
Desert Blacks—Warramulla Tribe,


Old Man —Wiamba Tribe —Oenpelli, making Native Rope.
Groote Eylandt Blacks—Awarikpa Tribe.


PLAN.
Proposed
Hmf Castl Home.
Abor_iginal Compound, Darwin N. T.
scaix of Sixteen feej -p m inch.
J.C.M. 2]- 12 28.


