

4.7. 2.3 19.21. 13.24. 24.25.26.26
27.30
The
Cygnet
S[?]PSFORD & CO PRINTERS BRISBANE


The Cygnet.
JANUARY, 19*1.
Essays and Notes on Questions connected
with Religion,
BY DOUGLAS PRICE, M.A.
The Cygnet is issued every two Months. The
Subscription is i/6 a Year, 2/- by Post.
All communications to be addressed to “ The Editor,”
All Saints’ Rectory, Wickham Terrace , Brisbane, Queens-
land.
The Third Sex.
LJNSUSPECTED by the common crew, there exists among;
) us a large class of men and women who are un-
touched by the ordinary laws of sex. To refrain from any
breach of the seventh commandment is no hardship to them,
forasmuch as it is no temptation. It is only to those of their
own sex that they are most deeply drawn, and because their
love requires no physical expression, they have been christ-
ened “ Timings ” from the word “ Uranos ” —heavenly.
Their affections are intense, but spiritual, and among them
can be counted the very highest names of human kind.
Christ himself seems never to have known “ the love of
women.” His personal affection was bestowed upon St.
John so strongly, so unmistakably, that he was for ever called
“ the disciple whom Jesus loved.”


Shakespeare, it is true, married, and was the father of
a family but his most pasidnate affection was for Mr. W. H.
His love sonnets, with all their terms of endearment and jeal-
ousy, were written, not to a woman, but to a man.
Michel Angelo was another born with the Uranian tem-
perament. It is the male figure that he delights in, and
which he is never tired of carving and painting in every
possible position. Julius Caesar and Alexander the Great
were both men’s men.
Among modern writers, the most striking instance of
this temperament is, perhaps, Edward Fitzgerald, the trans-
lator of Omar Khayyan. He speaks of his friendships as
“almost like loves,” and was only happy in the society of some
male friend. By a mistake, through which an offer of pro-
tection was taken as a promise of marriage, he felt bound in
honour to wed. But he only lived with his wife for a few
weeks and then separated, because the relationship was in-
tolerable to one of his kind.
Women of this type are by no means uncommon —
Sappho, the Greek poetess, Christine of Sweden, and Santa
Clara may be mentioned as instances. They are somewhat
masculine and fiery-bold, truthful and active, and they make
excellent doctors and matrons of institutions for women.
They have no desire to marry and are always unhappy when
they do. The attentions of men are positively distasteful to
their feelings.
Male Urnings are artistic and cultured, generally mus-
ical, and naturally refined. Often they are dreamers, and
they act as a counterpoise to the purely masculine portion of
society, which ever turns to material and sensual pleasures,
and the ruthless greed of gain. They are not women-haters,
but are rather the woman’s trustiest ally and safest friend.
Women often seek them, as the women of Palestine sought
Christ, knowing intuitively that their love is spiritual and
pure.
There is nothing morbid about the uranian tempera-
ment. It is rather a fuller development of human nature,
which combines in one person spiritual attributes of both
sexes. Such, by their double nature, are able to comprehend
many phases of life, and they act as a kind of intermediate
sex explaining the one to the other. Hitherto it has been
impossible to form any estimate of their relative number in
proportion to the race. Possibly it may be about one or two
per cent. To them bachelorhood and spinsterdom are purely
natural, and involve no hardships whatever, but entirely the
reverse. The monstery and the convent were formerly their
special creation, but they then failed to see that such a life


tv. as wrong for those to whom it is not natural, and so did
incalculable harm to their age by withdrawing the best
people from parentage. Nowadays they are often ashamed
of their bias, and seek to hide it, lest they should be mis-
taken for the slaves of nameless lusts, which to them are
abhorrent, as to all pure-minded people.
This uranian temperament is a matter of birth and is in-
eradicable. It carries with it certain hardships, for such are
generally fond of children, but are unable- because of their
dislike of marriage, to found families of their own. They are
often pitied by the ordinary types of humanity, but they
scarcely deserve pity, for higher fields of mental and artistic
life are open to them and they easily escape the slavery of lust.
Already they have passed far from the merely animal nature,
and it is sometimes hard for them not to despise those who
are bound by physical sense. One day science will doubtless
study them, just as it now studies frogs and idiots and em-
bryos and men of genius—then we shall understand better
the part they play in human life, and their enormous signifi-
cance to Religion and to Art.
Frequently our newspapers report uranian cases without
in the least understanding their nature. Two' women live
together, one assuming masculine attire, and pass as man and
wife. Or some woman of good position attempts suicide be-
cause her girl friend is about to marry. Or a man elopes
with his neighbor's son. The police are nonplussed, the
magistrates are entirely at sea. They think they have to
deal with a kind of lunacy, and the remedies they apply are
utterly futile. Undoubtedly we want a science of the inter-
mediate sex.
Or some man or woman refuses to marry, even to better
their worldly position. Others look on in astonishment, and
whisper dark, scandalous things. All sorts of horrors are
hinted at simply because the public is ignorant of the existence
■of the uranian type. Doubtless there are criminals and low-
minded people of this nature, but there is no reason to sup-
pose that they are more common among them than the
criminal type in ordinary nature. And it is certain that
many of the great leaders of Art, Science, Culture and
Religion have belonged to this caste, and have excelled
Recause of the larger and wider outlook which it gives. For
it combines the strength of the man with the tenderness of
the woman; it unites the intuition of the female to the in-
tellectual power of the male. In it justice and mercy are
both present, and there does religion find a perfect balance


between reason and emotion. If ever the sexes are to under-
stand one another, it will be through those who possess the-
higher attributes of both.
The Dream of Dreams.
THERE was once a dreamer who dreamed dreams. Some'
were beautiful, beautiful as the shadow of a white
rose in a mirror of silver; and some were terrible, so terrible
that he staggered back into life like one who has been laid
upon the rack of the torture house, wondering to what pur-
pose such agony could tend.
But one night when he awoke into the world of sleep,
he dreamed the dream of common men. He found that he
was rich and could command everything that money would
buy. All the luxury of a luxurious generation, all the art of
the seers of the beautiful, all the homage of a people who
worship the opulent, were his in a moment. Adulation and’
flattery surrounded him like a rich garment enfolding a
corpse. His servants bowed low as he passed. So also bow
the worshippers in the temple of Mammon. The poor looked
up to him with a kind of awe and he moved among his fel-
lows as a god moving among the sons of men. Yet he. was not
satisfied, and ho scorned the slave-souls of those who wor-
shipped his wealth, knowing that the love which money can
buy is as false as the beauty of a painted face, barren as the
flowers which are composed of wax. So he fled from his
sumptuous palace, and even as he fled he awoke; and 10, it.
was but a dream.
And he slept again and dreamed, the dream of health.
He dreamed of the hunt, of the joy of a perfect body, of the'
rapture of physical strength. He ran, but he was not weary,
borne up as upon eagles' wings, he felt that he could never
tire. And he shouted aloud in the madness and exultation
of the chase. He outdistanced all his companions and every
shot that he fired brought death to his prey. At length he
sat by the camp fire, and looked upon the bodies of the dead,
and even as he looked, he knew that he was not satisfied,
and that something within him demanded that he should be
more than a brute among brutes. And the blue smoke of
the fire ascended into the sky; it hpng among the pine tops;
it was blown into the valleys ; it shut out all his vision with
a four-fold veil. So he awoke and heard the bell tolling-
the requiem of the departed day.


Yet again he slept, and dreamed the dream of ambition.
In the theatre of his brain he beheld himself honoured as
tthe cleverest of men. His lightest word was received as a
revelation, and when he spoke, men laid upon their lips the
finger of silence. The papers were filled with his fame,
and men of high degree sat expectant at his feet. Whither-
soever he went he was received with grave deference, and
men pointed him out as the glory of his race. Deeply did
he drink of the flagon of fame, nevertheless he was not satis-
fied nor did his heart cease from hungering after that which
is greater than applause. One night, weary of praise, he
fell asleep in his sleep, and even as his dream faded he awoke
into the world which we consider to be real. Time re-
asserted the tyranny of its sway and beneath the spangled
fan of night the clocks gave the warning of the hour before
the dawn.
Then came the dream of the lover of wife and child.
He dwelt in a cottage with his family about him. He was
the idol of his children, and they worshipped him with
kisses and caresses. He watched them grow. He planned
their pleasures, and when all slept, he sat far into the night
in silent communion with the woman of his choice. Yet
even into his sheltered home crept the Spirit of Fear. It
crouched in the shadows about his hearth, and whispered to
him as the wind whispers, shuddering over desolate places.
“ Your children will grow up,” it said, “ and they will
leave you alone. Day by day you will wane in their eyes.
It is the law and they must make their own lives. The
thoughts of the young are not the thoughts of the old, even
-as the blossom is other than the fruit. Your wife may be
•snatched from you at any moment. The falling of a tree,
the flash of the lightning, the invisible sickness that lurks
in the darkness, or the march of the seasons which make
Autumn as inevitable as Spring—any day she may be taken
and you will be left alone. Your treasury is unguarded
against the perils of chance and change.”
And a great dissatisfaction darkened his soul, as the
clouds returning after the rain; and he longed for that which
should last for ever. And, as he longed for the imperishable,
he awoke to see the first shimmer of the dawn stealing the
radiance of the stars.
Whether be slept again or no he never knew, for he
saw visions no more; nevertheless he dreamed the Dream of
Dreams, and knew that it was true. A voice spoke to him
dreams, and knew that it was true. A voice spoke to him
from the sanctuary of his own soul. “ I know thee through


and through, and I love thee for ever. I know the thoughts'
which thou hast scarce dared to think, and the feelings
which thou hast ne’er admitted to thyself, and I love thee
utterly and for ever. Nothing can separate thy life from
Mine. To all eternity thou and I shall dwell together and
deathless time shall not exhaust the treasures of our love,,
for thou art My child, and the sharer of My peace.”
And he knew that the voice was the voice of God, and
infinite satisfaction stole into his soul. For there is a hunger
of the heart so vast that nothing but God can fill it, and ever
must a man go unsatisfied until the day when he dreams
the dream of dreams.
Sultan or Slave.
Nigel ; Alas, we are but creatures of circumstance, blown
to and fro before the winds of Fate.
Felix : That- is exactly what we are not, if so be that
we are in any way alive. Nay, Ido make my own destiny; it
is I myself who carve the marble of my soul.
Nigel ; So thou fanciest, my friend, but we who have
studied know that thou art but a ball in the hand of the
thrower.
Felix : Not so. The balls may be alike, but throw ten
men into the same circumstances, and no two of them will
bring about the same results. Each will select from his en-
vironment that which accords with, his own soul.
Nigel : Thou must go further back than that. If they
produce divers results it is because their inner circumstances
or heredity are dissimilar. For verily environment and
heredity are the sole movers of a man's life.
Felix : Assuredly thou art wrong. In the same family
with the same parentage and surroundings, it is seldom that
two are made alike The greatest diversity of character is
wont to exist in those who have lain in the same cradle and
drawn nourishment- from the same breast. Neither in creed’
nor in temper, in habit nor in love are the sons of one
mother wont to agree.
Nigel ; That may be because of some pre-natal influence,,
which it is impossible to trace.
Felix : Partly, no doubt, but I had rather attribute it
to the post-natal power of mastering one's own fate.


Nigel: “ Eather? ” It is not a question of which thou
wouldst rather.
Felix: Perhaps not. Yet the very scorn with which I
abhor the idea of being but a piece of helpless machinery
arises from some healthy instinct within my soul, which is as
sure a part of truth as thy cold and abstract intellect.
Nigel: Nay, reason is the only sure guide in life.
Felix : That I altogether deny. The sons of men never
have and never will live by reason alone. We live first, and
think afterwards. We act to-day and analyse our deeds to-
morrow. We fell now, and no dead logic will reverse our
emotions. This brain, in which thou puttest thy confidence,
was but evolved for practical purposes, and is only thoroughly
at home in tangible solids, hence it can but picture the uni-
verse as a kind of machine. Thy reason cannot comprehend
the nature of the ether, nor measure the significance of life,
nor can it unravel the spell of the beautiful. Therefore I
say that the intellect is not the only channel of enlighten-
ment. The heart and will perceive much which lieth too deep
for the brain to fathom.
Nigel: Beware how thou committest thyself to mystics
and intuitionists and to the prophets of the ‘ ‘ inner light, ’ ’
for verily madness hath pitched its tent among them, and
they wander afar from the dwellings of the sane. George
Fox marching barefoot through Lichfield crying “ Woe to
the bloody city,” not knowing why he did it, save that an
inner instinct urged him on, is a fair sample of those who
seek for other guides than the mind.
Felix : And do thou also beware how T thou committest
thyself to those who know no other light than that of reason.
Have there been no insanities among thinkers ? Was Lucre-
tius sane in attributing all this universe to a fortuitous com-
bination of atoms, without purpose and without goal ? Is the
world of the materialist sane; does it satisfy the heart, the
will or even the mind? Nay, the extremes of all sorts tread
upon the edge of unreason. It is in the balance of our powers
that the fullest vision of truth is to be found. Let intuition
be guided by reason, and reason be checked by emotion, and
all be woven into a seamless whole. To say that lam a mere
machine is one-sided and extreme. To assert that I can do
exactly what I determine is equally one-sided and extreme.
I may be king of my life, but I must rule according to law.
Therefore I maintain that I am not the slave, but the Sultan
of my Soul.


The Gospel of Sufiism.
4 As the hart desireth the water-brooks, so longeth my soul for Thee
O God.”
THE East is the quarter of the rising sun. It is also the
source of the world’s religions. Christians, Budd-
hists, Mohamedans, Parsees, Tbeosophists and Jews alike,
look to Asia as the home of the founders of their faiths.
Like some great tree continually producing flowers, the
East is for ever expressing itself in religious cults. Let us
call attention to one of these Oriental movements eminently
suitable to inspire us in these days of change.
Sufiism arose in Mohamedan Persia during the eighth
century A.D., and it has continued to some extent ever
since. It began as a spiritual revolt from the excessive
dogmatism, legalism, ceremonialism and narrowness of the
Mohamedan church, and it has inspired millions with its
sane, devotional, and tolerant views. It is the religion of
love. It is the religion of the love of God.
We live in days when men once again recognise how very
limited are the powers of the mind. Once reason seemed to
be all in all and now we know that the brain is but the slave
of its master—Life. “For us,” says Wildon Carr, “the
understanding is only thorughly at home in the presence of
solid matter.” Or as Henri Bergson puts it, “ intelligence is
neither the supreme, absolute, nor the only form of know-
ledge.” Love lies deeper than reason; so also does Art,
Devotion and Hope. Psychology now seeks to learn from
prayer and from mysticism, and the sub-conscious self is
recognised as the source of much that is profounder than
brain calculations and intellectual thoughts.
Hence we are prepared to listen once mere to those whose
inner illumination has led them to God. The Sufi teachers,
among whom Abu Haslum, Sa’di, Hafiz, Jalalu’d din, and
Jami are the most notable, were for the most part poets.
They felt that Art was more akin to Religion than Science.
They drew up no creeds. They propounded no dogmas.
They lived in the light of Divine Love and saw the Face of
God reflected in all goodness, beauty, friendship and wis-
dom in the world about them. All forms of faith were to
them sacred, for they were all roads by which men sought the
ineffable, and they persecuted no man whatsoever his
belief. “The ways to God,” they said, “are as the num-
ber of the souls of men.”
From Sufiism have arisen many orders of monks or der-
vishes, but they are more like travelling minstrels than


monks, and their rules are very light. They are not ascetics,
for they hold that the love of the good things of earth is the
bridge whereby w© mount to the better things of heaven, and
they would only renounce earthly joys for the greater joy of
the things unseen.
“ God moves the world as the object of its love,” said
Aristotle. The Sufis know this, and ever seek the Beloved,
the Best Friend, the Lover of the soul, believing that even
now they “ live and move and have their being ” in Him and
expecting, one day, to be united utterly and entirely in the
object of their soul’s quest. The love of God is the grand
passion of their lives, and the language of the lover is the
prayer by which they approach Him.
“ For Thee we have hastened o’er land and o’er sea
We have journeyed o’er hills and o’er deserts of dust
We have turned far away from all shadows and lust
Till we found the sure pathway to Union with Thee.”
So sings Jami. And again: “ Thou art the treasure that
makes lovers mad.” Or in speaking of the world’s creeds
he cries;
“ O Lord, none but Thyself can fathom Thee,
Yet every mosque and church doth harbour Thee ;
I know the seekers, and what ’tis they seek —
Seekers and sought are all comprised in Thee.”
Sa’di ransacks nature for anaogies of the Divine Love.
The moth burnt in the lamp, the faithful servant who will
not quit his master even for the sake of permitted plunder,
the fabled love of the nightingale for the rose (symbol of God)
are all among the commonest of Sufi parables
“ Philosophy goes many a winding road,
Now here she turns —now there—on ways retrod:
For lovers of the Friend straight leads the way,
They see and know and seek nothing save God!
Passionate for the Unsen as never one
Was passionate for seen, re mem b-ring none
Day tide and nighttide only Him, as never.
Lover remembered mistress under sun.”
To these men prayer was not a seeking to change the
order of Nature or an attempt to wrest blessings from an un-
willing God; it was a glad communion which asked nothing
save the Divine Presence.
“ A certain man inquired of one who lay
Soul-stricken on the mosque floor, ‘Dost thou pray
For Life or Death ? ’ He answerd, ‘ I ask nothing
What He adjudges I accept alway.’ ”


Nor was God to them an abstraction, a dogma, or a far-
away King. He was the Source of every delight, the closest
companion, the nearest Friend. All beauty was the reflec-
tion of His Face, and human love the momentary finding
of His Shadow in His creatures.
To stimulate the sense of things divine some of the Sufis
indulged in very questionable aids. Just as the Christian
monk produced visions by long vigils and fasts, and as the
revivalist stimulated conversions by semi-hypnotism and
music, so the dervish sought by dancing, by spinning round,
by singing, and by Yogi methods of breathing to produce
a kind of intoxication, which was thought to be sacred. This'
way lies madness and it is no more religious than an appeal
to the life blood of Bacchus, or the snare of the poppy as an
aid to prayer. Far wiser were those who followed Jalal's
advice and in silence sought to listen to the voice within and
to rest in the arms of the Beloved.
Sufiism thought but little of outward forms of religion,
and the Dervish dress (often to this day used as a disguise
by robbers and bandits) was an appeal for simplicity. It
w r as from their woollen robe that the term Sufi is derived.
They taught rather a quietism which made contentment, re-
signation, and renunciation of earthly fame the chief orna-
ments of religion. Death to them was no King of Terrors.
It was the way to the Bose-Garden of God. It only means
that the drop is nearer the ocean, that the lover is approach-
ing the Beloved, that the pilgrim is nigh to the shrine. Often
they express a longing for death, as when Jalalu’d din cries:
“ O take my soul. Thou Source of ev’ry life.
For I, apart from Thee, weary of strife.”
Of course it is not every one who can understand these
high things. Some natures are scientific and their vocation
is to serve in knowledge and invention. Others find their
fullest life in friendship and in human love. Others again
are artistic, and pure beauty is their path. But there are
also those who are spiritual, and the love of God is to them
the great passion of life. Let each be true to his own nature
and respect those who see what to him is invisible. And
surely it must be a consolation to- those who are prosaic and
occupied with mundane affairs to know that they who possess
the faculty of penetrating behind the visible, do find a God
of infinite love and compassion Who is more to them than all
the world beside.
The Sufis may specially claim the sympathy of modem
minds because they had cast off narrowness, and arrived at
those deep places of religion where the clamour of the sects


and the wars of rival creeds were but as the far-off rustling of
the wind in the trees. They saw “ the perfect Face beyond
this world,” and straightway forgot their theology in the
rapture of the Religion of Love.
“ All things shall perish save His Face.”
Novels for Women.
“ So the Prince married the Princess, and they lived happily ever
afterwards.”
THEY meet. They love (or, at any rate, one of them
does). Unforeseen difficulties arise, and they are
plunged in despair. Then it is all cleared up. They see
unutterable things in each other’s eyes. Their lips meet, and
the parson prepares to pocket a fee. So' ends y© ancient tale
of a moon-struck man and an immaculate maid. The really
interesting history of how two natures learn to live' together
is not even hinted at, for that would spoil the adult fairy
story by a touch of living reality.
Men are bored to death by this sort of thing, but
women love it. They weep over the middle chapters and sigh
ecstatically at the end.
Is it healthy? Yes and no. No, because it gives a false
picture of life, and hinders us from learning the great lesson
of how to make the best of a very imperfect world. Men
are not the spotless beings of the love story, nor, for a matter
of that, are women. Minds nourished on “ The Rosary,” or
on Myrtle Reed’s effusions are apt to become thoroughly dis-
gusted with real life, because they have been taught to expect
the impossible, and to live in an imaginary world, which has
no lasting counterpart in actual living. Ask your married
friends whether they have found the novelist’s love dream in
real life, and see if you can find any who will answer “ Yes.”
And yet marriage is not necessarily a failure for all that.
Nevertheless this ideal world does mean something and
surely serves some purpose in life. Algernon and Phyllis are
weak symbols of an ideal impossible here, but which shall
be realised in seme form in the fields of eternity. Perhaps
they are even a parable of religion and point to a consum-
mation in the hereafter, like the sticky “ land flowing with
milk and honey ” of our hymns. The Nirvana of our hope
is yet so far ahead that when we describe its realisation now
we generally end in making ourselves ridiculous.


Men are obsessed by the present and the real and therein
lies their weakness and their strength. Women live more
upon make-believe, and feel after the ideal intuitively. It
is of course in the union of these two views in the attainment
of the ideal through the real that the truest strengh lies.
That is what the Artist does. Knowing that his ideal can
never be realised here in its fulness, he yet strives to fashion
real material as nearly as possible to his inner vision. The
authors of the ordinary love story are not true artists, because
they are false to the real. Neither are the authors of purely
realistic fiction true artists, for they have no vision of the
ideal.
In the orthodox novel everything comes right in time for
the wedding. In actual life it is far otherwise. The lessons
of pain are not so swiftly learned, and the results of error
go down to the second and third generations. But the strong
instinct in humanity that the end of things will be harmony
and peace is no insecure foundation to build upon. And it is
this which is unconsciously reflected in the sugary endings of
our novels for women.
So let us be lenient towards these tedious tales soft and
silly though they be. They may encourage people to act like
the farmer who dreamed of heaven while the crows were
eating his corn, or like the maidservant who planned a ball-
dress instead of cooking the dinner, or the soldier who polished
imaginary medals while the enemy stole past him unawares,
or the mother who pictured a bishopric for her boy as the
urchin stole jam from the pantry. But at the back of them
all they keep before us two mighty truths—that love of some
kind is the secret of life, and that all will eventually be well.
Perhaps their greatest fault lies in the narrowness of the
love they depict —two only, apart from all the world. Me-
thinks we are fashioned for something larger than that.
Surely it is a lie to teach us that so small and selfish a love
as this is the uttermost satisfaction of life, and the final goal
of our being. It is too earthly. It is too sensual. It finds
no room for the inevitable fact of death, and whatever may
lie beyond. It suggests a fool’s paradise in the never-never
country, and can scarcely brace us up to accomplish the great
and stern duties of life.
And love—is this the only love that exists? Is there no
romance in the love of the mother for her child, in the de-
votion of a man for his country, in the passion of the soul for
duty, in the insatiable thirst of the mind for know


ledge? Is sex glamour the on© glory of life? Can
not our novelists enchant us with the passion of the artist, the-
enthusiasm of the teacher, the dreams of the reformer, the
pity of the saint? And the mightiest force of all—religion—
is this unworthy of the novelist’s task? Must every tale
dawdle back to an exaggerrated betrothal ? Do women really
care for nothing else? Surely they who write these sickly
novels for women are doing them an injustice, or are, at any
rate, pointing to an El Dorado which is not one in a thous-
and is ever likely to find. Of course our best writers aim at
something more real, but, to judge by the books one hears
most frequently discussed, our best writers are neglected and
the silly sentimentalist is the crowned hlero (or more fre-
quently the heroine) of the hour.
Sacrament.
ALL the world is a sacrament to the soul that is subtle to
perceive. Once you get away from the idea that
only one book is inspired, that only two ordinances are chan-
nels of grace, that only three creeds are the repositories of
truth, that only nine and thirty articles are the means of
illumination, then there comes upon you either the barrenness
of a blind scepticism, or the thrilling vision of a God-inhab-
ited world.
Then may you wake up to find that everything
air co-mingle in a jet of flame. Then is the awful hush of
the dawn, when mist and cloud rise as incense from the
swinging world, and the blood-red sun is elevated like the
consecrated host held up by invisible hands, a racrament of
power and mystery; and man bows low, even as the very
shadows that lie prostrate in adoration athwart valley and hill
and every eminence flashes its candle flame lit by the as-
cending sphere. Then may you see divine things in the deli-
cate markings of the painted flower, in the rhymic waving
of the leaves of the palm, in the agitation of the cornfield as
the wind sighs over it from tl\e South. And you may hear-
the voice of the Eternal in the deep mystery of music, when
the soul forgets its sorrow and listens to the secrets of the
Unseen. The smell of the moist soil, the laughter in the eyes,
of a child, the bowed head of the aged man, the firelight
dancing upon the wall, the curlew calling to its mate, the
memory of a long regret are all instinct with sanctity. Every


mother is a kind of Madonna; every child as an infant
Christ. All Art is the revelation of God’s loveliness, Who
is Beauty Itself among beautiful things. All science is an
unfolding of His Immanence in this “ divine-infernal world.”
All righteousness is the reflection of His goodness, and every
love a symbol of the Love* Divine. The supernatural is but
the soul of the natural, the ideal which the natural world is
trying feebly to express. Not less devoutly shall we kneel
before the altar to receive the consecrated bread and wine or
less reverently bare our brows to the waters of baptism, be-
cause we know that, the sacrament ends not as we leave the
Church and that every meal is an aeonian mystery, and
every washing a symbol of inner purity of heart. Not less
shall be call ourselves Christians because we believe that
every religion is true, forasmuch as all express the hunger of
the heart for that which is invisible, or because we think that
their arrogant conceit. (For surely the Christ never meant
their arrogant conceit. For surely the Christ never meant
to organise a Church which should make war upon all other
bodies and proclaim, itself as the one and only way of
salvation).
Earthly sacraments have two parts—the good and the
bad, the imperfect and the ideal* Not yet are we able to
behold the naked splendour of life. Therefore it is veiled as
it comes before us, veiled at times so heavily that we see no
splendour at all. Yet is the splendour always there, even the
common brick is an outward and visible sign of the thou’ght
and labour of man, and the hawk killing a sparrow tells us, in
fiendish symbol, that none may live unto himself alone.
Why must the Divine be thus limited and confined, the
saintly soul imprisoned in a grotesque body, the kindly
thought issue in uncouth words? Ah, cruel sacramentalism,
that ever forces symbols between the soul and its ideal, that
hints at Justice and places it just beyond our reach, that
dazzles us with love and clothes it in ten thousand lying forms,
that whispers of peace and leaves us in discord and distress.
Why cannot we behold things as they really are? There are
none who can answer, forasmuch as there are none who know.
But the conviction of the religious soul of humanity is this—
that eventually the outer imperfections will fade away and
only the inner splendour of life remain. Then there shall be
no more sacrament for all shall see, as with unveiled face,
and the Desire of the Earth shall be fulfilled.


The Penalty.
“Then happy low, lie down.”
A common man, woary of inconspicuousness, lengthened
the tongue of lament, and challenged the decree
of destiny. Turbaned and shod in dissatisfaction, he dinned
daily complains into the ear of his guardian spirit, clamour*
ing to know why he had no great gifts wherewith to astonish
his fellows, and to draw down their lower jaws in amazement.
“ My fame,” he cried, “ is but writ upon the pages of the air,
and every breeze doth scatter it. Give me some gift of
genius ; make me poet, artist, philosopher or saint, and of a
■surety I will be content.”
Then did deep sleep fall upon his eyeballs, even such sleep
as the poppy-cup contains, and the story of a dream was writ
in fire upon the dark. He saw himself bowed beneath the
burden of genius, striving for utterance, yet dissatisfied with
every word. He felt the pangs of such sensitiveness as he
had never supposed could be. He was as a volcano' in the
throes of an eruption, and he saw that his fellows for the most
part took no notice of his work. Pain and unrest such as he
had never imagined, hammered upon the threshhold of his
heart. He was more dissatisfied than ever, and the feeble
applause that he gained in no way compensated for his toil.
Drivn by genius, all homely joys fled before his touch; sleep
forsook him for whole nights and his food was loathsome to
his palate. And when he cried out in anger, a mocking
voice replied; ‘ ‘ Thou didst pray for the burden of genius;
behold, it is thine.” Then he recalled the old days of pleas-
ant toil and idle talk, of large meals and lengthy sleep, and
his soul yearned after the fieshpots of Egypt, and no more
did he desire to be a man of fame. Yet, forasmuch as he
could not otherwise escape, he flung his emaciated carcase into
the shuddering sea, and sinking into the chill darkness, awoke
at length upon his bed.
Thereupon he arose and prostrated himself thrice upon
the carpet of prayer and opening his lips he said “ I thank
thee, O God, that I am as other men are, gluttonous, idle
and dull-witted. I desire to live and die even as one of the
unbelauded. Deliver me, O Lord, from the toils of genius,
and let me die of old age in my bed.”
Great perception causeth great sorrow, and whoso is con-
tented with his own lot doeth well.


Acceptance.
I made no quest to mingle in this strife
This love, this fear, this madness men call life;
But, being here, I must my duty do
And quit myself in all things brave and time :
For, through the twilight gloom, a Face I see,
And hear a Mighty Voice which calls to me.
Sorrow or joy, the sceptre or the rod
What matter which ? so that it leads to God.
