



—<#*—
3 Thou turnest man, 0 Lord, to dust,
Of which he first was made ;
WILL BE SUNG AFTER THE LESSON IS ENDED.
And when Thou speak’st the word, Return,
’Tis instantly obey’d. - --*■
|Bf* 8 *
10 Our term of time is seventy years,
An age that few survive ;
But if, with more than common strength,
To eighty we arrive ;
Yet then our boasted strength decays,
To sorrow turn’d, and pain ;
So soon the slender thread is cut,
And we no more remain.
12 So teach us, Lord, th’ uncertain sum
Of our short days to mind,
That to true wisdom all our hearts
May ever be inclin’d.


* . *•
DEATH!


O ALMIGHTY GOD who hast knit together thine elect
in one communion and fellowship in the mystical body
of Thy Son Christ Our Lord; grant us grace so to follow
Thy blessed Saints in all virtuous and godly living, that we
may come to those unspeakable joys which thou hast prepared
for those who unfeignedly love Thee, through Jesus Christ
Our Lord. Amen.
Collect for All Saints'' Day.
Servant of God, well done!
Thy glorious warfare’s past;
The battle’s fought, the victory won,
And thou art crowned at last.


SERMON.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous judge, shall give me at that days and not to me only, but unto
all them also that love his appearing.
2 Timothy, iv. 7, 8.
The illustrations of Christian life which abound in Scripture,
very commonly set it forth as a condition of conflict and
strife.
We might at first sight suppose, that where one had
resolved to follow the Saviour fftlly and to be a Christian,
not in name only but in reality and truth, his difficulties
would be over, and his course be thenceforward one of security
and peace.
It is doubtless true that the difficulties which belong to a
state of timidity and indecision are then at an end, but the
greater difficulties of the Christian life have now begun.
While floating on the world’s stream no effort was required;
while rocked asleep in the arms of the wicked one no struggle
marked his consciousness of danger, but now that he is alive
and awake, and is animated with the love of a heavenly
Master and the hatred of sin, with the hope of victory and of
reward, the character of the man’s life is changed. It is a
wrestling not against flesh and blood, but against princi-
palities and powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world. It is a race in which he can never relax his efforts
till he has reached the goal; a warfare from which death
alone can give the soldier his discharge.
Those who are familiar with the writings of the Apostle,


will have observed how often he refers to the Grecian games,
and that he does this with a force and aptitude which must
have stirred to their very depths the feelings of patriotism and
national pride of many of his readers.
The apostle struck "a chord which vibrated in the hearts
of his Corinthian converts when he exhorted them, “So
run that ye may obtain. ,-1 He described a state of care-
ful preparation and of actual conflict with which multitudes
were familiar, when he said,“ I keep under ray body and bring
it into subjection.” The eager animation with which the course
had often been watched, would be immediately recalled by
those words, e{ I press towards the mark for the high
calling of God ”; and now at the close of his career, a
victor, ready to be crowned, he can gratefully and out of a
good conscience—not in a spirit for boasting, but for the con-
solation and imitation of his sorrowing disciple and son in the
faith, say, “ I have completed the glorious contest. I have
fought that good fight. I have finished my course ; nothing
remains but for the Judge to award the prize ”
A becoming end to a Christian life, a life of benevolence of
the highest order, carried on with a patience and diligence
and seif denial, which no weariness nor hungering nor pain-
fulness nor watching could overcome; the cause the noblest, the
contest the most glorious, the crown the richest that could
engage the affections, or call forth the powers, or reward the
efforts of one of the holiest of the servants of God.
To listen to those words coming forth from the prison in
which Paul the aged and forsaken awaited the cruel decree of
an unrighteous judge, is to hear a testimony to the truth and
power of Christianity which should carry conviction to every
heart, and dispose each one to pray, “ Let me die the death
of this righteous man, let my last end be like his.”
Blessed be God! such testimonies are not confined to
apostolic times. The power of Christ’s gospel is not
weakened, and whenever one has truly received it into the
heart, and been permitted long and consistently to exhibit its
influence in the life, all men are constrained to acknowledge


that 44 it is well with the righteous,'” and that when wisdom,
strength, and riches fail and flee away, the only abiding ground
of rejoicing is that we know and are known of the Lord.
Such a testimony we have recently received in the life and
death of one of the fathers of the Australian Church, the
revered and beloved pastor of this flock.
An apostle in spirit, in doctrine, in manner of life, he came
to this colony nearly half a century ago, the only minister of
religion in the land, and though he lived to see hundreds
engaged in that ministerial work in which for a time, under
the greatest disadvantages, he laboured alone, yet at his death
we may venture to affirm that he was still alone, unequalled
by any of those whom he had welcomed to these shores as
fellow labourers in the Lord.
The removal of so great a blessing is an event which
should not pass by unheeded. It bids us 44 mark the perfect
man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace.”
Moved, therefore, by private affection and called by
public duty, I thankfully unite my testimony to that universal
tribute of love and veneration which has been showed to his
memory, and at the same time desire, under the divine blessing,
to animate you to walk in his steps, to follow him as he fol-
lowed Christ, that so to you, also, my brethren, grace may be
given to say, 44 I have fought the good fight, I have kept the
faith.”
Let us consider,
1. The cause of which the Apostle was the champion,
2. The contest in which he was engaged.
3. The crown he waited to receive.
1. The cause was that of Christ and His gospel. He
was an ambassador for Christ, a minister of the gospel of
reconciliation, praying men in Christ’s stead, 44 Be ye recon-
ciled to God.” The gospel of the grace of God is the sole
and sovereign remedy for all the ills of man. Sin and sorrow.


trial and perplexity may be removed, painful separations,
losses and persecutions, may be sustained, by the believing
reception of Christ’s message of peace.
It is the offer of mercy and of life from a Father willing
to bestow the blessings of grace and peace upon all who
approach him through His well-beloved Son.
To make known this gospel to mankind was the cause
to which the Apostle had dedicated his whole being and
life.
It Avas the cause of truth against the lying vanities of the
heathen, and the corruptions of Christianity by the self-
righteous or philosophic Jew.
It was the cause of peace in opposition to the enmities,
strifes, swellings and tumults of the world. It was the cause
of righteousness against all the fraud, dishonesty, and lying
which corrupted society. It was the cause of mercy against
the cruelty and indifference of selfishness unrestrained by the
fear of God. It was the cause of holiness against all the
impurities of degraded sensual nature. It was, in short, the
cause of God against Satan ; its issue was life, eternal life,
in opposition to everlasting misery, the destruction of body
and soul in hell.
This was emphatically “ a good ” cause. The object
aimed at was the highest good—to rescue the soul from con-
demnation and death, and to bring it into a state of union
with Christ here and for ever.
The salvation of a soul! how poor and insignificant are
all the ordinary pursuits and interests of men in comparison
of this glorious and blessed object!
Kings and conquerors who by their mighty acts have
filled the world with the fame of their renown, may pass from
earth and find no place in heaven ; but at the salvation of a
beggar the rejoicings of angels are heard in the very presence
of God.
In the salvation of a soul you witness the fruit of Christ’s
labour; “ the great mystery of godliness, God manifest in the
flesh,” the mighty operations of the Holy Ghost, the glory


of the triune Jehovah, are all exhibited to our adoring view in
the salvation of the soul.
This was the trust committed to the Apostle, and he
discharged it with all good fidelity. In this cause he was
willing to pour out his soul as a libation. In love to Christ
and to the souls of men, he was prepared to lay down his life
for the brethren.
This cause was to be carried on in the face of great diffi-
culties presented by the world and Satan ; the apostle himself
being compassed with infirmities. Hence his life became a
conflict. The expression in our version is “ a fight.” The
Christian is in other places compared to a soldier ; here he is
rather a champion, one chosen of God to contend for His cause?
one who will so run as to obtain the prize.
We consider,
2. The contest.
There can be no victory where there has been no conflict.
The cross is before the crown. Opposed to the Apostle were
many adversaries. Open enemies, false brethren, weak and
ixiconsistent disciples, a world supremely indifferent to the
claims of Jesus of Nazareth, were set in array against the
Apostle and his cause. No sooner did he begin his Christian
course than he was compelled to feel their power. The men
who had armed him with authority against the Christians at
Damascus would gladly have taken his life.
The world was ready with its solicitations to entice him
from his course. Reputation, honour, wealth were at one time
strewed upon his path. To stoop to gather them would have
been to lose his cause, and he is content to become the off-scour-
ing of all things. These tempting baits he counts but as
dross, that he may win Christ and attain unto the resurrection
of the dead.
The temptations of Satan assailed him ; “ without were
fightings,” buffetings such as Christ himself endured, temp-
tations to despair or to blaspheme God through unbelief and
fear.


His own heart was a hindrance. There lurked the
remains of self-will, pride, contention and impatience, ready to
break out upon occasion and to impede him in his course.
The besetting sin, the law of the members warring against the
law of the mind, was a weight not easily laid aside.
Notwithstanding these obstacles, the apostle carried on
his contest as one resolved to overcome.
He strove lawfully in dependance upon the power of God
and the promises of his word ; by faith and prayer he sought and
obtained the grace which is in Christ Jesus, and in His strength
was strong. He 44 lived in the spirit, he walked in the spirit, 11
and never relaxed his efforts or ceased from his toilsome
course so long as any portion of it remained for him to run.
From house to house, night and day, in season and out of
season, labouring with his own hands, warning every man that
he might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, he con-
tinued faithful unto the end. And now, after years of toil and
danger, cast into a Roman prison, he could say, 44 1 have
finished my course, the goal is reached, the race is won, soon
I shall receive the prize. 11
My brethren, this contest is not confined to an apostle or
to a minister of Christ's gospel. Every man who seeks
eternal life must enter upon this course of willing self-denying-
obedience to a heavenly master. He must sacrifice his own
will and be prepared to abandon his own interests in order that
he may not lose his soul. Christ's condition of service is, 44 if
any man will come after me let him deny himself, and take up
his cross daily and follow me. 11
The subject naturally suggests the enquiry—are you
engaged in this contest P Are you contending on the side of
Christ and His gospel against His enemies and your own ?
In respect to this, He came not to send peace on earth but
division. Neutrality is treachery. If you are not with Him
you are against Him, and will be treated as His enemies in
the great day. There is neither security nor peace but in a
decided, bold, uncompromising adherence to the cause of
Christ and His Word.


3. The crown.
A “ crown of righteousness,” a righteous reward given by
a righteous judge.
The apostle, like his divine master, was about to be cut off
by an unrighteous sentence. A judge who feared not God
nor regarded man was about to slay his body, but he com-
mitted himself to him that judgeth righteously.
Conscious of his own unworthiness, the least of the
apostles, not meet to be called an apostle, less than the least of
God’s Saints, yea, the chief of sinners, he claimed nothing as
a debt due to his obedience, but looked for the fulfilment of a
promise made by his Lord, “ where I am there shall my
servant be.” He who had opened heaven to allow the dying
martyr to be comforted and strengthened by that beatific
vision, would soon welcome the converted persecutor to share
the joy of their common Lord. He who had said to the dying
thief, “To day thou shalt be with me in Paradise,” had
prepared an abiding place in His Father’s house for another
monument of His sovereign grace.
The reward is the same in kind for all, whether they
have toiled but one hour or have borne the burden and heat
of the day. But there will doubtless be differences in the
degrees of glory, “ as one star differeth from another star in
glory, so also is the resurrection of the dead.” The capacity
for enjoyment will be greater in one than in another, while the
occupation, the company, the joys are one. The praises of
Him who loved them and redeemed them unto God by his
blood are in every mouth; the spirits of the just made perfect,
the innumerable company of angels are there; and, above all,
He the Lord, the Life, die Joy of all, is there. To depart is to
be with Him, to be absent from the body is to be present
with the Lord, “ for ever with the Lord.”
But further, at the general resurrection, we look for “ the
perfect consummation of bliss, both in body and soul,”
We look for the Lord from heaven with ten thousands of
His Saints. We look for the Saviour who shall change our
vile body and make it like unto His glorious body. When


we commit the remains of the redeemed to the grave we know
that the voice of the Son of man shall call them forth, and
bid them live ; that He will send forth His angels and gather
Id is elect from the four winds of Heaven, as the wheat is
gathered into the garner.
This is His crown. “To him that overcometh will I
grant to sit with me in my throne, as I also overcame, and am
set down with my Father in His throne.’’'’ To enter into His
presence, to behold His glory, to celebrate the praises of His
grace, to recognize His wisdom, to acknowledge His love, to
share His joy, and to have all the delights of that condition
heightened by the consciousness that these pleasures are for
evermore, this is His crown, this is His joy, a joy unspeakable
and full of glory.
Such was the expectation of the Apostle; a hope in which
he has not been made ashamed. He is one of the
blessed dead. He rests from his labours and his works have
followed him ; they testified to his character and have
received their crown.
Now, however imperfect our conceptions of this blessed
state may be, we are not more certain of our present being
than Ave are of the reality of that heavenly rest.
Like as we do believe that Christ has ascended into the
highest heavens, so have we an undoubting certainty that all
avlio have fallen asleep in Him have entered into His rest and
share His joy. This is the strong consolation of Christianity.
We sorroAv not as others avlio have no hope. The heathen
who pressed to his bosom the urn in Avhich the ashes of his
daughter Avere enshrined, Avept over all that he could hope to
rescue from the tomb; but Ave, my brethren, commit the
body to the grave in the sure and certain hope of the resur-
rection of the just; that which Ave sow in dishonor shall be
raised in glory, mortality shall put on immortality, and
death be SAvallowed up in life.
This is the topic which Ave naturally present to the rela-
tives and friends of him Avhose death has occasioned this
discourse. Our father in the church of Christ, the beloved


pastor, the stay and comfort of his house, has passed away
from amongst us, leaving that good name which is “ better
than an inheritance,'” a remembrance sweet “as ointment
poured forth.”
Gratifying to all who loved him and honourable to all
who gave it, as is the universal testimony to his worth, still
more consolatory is the reflection, that every desire of a soul
athirst for God is now satisfied, that his highest anticipations
of the joys of the eternal world are exceeded, and that all the
powers and faculties of a glorified spirit find full, sufficient,
and unwearied exercise in the praises of God and of the
Lamb.
How delightful it is to dwell upon the thought, that a
world of glad and peaceful glory bursts upon the soul when
released from its shattered decaying tenement of clay. Now
wearied with the greatness of the way it has been bowed to
the dust, but in one brief moment it has passed from the heat
and noise, the turmoil and distraction of contest, into the
very presence of the Holy One and the Just. Free from every
sorrow and from every fear, conscious of the Redeemer’s
presence and rejoicing in the assurance of His love, it dwells
for ever in the light, the holiness, the peace, and joy of the
Lord. It lives in a fellowship which the flesh does not
interrupt; in the recollection of past mercies, in the discovery
of fresh glories, in the expectation of new and everlasting joys,
with an ever increasing love it is changed into the divine image
from glory to glory, “ as by the Spirit of the Lord.”
While, however, we delight to follow our beloved friend
to that goodly state and to that blissful employ, his removal
has some instructive lessons for us who remain.
His departure is a great trial to affection and a great loss
to the community in which he lived.
We have lost the example and influence of his consistent
life and holy conversation. We have lost his counsels and
his prayers. This is a grief and an evil under which we are
called to mourn. In every death we see the effects of sin.
<{ By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin.


and so death passed upon all men for that all have sinned.”
We desire to humble ourselves under the mighty hand of
Him who holds our lives in being and summons us at his
will. A strong rod has withered, a father in Israel has been
taken from our head this day.
And yet this removal may have its peculiar blessing to us,
if we endeavour to imitate the bright example which he has
left for us to follow.
The principle of his life is expressed in that passage, “ The
grace of God which bringeth salvation hath taught us
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously,
soberly, and godly in this present world.” When he had
learned to love the Saviour, he never ceased to serve him with all
good fidelity. In the spirit in which he came out to Australia
he lived and died here. When it was first proposed that he
should go out to this colony, the difficulties, trials, and even
dangers of such a step were strongly represented to him.
His reply to every statement of this kind was, “ no matter, if I
can only be the means of winning one soul to Christ 1 shall be
amply repaid.” In labours for this end he was most abun-
dant. The only minister of religion at a period when living
freights of vice had been cast upon these shores and left to
corrupt and infect the moral atmosphere with hardly an effort
to stay the plague, when few were married, when ardent spirits
formed the circulating medium, when on one Lord’s Hay
only three free persons attended divine service, while
every week groups of wretched criminals were launched into
eternity with far less concern than men would kill an animal
for food.
In this unpromising field he laboured forty-seven years,
painfully, prayerfully, most diligently and successfully.
His ordinary Sunday labour would now be deemed
sufficient for three clergymen. He conducted three, and often
four, full services in the Church, The military and civil
hospitals and the schools and the sick were visited, and at the
close of a laborious day, in which every moment had been
occupied, he failed not to enter the condemned cells and to


carry the message of mercy to numbers, sometimes twelve,
or even twenty, whose sun was about to set for ever.
At the same time, his preparation for the pulpit was care-
ful and exact. Late and early in his study, he showed by his
vigorous, pointed, and earnest appeals, that the labour of the
mind was not less than that of the body. He did not offer
for the service of his God that which cost him nothing. His
thorough acquaintance with the Scriptures, his accurate and
tenacious memory, his fervent spirit, his animated delivery,
his evident desire for the salvation of souls, as he himself once
expressed it, “ he wished to take all the world in his arms and
■fly away with them to heaven,'” made him a most effective
preacher of the word.
In his parochial arrangements he was methodical, punctual,
and diligent. Nothing that had to be done was neglected.
Up to a very recent period his weekly examination of the
Schools, his Thursday Evening lectures, the three services
on a Sunday were all attended by him; and his visitation
of the sick, and aged, and poor, was carried on with the
same interest as when his step was light and his voice was
strong.
He was a wise counsellor, and a faithful disinterested friend.
His judgment was excellent and his discernment penetrating
and accurate. His love of truth was manifest, in that he said
what he thought without hesitation or fear. He failed not at
a needful time to remind the highest that they also had a
master in heaven ; and while he boldly rebuked vice in the
lowest, he did it with such an evident desire to
reclaim the offenders, that the most hardened were
constrained to respect a reprover in whom they could
not fail to discover a friend. He was a lover of
peace and used no harsh provoking words, and yet
he was firm and uncompromising in the maintenance of his
principles. If he loved peace much, he loved truth more, and
would never consent to sacrifice his convictions for the sake of
a hollow truce with the world. He took a lively interest in
all the associations which had for their object the glory of God


and the good of man. It has been mentioned that at one time
he gave to six societies a large measure of his attention and
time as their Secretary.
In the questions of education, of Sabbath observance, and
in Missions to the heathen, as well as in the extension of
religion throughout the colony, he took a warm interest and
gave most valuable aid.
To myself, as the Bishop of the Diocese, he was a faithful
adviser and a most affectionate friend. The kindly welcome
which I received from him on my first arrival was but an
earnest of the continued and increasing regard which he
ever evinced towards me. I greatly prized his counsels, and
rejoiced that I possessed his confidence had the comfort
of his sympathy and the benefit of his prayers.
He was regarded with the like affection by the late Bishop,
who gave him the highest mark of his confidence, by making
him his sole Commissary during his absence from the Diocese.
The poor knew him well, and willingly gave him that
tribute which nothing but real worth can ever gain—their
love. All men honoured him for his integrity and consis-
tency while living, and lamented him when gone. It is
universally acknowledged, that not only the Church to which
he belonged, but the land in which he lived, has lost one of
its brightest ornaments and the most revered of its sons.
The terms in which I have spoken of him may to some
appear to savour too much of a panegyric, and yet, in truth, I
have said less than I might, though more than I should deem
it expedient to do in this place, were I not able to add,- that
whatever of good was found in his character and life, my be-
loved friend would have been the first to ascribe to the love
and mercy of God ; his language would have been, “By the
grace of God I am what I am.”
His end was in accordance with his life, peaceful, calm,
assured. My text was one of the portions of Scripture
frequently upon his lips, and, on one occasion he added, with
reference to it, “ If I could stand in the pulpit again I could
preach Christ as freely as ever; I have fought a good fight,
and my battle-axe is not blunted.”


My brethren, you desire his end, then must yon set out
with him on his course, and with him be faithful unto death.
He took the Saviour as the foundation of his hope, his guide,
companion, and friend. He passed through the strait gate of
conversion to God, and walked in the narrow way of holiness
of life. None ever reached the goal as he did but in the way
he took.
To you, my brethren, his parishioners, the members of his
flock, this removal speaks in loud and solemn tones.
How long, how faithfully, how fully hath he proclaimed
amongst you the great things of the divine law, the love of
Christ to you, the deep need you have of the renewing sancti-
fying power of the Holy Ghost, the excellence of godliness,
the joys of heaven, the miseries of hell. How manifestly he
lived for you and for God’s work in you and amongst you.
How truly your joys and sorrows were his own. How many
amongst you owe your admission into the Church of Christ to
his ministering hand, the baptism, the marriage, the dying
hour have witnessed his fatherly affection and deep sympathy
with you all. You have enjoyed no common privilege ; no
slight responsibility is laid upon you. You will meet again ;
we shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ. In
that day will you form a portion of his crown, his joy, and
his rejoicing?
Have his faithful words led you to the knowledge of your
evil heart and laid you low before the throne of grace,
penitent, seeking for pardon through the blood of the Lamb ?
Have you so marked his words and ways as to follow him as
he followed Christ?
My brethren, these are questions of the last importance.
This is an event which is intended to force upon your thoughts
the great concerns of man—a holy life, a happy death, a
glorious eternity. Oh that this death, while, it confirms the
faith and comforts the heart of every follower of the
Redeemer, may effect that in the case of others which a
living loving ministry failed to accomplish—may it bring
many souls to Christ and to the blessed hope of everlasting
life through Him. Amen.
o


sydnkt:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
BRIDGE STREET.




. ...
\V- < A ; 'V&y : -v
