

the new ' *J|
TASMANIAN . |
I H FOR
i VISITORS, INTENDING SETTLERS, i
MINERS, Etc. . |
aWITH IVE .A. IP, I
H CORRECTED TO DATE,
§ INDEX, AND RAILWAY TIME-TABLES. I
Also the . k*
T ' - it,
RATES'? AKD /Vic ST ELI ABLE JNFOPM.ATION ,1
n C „ , _ M
ABOUT THE /EEHAN LYER.FIELD AND
f* OTHER /VLIRERAL , f'IELDS
OF THE .
WEST COAST.
Hr • «
‘ 'f > CTasintsnta: ||i JS
PUBLISHED BY JM JOB
§E. MOWBKAY, BOOKSELLEfi AND STATIONER, ||
Brisbane Street, Launceston.
V __ PKINT . IEr> AT THK “ I,AUNC * STON EXAMINBR ” oF*"'-;E-
-, PRICE, ONE SHIEEING.
Hste>s, N
? % “ v '


* / . . i t \ ' *"r_ * ;
•’ '■ '' > ' ' ■ ' ;
•v f ; r ' •' ♦
t 7 ‘ / " ' '
|
6
Wk-' r ..*•
ips
ppryeg*


Mart, Park, ail Co.’s Ik
TASMANIAN SERVICE.
Launceston, via Melbourne, to and from
Sydney. Weekly.
Launceston, Formby, & Emu Bay, to Sydney
direct. About every 10 days.
Launceston, to and from Melbourne.
Tri-vieekly.
Launceston, via Formby and Emu Bay, to
and from Melbourne. Fortnightly.
Hobart, to and from Sydney direct. Weekly.
W & W W/.
TONS
S.s. Wastwater 5000
S.s. Santon 4500
S.s. Elingamite 4000
S.s. Burrumbeet 3500
S.s. Wendouree 2500
S.s. Lindus 2500
S.s. Nemesis 2000
S.s. Courier 1200
S.s. Coogee iioo
S.s. Dispatch 350
S.s. Excelsior 300
S.s. Meeinderry 150
S.s. COOMONDERRY, 150 tons.
Under Charter —P.s. Newcastle, 1260 tons
OWZ CSS:
Melbourne, 525 Collins St. Geelong, Mooiabool St.
Sydney, foot Margaret and Sussex Streets.
Ballarat, Lydiard Street.' Newcastle, Scott Street.
Portarlington, Wharf.
Launceston, The Tasmanian Woolgrowers’
Agency Co., Ltd., Agents.
Hobart, C. Piesse and Co., Agents.
Formby, The River Don Trading Co.
Emu Bay, J. W. Smithies.


W AYiilif
Hf Q Q LLE If lILl!S 5
LAUNCESTON,
AWARDED
FIRST ORDER OF MERIT
AND ■ .
SILVER MEDAL
AT THE
MELBOURNE CENTENNIAL EXHIBITION,
Wholesale Agents:
JOHN BAILY & CO.,
HOBART.
To Tourists and the Travelling Public!
The undersigned begs to call attention to his large and
varied assortment of Travelling Requisites, including
Portmanteaux, Gladstone and Carpet
Bags, Rugs and Rug Straps,
Leather Hat Cases, etc.;
Also Sard and Soft Felt Bats, Tweed Caps, White
and Beqatta Shirts, Celluloid Collars and
Cuffs, Scarfs, Braces, Belts, etc., in
qreat variety and at moderate
prices.
NOTE THE ADDRESS
rail, iiiiti*
BRISBANE STREET.
THE QUADRANT IS OPPOSITE.


THE NEW
TASMANIAN
VISITORS, INTENDING SETTLERS,
MINERS, Etc.
WXT HE IS/C .A. IP.
CORRECTED TO DATE.
THE
AND JAo ST RELIABLE JnFORMATION
ABOUT THE jZEEHAN AND
OTHER yVIINERAL
OF THE
ST COAST.
fflaantam's :
PUBLISHED BY
R. MOWBRAY, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
Brisbane Street, Launceston.
PRINTED AT THB “ LAUNCESTON EXAMINER” OIPIC*.


J 3 PREFACE.
In publishing this book I beg to tender my grateful
acknowledgment to various gentlemen and friends, who
have kindly and generously assisted me by supplying
articles on various districts, a task they are well
qualified to perform; also to the Daily Press, the
authors of Fenton’s History, and other publications,
from which I have culled some useful and interesting
matter; to Mr. Belstead, Secretary of Mines, for a
most useful summary of the mining acts and regula-
tions ; also to other public officials who have assisted
me with most of the few figures I present. For
omissions and errors I ask the kind indulgence of
readers, and I will thankfully receive any corrections,
or notice of omissions, especially if these are supplied.
R. MOWBRAY.
Brisbane Street, Launceston,
December, 1889.


y ASM AN I A.
O R those who are unacquainted with
Tasmania this very brief chapter, suited
to the limits of the book, is written,
Tasmania,separated from the mainlandby
Bass Strait, about 150 miles wide, has
evidently once formed part of the main-
land of Australia. The same flora and
fauna,- with a few variations, prevail in
both, while the eastern ranges of Tasmania stretch
in a manner more than half way across the
Straits, towards the Australian Alps, in a chain of
mountainous islands of which the largest is Flinders,
and the most outlying the Kent Group. A shorter
series of outlying islands extends northwards from the
north-west corner, terminating in King Island, so well
known to mariners. The country is essentially
mountainous, and often, when approached from Mel-
bourne, the long banks of mist may be seen floating
along the hill sides, just as it may be seen in the
Highlands of Scotland. The large extent of sombre
forest, however, covering all the land but the tops of the
higher mountains, proclaims a new country, and as the
steamer glides up the beautiful, and in some places
lake-like, river Tamar, one could easily fancy that the
country was being entered for the first time ; and
therein lies a charm to those accustomed to the
crowded rivers of the old country, with their numberless
smoke stacks both ashore and afloat. If it is winter or
early spring, more than likely the higher summits are
white with snow, a most pleasing sight, and a wonderful
and refreshing one to visitors from the mainland, who
may come here on business or to brace up the system.
But, however untenanted (except by sheep, perhaps) and
beforested a large extent of the country appears, there
are plenty of plains, and innumerable glens, with a soil


that is not to be excelled in fertility in all the
Australias; and among the mountains and in old
river beds are immense tin drifts, and gold, silver,
copper, nickel, and other ores to tempt the explorer and
speculator. And here it may be as well to mention
that though a steady and good yield of gold and tin has
been maintained for many years, and there have been
many failures (partly owing to a credulous public
facilitating the floating of worthless mines), yet new
discoveries of silver ores on the West Coast, and at
Godkin’s, of gold in the Middlesex district, of splendid
coal on the East Coast, together with the permanent
character of the coal deposits now being worked at
Mount Nicholas, seem to warrant the belief that the
new discoveries will more than keep up the reputation
of the island for mineral wealth. But climate after all
is the strong point of Tasmania, and its easiness of
access from the mainland of Australia renders its
climate available for the recuperation of numberless
visitors who take their annual holiday there. Those
with weak respiratory organs will find a dr}-, mild, and
delightful climate on the East Coast, while the more
robust will find healthful recreation with gun, rod
or line, in climbing the eminences around Launceston,
rambling up the secluded banks of the South Esk, or,
if in Hobart, in exploring the many delightful spots
that are within easy reach of that city. Sea bathing too,
can be obtained there, also on the East Coast, and at
the mouth of nearly all the rivers of the North Coast,
and for exploring, the western half of the island, except
on the North Coast, is in a great measure a terra
incognita, except to the surveyor, stockman, explorer,
or prospector, —a region traversed in all directions by
lofty rugged mountains, whose peaks tower to a height
of nearly 5000 feet, and intersected by deep gorges,
through which the rivers and mountain torrents rush.
The belt of country next the coast, where the ranges
recede, consists chiefly of low sandhills and button rush
plains, and here the rivers in some cases expand and
form noble and navigable streams. There are unfor-
tunately extensive sand bars at the mouth of most of
them, which at present are very sufficient bars to
navigation from outside. Heaped up in the centre of
the island, to an altitude of 2000 to 3000 feet, lie the
central table lands, wherein are those wonderful lakes,


the delight of all who visit them. This country is
guarded on the north by a lofty mountain range,
which is conspicuous throughout all the fine agricultural
plain lying south and south-west from Launceston.
The table land declines by terraces towards the valley
of the Derwent, and a cart may be driven all the way
from Hobart via Bothwell. A shorter but steeper route
lies directly west of Tunbridge on the Main Line
Railway, but of that more anon, A series of ranges
and detached mountains, which culminate about Ben
Lomond, north of the Fingal valley, and decline more
to the south, covers most of the eastern portion of the
island, while between the Eastern and Western Tiers
are situated the famous sheep pastures, celebrated in all
the neighbouring colonies as the home of the best
breeds of Merinos, etc.; and which, on account of
climatic influences, have become indispensable to the
flock owners of the mainland. At Antill Ponds, about
65 miles south of Launceston, the eastern and western
ranges join, and thence for 40 miles nearly the whole
country from east to west is covered with wooded
hills, but nearer Hobart the level country comes
in again to some extent. The main valleys are
the Derwent and the Fingal valleys, now traversed by
railways, but every river basin of the North-west Coast
now contains a thriving population. The main road
and Main Line Railway connect Launceston with
Hobart, and various branch and other lines are
rapidly overtaking the needs of the population. The
last line sanctioned is that from Macquarie Harbour to
the Mount Zeehan silver-fields on the West Coast.
The chief industries are the agricultural, pastoral,
mining, and fruit-growing industries, and manufactures
are on the increase. It is a country well adapted for
agriculturists and also for persons seeking a healthy
place of residence with good scenery. The mineral
explorer can here find plenty of new country of
which the geological features are most promising, and
people of all sorts and conditions, provided they are
sufficiently healthy and willing to work, can find
employment as readily as in any part of Australia.
Clerks are rather at a discount, as the native-born have
a better opportunity to get situations and grow up in
them.


STATISTICAL.
Tasmania was discovered by Abel Jans Tasman in 1642,
and possesses an area, including islands and lakes, of
26,215 square miles. The population is estimated at
148,000. The revenue has for years been steadily on
the increase, and amounted for 1888 to £640,068, and the
expenditure to £732,942. As comparative statistics give
a much better indication of the progress and condition
of a country than the figures of any single year, the
following, mostly compiled from the Treasurer’s statement
of 12th July, 1889, will show a few main points of com-
parison, and at the same time the latest figures obtainable.
PROGRESS
For decennial period ending with 1888:- —Increases:
population, 109,947 to 146,149; revenue, £375,569 to
£640,068 (the percentage of taxation to revenue for 1888,
63’40, was rpo less than for the average of the whole
period); bank deposits, £1,873,000 to £3,564,000; post-
office receipts, £17,000 to £36,000 ; telegraphs, £4,276 to
£14,000 (including telephone rentals) ; tonnage, 160,000
to 390,000 (a proportion of this increase is due to the large
steamers now calling with, or for, part cargoes); public
debt, £1,786,800 to £4,449,470 (1888), when Tasmania
owed less per head of population (£3O os. nd.) than any
of the other Australian colonies. The public debt on 30th
June, 1879, stood at £4,871,270. During the ten years
ending with 1878 the value of imports and exports was
£20,566,429, and in the succeeding ten years it amounted
to £30,542,941. The re-estimates for 1889 were—revenue,
£683,052, and expenditure, £670,087.
WEALTH.
The wealth of Tasmania is partly shown by statistics,
thus: Capital value of real estate for taxation, £21,300,000,
or an annual assessed valu ■ of over £1,000,000 (it may be
safely assumed that these properties could not be bought,
on an average, under from ten to twenty per cent,
advance on the assessment) ; 29,238 horses ; 142,019
cattle; 1,430,065 sheep (of sheep about 21,000 exported
since 1881 realised £364,000); 43,227 pigs. The railways
are valued at £2,530,280, with equipment, the last annual
receipts being£ls3,47l and expenditure £140,078. Bank
deposits are £3,564,000. The unalienated land, perhaps
x 0,000,000 acres, with its hundreds of thousands of acres
of good land and its wealth of minerals and timber 1 , is an
asset that nearly balances the public debt of £4,449,470
(1888). Then there are all the roads, bridges, jetties,
lighthouses, public buildings, and river and harbour
improvements, with the plant connected therewith, which


are not, of course, included in the assessment given above;
all agricultural implements and machinery ; all stocks of
goods in warehouses and shops, and shipping; all other
personal property, — all the above for a population of
146,000 (1888) is a result which Tasmanians may well be
proud of, notwithstanding the usual amount of debt in
mortgages and trade accounts due to people outside of the
colony, which must be deducted.
Cereals, etc., were produced in 1888 as follow. In
bushels: wheat, 819,497 from 40,657 acres ; oats, 946,354
from 33,834 acres ; barley, 109,979 from 4670 acres; other
cereals, 124,954 from 7476 acres. Of potatoes, 66,721 tons
were grown from 13,653 acres, and 58,290 tons of hay
were produced from 52,521 acres. There were 581,533
acres in cultivation, of which 172,189 acres were in crop,
and yet we have to import wheat, and flour, and meat.
As to timber, fruit, minerals, bark, etc., and all other
figures, returns, and reports, are they not recorded in the
parliamentary papers, the Gazette , the daily press, and
the standard works on Tasmania ?
j^OBART.
From whichever approach Hobart is viewed it and its
immediate surroundings are eminently picturesque.
Here the Derwent, a noble river, widens into an
estuary, with shores now bold and wooded, with a back-
ground of hills or mountains in immediate proximity,
and again with delightful sandy beaches, and the hills
receding somewhat. From landward the broad expanse
of river, with the city nestling on the bank, gives a
sense of roominess and freedom, with delightful antici-
pations of boating and fishing trips ; while from the
river the majestic aspect ot Mount Wellington, which
rises abruptly to a height of over 4000 feet almost from
the city, cannot fail to strike even the most apathetic
observer with admiration at its grandeur.
The city has a population of nearly 27,000, and is the
Capital and seat of Government. It is distant from
Launceston 120 miles by a good road, or 133 miles by
rail; aod the express train, which leaves the latter city
at 3 p.m. and arrives in the capital at 8’45 p.m., is the
train mostly used by the travelling public. Hobart is
prettily yet compactly laid out on undulating ground,
and the harbour is capacious, easy of access, well
sheltered, and has good anchorage for vessels of the
largest tonnage.


THE
|||ufttal |)ijiitnden{
(REGISTERED IN TASMANIA).
The Most Prosperous life Assurance Office doing
business in Australasia.
LOCAL TO THESE COLONIES.
Assurances Granted on Approved Lives up
to £lO,OOO.
This Society offers Advantages to Assurers that cannot he
equalled by any competing office , local or foreign.
BONUSES DECLARED EVERY YEAR.
LOCAL INVESTMENT,
LOCAL MANAGEMENT
PERFECT SECURITY TO POLICY HOLDERS.
Invested Funds in Tasmania exceed
Invested Funds in Australasia exceed
Annual Revenue exceeds /"i,500,000
Management Entirely in the hands of the
Policy Holders.
CASH SURRENDER VALUES GRANTED after Policies
have existed two years.
POLICIES KEPT IN FORCE, should default in payment of
Premium occur, as long as the Surrender Value is suf-
ficient for payment of One Premium.
CASH BONUSES PAID after Policies have existed two years.
BONUS ADDITIONS PAID IN FULL at death after
Policies have been two years in force.
LOANS GRANTED ON POLICIES within their Surrender
Value after two years.
DIRECTORS IN TASMANIA :
The Hon. P. O. Ftsh, M.L.C,, Chairman.
The Hon. W. Crosby, M.L.C., Deputy Chairman.
Neil Lewis, Esq. E. O. Giblin, Esq., M.D.
HOBART OFFICE: 41 ELIZABETH STREET.
LAUNCESTON OFFICE: BRISBANE STREET.
Apply to any of the Society’s Agents, or to
NIGER HERRING, Resident Secretary.


The principal streets are Liverpool, Murray,
Elizabeth, Collins, and Macquarie streets, where are
situated the principal shops, banks, warehouses, and
Government offices. The principal hotels are also
situated in these streets; and as it will be the first
consideration for the visitor to select suitable accommo-
dation, I will enumerate a few of the leading hostelries.
First, in Murray street is the Orient Hotel (Hadley’s),
the leading hotel in the city, also Currie’s Club in the
same street; Criterion, Carlton, and Heathorn’s, in
Liverpool street; the Ship, in Collins street; and the
Albion, In Elizabeth street. These can all be highly
recommended for first-class accommodation and reason-
able charges. Others can also be found with fair
accommodation; but those enumerated are the princi-
pal, and situated in the business centres of the city. A
Coffee Palace has also been erected in Collins street,
suitable for all requirements..
Should the visitor prefer the more quiet accommoda-
tion of a boarding-house, there are Westella, in Eliza-
beth street; Pressland House, in Melville street ;
Macquarie House, in Macquarie street; and Waterloo
House, opposite the Post Office, in Murray street. A
great many others could be named, but these are the
principal —all with first-class accommodation and
reasonable charges.
After being settled in comfortable quarters, the
next object will be to see the sights in and about
Hobart, First of all, there is the Museum and
Public Library, in Macquarie street. In the Museum
(Open daily) will be seen a very fine collection of
curiosities from different places ; a splendid collection
of Specimens of tin, gold, silver, coal, etc., of the island)
Collections of warlike implements and photosand busts
Of the aboriginals. Here two hours may be spent with
pleasure and profit. The Public Library also contains
about 11,000 volumes.
The visitor will afterwards proceed to the Botanical
Gardens, a distance of scarcely a mile from the city,
which can be reached by walking or cab. The walk is
delightful, conducting through the Domain and skirting
the noble Derwent. On his way he will pass iri
close proximity to Government House, situated on a
point of land facing the Derwent and in a corner of the
Gardens. Tt is truly a magnificent building, of white


freestone procured from quarries close by, and bears a
commanding aspect when viewed from the river. One
cannot fail to be delighted with the beautiful position
and arrangement of the Gardens, and with the
magnificent flowers, shrubs, etc., which are here to
be found in great profusion.
On leaving the Gardens the visitor can either walk
or drive round the Domain, still skirting the Derwent,
and passing the General Cemetery at Cornelian Bay
(in which are some handsome monuments) will arrive
at New Town, about three miles from Hobart. This is
a famous place for orchards, and here also is the
Government Charitable Institution. He will be amply
repaid for his trouble by the beautiful landscape
presented to view, embracing the high wooded ranges
extending from Mount Wellington in the direction of
New Norfolk ; to the north and east also the view is
very fine. He can then return to town either by bus
(every half-hour) or by rail, fare nominal.
NEW NORFOLK.
On the following day thetouristmaybeinclinedtogoa
little farther from the city, and this can be accomplished
by proceeding to New Norfolk, a distance of 21 miles.
This charming township can be reached either by rail,
road, or river. Trains leave the Main Line Terminus
at 8 a m., no p.m., and 5 p.m., arriving at New
Norfolk at g' 15 a m., 2'50 and 6'15 p.m., and leave for
town at 1'25 or 5 p.m., or at 7*40 the following
morning. Should he prefer the water, he can have a
delightful trip by steamer up the Derwent in the p.s.
Monarch, passing Bridgewater en route. The railway
runs along the north bank of the river (which shrinks
considerably in width above Bridgewater), and when
near New Norfolk runs beneath some perpendicular
cliffs of slate or sandstone, which are seamed horizon-
tally like courses of masonry. These cliffs are about
150 feet high and are a striking feature in the landscape.
At New Norfolk the valley expands somewhat, and a
fine pile bridge here spans the river, above which
there is no navigation. This excursion is a pleasure
that cannot be over-rated, for the scenery is un-
rivalled. The drive by road is also delightful, b»t
rather tedious. Arriving at New Norfolk, should he
be inclined for lunch, he can betake himself to Blockey*s


or Allwright’s Hotels, where he will be find the cuisine
perfect. After regaling the inner man he will proceed
to inspect the Hop Grounds, which are beautifully laid
out around the township and the banks of the river.
Boats can also be hired at Blockey’s Hotel, when good
amusement is found in sailing on and fishing in the
river. The gardens around here are luxuriant in
foliage, and those of Blockley’s Hotel and the late Sir
Robert Officer are always open for the inspection of
visitors. He will also visit the Lunatic Asylum situated
on the edge of the township. This has to be approached
by having an order ; and I may here state that the proper
way to receive this order is to proceed to the Chief
Secretary’s Office in Murray street, state he is a visitor,
and would like to visit the Government Institutions.
He will then be accommodated with a printed form
duly signed, which on production at any of the
Institutions will secure his admission and proper
attention at each place. He must always carry this
wi)h him, and only show it, as it is a general order, to
all heads of departments. By following these instruc-
tions the visitor should have no difficulty in securing
admission to any Government Institutions in the North
or South.
The Asylum, as we saw it, was scrupulously clean,
and the Attendants polite and willing to impart any
information. In the women’s side is a beautiful grass
lawn, with emus and kangaroo feeding quietly about.
The patients seemed well cared for, and the only one
we interviewed (a friend) conversed rationally enough,
but expressed no desire to come out. Many are so
harmless that they can be entrusted with axes and
saws to cut wood, and it is the practice to encourage
the patients to work, but no compulsion is used. Over
30 per cent, of the ordinary cases admitted are cured.
Having inspected the Asylum, which is under the
superintendence of Dr. McFarlane, relief will be felt
at being once more outside its precincts, wherein are
confined over 300 male and female patients. Arriving
again at the hotel, the visitor can get a convey-
ance, and a splendid drive of about six miles, still
skirting the Derwent river, will conduct him to the
Salmon Ponds. Here will be seen the manner and
results of the hatching and acclimatization of that king
of fish, and also of the trout. The first successful ship-


merit of salmon and trout ova arrived in April, 1864,
and on the 4th and sth May the first salmon and trout
respectively were hatched. The shipment consisted of
100,000 of the former and a few-thousands of the latter.
The celebrated estate of Bushy Park is six and a half
miles further on the same road, and in two miles more
Glenora is reached —the present terminus of the Derwent
Valley railroad, which is 13 miles by rail and 15 by road
from New Norfolk. Myrtle Falls, on the Lachlan river,
seven miles distant, and Sorell Creek, six miles distant,
are also favourite spots for visiting. The celebrated
Russell’s Falls and the Upper Derwent country will be
described in another place. The distance by railway
from Hobart is about 36 miles, and the fares are 75.6 d.
return first-class. Having thus spent a very pleasant
time at this pretty inland village, we again return to
Hobart.
The following day thebus can be taken in Collins street
to proceed up Macquarie street to the far-famed
Cascade Brewery , but before leaving it is better to
procure an order for admittance at the company’s office
in Collins street. At the Brewery he will be shown
over the buildings, and also all the intricacies of
brewing, by the obliging officials in charge, and will be
asked in the capacious cellars to sample the famous ale
brewed here. A cordial factory is also carried on here
in connection with the Brewery, at which those so
inclined may quench their thirst. This is a delightful
visit to make, the surrounding scenery backed by
Mount Wellington (which here seems almost to over-
shadow the place), forming a beautiful landscape.
By walking about a quarter of a mile further down
Macquarie street we arrive at the Cascades Lunatic
Asylum, where will be required the order previously
described to obtain admittance from the Surgean
Superintendent or officer in charge. Here we will find
our visit more interesting than to the Asylum at New
Norfolk. The inmates (nearly 60) are nearly all
criminals, and mostly the remnants of the convicts
removed from Port Arthur at the breaking up of that
establishment (of which I shall have something to say
hereafter). Some of the inmates are dangerous, and
are confined in dormitories and cells, according to the
peculiar nature of their insanity. Some interesting
prison records are kept here of the various patients in


convict times, showing the rigour of the past system.
Attached to this establishment are also a reformatory
for boys and a hospital for females, neither of which
are very interesting. This place was originally built
and used as a gaol for females transported from home,
and has of late years been used as a pauper depot, and
for various other purposes. It has rather a bleak
appearance; and being built so near the base of the
mountain, and flanked on each side by hills, is apt
to ha ve a depressing effect on inmates, especially during
the cold winter months.
Another place which may be visited is the gaol, in
Campbell street. The number of inmates is not
numerous, but one or two of the worst Port Arthur men
are still located there.
A very pretty place to enjoy half-an-hour’s rest in is
Franklin Square, in the vicinity of the Government
Buildings, in the heart of the city. Here is a very fine
bronze statue of the great navigator and once Governor
of Van Diemen’s Land, Sir John Franklin. This
square is tastefully laid out and planted with trees and
ornamental shrubs, and was formerly the site of the old
Government House in the early days of the colony.
MOUNT WELLINGTON,
No one who is able should leave Hobart without
ascending Mount Wellington, and viewing the grand
panorama of river, estuary, and ocean, and mountain
succeeding' 1 ' mountain, which is disclosed when the
summit is reached. No pen can do justice to such a
scene; but for those unable to accomplish the whole
ascent, much may be seen on the way. A favourite
mode of accomplishing this journey is for a party to
combine together, hire a conveyance, and proceed along
the Huon road to the Finger Post, five miles from
Hobart. Here the party will take leave of the convey-
ance, stipulating the time it is to meet them on their
return from the mountain. On leaving the conveyance
at the Finger Post each one will have provided himself
with a small bag to carry on his back with refreshments,
and a little stimulant is also a desirable thing on
undertaking this ascent, as on approaching the summit
the party may meet with snow, or cold bleak winds, or
both. Proceeding from the Finger Post by a well-
defined track, three very steep ascents will be encoun-


tered; and at about a distance of three miles the Springs
will be reached. Here will be found a very snug hut,
where the recognised guide takes up his abode in
summer and winter, ready and willing at all times to
escort visitors to the top. A book is kept here,
wherein visitors may inscribe their names. The billy
(in bush parlance) having been boiled, and refreshments
partaken of, the ascent is again commenced. I may
here state that if the party have confidence in
themselves the guide need not be employed, but if any
doubt should arise it would be advisable for them to
avail themselves of his services. On leaving the
Springs the ascent is not so difficult, and in due course
the noted Ploughed Fields will be reached. This is a
vast field of basaltic rocks “ promiscuously hurled ”
together in a slight depression or valley, which
has to be crossed by jumping from one rock to
another, but this can be easily accomplished with due
care. After crossing this wonderful labyrinth of rocks
and boulders, a walk of a fairly good nature of about two
miles will bring the party to “ The Pinnacle,” or the
highest point of the mountain. Here the view (should
the day be clear) is sublime—who can describe it?
Tasmania in miniature is here —a veritable Wonderland.
Far below, and stretching away to the Pacific, lie
extended
. . . . “ promontory, creek and bay,
And islands that, empurpled bright,
Floated amid the livelier light
While around the rest of the horizon are
. . . . “ mountains that like giants stand
To sentinel enchanted land.”
The view is beyond description, and is ample recom-
pense for all the trouble and discomfort the tourist has
sustained in reaching it. Berries of various descriptions,
also native laurel and waratah, can be procured in
abundance near the summit.
On the return journey, when the Springs are reached,
it is well to again have recourse to the billy, and its
invigorating cup of tea. After a brief chat or smoke
with the guide, and handing him from the company a
small douceur iox any trouble and attention he may
have paid, the descent may be commenced, and on
arrival at the Finger Post we find the conveyance ready
to take us back to town.




Another route to reach the Springs or the summit is
by Fern Tree Gully, and this is in our opinion by far
the best way. To avoid unnecessary fatigue, and so to
thoroughly enjoy the trip, it is a good plan to stay
overnight at the Fern Tree Inn, or Fern Tree Villa, on
the Huon road, five and a half miles from Hobart.
Nearly opposite the inn is the entrance to the Water-
works track, a sort of cart road, and a quarter of a mile
of level road leads to “ The Bower/’ a double row of
planted fern trees, with tables and benches between.
Here the clear stream of the gully is conveyed under-
ground to the reservoir nearer town, and the track,
with piping underneath, continues further on till St.
Crispin’s Well is reached, which is the head of the
Waterworks. Proceeding up the gully the scenery is
lovely in the extreme, for the tall straight trees on its
steep sides, still rising as you look upwards, throw
everything into shade, and in many places completely
overarch and darken the path ; and underneath
moss everywhere, on the banks, the stones of the
creek, the huge logs lying across the creek in places,
and even covering the face of the little cliff, over which
the clear stream falls in a beautiful silvery cascade.
This, and the luxuriant growth of fern trees and other
shrubs, continually make fresh scenes and vistas of
refreshing coolness and surpassing loveliness. Almost
anyone can come this distance without fatigue, and here
is enough, and more than enough, to repay the trouble.
Continuing up the gully the ascent becomes steeper,
but by going easily, and taking time to admire the
ever-varying gems of scenery and the immense trees,
in about an hour and a half the light increases, and
directly afterwards we emerge into the upper air at
THE SPRINGS.
The contrast is most striking, for here a wide and
beautiful prospect is disclosed, and it is difficult to find
adequate words to express the admiration which is
called forth. The first impression is that of a map
showing a beautiful birdseye view ; the broad estuary
and intricate system of bays and channels coloured
blue ; the peninsulas and islands covered with a deep
olive-brown forest, relieved here and there with the
lighter green of the cultivated fields; the white sandy
beaches skirting these fairylands ; and to the south-east


the limitless ocean spreading away into the dim
distance, —combine to make a picture grand in the
extreme. Looking at the mountain, the Organ Pipes,
now turned into immense cliffs, are a most conspicuous
feature, and a track from the Springs runs along
immediately under their base. In a line with Kangaroo
Point is seen Frederick Henry Bay, where Tasnjan first
cast anchor on Ist December, 1642, having first sighted
the land a week previously, at Point Hibbs, 30 miles
south of Macquarie Harbour. At the head of this bay
is seen a broad sandy beach (the seven-miles beach),
then a narrow neck of lew-lying land, and again the
expanse of Pittwater, crossed by the celebrated Sorell
Causeway. But to describe more would be simply
describing the map of that neighbourhood. All we can
add is, go and see for yourself, and if a further ascent
seems too much, you may rest assured that you have
seen the best part of .the view obtainable from Mount
Wellington.
THE PLOUGHED FIELDS.
Leaving the guide and his hospitable hut, the track
makes a long zigzag, first to the left and then to the
right. This can be cut off by simply breasting the hill,
a little gully being on the left of the track, and striking
the upper track about 40 yards past a roofless icehouse.
The ascent then is easier till the Ploughed Fields are
passed, but these may be avoided by taking a left-hand
path about 30 yards from the edge of the Fields. The
summit is now apparently close at hand; and here it is
best to keep well to the left, as the tracks, marked
principally by small stones set on boulders, diverge at
times, and the front of the mountain is much rougher.
Passing some boggy ground the first summit is reached,
and then the pinnacle is seen, about two miles further
north, over a stony plain with a slight depression. The
summit slopes gently down to the westward for about a
mile, and a western rim or shoulder also slopes into
that valley, giving it the appearance of a vast basin or
crater, with an outlet to the south. The whole place is
a stony desert (but not without water), with a few
stunted shrubs and flowers growing here and there, and
ever and anon bunches of basaltic rock appearing,
showing the columnar formation so strongly marked in
the Organ Pipes. Some of these are immense stones,


and on the top of one is the celebrated rocking-stone*
which has been rocked once too often, for now it is
immovable.
THE PINNACLE.
When the Pinnacle is reached it is seen to be a cairn
of stones placed on a natural pinnacle, with a pole in
the centre. The view here is not unlike that from the
Springs, but much more extended, for now Bruny
Island and D’Entrecasteaux Channel are seen, and the
Derwent till a little above Bridgewater Causeway. A
good field-glass is an excellent aid to the sight, and a
good lunch is an aid of another kind ; and now, having
looked, and lunched, and looked again, the return
journey is commenced. My guide and companion,
Mr. S. Stephens, of Liverpool street, who was excellent
company, conducted me back by the Forks Creek, but
first we rested at the Upper Icehouse, where the
towering rocks, heaved high in air just above, form a
noteworthy sight. A horizontal track runs south from
the Springs to Mount Wellington Falls (210 feet high
and five miles distant), and along this a pure mountain
rill is conveyed in a sandstone channel. A good half
mile from the Springs a track strikes downward, and
again we are in the shades of the forest, and among
the immense trees, with ferns, huge logs, and the
beautiful grass tree in blossom, all impediments to a
speedy return. The change from stones to earth under
foot is a grateful one, and presently we reach the
bottom of the gully and emerge on the Waterworks
track again, which conducts us back to the Bower and
the inn. After a slight refreshment we returned by the
reservoirs, the track striking off at Fern Tree Inn.
After a most interesting but steep descent, and seeing
the water rushing down the channels cut in the sand-
stone cliffs, a pleasant walk by the reservoirs, and then
by the blossoming hawthorn hedges and orchards of
the suburbs, brought us to Hobart after a most enjoyable
day. The new reservoir—built higher up the valley
than the old one, which-burst some years ago —has a
storage capacity of 70,000,000 gallons, and is quite a
little lake. It is situated in that valley, immediately to
the south of the Cascades valley, the Huon road being
between, but on the Cascades slope. It is reached by
way of Upper Davey street, turning to the left about a


square after the Military Barracks is passed. The
cost of the new reservoir was about and the
whole works are valued as an asset at The
Waterworks valley is a favourite place for picnicing
and Sunday-school trips.
After the trip to the mountain the visitor will
naturally feel the effects of the fatigue on the following
day, and a pleasant variation would be to arrange for a
nice fishing excursion on the Derwent river. This can
easily be accomplished at very small cost by going on
board one of Whitehouse’s steamers at the wharf, when
he will be conveyed a distance of 10 or 12 miles down the
river to the famous fishing banks. Lines, hooks, and
baits are supplied on board free of charge, and here as
a rule the visitor will find ample enjoyment in hauling
up two or three at a time of the denizens of the deep
in the shape of perch, rockcod, bastard trumpeter,
flathead, etc. These fishing excursions are always a
source of real enjoyment and pleasure. I can recom-
mend the Whitehouse Brothers’ boat to the tourist —
the utmost civility and attention being paid by the
proprietors and employes at all times, combined with
moderate charges for refreshments of all kinds which
can be had on board.
Another very pleasant day may be spent by taking
the coach or driving in a hired conveyance to Brown’s
River, a distance of ten miles —one of the most
beautiful drives in the neighbourhood, the road skirting
the river all the way from Hobart. Here is a magnificent
sandy beach for miles, where one can inhale the pure
ozone, and if so inclined find ample sport in the river
for rod and line. The hotel accommodation is first-class
and the charges are extremely moderate. I would
advise the tourist not to miss this trip, passing as it
does through beautiful mountain scenery, past the Shot
Tower, in close proximity to which will be seen the
remains of one of the old convict stations of the years
gone by. Altogether this is one of the most delightful
drives out of Hobart, and a splendid road. Should the
tourist have sufficient time he may feel inclined to visit
Port Arthur. Port Arthur, as is generally known, is
situated on Tasman’s Peninsula, in a south-easterly
direction from Hobart, the distance by water direct
being about 60 mileS. By going direct the tourist would
have to take advantage of one of the large steamers,


which only run there at holiday times, and do not
allow sufficient time to inspect the various places of
interest. I would therefore advise the tourist to take
Whitehouse Brothers’ steamer Taranna, which runs
regularly to Norfolk Bay (the port at the head of which
is Taranna) on the Peninsula twice a week, fare
6s. On the route the steamer will pass Frederick
Henry Bay, where Tasman anchored for the first time
in Tamanian waters. Taranna is seven miles from Port
Arthur proper, the head station of the Peninsula in the
old convict days. Conveyances are in readiness on the
arrival of the steamer to convey passengers to the head
station, where during their stay accommodation can be
obtained in the hotel there, which, by the way, used to
be the commandant’s quarters when the convict element
was there in. full force. The first place to be visited
will be the Penitentiary, a very large building standing
at the head and on the edge of the bay. Here will be
seen on entering the receiving hall, where all prisoners
were subjected to the searching scrutiny of the officials.
Passing along on each side and on tiers above are the
cells where the prisoners were confined. On the third
flat is the large dining hall, a magnificent room where
the majority had meals, ten sitting at each table. At
one end of this hall was a well-appointed library for the
use of the prisoners. The food was conveyed from the
cook house on the ground floor by means of a lift. At
the top of the building were large dormitories, all filled
every night with prisoners, and at one end was a chapel
where the Roman Catholic service was conducted daily
by the clergyman, while the Church of England was
represented in the dining hall. At the end of this huge
pile will be seen the workshops, viz., carpenter’s,
blacksmith’s, and other trades. A large sawmill driven
by steam was also beside it, and a tannery, etc., was
opposite. Nearly every industry was more or less re-
presented at this large establishment, the convict
element being so large, and possessing tradesmen of
nearly every class. The large square in front was
commonly called the muster;grqund, where all the
prisoners were inspected and marched off to their re-
spective gangs on week days, and on Sundays were
escorted to the church by a band of armed guards.
The church is a stone structure built by prisoners, and
is situated a short distance from the Penitentiary, and


in close proximity to a neat villa called Government
Cottage, where his Excellency the Governor on his
annual visit, or members of Parliament, had their
quarters. The church is now in a semi-ruined con-
dition, having had the roof and all the interior fittings
damaged by fire some years ago. I may here state
that the place was finally abandoned as a convict
station in 1877. Besides prisoners, lunatics and
paupers were confined there. The Lunatic Asylum still
remains nearly intact, and .adjoining it is the noted
model prison, where all the worst criminals were con-
fined. The exterior of the building still remains,
although the interior is very much gutted. A large
building at the top of the hill, which used to be a
hospital, will also be a source of interest; also the
guard room, magazines, stores, and many other
buildings that were in use during the full sway of con-
victism. Near the hospital will be viewed with special
interest the cottage where Smith O’Brien was confined
for some time during his exile. It would take too
much space to enumerate all the places of interest, but
an officer of police who is stationed there will, on
producing the necessary authority from the Minister of
Lands and Works, be able to shew everything worthy
of inspection.
The visitor can, if he has the time to spare, visit
what was called the out stations, viz., Safety Cove,
Cascades, Impression Bay, Saltwater River, and’the
Coal Mines, at all of which places huge buildings were
utilised for the safe keeping of criminals.
Before leaving Port Arthur it will be worth while to
visit Dead Island, a short distance from the settlement
in the bay. Here are interred all the prisoners, besides
a good sprinkling of free people, who died here. Some
magnificent tombstones are here to be seen, all the
result of prison labour. Point Puer, where the criminal
boys were confined, will be seen from here. Splendid
fishing and shooting are to be found, and should the
visitor have a week to spare he will find his visit to
this place very enjoyable. •
Before joining the steamer at Norfolk Bay, should
time permit, a visit to Eagle Hawk Neck, a distance of
five miles, will repay the trouble. Here will be seen the
narrow neck of land where the ferocious dogs were
chained and an armed guard kept night and day to


prevent prisoners escaping. In close proximity is the
famous natural pavement, Tasman’s Arch, a«d the
Blowhole, all of which|are wonderful, and made famous
in the late Marcus Clarke’s celebrated convict story.
From Eagle Hawk Neck can be seen Maria Island, a
long abandoned convict station, and now a flourishing
settlement where the cultivation of vines and many
other industries are carried on. The Taranna leaves
Brooke street Pier, near the foot of Murray street,
every Monday and Thursday, at 8-30 a.m., arriving at
Taranna at 2-30 p.m., and leaves Taranna the following
mornings, viz., Tuesday and Friday, at IC3O a.m.,
arriving in Hobart at 4:30 p.m. Fares, 6s. ; return, 10s.;
available for a fortnight. The places of call are, Salt-
water River, Impression Bay, Cascades, Taranna,
Dunnally.
THE HUON AND SOWELL,
Another pleasant trip is to the Huon, 18 miles from
Hobart in a southerly direction. This district can be
reached either by road or water. I would advise the
visitor to take the steamer down, which runs daily;
thereby having a view of the beautiful scenery of the
river and Channel (D’Entrecasteaux). After remaining,
say one or two days, at any of the comfortable hotels,
and also enjoying shooting and fishing to his heart’s
content, he may then return by road on one of Webster’s
well-appointed coaches which carry the mail to and
from Hobart daily. The drive from the Huon to
Hobart is a charming one, the good road winding round
the gullies and hills, and at times completely hemmed
in on both sides by magnificent fern trees, etc. The
following day a very interesting run can be made to the
district of Sorell. This is easily accomplished by the
visitor taking one of O’May’s ferry steamers at the
wharf and crossing the Derwent to the pretty sea-side
village of Bellerive, where a magnificent battery, recently
erected by the Government for the defence of Hobart,
can be inspected. Rambling along the beautiful beach,
shells and many other curios can be picked up, and for
a real sea beach close to town this bears the palm.
On landing from the ferry steamer, coaches are
always in readiness at the hotel to convey visitors to
Sorell, a distance of about 12 miles, along a good road.


through beautiful farming country. In proceeding there
the visitor will cross the famous Sorell Causeway, an
extensive piece of engineering work. Sorell itself is a
neat quiet country township ; but good shooting and
fishing can be obtained in the district. The Huon and
Sorell districts will have fuller notice further on.
THE LAKES.
Another trip that may be undertaken by the tourist
is to the Lakes country, via Bothwell. This trip, like
the one to the mountain, would be best undertaken by
a party, as it would relieve the monotony of travelling
alone, and likewise diminish the expense. The visitor
could leave the Main Mine terminus by the 8 a.m.
express, and arrive at Brighton in about an hour. Here
he would find a. coach ready to convey him to Green
Ponds, a distance over the main road of 16 miles.
Arriving here, after refreshments he will again proceed
by Reynolds’ coach to Bothwell, via Melton Mowbray,
Apsley, etc., crossing the Jordan river on the way.
After staying over night at Bothwell, and having made
special arrangements with Mr. Reynolds, the .coach
proprietor, fora conveyance to the Lakes, a careful and
competent driver, who is also guide, is provided, and
under bis care the party will be safely and agreeably
piloted thither. On arrival at the Lakes, boats
are provided, and fishing, shooting, etc., are indulged
in ad lib. A hut is also provided for shelter and
sleeping accommodation. This will be found a very
agreeable journey, should the visitor have the time to
spare, and the expense is not so great, considering the
long coach trip and the carriage of provisions, etc.
For those who have to rely on public amusements
for passing their evenings while at Hobart, there is the
Theatre, with, during the season, always a good com-
pany ; also skating rinks, concerts, bands, and other
entertainments, all contributing to enliven and enter-
tain both residents and visitors.
THE HARBOUR, WHARVES, STEAMERS, ETC.
Although the whole estuary of the Derwent near
Hobart affords good shelter and anchorage, the harbour
proper is situated between Battery Point (a grassy
bluff gently sloping up to an old earthwork) on the south,


and a projecting point of the Domain on the north, or
to narrow the limit, from Battery Point to the shoal
and point of land at the foot of Hunter street. That
point was once Hunter Island, where criminals were
gibbeted, until remonstrances led to Sandy Bay being
selected for that purpose. Inshore of it was the “ Old
Wharf,” Battery Point in the early days was known
as Cottage Green, and 30 acres there, including the
site of the new wharf, was granted to the Rev. Mr.
Knopwood, the chaplain of Collins’s expedition. He
offered the lot in 1824 for Here is now the
splendid residence of the Hon. Alex. McGregor, and
beneath I saw snugly moored at the New Whaif the
barques Harriet McGregor and Loongana, both built
in Hobart, the latter a London trader. The Ethel
barque also was there.
The cove between these points is named Sullivan’s
Cove, and here the Ocean and Lady Nelson anchored
early in 1804 with the men who founded Hobart. The
New Wharf, which dates from the thirties, is built
along the north shore of Battery Point, and under its
lee, facing the wharf ,are stores, hotels, and the Derwent
Iron Works. Next is Franklin Wharf, at right angles
with fhe former, and in a line with the natural shore of
the harbour. This wharf is used by small craft for
discharging sawn timber and firewood, and facing it is
the Custom House, a long freestone building, the
central entrance of which conducts to the Houses of
Parliament. The north end of this wharf is at the foot
of Murray street, and is joined by the Waterman’s
Dock, a slight indentation, where boats may be,hired
for visiting vessels in the harbour (fare is , return
is. 6d.), or for pleasure.
KANGAROO POINT STEAMERS.
Brooke street Pier then juts out, and on the south
side next the shore is the landing stage for O’May’s
steamers, which cross to Kangaroo Point every hour
from 8 - 30 a.m. to 6 p.m., with labour interval between
12'30 and 2 p.m.; leaving the other side at 8 am.
and every hour till p.m., with an interval of ii
hour from 12 to i - 30 p.m. The fare is 6d return (for
one day only) or 4s. per dozen tickets.


HUON AND CHANNEL STEAMERS.
On the same side are the Huon steamers Cygnet,
H non, and the well-known tug Tamar. The time of
departure is the same in all, viz., B’3o a.m., the Huon
leaving on Mondays and Thursdays, the Cygnet on
Wednesdays and Saturdays, and the Tamar on Tuesdays
and Fridays, together making a daily service, the
furthest distance being reached about 6 p.m.
To Return.—The Cygnet leaves Port Cygnet on
Thursday at p’go a.m., and Southport on Mondays
at 6'30 a.m.; the Huon starts on Tuesdays and
Fridays about 6 30 a.m., calling at Shipwright’s Point,
the furthest up these boats go, only steam cargo
ketches going up farther. The Tamar returns on
Wednesdays and Saturdays, leaving at an early hour.
The trips vary a little, the Cygnet going to Port
Cygnet on Wednesdays, and to Port Esperance and
Southport on Saturdays, so inquiries had better be
made before starting whether the visitor’s destination
is a port of call by that steamer or on that particular
trip.
The fares by the Channel steamers are, usually, to
Denn’s Point, 2s. ; Oyster Cove or Little Oyster Cove,
each 2S. 6d. ; Peppermint Bay, 35.; Long Bay, 3s. 6d.;
Three-hut Point, 4s ; Huon Island, ss. ;■ Garden
Island Creek, ss. ; Port Cygnet, 65.; Hope Island,
Pulsford’s Wharf, Main Wharf, each 6s. ; Port
Esperance, 75.; Lady’s Bay and Southport, each Bs.
From jetty to jetty is. is usually charged. Return fares
are reasonable—to Port Cygnet, Bs.; Port Esperance,
12s ; Southport, 14s. Signal fires will usually bring the
steamers to other points. Watchorn Brothers are
agents for the Cygnet, Fisher and Facey for the Huon,
and the Master for the Tamar. Information can be
obtained at these offices, at the wharf, or on board.
Cargo ; stores down ; potatoes, fruit, and produce up.
tasman’s peninsula steamer.
On the other side of the same pier is the berth of the
Taranna (see end of Port Arthur article for particulars).
This boat also makes trips to South Island (eight miles
down) every Wednesday and Saturday afternoon,
weather permitting. The proprietors furnish bait and
lines, refreshments, etc., and fishing is then indulged


in for cod, flathead, perch, mullet, etc , which are
caught there. The steamer leaves at pm. and
arrives back about 6 p.m. Fare, is. 6d. the round trip.
NEW NORFOLK STEAMER.
The next berth inshore of the Taranna is that ot the
p.s Monarch. This boat goes to New Norfolk on
Tuesdays and'Thursdays at 3 p.m. and on Saturdays
at 2 p.m. ; leaving New Norfolk at 8 a.m. every
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday.
T.S.N. CO. S STEAMERS.
The next pier is the Elizabeth street Pier, known as
the T.S.N. Co ’s Pier, and there I saw the Flora, 1273
tons, and the Corinna, 1280 tons. The Flora is in the
Melbourne trade, and leaves every 8 or 10 days, and the
Corinna about every fortnight. The next pier is the
Argyle street Pier, and at it were the T.S.N. Co.’s
steamer Oonah, 1700 tons, on the berth for Sydney. At
present she leaves every other Friday, leaving Sydney
every alternate Thursday.
NEW ZEALAND STEAMERS.
On the north side of the same pier was the
Manapouri, of the Union s s. Co. of New Zealand, a
large boat. These boats run fortnightly from New
Zealand ports and from Melbourne, calling at Hobart
every trip, and coming alongside the Argyle street
Pier. During the summer season weekly trips are
made, and excursion fares at special rates are allowed
CONSTITUTION DOCK.
Between Argyle and Dunn street Piers is a small
tidal dock, but only small craft seem to use it. It and
the Fisherman’s Dock, still further north, are on the
natural head of the cove, being indented perhaps 200
feet beyond Franklin Wharf. It is wharved, but does
not seem to have been excavated, or if so, not
to any depth, and the Fisherman’s Dock has simply the
shingly beach for its inner end.
DUNN STREET PIER.
Continuing on, and crossing by a slight bridge the
entrance to Constitution Dock, we come to Dunn
street Pier, and this is the deep-water pier of
the port, having 40 feet at the sea end, and
26 to 27 feet of water at the shore end,
and from what I could learn the latter is about the


normal depth at all the other piers, and also at New
Wharf, which has deeper water, but also one spot of
only 20 feet deep.
NEW ZEALAND SHIPPING COMPANY’S STEAMERS.
Alongside the pier I saw the Kaikoura, 4474 tons,
and drawing 23 feet aft. She is one of the New Zea-
land Shipping Company’s boats which arrive here every
four weeks from London, and accomplish the passage
usually in 40 days. Dunn street Pier has one defect,
and that is that its angle is wrong for ocean steamers,
for instead of backing out up the Derwent, and then
heading down to sea, they are compelled to back out
down and across, with about one-third of a circle
to turn, which even the Derwent is not broad enough
for without manoeuvring, and that is one reason why
these steamers, which are tied to contract time, do not
usually come alongside to discharge the Tasmanian
portion of their cargo.
SHAW, SAVILLE, AND COMPANY’S STEAMERS.
These large steamers also call here every four weeks,
which makes a fortnightly service from London, the
time usually being 42 days. There are five steamers
in this line, the Arawa, Tainui, etc., and all carry
passengers and cargo to Hobart.
A little pier still further north is used by the
Kangarooo Point steam ferry boat, on which I saw about
twelve vehicles. A new pier and landing-place are to be
built for the accommodation of this steam ferry
service at the end of Hunter street, and a new bridge
is to be built over the Fisherman’s Dock strong enough
to carry a railway, which in the future is likely to
be carried along the wharves. has been voted
for the above-named portions of the work.
WEST COAST STEAMERS.
The steamer Koonya runs weekly to Macquarie
Harbour for Zeehan, etc., from Elizabeth street Pier.
The run usually occupies 20 hours. Fare, 30s.
Piesse and Co., Agents. The Pioneer is another West
Coast steamer.
EAST COAST STEAMER.
The Warrentinna leaves Elizabeth street Pier fort-
nightly (on Tuesdays if possible), for Maria Island,
Bicheno, Seymour, George’s Bay, and Launceston.


Fares, to Maria Island, 15s. ; Bicheno and Seymour
255.; George’s Bay, 30s. Agents, J. R. Fryer and Co.,
New Wharf, Hobart.
fisherman’s dock.
Continuing on is the Fisherman’s Dock, described
before, the entrance to which is through a slight bridge
fit for foot passengers only. When I saw the harbour
there was a south-east breeze blowing, moderate to
fresh, and this end of the harbour being most exposed,
the fishing boats were making bad weather of it, and
the spray was dashing in places over the end of
Hunter street Wharf, which forms one side of the
harbour, and also of the Fisherman’s Dock. A brig-
antine under full sail came up the river, rounded to,
shortened sail, and stood in for Dunn street Pier with
great way on, but very cleverly anchored 100 yards off
and swung round nearly alongside, opposite the
Kiakoura. The many fine steamers about the piers,
the fresh breeze whitening the Derwent, and the crowd
down to see the Kaikoura alongside, created a very
favourable and lively impression of the harbour ; but
alas, it is not always so, and sometimes the wharves are
nearly deserted. The piers, which have shed accommo-
dation, are no great distance apart, the Cove being
rather less than a mile across.
MOUNT F^UMNEY,
About seven miles from Kangaroo Point, is held
by good judges of scenery to possess an outlook
equal to any in the island for beauty and variety.
Those who think “ The Mountain” too much for
their powers may spend a pleasant day there and be
well satisfied. To go to Mount Rumney cross the
Derwent by the 8 30 boat (O’May’s), and take the
Sorell coach, which leaves at 9a m. The driver will
set the party down at the turn-off, which is through
a gate on the right, about four miles from Bellerive,
and the return coach passes the same point about
4T5 p.m. The track is blazed, and follows an old
sheep track. The walking distance is three miles,
ascent easy.
MOUNT NELSON.
This is one of the most accessible points of out-
look near Hobart, and a half day will suffice for the
whole journey. It can be reached by cab, or by taking


the Sandy Bay bus, which leaves the corner of
Collins and Murray streets every half hour fr jm 9
a.m. to 6 p.m. The driver will set you down at the
turn-off, which is near the bus terminus. The
mountain is 1191 ft high, and commands an exten-
sive view sea-ward, and across to Frederick Henry
Bay and Ralph’s Bay, etc. ; also up the Derwent to
Mount Direction, including a very good view of
Hobart. The signal station is at the summit, and
visitors are often allowed to use the large telescope
there.
WELLINGTON FALLS,
210 ft high, are situated in a deep gorge round the
south shoulder of Mount Wellington. To go thwe
ascend the Mountain to the Springs by the Finger
Post or Fern Tree Gully routes, and then follow a
nearly level track to the left. The distance from
the Springs is about five miles, but the walk is a
grand one. The Huon coach, which leaves Webster’s
British Hotel daily at 9 a.mconveys passengers to
the Finger Post or Fern Tree (5| miles). Fare, 2s6d.
The return coach leaves Fern Tree Inn at 2’30 p.m.
FERN TREE BOWER AND GULLY, SILVER FALLS, THE
SPRINGS, THE PINNACLE,
The above coach, and also the Sandfly and Longley
coach, which leaves the Man at the Wheel hotel daily at
4 p.m., leaving the Fern Tree the following morning
at 9 a m. for town (fares. Is 6d), are the regular
conveyances. Other conveyances may be had, and
it is easy to arrange for your vehicle to return to
the Finger Post or Fern Tree at any hour.
Many other places of interest are to be seen in and
about Hobart, all of which the visitor will easily find
out from his hotel-keeper.
CAB FARES—HOBART.
By Distance.
Stated briefly the charge is Is a mile, Is being the
minimum charge. After the first mile 6d is charged
for every half-mile, or part of a half-mile. No
driver can be compelled t© go further than five
miles.


Return fare, if the same party (and not having'
detained the cab more than 15 [minutes), to be half
the above.
By Time.
.Not exceeding 30 minutes, 2s; 45 minutes, 3s; 1
hour, 3s 6d ; 1 hour and 20 minutes, 4s 6d; 1 hour
and 40 minutes, 5s 6d ; 2 hours, 6s 6d ; 2 hours and
20 minutes, 7s ; 2 hours and 40 minutes, 7s 6d; 3
hours, 9s; 3 hours and 20 minutes, 9s 6d; 3 hours
and 40 minutes, 10s 6d ; 4 hours, 11s; and for
any further time at the rate of 6d for every 20
minutes.
One half more if between the [hours of 10 p.m.
and 6 a.m.
Time or distance at option of hirer.
OMNIBUSES.
Battery Point. —Ward’s buses leave Collins
street every half-hour, from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Satur-
day nights—Leave office: 9 30, 10 Battery Point:
9T5, 10 15. Fares, 3d each way ; 12 tickets, 2s 6d.
North Hobart via Aeoyle, Coeville, and
Campbell Streets. —Leaves every half-hour from
8 - 30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Saturday nights—Leave Collins
street: 9 30. 10. Leave angle of Letitia street,
9T5, 1015 p.m. Pares, 3d each way; 12 tickets,
2s 6d.
Landsuowne Crescent. —Hogan’s buses leave
Elizabeth street, next Bank Y.D. Land, from 9 a.m.
to 6 p.m.
Macquarie street and Cascades —Hogan’s buses
leave Cascades every hour from 9am., and Liver-
pool street, opposite Mil’er’s, from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m.
New Town and G-lbnorchy. —Buses for New
Town (3 miles), and O’Brien’s Bridge (5 miles), run
from Albion Hotel, Elizabeth street, 9 - 30, 10, 11, 12
a.m., 1,2, 3 3T5, 4*, 4 30, 5, 5 30*, 6, 10 p.m. Arrive
at New Town, 10, 10-30, 1130 a.m., 12 30, 130, 2-30,
3-30, 3-45, 4-30, 5, 5 30, 6, 6 30, 10 30 p.m. Arrive at
O’Brien’s Bridge, 10T5, 10-45, 11-45 a.m., 12 45,1 45,
2-45, 3-45, 4, 5-15, 5-45, 6‘45 p.m.
Leave O’Brien’s Bridge, 8 40, 10 20, 11 a.m., 120*
1-40, 2TO, 2-45, 4 - 40, 6 - 45 p.m. Leave New Town*
* New Town only.


8 30, 9, 10, 10-45, 11-15 a.m., 12-15 2, 2-30, 3, 3 - 45,
1-30, 4-45, 5-15, 7 p.m. Arrive at Hobart, 9, 9-30,
10-30, 11-15, 11-45 a.m., 12 45, 2 30, 3, 3 30, 4 15 5,
•5-]5, 5"45, 7"30 p.m.
Sunday—tieave Hobart, 3,6, 9 p.m. Arrive at
New Town, 3 30, 6'30, 9-30 p.m. Arrive at O’Brien’a
Bridge, 3*45, 6"45 p.m. Leave O’Brien’s Bridge,
4-45 p.m. Leave New Town, F 45, 2’5, 5 p.m. Arrive
at Hobart, 2 15, 2 35, 5 30 p.m.
Leave Hobart to Cornelian Biy Cemetery, 2-30
p.m., returning 4 30 p.m.
Sandy Bay. —Hogan’s buses leave angle of Murray
and Collins streets (opp site Central Property
Exchange) for Sandy Bay every half-hour, from
9 a.m. to 6 p.m. ; and Lipscombe’s, Sandy Bay, for
town every hour, from 9-30 a.m. to6’3op.m.
COACHES.
Brown’s River (10 miles). —Leaves Graham's
Hotel, Melbourne street, daily, 9 a.m. and 4 p.m.
Leaves Smith’s Hotel 8 30 a.m. and 4 p.m.
Sandfly and Lon«ley. —Coach leaves the Man
of Ross Hotel, Liverpool street, every day at 4 p.m.,
and leaves Sandfly 7'30 a.m., and Loaeley at 9 a.m.;
arrives in the city at 10 a.m.
Htjon. —Leaves Webster’s British Hotel daily 9
a.m., Victoria 1-30, arriving at Franklin 2'30.
Leaves Franklin 9'30 a.m., Victoria 10-30, Vines’s
12-30, arriving in Hobart 3 30.
Sorkll. Leaves Bellerive daily (Sundays ex-
cepted) 9 a.m., 4 - 30 p.m., arriving at Sorell 11 a.m.
and 7 p.m.; leaves Sorell 8 a.m. and 3 p.m., arriving
at Bellerive 11 a.m. and 5"30 p.m. ; on Sundays
leaves Bellerive 10 a.m. and Sorell 3 p.m. Another
conveyance also leaves Bellerive daily (Sundays ex-
cepted) 4 - 30 p.m. and Sorrell 8 a.m.
fi. Historical H pitome *
{Compiled from Fenton’s History.)
Hobart, named after Lord Hobart, the then Colonial
Secretary, was founded on 30th January, 1804, by
Lieut.-Colonel David Collins, after an unsuccessful
attempt to found a colony on the shores of Port
Phillip. On 16th February the second detachment


arrived from Port Phillip, and the party then num-
bered about 400, of whom about one-tenth were free,
and the remainder prisoners and their guards. They
found a small party at Eisdon (four miles higher up
the Derwent) who had been despatched under Lieu-
tenant Bowen some six months previovsly, in a semi-
starved condition, that officer having left for Sydney.
In 1805 the Norfolk Island settlers, numbering about
1000, were removed to Hobart and given grants of
land, hence New Norfolk, Norfolk Plains, etc. From
1807 to 1810 famine threatened the new settlement,
and the prisoners were allowed to roam at large in
search of food. Eice, the only food in store at one
time, was served out at the rate of weekly.
The outrages of these armed convicts, and also of
the free settlers on the natives, led to retaliation,
and hence the beginning of the Black War; though
a serious collision had happened at Eisdon as early
as 1804, when the soldiers, under a misapprehension,
fired on a large party of ratives with deadly effect.
In 1810 Governor Collins died suddenly, and was
buried in St. David’s Churchyard, where there is a
monument erected to his memory by Sir John
Franklin. In 1811 the population of the colony was
1500. Governor Davey arrived in 1813, and queer
stories are told by West, the historian, of his jovial
but lax administration. In 1810 the short-lived
Derwent Star and Van Diemen’s Land Intelligencer,
price 2s, was published fortnightly, and in 1816 the
Hohart Town Gazette was published by Mr. Andrew
Bent. In 1817 the foundation stone of old St. David’s
was laid, the ceremonies including a sermon by the
Eev. Mr. Knopwood, and a masonic oration, the
whole winding up with a jollification among the
soldiers and constables, to whom a half-pint of spirits
each was served out. In April of this year, when
Governor Sorell arrived, Hobart possessed a popula-
tion of 1000 souls, or one-third of the entire European
population of the island. The lax discipline of his
predecessor had fostered the growth of a terrible
depravity, which pervaded all classes, but the new
Governor, by a very liberal system of land grants,
encouraged immigration so successfully that in 1821
the population of Hobart had increased to 2700, and
of the colony to 7400. With that increase came the


■clergyman and the schoolmaster, and in consequence
a great improvement in morals as well as in wealth.
In May, 1824, a Supreme Court was inaugurated,
and in that year Governor Lieut.-Colonel George
Arthur arrived. During his term of office the
colony prospered exceedingly. In those 12 years (to
1836) the population trebled; imports increased
nearly ten-fold, and exports over twenty-fold, bank
capital increased from .£IO,OOO to .£200,000, and the
convict labour was utilised in important pubiic
works. The gagging of the press, and the establish-
ment of police, which were also flogging stations
throughout the island ; the futile “ line” expedition
to entrap the blacks, and the ultimate concilation
and deportation of these to Flinders Island, are all
important events of his time. From 1831 to 1835 the
natives, to the number of 167, were brought in by
Eobinson, the Conciliator, assisted by Truganini and
other natives, without shedding a drop of blood. In
1837 Sir John Frank’in arrived as Governor, and
much progress was made in marine and land surveys.
He and his lady made a journey overland to Mac-
quarie Harbour, via Derwent Valley, and met with
no little difficulty from the nature of the country.
Little of interest remains to be told. When his
Eoyal Highness Prince Alfred visited Hobart in the
Galatea, in 1868, he was in time to see the last native
man, William Lanne (King Billy), then a sailor in
the whaling trade. In March, 1869, he died, and on
the Bth May following, at the age of 65, Truganini,
the last of her race, also died. Transportation ceased
in 1853, and the convicts, being mostly childless,
have left little trace behind them, unless in many
well-made roads, huge causeways or breakwaters,
bridges, and buildings throughout the colony. In
early days Hobart was an important centre of the
whaling industry, built and manned her own ships,
and made much wealth thereby. Since then good
ship-building yards have existed in Hobart, and a
good class of work is turned out. The patent slip at
Battery Point can take the Floia or Corinna, and
there is also another at the Domain. Manufactures
have increased, and among others two woollen
mills have recently been established. Hobart was
incorporated in 1857, and since then great improve-


merits have been made, especially in the water
supply, and in the splendid new Town Hall. In
1861 the population numbered 19,449, but only
19,092 in 1871—that decade being marked by a
general stagnation. In 1881 the population had in-
creased to 20,701, and now, owing to a variety of
causes, the inhabitants of Hoi art are estimated to
number about 27,000. Of late years Hobart has
shared in the general prosperity cf the colony by an
increase in tiade and departmental expenditure, and
also by the development of the Huon district and
Derwent Yalley. The better appreciation of its
splendid climate and beautiful surroundings by
visitors from the mainland, and the large English
steamers new calling, also add materially to the
prosperity of the city.
HOBART.
Family Draper and Importer
A CHOICE ASSORTMENT OF
PLAIN AND FANCY DRAPERY
ALWAYS ON HAND.
THE LATEST NOVELTIES ALWAYS COMING
FORWARD.
ALSO,
A Well-assorted Stock of Men’s and
Boys’ Clothing, Shirts etc .
FIRST CLASS DRESSMAKING ON THE
PREMISES AT MODERATE CHARGES.
Visitors to Hobart may rely upon reeeiving care-
ful and prompt attention.
8. STEVEN


L. FAIRTHORNE & SON,
FAMILY & DISPENSING CHEMISTS
PHARMACIES
St. John Street,
Opposite Criterion Hotel, and
CORNER OF CHARLES & YORK STS.,
LAUNCESTON
IMPORTERS OF
Drugs, Chemicals, Perfumery, Druggists’ Sun-
dries generally, and Surgical Appliances.
Photographic Goods,
Homoeopathic Medicines,
Air Beds and Cushions, &c.
TheDISPENSING receives
our most careful attention.
MEDICAL TRANSFER AGENCY.
¥. A. AHDERSOU
HAM AND BACON GURER,
FAMILY GROCER,
Tomato Sauce Manufacturer,
(TELEPHONE No. 53).
CHARLES h YORK STS.,
LAUNCESTON.


J^AUNCESTON.
Launceston was first settled in 1806 by Colonel
Patterson, and at that time bore the name of Port
Dalrymple. Two years previously that officer had
entered the Tamar with a small party of convicts
and soldiers, and after a short stay at York Town,
where he was visited by a large body of natives, he
removed across the river to George Town, which he
made head-quarters. Probably the first white men
who entered the Tamar were the celebrated surgeon
Bass and Lieutenant Flinders, with the captain
(Hibbs) and crew of the sloop Norfolk, 25 „tons.
That was in 1798, and many islands, points, and
reaches still bear the names they gave them. The first
buildings were erected at the east end of Cameron
street, but the settlement made slow headway, for in
1816 only 566 Europeans inhabited the whole nor-
thern part of the island.
In 1819 the Rev. J. Youl came up from George
Town and cleared off some arrears, marrying 41
couples by ceremony, and baptising 67 children.
In 1824 Brady and his gang made a raid on Laun-
ceston, but were repulsed by the soldiers. _
In 1828 the first bank was established, and in 1830
a contingent of 350 men marched out on The Line
expedition, scaled the Western Tiers, and helped to
complete the cordon of 3000 men who captured a
native man and boy. .. ,
In 1834 the Messrs. Henty crossed Bass btrait and
depastured sheep at Portland Bay, where they had a
whaling station, the whales being killed in the bay
by boats from the shore, then towed ashore and tryed
In 1835 Mr. John Batman in the Rebecca, 15 tons,
crossed to Port Phillip, and later on in the same year
Mr. J. P. Fawkner sailed from Launceston in the
Enterprise, 55 tons, and founded Melbourne. The
supplying of the new settlement at Port Phillip gave
an immense impetus to Launceston, and since then
the conferring of Municipal Government on the town,
followed by the bringing in of a splendid water
supply, the lighting of the town by gas, the inaugura-
tion of railways, and, lately, the successful working
of the gold and tin mines of the colony, have all con-


tributed to the rapid progress of the town. During
the last 15 years the rateable property of the city
has doubled in value., and architecture has kept
hand and hand in the march of improvement. That
central block, from St. John to Charles streets, along
Brisbane street, and reaching back to York street,
has been half re-built within seven years, and with a
full storey higher all round than the old buildings,
while the improvement in the style of the new
buildings over the old is very great.
Launceston is situated at the confluence of the
North and South Esk Eivers, which thence to the sea
is known as the River Tamar. The normal course
of the North Esk is through a valley a mile or two
eastward of Launceston, but just as the valley
expands to the westward so does the river, where it
makes a detour of about three sides of a square, and
then resumes its north-westerly course to the sea.
The first westerly reach of about a mile contains the
wharves, etc., of Launceston, the city proper lying on
the south side, mainly in a valley flanked by two
converging hills, the more easterly (the Windmill)
being a spur of the other, and terminating at the
river. At the angle turning into the next reach,
which is a full mile in length, the South Esk emerges
from a rocky gorge, and the united rivers then flow at
the foot of the range bounding the valley on the
west, on the slope of which is the pretty new suburb
of Trevallyn. Another abrupt turn of less than a
mile to the east brings the Tamar to the eastern
banks, which turn it again to its usual course. The
city is now covering the sides of the Western
(Cataract) Hill and has long since topped the Wind-
mill Hill, and over the other side, flhe flat con-
tained by the three sides of the river is in great
part occupied by the flourishing suburbs of Invercsk
and Invermay, and these cling mostly to the east
side of the George Town road, which, with the river,
nearly completes the square. From the top of the
valley on the south (the Sandhill), to Invermay on
the north, the distance is about three miles, and from
the South Esk (or Cataract) Gorge on the west to
Newstead on the east is also nearly three miles.
The population is about 16,300, spread over a
large area traversed by 42 miles of streets, for


your Launcestonian is very fond of a roomy yard and
garden where he can get it, and the number of
gardens filling the centre of many of the blocks gives
a very nice appearance to the slopes of the city. The
number of houses and buildings is 8700, and the
annual value of property is assessed at <£132,653.
The debt of the city is £150,000.
Steam communication with Melbourne and Sydney
is regular and frequent, also with the Coast and
river ports. Railways terminate here from. Hobart,
St. Mary’s, Scottsdale, Mole Creek, and Formby;
and the extension from Formby to Ulverstone
will be open in a few months. Telegraphic com-
munication there is with all the world, as well as
inland, and a Telephone Exchange is largely availed
of.
COMMERCIAL.
Launceston is essentially a commercial city, and
anyone looking at the map of Tasmania will see at
a glance its favourable natural position. There is no
bar. That has been entirely dredged away, and now
vessels drawing fully 18 ft can come up to the wharf
at ordinary high tide. The improvement of the
River Tamar is recognised and provided for by Parlia-
ment by an annual grant, and a large plant, con-
sisting of two steamers, three Priestman dredgers,
and 41 lighters is employed. Besides deepening the
channel, reclamation of river flats and shoals is going
on. and a commencement has been made to remove
the Whirlpool Rock, which, though not an impedi-
ment to navigation, yet makes the river a little
difficult at that point. The shipping of the port
amounted in 1888 to 102,572 tons inwards, and
109,431 tons outwards, only one foreign vessel
having entered. A good deal of cargo is imported
into Launceston by rail from Hobart, as the large
London steamers call there fortnightly on their way
to New Zealand. The imports of Launceston in 1888
were valued at £737,458, and the exports at £894,090.
The exports are chiefly smelted tin, gold, wool, bark,
stud sheep, fruit, and produce, as potatoes, hay,
straw, etc. The imports are mostly general merchan-
dise, but include wheat, flour, live-stock, meat, etc.


PUBLIC BUILDINGS, STREETS, ROADS, ETC.
Here are given a few particulars of these, keep-
ing only to the principal streets, and especially those
that conduct to the main roads connected with the
town, and first of all in importance is
ST. JOHN STREET.
This street, which runs south from the wharf, is
the main approach from the shipping to the centre
of the town, and in it are the new Custom House,
Town Hall, new Post-office, Mechanics’ Institute,
Telegraph, Post, Real Estate, Registry, and Sheriff’s
Offices, St. Andrew’s, St. John’s, and Chalmers
Churches, the Union and National Banks, also the
Banks of Australasia and Van Diemen’s Land, Odd
Fellows’ Hall, and some fine Insurance Company’s
buildings, hotels, merchants’ offices, and residences.
BRISBANE STREET
Is the best street for hotels and retail shops, many
of the latter being large establishments, and doing a
good wholesale trade as well. Brisbane street East
is prolonged into the Elphin road, and this makes a
good walk, the road passing the Public Park on the
left, and some fine residences on the right. Where
the fountain is placed at the junction the right hand
road leads up to the Windmill Hill reserve, where
seats are placed, and a good view of city and river
can be obtained. Taking the level road from the
fountain a good mile brings us to Newstead Inn,
where the main eastern or Scottsdale road takes its
departure to the eastward, with the road to St.
Leonards, Corra Linn, and White Hills branching
off to the right about a mile further on. The road
straight on, known as the Penquite road, also passes
St. Leonards Railway Station.
CHARLES STREET
Runs at right angles to Brisbane street, and extends
from the end of the new wharf to the General Hos-
pital. For shops it is a close rival to Brisbane street.
PATTERSON STREET
Extends from the Cataract Hill to George street, and
contains some fine warehouses, banks, and churches,
also the two newspaper offices. Court House, Gaol,


Invalid Depot Grounds (a public reserve), and at
the hill the Corporation Quarry. This street con-
ducts to the Cataract Bridge and Zigzag road, and
also connects with the East Tamar road, which termi-
nates mainly at Beaconsfield, but branches off to
Glengary, Frankford, Winkleigh, and Port Sorell
(Green’s Creek).
GEORGE STREET
Is a good business street, and extends from the wharf
to the top of the Windmill Hill near the Scotch
Cemetery. The Punch Bowl lies about a mile past
that spot, and about 500 yards to the left of the old
road which follows the ridge of the hill. Near the
wharf in George street is the office of the T.S.N.
Company, and a little above it is the Customs
Bonded Store.
TAMAR STREET
Extends from the river to the front of the Windmill
Hill at Welman street, and is intersected by York,
Brisbane, and Cimitiere streets. The main entrance
to the Public Park is here, and one of the oldest
Churches in which preaches the oldest minis-
ter in Launceston. The church was built in
1837, but the Eev. C. Price preached in the Court
House, Launceston, in September, 1832, and after a
stay in Sydney, returned to Launceston in 1836.
Tamar street leads to the bridge of that name,
crossing which we are in
THE GEORGE TOWN ROAD,
Which passes through the suburbs of Inveresk and
Invermay, and on past Mowbray, two miles distant,
to the right of which is the racecourse. To the left,
before ascending the hill, is the entrance to the
Regatta Ground, private property, and here the
great annual carnival of Launoestonions is held, the
racing of boats and yachts, which in the main is
very good, being a secondary consideration with most
present. No public gathering is so well patronised
as this
WELLINGTON STREET
Is west of Charles street, and one of the main
arteries, for this is the beginning of the
HOBART ROAD,
And was a stirring place in the old coaching days,
as its many old hostelries testify. Continuing south


the valley rises (at the Sandhill) and so does the
road, passing foundries, potteries, and brickfields,
till at last the road crosses the spur which terminates
at the Windmill Hill, and descends the other slope
to Young Town, and so on. On the summit, and at
the last turn before descending, there is a gate in the
fence on the left, with a path inside leading straight
down from the fence. That is one of the roads to
THE PUNCHBOWL,
Which is a cleft in a rock, through which a tiny
stream descends to a lower level. The divided cliffs
are some 40 or 50ft high, and are of no extent. The
valley below sweeps up to the base of this cliff, which
has resisted the erosion of the stream, and hence the
sudden change of level. The Punchbowl bush is
considered a nice walk, and heath in blossom can be
procured here early in the spring. The distance
from the gate is about half a mile.
THE WESTBURY ROAD,
Which is the main route to the westward, branches
to the right from the Hobart road at the Sandhill,
and makes a long ascent up the spur, passing Mount
Pleasant on the left, until the Rising Sun Hotel is
reached, about three miles from town, and then a
rattling descent of about two miles and the Travel-
lers’ Rest is reached, where the Muddy Plains road
branches off to the left for Longford and Cressy,
while the main read continues on via Hadspen,
Carrick, Westbury, and Deloraine. (See Western
District).
THE HARBOUR, WHARVES, STEAMERS, ETC.
The harbour of Launceston is mainly on the North
Esk River, from Tamar street bridge to the point of
junction with the South Esk. The wharves line the
south bank of the river continuously for a distance
of a half-mile, terminating in a new and substantial
pier, inside of which the Market Wharf runs at right
angles for about 200 yards. Commencing at the
bridge the wharf opposite the Bischcff Smelting
Works is the berthing place of the
NORTH-WEST COAST STEAMER
Herbert, which trades to Circular Head and inter-
mediate ports, leaving every Tuesday night. Fares :
Mersey, 7s 6d; Leven, Forth, and Penguin, 10s;


Emu Bay, 12a 6d; Table Cape, 15s; Circular
Head, 20s. Further down, opposite Sydney Place,
is the berthing place of the
BEACONSFIELD AND GEORGE TOWN STEAMERS,
Indignant and Centennial, which leave at 11 a.m.,
making between them a daily service. Pares, ss.
Opposite the new Custom House, at the shed, is the
berthing place of the steamers of the
TASMANIAN STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANY,
Whose steamers leave twice a week for Melbourne
(thrice in the summer) and once a week for Syd-
ney.
HTJDDART, PARKER, AND CO.’S STEAMERS,
For Melbourne direct, Sydney via Melbourne, and
Melbourne via Formby and Emu Bay, berth at the
New Pier.
THE WEST COAST STEAMER
Wakefield, leaves the Market Wharf, Charles street,
for Strahan (Macquarie Harbour) every 10 days.
Fare, 355. Trial Harbour and Corinna are reached
from Strahan by the steam tender. Minx. Fares, ss.
From the New Pier
THE EAST COAST STEAMER,
Warrentmna, leaves fortnightly for Hobart. Fare,
to George’s Bay, 255. The steamer Linda also leaves
for the Straits Islands about every three weeks.
Fare, 20s.
THE NORTH-EAST COAST STEAMER
Dorset leaves Market Wharf about every six days
for Boobyalla port. Fare, 15s.
THE NORTH-WEST COAST STEAMER
Cambria leaves Market Wharf for Table Cape and
intermediate ports every Friday night. Fares, as
per Herbert (see above).
Inveresk Ferry.— This boat crosses from the
inner end of the New Peer, at the foot of Charles
street. Fare, Id.
At the outer end of the same pier is the station
for the
watermen’s boats.
Which may he hired for pleasure at the rate of 2s
per hour for the first hour, and less afterwards, as
per agreement; 10s being the charge for a whole


day. To have a waterman as well would cost about
Is 6d per hour extra, according to time hired. The
regulation charge is 8d for each person to any vessel
or landing within the harbour, and more in propor-
tion as the distance is increased.
HOTEL ACCOMMODATION,
Those who have not visited Launceston for several
years would hardly credit the improvement in the
style of the principal hotels and in the accommoda-
tion available, and the improvement has spread to
very many of the second-class hotels. In fact Old
Launceston in that respect, as in many others, has
passed away, and it is a new Launceston that
meets the eye, especially in the central streets.
Brisbane street is decidedly the street for the best
hotels, and it would be a delicate matter to attempt
to grade them. The principal hotels are the Laun-
ceston, International, Brisbane, Club, and Sutton’s
Coffee Palace, all in Brisbane street, the Criterion
in St. John street, the Central in Charles street, the
Cornwall in Cameron street, the City in St. John
street, and the Enfield in Charles street. Some very
comfortable hotels there are in George and Tamar
streets which have their own connection, but have
plenty of accommodation for strangers.
Those who \ reL r piivate board and lodging can
be supplied at from .£1 to £2 per week. Mechanics
and others often find comfortable board and lodging
for 16s per week.
Walks and Drives,
prince’s square.
Five minutes walk from the centre of the town is
this beautiful and well kept garden. The bronze
fountain in the centre is a work of art the town may
well be proud of, and is the replica of a prize foun-
tain exhibited at the Paris Exhibition in 1867. A
variety of trees, including the lighter green of the
weeping willow, afford ample shade, while seats are
placed at intervals. The grass, always green and
well kept, is a favourite spot for children with their
nurses, and in the basin are numerous gold fish, also
waterlilies. The Square is bounded on the east by
St. John’s Church and Parsonage, and on the south


by Chalmers Church, Christ Church, High School,,
and residences.
CITY PARK
Lies between Brisbane road and Cimitiere street,
east of Tamar street, and consists of 14 acres, laid
out in grass, shrubberies, and flower beds, with a good
sprinkling of ornamental trees. There is also a green-
house, fernery, and small but interesting collection
of native animals and birds. The monkeys, too, are
an unfailing source of amusement to children, small
and large. The new Pavilion for concerts, rinking,
etc., is to be erected here. On the lower side is the
Main Line Eailway Station (for Hobart), and on the
upper some fine residences. It is about from five to
ten minutes walk from central Brisbane or central
St. John streets.
VICTORIA PARK (INVALID DEPOT GROUNDS).
A pleasant river-side stroll can be enjoyed by
visiting these grounds, which contain about 17
acres, laid out in lawns, shrubberies, and flower-
beds, oesides a kitchen garden for the use
of the male invalids, who reside on the upper por-
tion of the grounds. The entrance is in Patterson
street, and the place has a nice river-side
walk, also a private bowling green, which is not
inaccessible to visitors who may apply for the use of
it. From the river-side nice views may be had of the
Cataract Gorge and Bridge, Trevallyn, and the
broad upper reach of the Elver Tamar, often studded
with small sailing craft or the boats of the Tamar
Sowing Club, whose shed is opposite. The river
looks best at high water. The city bands often per-
form here on summer evenings, and here also is
situated the new Victoria Museum of Science and
Art.
The gaol is nearly opposite these grounds, and it
is satisfactory to record that while population is on
the increase crime is on the decrease, and the in-
mates under durance are fewer in number now than
at any previous time.
TREVALLYN.
For a short walk or a short drive Trevallyn is
certainly unexcelled, if equalled. There is no effort
required (for any one in good health), and a fine


outlook of river, city, and distant mountain can be
enjoyed all the time. The distance from the centre
of the town to the South Esk Bridge, via Patterson
street, is about a mile, and here is a fine view of
itself, up the Cataract Gorge and down the harbour.
Crossing the bridge take the well-gravelled high
road, and if driving you need go no higher than this
road, but continue along for a mile or more until a
descent is made to the low (West Tamar) road.
This short drive is recommended as the very best
obtainable for a short drive, although the descent to
the low road is rather steep. The road is interesting
further on, and the route can be reversed, and the
return made through Trevallyn. Nice roads are
plentiful about Trevallyn higher up, and the number
of native trees left in the gardens and in the vacant
allotments enhances the beauty of this charming
suburb. From the top walk here it is usual to take
a departure for
THE THIRD BASIN.
The simplest direction to go there, a distance of
three miles, is, I think, to follow up the far side of
the first gully (which is about three-fourths of a
mile from the bridge), and about a mile above the
river the track will be picked up crossing that gully.
The direction is away from the river, but inclining a
little down stream. The track is up-hill for half the
distance, and down-hill for the remainder, but owing
to the much higher level of the South Esk there
the descent is not so great. The Third Basin is a
lovely spot, and the walk there is about the finest
bush walk near Launceston. Fishing and picnicing
are the main attractions.
VICTORIA SQUARE.
The north brow of the Windmill Hill, reached via
York street, is a reserve of about 13 acres in extent.
Little has been done to the place, but a few tress
have been planted and seats placed about. A good
view of Launceston and its rivers can be obtained
from this spot, and a wide stretch of country to
the eastward, terminating in Mounts Arthur and
Barrow.


CATARACT GORGE AND FIRST BASIN.
The easiest way to visit these places is to hire a
waterman’s boat from the end of the pier at the foot
of Charles street, and row up the Gorge. The dis-
tance is about a mile, of which one-fourth is in the
Gorge. When the foot of the Cataract is reached a
rather rough walk of about 250 yards will conduct
the party to the First Basin. The First Basin may
also be reached by cab.
The most popular way to the Basin is via the Zig-
zag path, which commenees at the South Esk Bridge.
The ascent, about 200 ft high, is fairly steep in
places, but seats are placed at intervals, and the
wattles and other young trees afford some little
shade. The view from the Zig-zag is, perhaps, the
finest that Launceston affords. In addition to a
comprehensive and minute view of Launceston,
which lies beneath, and of the Tamar stretching
away northward past the meadows of Inveresk,
there is, just beyond the river valley, a continuous
mantle of olivc-coloured forest, stretching upwards
and eastwards for 20 or 30 miles, and culminating
in the ridges of Mounts Arthur and Barrow. The
cleared lands bordering the river seem a mere fringe
compared to that expanse, but from that forest
every autumn the smoke may be seen ascending in
many places, telling its tale of the clearing and
burning going on in the intervening nooks and
valleys. In the deep gorge below a glimpse of the
South Esk is seen, smooth and dark, gliding on into
the bright sunshine of the open river. The distant
roar of the Cataract reaches the upper air, and
presently it is seen foaming over its rocky bed as it
plunges into the depths of the defile. Softened by
the distance, and especially in summer time, the
Cataraefc appears as the picture of some mountain
stream, brawling over the stones; but when the
floods come and the rushing river plunges headlong
down the steep, then is the time to see the Cataract.
From the Giant’s Grave the scene is simply fas-
einating—the roaring flood overleaping all obstacles,
and throwing up clouds of spray as it dashes down
the slight descent with irresistible fury, enthrals the
senses to the verge of giddiness. When the Cata-
ract comes into view the path begins to descend.


and immediately the eastern prospect is shut out, and
there succeeds a secluded valley, whose steep rocky
sides are “ feathered o’er” with sheoaks, peppermint,
musk, and a wilderness of native shrubs. The gorge
here has widened and softened a little, and is broken
by a small valley on each side, and down the left
hand one is the regular cart road to the Basin at the
bottom, and in the course of the river is the First
Basin, a dark and deep pool of some 200 yards in
diameter, a lovely spot, and which is so easily
reached that it is needless, as it would be difficult,
to describe it further. The Zig-zag path near the
foot inclines to the I’ett, and passes a cottage at the
termination of the regular Basin road, whence about
50 yards of a footpath conducts to the water-side.
Two boats are placed on the Basin, and may be hired
at a very reasonable charge from the proprietor of
the cottage, wlio also keeps light refreshments. The
return journey may be made by this road, which
crosses the ridge of the Cataract Hill precisely at
the top of York street. Those who do not care for
that descent may get an easier by following the
cart toad down to town. The First Basin may be
easily reached in 45 minutes.
THE SECOND BASIN
Is further up the South Esk, the river continuing
confined in steep gorges for four or five miles. One
way is to take a left-hand track from the Basin road,
which slants up the hill from a point about 200
yards from the Basin. Keep well up on the shoulder
of the hill and you have a nice open bush and elastic
turf, and so avoid the rocky sides of the river gorge.
In less than two miles a gully is reached, which is
best crossed pretty high up where the " regular”
track crosses, and then follow the opposite spur down
to the river. The banks near the river on the near
side of the gully are dangerous, a sheer cliff of from
40 to 60ft bounding the river bed in many places.
The Second Basin is simply an expansion of the
river bed with a small islet in the centre dividing
the stream. It is a picnicing and fishing resort,
though the fish are not so plentiful now. Some small
cascades may be seen lower down, and a walk over the
rocks close to the clear river is a treat to those con-
fined in cities. The regular road to the Second


Basin is via Frederick street and Hill-side Crescent.
At the top of that sloping road three roads diverge ;
tab<s the centre or level one which leads to the foot
of a steep rise of about 200 ft. This negotiated (and
a fine view is obtained from the summit), follow the
downward track, which inclines just a little towards
the right, where the river is. When the gully is
crossed (about a mile from the summit) the track
leads straight down to the river. Time, one to one
and a half hours.
DISTILLERY CREEK
Is a pretty spot for a ramble or picnic. To go there
take the bus, and then take the track up the creek
beside the flour mill.
CORRA LINN
Is one of the lions, and is about seven miles from
Launceston by the White Hills road, via St. Leonards.
It is a rocky defile through which flows the North
Esk, now in a foaming cataract, and anon as a deep
lynn or pool between perpendicular walls of basaltic
rock. On approaching it from the road there is very
little sign of the chasm which is sunk below the
level of the country in the immediate vicinity of the
bridge. The old bridge, supported by trestles, was
a favourite subject of the photographic artist, but
now the river is spanned by an iron girder bridge.
The cliffs may be about 60ft at the highest, and a
remarkable pillar of rock, called the Pulpit Eock, is
one of the curiosities of the place. Corra Linn is
reached by cab, and the return journey for the whole
cab usually costs about 12s 6d. That allows for an
hour’s stay or more before returning.
RAVENSWOOD,
On the west bank of the North Esk, north of Dis-
tillery Creek, is a very pretty drive. The direction
is by the George Town road to Mowbray, then turn
off to the right past the racecourse, and again to the
right along the side of the hill above the rifle butts,
and so on to Distillery Creek and back by Hobler’s
Bridge, or vice versa. The distance round is about
five or six miles.
EBRN-TREE GULLIES.
The nearest good fern-tree gullies are on the Piper
Eiver road, and commence about 10* miles from


town. The road is very good now, and makes a
splendid drive. The route is by the George Town
road, and turn off at Rocher’s Lane, about four miles
from town.
Launceston Omnibuses.
Sandhill to Wharf (green lamp).—Leave Sand-
hill 8'45 a.m. and 1*45, 2 - 40, S - 40, 4 40, 5 - 40, 6 40 p.m.
Arriving at the wharf, via Post Office, at 9 a.m., and
2,3, 4,5, 6, 6 - 57 p.m. respectively.
Leave wharf at 1,2 TO, 3TO, 4TO, 5 - 5, 65, and
7 p.m., arriving at Sandhill at ITS, 2‘30, 3 - SO, 4 30,
5 30, and 6 - 30 p.m. Fare, 3d.
Prince’s Square to Invermay (Roles’). —Leave
Elizabeth street at 8,9, 10, 11, 12 a.m., and 1, P3O,
2, 2'30 p.m., arriving at the Post Office five minutes
later, at the Western Railway in eleven minutes, and
at Invermay (Roles’) in 25 minutes from starting.
Invermay to Princes Square. — Leave Roles’ at
8-30, 9-30,10 30, 1130 a.m., and 12 30,1 30, 2, 2 30, 3,
3-30, 4, 4-30, 5, 5-30, 6, 6'30, 7 p.m., arriving at the
Western Railway in 14 minutes, at the Post Office in
20 minutes, and' at Elizabeth street in 25 minutes
from starting. Fare, 3d.
For Newnham. —Leaves York street at 7'50 a.m.,
and Square at 4'55 p.m. Leaves Newnham at B'3o
a.m. and 5'30 p.m. for Princes Square. Fare, 4d.
To Newstead and Distillery Creek —Leave
York street at 8T0.9T0 a.m., and at 1,2, 3 15, STO,
and 6 1 p.m., arriving at George street four minutes
later, and at Newstead in 14 minutes from starting. The
2, STO, and 6T p.m. buses proceed on to Distillery
Creek, which is reached at 2 - 22, 5'32, and 6’24 p.m.
From Newstead and Distillery Creek.—
Leave Distillery Creek at 834 a.m. and 2 24, 5 34,
and 626 p.m. Leave Newstead at 8‘44, 930 a.m.,
and at D 44, 2 34, 3'35, 5 42, 634 p.m., arriving at
George street in 11 minutes, and at York street in
15 minutes. Leaving Newstead (yellow light) at
night. Fares—Newstead, 3d. Distillery Creek, 6d.
SATURDAY NIGHT BUSES.
Leaves Newnham at 6 - 50 for Elizabeth street.
Leaves George and Brisbane streets at 930 for
Sandhill.


Leaves Sandhill at 9 45, York street at 10 for
Invermay and Newnham. Fares, 3d. and 6d.
Leaves York street (via Brisbane street) at 9 - 30
for Newstead (fare, 3d.) and Distillery Creek (fare,
6d.)
Cab Faees.—Launceston
By distance.
Under half a mile for one passenger ... ... Os 6d
Above half a mile, and not exceeding a mile
for the whole cab ... ... ... ... Is Od
For every additional half mile, for the whole
cab, not exceeding five miles ... ... Os fid
Eeturn fare, if the same party, and not having
detained the cab more than 15 minutes, half the
above.
Bu time
The charge is 3s per hour, rising 9d for every
additional quarter of an hour, or part thereof, but
Is fid is the minimum.
H. J. MARSH & CO.
IRONMONGERS
MURRAY & COLLINS STS.,
HOBART.
A Choice Assortment of
Electro-plated Ware,
Novelties, etc.
Fishing Tactile, Guns ,
Game Bags , Sporting Am-
munition always on hand ,


LONGFORD, PERTH, AND EVANDALE, BTC.
To visit these township?, which are only a few
miles apart, would make a whole day’s drive, and
that through one of the most prosperous and
“ English-like” districts in the island. About the
best way to make this journey, and to vary the
route, would be to drive along the Westbury road as
far as Hadspen, cross the South Esk, and take the
left-hand road, which follows the right bank of the
river till Longford is reached. The Pateena road,
branching off at Traveller’s Rest, is a shorter route.
Here a stay could be made to inspect the town, which
is situated at the confluence of the Lake and South
Esk rivers.
LONGFORD,
A town of about 1500 inhabitants, is the largest
town in the Western District, and mainly supported
by the pastoral and agricultural industry. The river-
side at Longford is a beautiful spot, and the sub-
stantial iron railway bridge over it has not yet lost its
celebrity as a lion. There is a pretty cemetery in Long-
ford where a half-hour may be well spent, and in it
may be seen the tombs of the pioneers of the dis-
trict-names that are as “household words” in
Northern Tasmania. The Church also possesses a
very handsome stained glass window. There are
four other churches, a good library, and the cele-
brated Agricultural Show Ground, where the finest
breeds of sheep, cattle, etc., are exhibited yearly on
a proclaimed holiday. A good road extends toCressy,
a distance of seven miles further south. By rail the
distance from Launceston is I7f miles. Fares, 3s 8d
and 2s 3d ; return, available on the following day, 4s
6d and 3s 6d. Trains leave Launceston at 8 a.m.,
arrive 8 - 50; leave 12-40, arrive 140; leavp 315,
arrive 4 5 ; leave 5 p.m., arrive 5 50. To Launceston,
leave 8-50 a.m., arrive 9 - 40 ; leave 10"43, arrive 11-30;
leave 144, arrive 2 40; leave 5'51, arrive 6 40 p.m.
A conveyance to and from Cressy meets the morning
and evening trains. Fare, 2s.
PERTH.
The drive from Longford to Perth, some three
miles, is a very enjoyable one, and from here you
may return to Launceston by the main road, via


Breadalbane, or else, if time permits, proceed to
Evandale. There is a good hotel here, and the
country around is an almost level plain, devoted
chiefly to grazing. The roads are often too well
lined with gorse, which, when in bloom, together
with the hawthorn hedges so frequently seen in the
neighbourhood, bring recollections of England
forcibly to the minds of new arrivals. Perth has
the same train service as Longford, the trains from
Launceston arriving eight minutes ehrlier, and
leaving for Launceston eight minutes later. The
train distance is 14f miles, and the fares 3d to 6d
less.
EVANDALE,
Like Perth and Longford, is situated on the South
Esk. There is a cross road from Perth to Evandale,
the distance being about three miles. This is a
very neat and English-like town, situated on a little
rise overlooking the river. Th most striking feature
of Evandale is the two churches facing each other,
one on each side of the road, on entering the village.
The hotels here are also good, and there is an
excellent public library. The road through the
township continues on toLymington andDeddington,
both on the river Nile. A cross road also runs in an
easterly direction, through the White Hills farming
district, where it joins the White Hills road from
Launceston, via Corra Linn, flhis road is not much
frequented by visitors, and would make an excellent
day’s drive, starting via Corra Linn to White Hills,
and then doubling back to Evandale, where dinner
and a rest could be indulged in; then back to town
by the main road, via Breadalbane. The White
Hills road merges into a track which skirts the north
side of Ben Lomond, strikes the South Esk near its
source* and follows it down to the mining district of
Black Boy and township of Mathinna. Deer are
plentiful in this direction. Trains for Evandale
leave Launceston at 8 30, arrive 9 20 ; leave 3, arrive
3’38; leave 4, arrive 445 ; leave 8 - 30, arrive 9-20
p.m. For Launceston, leave 6TO a.m., arrive 7;
leave IP2O, arrive 12; leave IT3, arrive 1'45; leave
7-30, arrive 820 p.m. Fares, 2s 2d and Is 8d; re-
turn, available on following day, 3s 3d and 2s 6d.


Distance, 13 miles. The 12 40 train of the Western
Line arrives at the Junction at 1 15, and is met by a
car for Evandale. Distance, two miles. Fare, 3d.
This conveyance attends every train.
Trains also leave the Junction for Launceston at 9 - 9
a m., arrive 940; at 11, arrive 11 - 30; leave 2 - 4 p.m.,
arrive 2 40 ; leave 6’9, arrive 6 40 p.m.
LYMINGTON AND DEDDINGTON.
Lymington is about seven miles south-east of Evan-
dale, by a good coach road. There-is one hotel here,
and trout fishing is to be had in the river Nile. The
district is agricultural and pastoral. A coach leaves
for Launceston every Monday, Wednesday, and
Saturday at 7 a.m , arriving about 10, and leaves the
Sydney Hotel, Launceston, at 3 p.m., airiving
back about 7 p.m. Pares, 2s 6d ; 5s return. Dis-
tance, 19 miles. Deddington is six miles further up
the Nile, on the opposite bank, the country being
pastoral. It has a hotel and church, and there is a
rough track through to the Ben Lomond tin mines
and Fingal Valley. A conveyance meets the 8 a.m.
train from Launceston at Evandale Junction.
EAST AND WEST TAMAR.
Excellent drives are obtainable along these roads,
with frequent glimpses of river scenery, and some
distant but good views of Launceston.
THE WATERWORKS AND DAM.
The Waterworks consist of a tunnel 620 ft long,
which taps the St. Patrick’s Eiver 13 miles from
town, near the Scottsdale road. An open channel,
1200 yards in length, then conducts the water
into Distillery Creek. Seven miles down the creek
and six from Launceston there is a reservoir capable
of holding 1,500,000 gallons of water, and thence the
water is conveyed through iron pipes to town. There
are also three small reservoirs in town, which hold
1,000,000 gallons of water. The water is exceedingly
pure and sweet, but deficient in lime. The water-
works and dam, both on the Scottsdale road, are
favourite spots for visiting—the aldermen’s annual
picnic of pleasure and inspection being held there.


McKAY,
SAMPSON &
McKINLAY,
DIRECT IMPORTERS,
GENERAL DRAPERS,
COSTUMIERS AND MILLINERS.
MEN’S & BOYS’ OUTFITTERS
GENERAL HOUSE FURNISHERS.
NOVELTIES CONSTANTLY ARRIVING
By Orient and P. & O. Liners.
TWO DRESSMAKING DEPARTMENTS,
Under entirely separate managements.
TAILORING BRANCH,
Under first-class supervision.
TWO SHILLINGS IN THE POUND
RETURNED TO CASH BUYERS.
M‘KAY, SAMPSON, AND M'KINLAY,
BRISBANE ST., LAUNCESTON.
London Address: 3 Falcon Avenue, Aldersgate
Street, E.C,


WESTERN DISTRICT.
From Hadspen, after crossing the South Esk River
hy a fine wooden bridge—which has, however, been
covered during a late flood with 12ft of water, owing
to the confluence just below ©f that river with the
Meander at almost a right angle—the main road runs
in a westerly direction on to Garrick, much of the way
within a few hundred yards of the Meander, of
which here and there glimpses are caught when some
picturesque reach flashes in the sunlight between
its overhanging willows. To the left the hon. T.
Reibey’s comfortable residence, Entally, lies snugly
ensconced in park-like grounds, which, merging into
sheep pastures, border the road for about a league.
The “ Squire of Intally” is a gentleman of the old
English school, fond of hunting, and a patron of
horse racing. He keeps a rare pa«k of beagles, and
the Eatally stables are celebrated throughout Aus-
tralia. About two miles from Hadspen a road turns
off to the right, crossing the Meander by the West-
wood bridge, and after leading through the estate
of that name bears back over the river once more,
via Quamby House, to the main road near Hagley,
or else by a road leaving it at right angles, about
three miles from the bridge, taking the traveller
to Rose Tal«, and so on to the West Tamar. The
Westwood estate contains some fine alluvial lands
near the river, but to the back consists of open
and rather stony hills, forming excellent sheep
runs, but the land gradually deteriorates as you go
back from the Meander, with the exception of little
nooks like Rose Vale, Glengarry, Winkleigh (or Silver
Mines), till it reaches the Tamar on the east and
the sea to the north. Returning to our point of
departure on the main road we find 800 yards fur-
ther on a road branching to the left, which, passing
through the fertile flats of Illawarra, conducts the
traveller to Longford, distant some seven or eight
miles from the turn-off.
GARRICK,
Eleven miles from Launceston, is next reached, a
township kept up, since the coaching days, by Mends’
flour mill, wood carting, the fortnightly stack sales,
and the custom of the neighbouring farmers. Here


a road branches off to the left to Bishopsbourne, a
little village in’the midst of splendid agricultural
land, seven miles from Carrick, and Bishopsbourne
Station on the Western Line. A coa«h plys between
the station and Carrick Hotel (W. Selby’s) at train
times. Crossing the rivulet at Carrick the main
road continues on through Ashburner’s Forest, but
at the Fifteenth milestone the land begins to im-
prove, and passes through the well-known Quamby
estate, now in most part cut up into farming free-
holds.
HAGLEV,
A small neat village, next lines the road, and is the
centre of a considerable agricultural area. The
farmers here are a pushing and intelligent class,
and among them is discernible strong elements of
that patriotic eharaeter which we may hope some
day will distinguish all Tasmanians. Before entering
the village a road on the left connects with the
railway station of that name, and thence on to
Glenore, Whitemore, and Bracknell, hamlets three,
five, and twelve miles distant from Hagley station.
From the township itself a road on the right leads
over M'Kinnon’s bridge (across the Meander) to
“ The Park,” and through Three Springs Plain to
the Green’s Creek road and Frankford, Glengarry, or
Beaconsfield along this road. “ The Park” contains
several hundred acres of very good land, but the
residue is worthless for all but bush grazing. _ From
Hagley (17 miles from Launceston) to Elizabeth
Town (36 miles) the main road passes through one of
the finest agricultural districts of Tasmania, consist-
ing chiefly of rich chocolate soil, well farmed, and
traversed by excellent roads. Westbury, 20 miles
from Launceston, is located on a gravelly table land,
but has fine soil surrounding it divided amongst
many small landholders. Pensioners’ Bush lies south-
east of but adjacent to that town ; Cluan, some seven
or eight miles south; and Egmont, with its bridge
over the Meander, three miles to the north. Over
that bridge runs another road, which, tapping the
Black Sugar Loaf settlement, passes on like the
Park road till it also reaches the Green’s Creek
road. Betwixt Westbury and Deloraine lies Exton,
at the 26th milestone, another neat little farming


village in communication with Launceston by rail-
way. Then Deloraine, at the 30th mile-post, lies
nestled on each side of the Meander, which is here
crossed By an excellent bridge, as well as by the
railway girder spans. Perhaps no town of Northern
Tasmania can boast of a more picturesque position,
or a more thriving, well-to-do aspect. From it ope
cross road runs up the east bank of the Meander,
leading on to Cheshunt, 10 miles, Jacker’s Marsh,
and many small farming settlements. Paddy’s
Scrub and the Bluff lie south-east of Deloraine;
Tongataboo and Brady’s Plains to the northward;
while north-west the main road pursues its way
through undulating but most fertile and lovely
country to Elizabeth Town, 36 miles, and thence on
through poor land, broken only by fertile Sassa-
fras, to Latrobe. But just on the outskirts of Delo-
raine the route to Dairy Plains, Chudleigh, Cave
Side, Mole Creek, Circular Ponds, and Gad’s Hill
branches from the main road at an acute angle to
the left. Space does not permit us to dwell largely
on these settlements’, none of which, except Chud-
leigh, has anything approaching to a village, though
the four first are well settled, and even Gad’s Hill
has good land when you have got there, a matter of
some difficulty, except the traveller be on horseback.
In fact, the largest track of good unalienated land,
the Emu Plain, is situated south of that point. The
railway must, in time, extend in that direction,
which is the most direct route to the West Coast.
THE MIDDLESEX GOLDFIELDS
Are also situated in this neighbourhood, on the
banks of the Forth, partly north, near Mount Claude,
and partly south, close to Gad’s Hill, and some claims
to the westward on the Dove Eiver. These mines
are still in the prospecting stage, but the prospect
is considered very good. This is possibly the best
spot in the island to look for fresh discoveries of gold,
the gold-bearing country being extensive. This
district is also in proximity to the highest peak in
Tasmania, namely, Cradle Mountain, with Barn
Bluff and Brown Mountain on each side of it.
Prospectors frequently push through from Waratah
on the west. The distances from Deloraine are—
Dairy Plains, 6 to 10 miles; Chudleigh (which boasts


an inn), 10| miles; Cave Side and Mole Creek on
diveigent reads, about 5 miles each from Chud-
leigh ; Circular Ponds (a new settlement), 9 miles
beyond Mole Creek railway station ; and Gad's Hill,
Bor 9 miles beyond that. Liena, about 5 miles from
Gad's Hill, possesses an inn and a good bridge over the
Mersey. The Forth, just beyond Gad's Hill, is
crossed a cage on a wire rope. There is a track
from Sheffield to this place, via Mount Claude, where
silver-lead ores exist, but not in payable quantities
as far as yet discovered.
CAVE SIDE AND MOLE CREEK
Are of limestone formation, and there are found the
celebrated (so-called) Chudleigh Caves.
THE CAVES.
The Caves, at Cave Side, have a stream of water
running through them, and may be traced upwards
to the chambf r called the Cathedral, some two miles
under the hill; or in the Mole Creek direction for
tvo or three miles from the entrance. In this latter
direction they are dry, the stream gurgling under*
ground, but owing to their tortuous windings and
many branchings, and irregularity of bottom, are not
so much visited as the wet caverns higher up stream.
The Cave stream itself comes to the surface at Mole
Creek in the shape of a ready-made rivulet, spring-
ing from a deep hole or well between Mr. Alex.
Cameron’s farm and that of Mr, James Scott. The
Mole Creek Caves (two) are more recently discovered.
They are some four miles from the railway station
at Mole Creek, are richer in stalactites and lime-
stone concretions, and are, except in winter, quite
dry. Lanterns, matches, a ball of stout twine as a
clue, and one or two very light 10ft ladders, would
enable many cress passages to be explored, and
possibly many new wonders discovered. There is
nothing worthy of the epithets “grand,” “mar-
vellous,” or “ enchanting,” in any of the caves or
tunnels yet discovered, but there is much that is
weird, interesting, and worthy of a careful investiga-
tion, and the Government reserves in the immediate
surroundin g are well adapted for picnicing.


MEANDER FALLS.
About three-quarters of a mile beyond the Chud-
leigh Eoad Station, and from Deloraine by the
road, we come to a narrow road leaving the Cbudleigh
road at right angles to the left, and tending down
hill to the Meander. Followed for about five miles it
conducts to a waterfall on that river which is well
worth the inspection of the lovers of nature in her
romantic and beautiful moods. The river rushes, 20
or 25 yards wide, over a precipice 25ft in height, but
not in one unbroken sheet except during floods, but
in numerous spouts, shooting through the fringe of
rocks so as to precipitate itself 10ft outwards at the
base of the fall. The same spot may be reached
more easily from Deloraine by the road that leads
up the east bank of the Meander to Cheshunt. By
turning to the right, some four miles along that
road, through one of Mr. Field’s river frontage farms
the spot may be easily arrived at, as a rough
bridge crosses the river close by. A return could be
made, if desired, by the route first pointed out.
Other falls, yet more romantic, and 40 and 50 ft in
height, are to be met with beyond Cheshunt up the
gorge, through which the river descends from the
Western range, but after going some 12 miles on
horseback, oi by vehicle, the rest of the way must be
performed on foot with a local guide.
Trains leave Launceston for Deloraine at 8 a.m.,
arrive IGTS ; leave 12 40, arrive 3 - 20; leave 3T5,
arrive 525 ; leave 5 p.m., arrive 7TO. Trains leave
for Launceston at 730 a.m., arrive 9 40; leave 922,
arrive 11 30 ; leave 12, arrive 2 40; leave 4 3@, arrive
6’40. Distance, 45 miles. Fares, 7s and 5s 6d; re-
turn, available for five days, 10s fid and 8s 3d.
Trains leave for Formby at 10 25, arrive 12 22;
leave 535 pm., arrive 7 32. Formby to Deloraine,
leave 7TO a.m , arrive 9 12 ; leave 2T5 p m, arrive
4 20. Distance, 37 miles. Fares, 9s 3d and 6s 3d;
return, available for four days, 13s lid and 9s fid.


THE NORTH-EASTERN DISTRICT.
This district is mostly noted for its rich tin mines
and the fertile agricultural districts of Scottsdale
and Eingarooma, especially. The main highway
now is the railway as far as Scottsdale, which
was formally opened for traffic on August 9,
1889. The total distance is 47 miles. The line
starts in a northerly direction at first, passing
Mowbray, Eocher’s Lane, and crossing Barnard’s Creek
by a substantial bridge. The grade is uphill for the
first 13 miles and the direction changes to north-east,
while cuttings, embankments, and bridges are fre-
quently met with. The Piper river is crossed 16
miles from town, and Karoola station is passed half a
mile further on, Karoola being a native name to
represent Piper’s river as near as may be. At 21
miles is the thriving settlement of Lilydale, the
Upper Piper station, and about here a good view of
Mount Arthur is obtained, and then in quick succes-
sion the second and third rivers are passed, both
being branches of the Piper. At 26 miles the
lowest summit of the Denison range is pierced by a
tunnel 35 chains in length, 16 feet in height, and 12
feet in width, the sides being of concrete, and the
arch and fronts of brickwork. The highest level,
1003 feet, is here reached, and the direction then
changes to due east, downwards into the valleys of
the Little Forester river. This is the most attrac-
tive and romantic part of the journey, the timber
being heavy, and numerous fern-tree gullies are
passed as the line curves in and out, the most re-
markable being the Denison Gorge, which is rounded
by a horseshoe curve. We are now in an auriferous
region, the Denison gold-field lying north and
further on at the 38 mile station. Lisle, whiqh lies
some miles south of the station. Away to the north-
east, too, from Bridport to Boobyalla port, gold has
been found, but the fields, hitherto, have not proved
permanently profitable. Lisle is connected with the
main Scottsdale road as well as with the railway.
The Waterhouse field, to the north of here, is at
present doing next to nothing. It was a place of
great hope once for reefing, but did not turn out
well; so also the Panama Creek in this neigh-


bourhood. After passing a belt of rather poor
country, the railway for a few miles trending to the
north-east, the fertile region of Springfield and
Scottsdale is entered, a region of dense forest, in
whose shades the tree-fern grows luxuriantly and
where big trees are to be found in abundance. The
soil is chocolate coloured and considered very good,
and in the clearings the grasses are rich and’
abundant. The terminus is near “The Corners”
where the road to Bridport branches off to the left.
But now we will take a fresh departure from Laun-
ceston by the road, which is well worth driving along
and describing. Settlement has been (1889) going
on along this line in the neighbourhood of Lisle and
Scottsdale, and good land is still available for
selection.
Trains leave Launceston for Scottsdale at 7-30 a.m.,
arriving, JO-45 ; leave 4-30 p.m, arrive 7-45 p.m.
Scottsdale to Launceston, leave 7'25 a.m., arrive
10-25; leave 4-25, arrive 725 p.m. Fares, Us. 9d.
and 7s. lOd.
Return, available for five days, 17s. Bd. and 115.9 d.
ROAD TO SCOTTSDALE AND RINGAKOOMA.
The railway having superseded the coaches on this
road as far as Scoottsdale, the traveller who prefers
the road may easily hire horses and vehicles, and he
will find the road good and the scenery in some
place# hardly equalled in Tasmania. The road,
called the Pattersonia road, is reached by proceeding
eastward along Biisbane street and Elphin road to
Newstead Inn, where it turns off to the left. Less
than a mile from here the St. Leonard’s read
branches off to the right, but we continue straight
on, and immediately after the Waverley Woollen
Mills may be seen to the left. These are now lighted
with eminent success and great economy by the
electric light. Magg’s Hill, a short steep acclivity,
is then ascended and here a good view of Launceston
and the Eiver Tamar is obtained. The road then
wends through a hilly country of basaltic formation,
fairly wooded with peppermint and eucalypti, while
the gullies abound with dogwood, lightwood, musk,
fern-trees, and bracken ferns. The land here is
mostly of a second or third-rate quality and suitable


only for pastoral purposes. Small farms are passed
at various points along the road as far as the
Pattersonia Rivulet, and about nine miles out the
aqueduct for supplying Launceston with water from
the St. Patrick’s River, crosses the road. As the
traveller descends to the bridge which crosses the
rivulet he obtains a striking view of the two moun-
tains which sentinel the North-eastern District. On
the right is the massive Mount Barrow, and directly
in front Mount Arthur (Row Ter) rears itself
abruptly from the plain. The road continues along
the valley for about 10 miles, and nearly the whole
distance St. Patrick’s Rirer on the right, and the
Pattersonia Rivulet on the left, run parallel with it.
About 19 miles from Launceston, and directly
opposite Mount Arthur, is Milwood’s Hotel, an old-
established and favourite hostelry. Continuing on
through a thickly-wooded country, where in the
spring a profusion of wild flowers deck the hill-
sides, the ascent to Myrtle Bank is commenced, and
here, about four miles from Milwood’s, the road to
the Lisle goldfield turns off to the left.
LISLE.
Passing under the shadow of Mount Arthur, in
about six miles from the main road, the township,
which is built on one of the mountain spurs, is
reached. The little village is quiet enough now, but
in 1879 it was a stirring place, and undoubtedly the
best alluvial goldfield in the colony. Alluvial
mining is still carried on by about 52 diggers, and
it is not improbable that fresh discoveries of import-
ance may take place, as the field extends over a con-
siderable area, and has been comparatively un-
prospected. There is a rough track from here to
Lilydale, over a shoulder of the mountain, the dis-
tance being about seven miles, and the scenery
grand. A new road is being constructed to the Lisle
railway station, a distance of seven miles, through
hilly country and down the valley of the Little
Forester River. Trains for Launceston pass there
at 7 - 55 a.m. and 4‘55 p m., and for Scottsdale, nine
miles, at 1016 am. and 7T6p.m. It is not generally
known that a large track of good Crown land still
unalienated lies a few miles cast of the main road
just past Lisle Junction, It extends for 10 or 12


miles nearly due west of Mount Maurice, and round
and four or five miles to the northward and east-
ward of that mountain into the neighbourhood of
Mount Victoria. It is watered in the eastern por-
tion by the St. Patrick’s River, and can be reached
by striking for five or six miles south or south-east
from Springfield, or four or five miles south-east from
Myrtle Bank. It would be best to secure a local
guide from Springfield or Myrtle Bank to view this
ground.
From the turn-off at Lisle the road ascends to
Myrtle Bank, which commands a fine prospect of
wild mountain scenery, and of a deep valley rejoicing
m the euphonious name of Diddleum Valley. The
land here is a very rich chocolate soil, and com-
fortable quarters may be obtained at. Faulkner’s
Hotel. After leaving Faulkner’s the road passes
through a charming tract of mountain and forest,
every turn disclosing fresh scenes of beauty—stately
trees, beautiful shrubs, and crystal streams abounding
on every hand, and then we reach the most beautiful
of all, namely.
THE SIDELING.
This is another version of St. Mary’s Pass, but
instead of the ocean at tke foot a sea of forest far as
the eye can reach, only bounded on the north-east
by the distant view of the sea in Bass Straits, and
showing Flinders and Cape Barren Islands and
Eingarooma Bay, also a succession of ranges on the
right hand. It is a scene to call a halt upon so as
to take it all in. The steep hill-side on one side and
the deep and precipitous gorge on the other, are
alike clothed with lovely fern trees, musk, sassafras,
wattles, lilac, myrtle, etc., the trees towering to an
immense height, and shading the roadway, while
rugged rocks piled up the steep add to the grandeur
of the scene. When first seen from the top of the
Meredith Eange Scottsdale is discerned mainly by
the skeleton trees which still crowd the land, though
splendid pastures are underneath. The road winds
downward into the gulleys, and out round the spurs
until a continuous descent of about three miles brings
the traveller to the River Brid, which is crossed, and
now level land and the settlement of Springfield is


reached. Before crossing the Brid, which is " the
sweetest stream in the colony/’ in the estimation of
local people, a read branches to the left, in the direc-
tion of the railway, to ScottSVille. After crossing
thatrivertheTenMileTrackbranchesoff on an easterly
course for the Eingarooma district, and along the
track are numerous new settlers. The forest here is
very dense.in places, and the land is fairly good.
The Eingarooma road, which goes to Bridport, in-
tersects the track at Mary Yale before Mount
Stronach is reached. Turn to the right, then, for
Eingarooma.
After leaving the Brid, where English trout
abound, we are in the well-known Springfield dis-
trict, where a well-conducted hotel is met with. All
the way now to Ellesmere, four miles, we are in the
region of rich chocolate soil and abundant grasses,
for which this district is celebrated.
ELLESMERE.
The township of Ellesmere, 41 miles from Laun-
ceston, can boast of four hotels, Mechanics’ Institute,
churches, banks, etc. It is a prosperous and well-
watered district, the streams all flowing northward
to Bass Strait, The terminus of the railway is here,
and a daily service of coaches runs eastward to
Eingarooma, Brothers’ Home, etc.
BRIDPORT
Is 13 miles from Ellesmere (the Corners) and the
first three miles to Jetsonville is-through the rich
soil characteristic of the Scottsdale district. After
leaving Jetsonville the road passes through very
sandy country, which, in early spring, is quite a
garden of gay and gorgeous bloom with heath and
various other wild flowers. The country around
here, as all along this coast, is mostly barren, but
good fishing, hunting, and shooting are to be had.
The broad sandy beach, too, and the river at Eocky
Point are interesting to those who like pleasure
without exertion. Bridport is connected with George
Town and Lefroy by road, and the Lower Piper Eoad
and Hall’s Track join between these points.
Bridport, 40 miles east of Low Head, is a bar
harbour with Sift of water at high tide, on a bar of
soft sand. It is sheltered from the prevailing north-


west winds, Ibut since the opening of the Scottsdale
Line for traffic it has ceased to- be a port of call for
steamers. The whole ©oast between George Town
and here, and, in fact, to the East Coast, presents a
low undulating surface of gravel and sand ridges
with occasional marshes and lagoons, for an average
distance of 10 miles back from the coast. The coast
line is broken by a series of bold rocky points. The
district is thinly peopled.
BOOBYALLA PORT.
Leaving here for Boobyalla Port the road passes
through the estate of Mr. M. Stephenson, thence
along the popular Stephensons Marsh and on to
Lyndhurst, the country being sandy and marshy all
the way to the Bay. From the Port to Cape Port-
land, where Mr. I). Campbell resides, the beach
makes a splendid road, and shooting and fishing are
plentiful. From Boobyalla Port it is easy to visit
the islands of the Straits, the islanders frequently
visiting this part with their boats. The steamer
Dorset calls here weekly. Pares to Launceston, 15s.
Roads and tracks connect with Gladstone, Ringa-
rooma, and Springfield, via Mounts Horror and
Stronach, the latter passing through a track of good
land still unalienated, about midway between those
mountains, which is intersected by branches of the
Great Forester River. A brake can be hired at the
Port to convey passengers to Gladstone, 11 miles, or
any other point desired. There is a horse track
from Ellesmere to Gladstone—distance, 35 miles. To
Moorina, direct road, 21 miles.
TO BRANXHOLM, DERBY, MOORINA, ETC.
Leaving Ellesmere at the Corners by the coach,
which leaves on arrival of the train, a descent is
made to Tucker’s Creek, and for two miles further
the land is under grass, and then it gradually
deteriorates till Mount Stronach is reached, where
a swampy and barren stretch of decomposed
granite is met with until the valley of the Great
Forester is reached, where some good land is found
skirting the river. We are now in the tin-producing
part of the North-eastern district, part of which
surrounds Mount Stronach, but the most important
part lies south and east of the Ringarooma River,


from Branxholm to Wyniford River, extending
south over the Blue Tier to the George’s Bay dis-
trict. The total output of tin for this district
(North-eastern) for the year ending. 30th June, 1889,
was 2216 tons, which was an advance on the previous
year, and, considering the drought, very good. The
number of miners employed, in the aggregate, was
385 Europeans and 605 Chinese, in 132 claims, of
which 71 are worked by Chinese only.
After Mary Yale is passed the road ascends
Rocky Gully, and the country begins to improve till
the Half-way House is found nestling among the hills,
the host being a character in his way, and well-known
throughout the district. The Billycock Range is the
next ascent, and here the road winds about through
a suecession of gullies, with numerous streams, and
on the banks stately trees, in the shade of which
grow the beautiful tree ferns. After the top is
reached a descent of about three-quarters of a mile is
made, and the Finger-post is reached, the main road
then bearing away to the left for Moorina, while the
right-hand road conducts to Upper Ringarooma and
Mount Victoria,
UPPER RINGAROOMA AND MOUNT VICTORIA.
From the Finger-post to Upper Ringarooma,
miles, the road is beautifully shaded by large myrtle
trees and eucalypti, and the land is second to none
in Australasia. Grass and clover grow most
luxuriantly, and cereals and root crops yield much
above the average. The country is well watered,
and the road crosses the Legerwood and Ringarooma
River. The township is situated about two miles
from the river, not large, but nicely situated, and
there is a well-appointed hotel here. From here a
line in the direction of Mount Maurice, which, by
the way, is tin country, will fetch the large track of
unalienated good Crown land already mentioned,
which stretches for about 10 miles west of that moun-
tain, mainly north of St. Patrick’s River. Shortly
after crossing the Ringarooma a track strikes to the
left, or eastward, for the Upper Cascade River and
Weldborough. Tin lodes are known to exist along
the neighbourhood of this track.


Pushing south for a few miles Alberton is reached,
prettily situated on the Dorset, a tributary of the
Ringarooma, and under the north side of Mount Vic-
toria. Phis is a region of unfulfilled promises, only
three claims being at work, and one (the Mercury)
raising stone, which crushes (1889) lldwt to the ton.
Mathinna can be reached from here by a track across
the range and down Dan’s Rivulet; thence to Fingal,
fey a fair road, 17 miles.
Returning to the Finger Post on the Billy-cock
Range and taking the left-hand road, which is the
main road, the traveller descends into the well-wooded
valley of the Legerwood, up the opposite side, and
then comes the valley of the Ringarooma, with
Branxholm just below on the east side of the river.
BRANXHOLM,
Like Scottsdale, is a family name of the Scotts, the
original being the hall or hdd of the Scotts of Buc-
cleuch, celebrated in the “ Lay of the Last Minstrel,”
The clan Scott, sons of the late Jas. Scott, surveyor,
who first surveyed and named these wilds, own the
Legerwood estate in the neighbourhood. This is a
progressive little town, the first centre of the tin
mining region yielding considerable results. The
town possesses a well-conducted hotel, telegraph and
post office, court house, etc. The principal mine of
the neighbourhood is the well-known Arba, which
still yields sati factory returns. Twenty-six Euro-
peans are employed at this mine and many Chinese ;
the whole adjoining district, including Ruby Flat,
three miles off to the right (south), employing in 1889
70 Europeans and 74 Chinese in 19 claims. A deep
lead is known to exist here, which is to be worked by
tunnelling. Tin lodes are also known in the locality,
and a large deposit of kaolin has recently been dis-
covered. From this onwards, in a north-easterly
direction, the country for many miles is all tin-bear-
ing, and is intersected by the Cascade River, Main
Creek, and the Weld, Frome, and Wyniford rivers in
succession, nearly parallel, and all flowing from the
Blue Tier, and entering the Ringarooma after a
north-westerly course of from ten to fifteen miles.
The townships of Derby, or Brothers’ Home, and
Moorina lie about five and ten miles respectively


north-east of Branxholm, the first at the juncth n of
the Cascade, and the latter at the junction of the
Weld and Freme rivers with the Eingarooma.
The main road crosses the Eingarooma between
Branxholm and Derby, and continues on the west
side of, and parallel to, that river till Gladstone is
reached. A coach plies between Derby and Glad-
stone three times a week, the distance being about
16 miles. A branch road crosses the river at Moorina
and follows the Frome Eiver up to Weldborougk,
crosses the Tier to Thomas Plains and Gould’s
Country, thence down to the George’s Eiver and
township of St. Helen’s, George’s Bay, on the East
Coast. A coach runs from Moorina to St. Helen’s
three times a week.
DERBY OK BROTHERS’ HOME
la a progressive town on the banks of the Einga-
rooma, and has a famous mine, the Brothers’ Home
mine, owned by the Krushkas. Another mine on
which a great deal of money has been spent is the
Briseis, 35 Europeans being employed, but the work
done so far is only preliminary. The claims are all
about the hills close to the town, which contains
several good hotels, bank, post and telegraph offices,
churches, and school. A few Chinese make a living
tin mining at Tin Pot Creek and up the Cascade
Eiver. There is a new road from Derby to Moorina
across the hills, steep and rough. The direct road
passes some good land, well grassed and cultivated,
but nearer Moorina the granite formation again comes
in with poor soil.
MOORINA
Is a nice clean township nestling among the hills,
with the Eingarooma Eiver issuing from a narrow
rocky gorge and passing through the town. There
are hotels, a bank, post and telegraph offices, church.
State school, public hall, etc.
The eoach for Ellesmere leaves every morning, and
arrives every evening ats - 15. Thecoachfor St. Helen’s
via Weldborough and Thomas Plains leaves on Tues-
days, Thursdays, and Saturdays, returning from St.
Helen’s on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. The
coach for Gladstone leaves every Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday at 10 a.m.


There is prospecting for a sub-basaltic deep lead
of tin going on at David’s Creek in the neighbour-
hood. There is a direct road to Boobyalia Port, a
distance of 21 miles, through barren country, the
prettiest part of which is at Mount Cameron, whose
western side the road skirts.
THE WYNIFOBD RIVER
The most easterly of the group of rivers flowing fiom
Blue Tier to the Eingarooma, is about eight miles
from Moorina by road, the Pioneer being six miles.
A large number of men are employed in this part, the
Argus Company employing 28 Europeans on wages
and 62 Chinese on tribute. There is also the Argus
Extended and the Garibaldi, good claims; This is
certainly the largest tin-producing district of them
all, the tin raised for the year ended 30th June,
1889, being 705 tons, and the number of miners em-
ployed 260.
GLADSTONE.
Nine miles past the Wyniford and 17 miles from
Moorina Gladstone is reached. The town is nicely
situated on the eastern side of Mount Cameron, and
is a tin mining district, 130 men being employed
about the neighbourhood, who last year raised 237
tons of tin. The Mount Cameron Water Eace, re-
cently purchased by the Government, and to be
finished directly, is expected to add greatly to the
prosperity of the neighbourhood. The race is 12&
miles long with 9 miles of branches, and the water
gold last year returned 6 per cent, on the outlay.
From Gladstone the Eingarooma, and with it the
road on its west side, takes a bend at right angles and
runs to the north-west, a distance of eleven miles, till
the port is reached.
The mail coach leaves Gladstone for Moorina every
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday at 8-30 a.m., and
leaves Moorina for Gladstone every Tuesday, Thurs-
day, and Saturday at 10 a m.; distance, 17 miles.
AVOCA. —BEN LOMOND.
All travellers by the Fingal Eailway should make
a stay at Avoca, provided they have any love for
picturesque and grand scenery, have any taste for
excellent trout fishing, or are interested in lode tin


mining, for Avoca is the centre of all three attrac-
tions. The township is situated 16 miles east of the
Conara Junction, at the junction of the St. Paul and
South Esk rivers, and nestles cosily at the foot of the
lovely spurs which descend from the rugged top of
Ben Lomond, the highest but one of all Tasmania’s
mountains. The station is at the riverside of the
Esk, just below the township, which in itself is not
very pretentious, but contains a fairly large school,
two churches, stores, and a few private houses as well
as the Union Hotel, where more comfortable quarters
can be obtained than in many townships of far larger
size. The two rivers are both within five minutes
walk of the township, and many a local fisherman
will be found to lay the visitor on to the most
favoured spots for the speckled beauties he
longs to land. If scenery is the visitor’s object, no
better trip can be made than to the top of Ben Lomond,
5010 feet above the sea level. The height is rather
appalling, but as a matter of fact the ascent is very
easy, and an energetic rider can get to the top and
back to Avoca the same day, though the base of the
mountain is at least 12 miles from Avoca by the
shortest route. A guide can be procured at Avoca
by those who wish to make the ascent the easiest way,
but those who are bold enough and good bush men
enough to make the journey alene will find little
difficulty in doing so. The best riding will be found
northward, across the South Esk bridge, and then
along a new road, turning off to the right about four
miles from Avoca. This road is somewhat longer
than the western road, but it brings the traveller
out on level ground about 2000 feet below the top of
the mountain where a magnificent view is obtainable,
and within a couple of miles of the Ben Lomond
Hotel, where the horses can be put up. The rest of
the ascent may be made directly from this point,
which is immediately at the foot of the steepest part
of the cap, or by travelling about three miles west-
ward and skirting what are called the Butts of the
mountain, it is possible to .riel® within 1000 feet of
the top, the rest of the ascent being up a gentle rise,
though over very rough ground strewn with large
greenstone bouldevs. But the steeper track is more
exciting for male tourists, and the labour of the


ascent is well repaid in reaching the top. From it
can be seen the sea to the east, north, and south, the
hills and valleys between seeming but gentle un-
dulating plains clothed with verdure, with here and
there a little silver streak meandering along t©
betoken some fine river, while the air is so keen and
invigorating that it seems as if no hill at all had
been ascended, and that the ascent of Mont Blanc
itself would be mere child’s play. The top of the
mountain is level for some miles, except where a
slight depression contains a lake of unknown depths
and considerable size. In the oj posite direction the
Western Tiers rise up and block the view, but the
scenery between is perfect, wild as nature has made
it in some places, but with just sufficient sheep runs
and homesteads dotted here and there to give the
idea of cultivation and man’s handiwork that is
required to make a perfect contrast. The descent,
like the ascent, is easy, and on returning to Avoca
every tourist will have sufficiently enjoyed himself
or herself to be eager to recommend the same trip to
their friends.
THE TIN MINES.
Those who are on business bent in making the trip
will pass through a large tin raining district, but
unfortunately it is suffering from the customary curses
of Tasmanian mining—bad management and want of
capital. The mineral belt is about 4 miles by 8 in
extent, and the best track to take to reach it is by
the western or old road which leads straight into the
Ben Lomond and Republic claims. The country rock
is for the most part a coarse granite in which felspar
predominates, intruded by bands of finer posphyritic
granite containing a good deal of mica, and carrying
the lodes, which are true fissure veins, and so far
showing no sign of cutting out. The country, how-
ever, is very hard and somewhat disturbed, con-
sequently the lodes frequently pinch, and slides and
heaves are frequently met with. These features
have usually caused mining operations to be stopped
altogether or suspended through ignorance and want
of heart, though the percentage of ore to the ton is
often very large, sometimes as much as 10 and 12 per
cent. The only mine at work at present is the Great
Republic,which has crushed some hundreds of tons


The commercial bank of Tasmania
LIMII ED (Established (1832.)
Capital ... ... ... .£500,000
Paid-up Capital 125,000
Reserve Fund... ... ... 150,000
Head Office, Hobart.
Directors— C. J. Barclay, J. H. B. Walch, Thos.
Lewis. Chas. J. Barclay, Managing Director.
D. Barclay, Manager.
Branches.
LAUNCESTON. Local Director; Alfred Harrap.
E. D. Harrop, Manager.
LATROBE W. S. Allanby, Manager.
OATLANDS E. Whitesides, Manager.
LONGFORD ... ... J. H. Stewart, Manager.
GEORGE’S BAY ... B. H. Wright, Manager.
DELORAINE ... ... E. A. Morris, Manager.
NEW NORFOLK ... C. H. Dignah, Manager.
WESTBUEY W. G. Baird, Manager.
ULVERSTONE ... G. F. Henry, Manager,
BOTHWELL C. A. Drake, Manager.
Agencies :
LONDON : The Bank of New South Wales,
Union Bank of London Limited, City Bank
Limited, Bank of Victoria Limited, National
Bank of Australasia, Commercial Bank of Aus-
tralia Limited, The London and South Western
Bank Limited, Bank of South Australia Limited.
Bank of New Zealand, The Mercantile Bank of
Sydney, The City of Melbourne Bank Limited,
The National Bank of New Zealand Limited,
The Mercantile Bank of Australia Limited,
The Federal Bank of Australia Limited.
VICTORIA: The Bank of New South Wales,
National Bank of Australasia, Commercial
Bank of Australia Limited, Bank of Victoria
Limited, City of Melbourne Bank Limited,
Federal Bank of Australia Limited, Bank of
New Zealand, Mercantile Bank of Australia
Limited, The Bank of South Australia Limited,
The Royal Bank ©f Australia Limited.
NEW SOUTH WALES: The Bank of New South
Wales,Mercantile Bank of Sydney, Federal Bank
of Australia Limited. Commercial Bank of Aus-
tralia Limited, Bank of New Zealand, National
Bank of Australasia.


QUEENSLAND : The Bank of New South
Wales, Mercantile Bank of Sydney, The Com-
mercial Bank of Australia Limited.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA: The Bank of New South
Wales, Bank of South Australia Li mited. National
Bank of Australasia, Bank of Adelaide, Com-
mercial Bank of Australia Limited, Bank of New
Zealand, The Federal Bank of Australia Limited.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA: The Bank of New
South Wales, The Western Australian Bank,
National Bank of Australasia, The Commercial
Bank of Australia Limited.
NEW ZEALAND: The Bank of New South
Wales, National Bank of New Zealand Limited,
Bank of New Zealand.
FIJI: Bank of New Zealand.
MAURITIUS : Blyth Brothers and Go.
The Bank grants drafts and issues credits on the
above establishments; allows interest at current
rates on fixed deposits ; negotiates and collects bills
of exchange; makes advances against produce
shipped on receipt of shipping documents; and is
prepared to undertake all descriptions of Banking
business on terms which can be ascerca'ned at the
Head Office or Branches of the Bank.
G. C. JACKSON & CO.,
DISPENSING CHEMISTS,
Brishane-st. (Opposite Quadrant,)
Launceston.
THE CENTRAL PHARMACY.
If suffering from any affection the unde: -mentioned
remedies are compounded to relieve. O.ie trial will
prove their superior excellenc .
Corn Solvent, Toothache
Drops, Dr. Millar’s Diarrhoea
Mixture, Neuralgia Cure,
Dr. Hunter’s Pectorol for
Coughs and Colds.


for an average of nearly 10 per cent., enough to make
English shareholders in Cornwall mines consider
their fortunes made. The mine is now proved to a
depth of 170 feet, and is opened up by a main shaft,
with pumping plant and battery complete in the
estimation of the directors, but the dressing plant
and water supply has to be increased considerably,
and further levels to be driven, while the main shaft
ought to be sunk and connected with the lode at a
lower level before the mine can be placed in a pay-
able condition. Adjoining this is the Ben Lomond
claim, the pioneer claim of the district, and dis-
covered in 1881. About .£l7OOO has been spent on
this claim, there being about £7OOO of valuable work
done and the rest wasted. The Tasmania, three
miles to the east, and the Storey’s Creek about two
miles further east of that, were similar instances of
mismanagement, though both were really good sur-
face shows, but mismanaged. Some dozen other
claims had a certain amount of prospecting work
done on them, but the failure of the Ben Lomond
and the rest damped the shareholders’ ardour and pre-
vented proper work being done. There is plenty of
opportunity for good returns being obtained by the
judicious expenditure of capital, but until one claim,
by good luck or good management, is proved payable,
the rest of the field will be idle for years to come.
The same tin-bearing country crops up again some
ten miles south-east of Avoca, but here little has been
done to prove it; still, the whole district is one well
worthy of attention by the mineralogist, and even
Ben Lomond itself is worth ascending, on account of
the example it gives of the different strata. Above
the tin claims the granite is succeeded by sandstone,
on which rests a large seam of coal about 4000 feet
high. Above this again is a more recent sandstone,
on which the greenstone forming the capping of the
mountain, is superimposed.
Page’s mail conveyance leaves Avoca for Swansea
on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, at 1230 p.m.,
arriving at B'3o p.m.; leaves Swansea for Avoca on
Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, at 730 a.m.,
arriving at 3'30 p.m., in good time for the 431 train,
which in Launceston at 820 p.m., or in
Hobart at 7TO next morning. ,


Continuing our journey eastward along the Fingal
valley for another 17 miles, Ben Lomond being on
the left, we reach the old-established substantial
township of Fingal, the chief town of the district.
FINGAL, MATHINNA, MANGANA.
Fingal is the oldest gold-producing district in
Tasmania, the first payable gold being found at the
Nook, four miles from the township, in February, 1852.
Since then profitable gold mining has never ceased
in the district. The alluvial, which continued for
many years, is now abandoned and quartz-reefing
(for many auriferous reefs abound among the hills to
the north), is carried on profitably at present. The
best centre of reefing is Mathinna, about 18 miles
north (the old Black Boy diggings), celebrat-d for
the steady and satisfactory yields of the old City of
Hobart mine. The new Golden Gate mine with a
small 10-head battery yielded 1448 oz. in the three
months ending June, 1889, and has good prospects
ahead.
The South Esk takes its rise in the dividing range
about ten miles north of Ben Lomond, runs in an
easterly direction till past Mathinna, then south to its
junction with the Break o’ Day river (which comes
in from the east), and south-easterly from Fingal to
Avoca, having in that distance half encircled - the
giant Ben Lomond, and at Evandale three-fourths,
while the North Esk all but completes the environ-
ment. The mountain is 18 miles long.
A track from Mathinna follows the river up for
about 12 miles, then strikes south-westerly for the
northern skirt of Ben Lomond, thence westward to
the South Esk river, and into Launceston by the
White Hills road. Deer abound in this direction.
A track from Mathinna, both rough and steep,
follows up Dan’s Rivulet and crosses the divide at
Mount Victoria into the Eingarooma district. Dis-
tance, about 15 miles to Alberton.
Mangana, about seven miles north-west of Fingal,
is a newer gold-mining township but is very quiet at
present. The bush in the gold mining region is
generally open till the range is entered, and then it
becomes more dense, and is in many parts scrubby.


and the country greatly broken up. Scarcity of
water is one of the drawbacks to mining in the
Ben Lomond neighbourhood.
The coach for Mathinna leaves Fingalon Tuesdays,
Thursdays, and Saturdays, at 4 p.m. (the Launceston
train having arrived at ITO, and the Hobart at 3T9
p,m.), and leaves Mathinna on the return journey on
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, at 10 a.m.
(fare, 55.), in time for the 2T6 p.m. train for Hobart
(arrive 8'45 p.m.), and Launceston (arrive 8 20 p.m.)
Proceeding eastward for another 18 miles (the
Mount Nicholas range rising about two miles off on
the left the latter part of the way), the township
of St. Mark’s and terminus of the railway is reached,
the total distance being 47 miles from Conara junc-
tion, 145 miles from Hobart, and 82 miles from
Launceston by rail.
COAL MINES, FINGAL DISTRICT.
About three miles north-*west of St. Mary’s, and
in the Mount Nicholas range, are the Cornwall and
Mount Nicholas coal mines, the former being the
principal coal mine in the colony. The Fin gal
Bailway was built principally to accommodate these
mines, and they are connected with it by sidings and
self-acting tramways. The coal is a good household
and steam coal, the seams, which are very many,
varying in thickness, and having mostly a sandstone
roof. The seams principally worked are a 7 ft.
seam in the Cornwall, and a 4ft. Gin. seam in the
Mount Nicholas. These mines started in 1886, and
since then the output of coal has been steadily on
the increase, that from the Cornwall being about
30,000 tons, out of a total of 42,297 tons of native
coal raised in the year ending 30th June,- 1889.
About 15,000 tons of this coal has been exported, but
the distance by rail is a drawback to the proper
development of this trade. There are about 100
miners employed in the two coal mines here.
ST. mart’s AND ST. MART’S PASS.
Between St. Patrick’s Head and the south-eastern
skirt of the Mount Nicholas range is St. Mary’s Pass,
justly considered one ©f the most beautiful of
scenery in Tasmania. The trains that connect with


An Attractive & Famed Pleasure Resort
In Launceston is the Drapery
Establishment of
RUBDEN, THE DRAPER,
ST. JOHN ST.
Its notoriety is claimed by the WONDERFUL BARGAINS
always on show, and embraces every department in the
Dancy, General Drapery, and Clothing.
Visitors to Launceston should not fail to prove this
assertion.
One of the largest and keenest-bought stocks to select from.
An elaborate Show Room, with the
I(citest I<or|do;q kpd Pkddiku }[oveltied
ii\ Ydiipiped kpd lfptfitqn\ed
©oppetd, Jkdketd, etd.
SPACIOUS FITTING ROOMS, Etc.
Doing an entire Cash Business, your small or large purchases
will repay you making
RUSDEN YOUR DRAPER.
Dresses Gloves Gent’s Shirts Haberdashery
Silks Jtibbons
Plushes Paces
Moires Flowers
Satins Feathers
Velvets Umbrellas
Braids Sunshades
Trimmings etc., etc.
etc., etc. Gent’s Hats
Ties Calicoes
Graces Flannels
Gloves Ticks
Collars Sheetings
Cuffs Blankets
Sox Quilts
Studs Curtains
Undergarments, etc.
Hosiery „ Caps „ Mackintoshes, etc.
Muslins Pinings Gent’s Suits etc., etc.
DRAPER AND IMPORTER,
ST. JOHN STREET, LAUNCESTON.


the coaches running through the Pass to Falmouth
and St. Helen’s are the 5 - 45 am. train from Conara
Junction on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays,
arriving at 8 - 50, and coach leaves at 9 a.m.; and on
Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays the 8 - 30 a.m.
train from Launceston and the 8 p.m. from Hobart
the previous evening (leaving Conara at 10 55 a.m.),
arriving at St. Mary’s at 2 p.m. From October 1 to
March 31 Page’s coach for St. Helen’s leaves at 2 p.m.
(formerly 4 p.m.), but the rest of the year on arrival
of train at 2 p.m. Comfortable accommodation can
be procured at St. Mary’s, which is a quiet pretty
little town, with church, inn, post and telegraph
office, stores, etc. Private vehicles will go at any
time to Falmouth, etc., which is nearly two miles
off the main coach road to St. Helen’s.
Two miles from St. Mary’s, the road ascending
through pretty country, the entrance to the Pass, or
“Heads” as it is called, is reached. A sudden turn
and a steep hill or mountain rises abruptly on the
right, covered with a dense growth of shrubs, ferns,
and flowers, through which the tall trees rise, ever
higher and higher with the ascent, while on
the left is a deep ravine of the same character, in
whose cool and mossy depths the fern trees grow
abundantly, as also in the gullies of the opposite
slope. The further we advance the deeper the ravine
and the higher the tiee-crowned heights, while the
road winds along and seems to hang on the sideling
in a variety of curves and sharp bend?, now into the
heart of a gully and then returning out and round
the opposite spur, where is plainly seen the road you
have passed. The longest of these bends is called
the Long Horse-shoe, and here I may say that the
road on the ravine side is securely fenced by a strong
post and rail fence. In places the descent to the
“ fairy land” below is possible, and a rope attached
to the fence is often used for the assistance of those
who venture. A stream at the bottom heightens the
charm of this shady bower. At the first sharp turn
a grand view of the ocean is seen, with the waves
rolling in in long lines of foam j and ever and anon
on rounding the spurs of the mountain the grandeur
of the scene compels unqualified admiration even
from those who have travelled much. These often


say they have seen nothing to surpass it.* JThe oppo-
site hills and gullies to® are beautiful with sassafras,
musk, and ferns, and at one place a pretty little
waterfall of some eight or ten feet in heiarht adds to
the enchantment of its ferny surroundings. When
nearing the bottom of the Pass the hills gradually
lessen till the open country is reached, and then
three miles on a good road, the last mile of which is
within sound of the rollers on the shore, brings us t®
Falmouth. Here comfortable lodgings may be pro-
cured at Mr Yiney’s Temperance Hotel, with good
cookery and every attention.
FALMOUTH.
For a mild and dry climate Falmouth is probably
unsurpassed in the colonies. In summer it is never
too warm, the cool breezes of ocean tempering the heat,
and in winter the air is so mild that wraps are almost
unnecessary. There is good fishing here, splendid
bream weighing l£lb to 41b, and many other varieties.
Sea bathing is another attraction, and there is a fine
beach. Roads run along the coast from here, north-
wards to George’s Bay, but southward to Swansea,
etc., there is only a horse track, and many pleasant
excursions can be made in the neighbourhood. For
a resting place for invalids the place is well adapted,
and once having stayed there the visitor usually re-
turns. To see St. Mary’s Pass and Falmouth is well
worth the journey, and the above is only a feeble
attempt to portray what is usually characterised as
“beyond description.”
From Falmouth to George’s Bay is 16 miles, the
Scamander River being passed in the first part of the
route—a splendid place for fishing, and with gold,
galena, and antimony in the neighbourhood, but not
in payable quantities. Continuing along the coast,
the view of the sea being shut out by intervening
sand dunes—the whole soil here, where not marsh,
being sand—the road passes Diana’s Basin, an inlet
of the sea enclosed by a high sandbank, where one
would love to linger. The sea ' has been more in
view for some time, but now the road strikes inland,
and presently we come to the most picturesque bay
in the island, —beautifully varied in its outline and
surroundings. As a harbour it is commodious, deep.


and land-locked, the town of St. Helen’s being situ-
ated at the end of a small inlet at the head of the-
bay.
st. Helen’s, George's bay.
Is the most important place on this part of the. East
Coast, being the outlet for the tin mines of the
neighbourhood and for many miles. There are good
hotels here, a bank, and, in addition to the St. Mary’s
coach, a coach leares for Moorina on Mondays, Wed-
nesdays,and Fridays,at 6a.m.,returningfrom Moorina
on Tuesdays,Thursdays, and Saturdays, at 6 a.m. The
route passed through is splendid mineral country, and
settlement on Crown lands has been proceeding lately
(1889) up the George Elver, both in the north and
south branches, east of Mount Victoria, and there is
still some good land available there. The coach road
passes through Gould’s Country and over the Blue
Tier, where a good amount of tin is being raised, the
Full Moon Company working a lode and having a
crushing plant recently erected. Over the Blue Tier
we come to Weldborough, another steady tin mining
district, which now has a company searching for gem
stones, an industry hitherto looked after exclusively
by the Chinese, who abound in this district. The
road is now in the Eingarooma watershed and dis-
trict, which has been described already. On the
whole it would be difficult to find a nicer spot than
George’s Bay for a holiday, as the bay is extensive
and splendid for boating or fishipg, and the neigh-
bourhood for fishing and shooting. The fish in this
neighbourhood are trumpeter and barraeouta outside,
and flounder, bream, perch, and flathead in the bay.
Crayfish abound and oysters are not scarce. One of
the finest pieces of scenery is the Leda Falls, situ-
ated in a deep and precipitous ravine about seven
miles from St. Helen’s, and an immense mass of
overhanging weathered granite near by has been
christened Trugauini’s Throne.
From October 1 to March 31 the coach for St.
Mary’s leaves St. Helen’s on Mondays, Wednesdays,
and Fridays at 8‘45 a.m„ and arrives in time for the
I’lO a.m. train, which reaches Launceston at 8 20p.m.
or Hobart at 845 p.m. On Tuesdays, Thursdays, and
Saturdays it leaves at 10 a.m. in time for the 2 25 p.m.


tram, which arrives in Launceston at 8 - 20 p.m. or in
Hobart at 7‘lo next morning.
From April 1 to September 80 leaves for St. Mary’s
on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays at 8 - 45 a.m.
in time for the I*lo p.m. train, which arrives in
Launceston at 8 20 p.m. or in Hobart at 8 45 p.m.
On Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays leaves at
10 a.m., in time for the 2 25 p.m. train, which arrives
in Launceston at B‘2o p.m. or in Hobart at 7'lo next
morning. Fares—Coach, 7s fid; St. Mary’s to Coaara,
11s. 9d. and 7s. 10d.; return, l7s.‘Bd. and 11s. 9d.
The s.s. Warrentinna calls at this port once a
week, alternately from Hobart and Launceston.
Fare, 255.
Twenty-five miles north of St. Helen’s is Eddy stone
lighthouse, recently erected at a cost of .£12,400,
including lantern, etc.
SWANSEA, ETC. —EAST COAST.
Should the visitor desire to roam further among
the rocks “ when the tide is low,” he cannot do better
than take a trip to Swansea, further south on the
East Coast, certainly one of the most picturesque
coastal towns in the whole of Tasmania. Till recently,
Swansea was a difficult place to reach, especially
from the northern part of the island, but now the
trip is nothing less than an excursion: and he is
certainly well paid for his journey. Leaving the
Launceston terminus of the Main Line Railway by
the 8-30 a.m. train on Monday, Wednesday, or
Saturday, or Hobart by the 8 a.m. train, he will
reach Campbell Town by 11 15 in the former and
125 in the latter case, and after being allowed
ample time for refreshments, he will find Hunn’s
well-equipped coach awaiting him at Kean’s
Hotel, and for 15s. he can have an interesting
drive to Swansea, which is reached just in time
for tea. The road is not as good as a bicycle
track, but it is what may be called a first-class
country road, the only ticklish part being near
Kearney’s Bogs, where the inner man can again be
refreshed. The last five miles of the road to Swan-
sea is very attractive, as the “ Royal Mail ” passes
through several smiling homesteads, and the air is


made odoriferous with orchards in blossom and
hedges of may. About three miles from his destina-
tion/a glimpse of the blue ocean is seen, and the salt
sea air is sniffed with a degree of pleasure. Two
things strike the visitor when he enters Swansea,
namely, the large store kept by Mr. James Morris, a
mammoth building for the size of the place, and the
pretty English church that " tops the neighbouring
hill.” There is no lack of hotel and private accom-
modation, the Pier Hotel commanding a splendid
central site, from the steps of which a grand view of
the large crescent-shaped bay and Schouten Islands
can be seen. On a clear morning or a moonlight
night, the view across the sea to Cole's Bay, the
mouth of the Swan Elver, or more south to Maria
Island, is exceedingly grand, the effect being
heightened by the low rumble of the huge waves as
they tumble on the sandy shore or play round the
rocks at Waterloo Point. If the visitor has any taste
for choncology, he has a splendid field in what is
known as the Nine-Mile beach, which stretches in
crescent shape for a few yards from the Swansea or
Pier Hotel doors round to where the Swan Eiver
empties itself into the sea. If he is a good pedestrian,
he may walk, but there is plenty of room for riding
or driving here, and we feel confident he will enjoy
it. If he is fond of the gun, red, and saddle, he can
hardly strike a better place, the rivers swarming with
wildfowl of various hinds (sw r an shooting being one
of the cardinal features), and bream, mullet, eels,
tench, blackfish, and sometimes herring. Some
good sport is also had in the bay, and as boats can
be had on hire, this is a favourite pastime for visitors
as. the fishing ground is so handy. The town of
Swansea is a very old one, Glamorgan, the county,
being the oldest municipality in the island, and it is
also an historical place. It has its Literary and De-
bating Association, of which the Eev. W. W. Craig
is president, a Social Club, where the young
men do mostly congregate to play billiards,
draughts, chess, or read all the principal colonial and
English illustrated paj. ers. Altogether an extremely
pleasant time can be spent at this favourite seaside
resort, both by inval ds and those seeking a rest
from the busy madding crowd of the larger cities of


the other colonies, or the young man who wants to put
in a holiday by having some good sport. We would
recommend him when he takes his departure to book
a seat for Burden’s coach, which runs to Campania,
where the traveller can pick up the train and be in
Hobart in an hour and a half. Barden’s mail
conveyances leave Swansea on Mondays, Wednes-
days, and Fridays, at 8 a.m., passing through
Lisdillon, Little Swanport, Spring Bay, Orford, and
Buckland, arriving at Campania at 7 p.m., in time
for the express train for Hobart, arriving at 8 45 and
leaves on return on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Satur-
days, after arrival of express train from Hobart,
arriving at Swansea at 8 p.m. The drive from
• Swansea to Campania is without doubt the most
romantic of any in Tasmania. The coaches are really
first-class, and the fare (235.) very reasonable. For
many miles the road skirts the sea, and the view
round by Eocky Hills is one of surprising grandeur,
and should be seen by all those on tour. The settle-
ments of Lisdillon and Little Swanport, where the
reapers at harvest time are kept busy for weeks, are
most interesting to the traveller, who, by the time
he reaches Spring Bay, has discovered he has an
appetite, and here a spell is made, advantage of
which is taken by man and beast to refresh at a well-
kept hotel. If the visitor is not pushed for time he
.would find much to amuse and interest him at
Spring Bay, where some splendid fishing can be had.
The next place of interest is Prosser’s Bay and
Paradise, so named on account of the beauty of the
scenery, which can be viewed as the coach rattles
down a first-class macadamised road, and which
margins the course of the tortuous river. Close by
can be seen the home of that gifted lady, Mrs.
Charles Meredith, who has given to Tasmanians
some excellent specimens of her literary and artistic
skill in a number of works on the fauna and flora of
their own country. A halt is next made at the
Buckland Hotel for a few moments, and a couple
of hours afterwards Campania is reached, on
the Main Line Eailway. Few places in Tasmania
offer so many advantages to tourists and others as
Swansea. It has a climate unequalled in Australia,
it is blessed with many natural advantages, the


people delight in welcoming strangers, who always
leave with pleasant remembrances of their trip.
RICHMOND.
Connected with the coach road between Buckland
and Campania is the Richmond road, which conducts
to Hobart via Richmond, Risdon Ferry, and New
Town. Richmond, situated on the Coal river, is a
quiet town, with several churches, hotels, and stores.
The distance from Hobart is 14 miles. The district
is agricultural and pastoral, the town being situated
in a valley walled in by mountain?.
Crossing the shoulder of the mountain at Shenstone,
where there is an inn, and where a grand view of the
Derwent and the city of Hobart is obtained, the road
descends to a narrow glen which leads to Risdon,
Ferry, a spot of historical interest. Richmond is
also connected by road with Hobart, via the Sorell
road and Bellerive.
Connection with the Main Line Railway at Campania
is made twice a day by coaches leaving Richmond at
8 a.m. and 6 p.m., returning from Campania at 930
a.m. and 7'30 p.m.
A coach for Hobart leaves daily at 8 a.m., leaving
Collins street on return at 3 - 45 p.m.
green’s CREEK ROAD.
GLENGARRY, FRANKFORD, WINKLEIGH, ETC.
The road to Frankford and Green’s Creek diverges
from the West Tamar or Beaconsfield road at Exeter,
a township (on paper) some fifteen miles from Laun-
ceston, bearing to the left just opposite its one soli-
tary house, and passing through second-class pastoral
country till the hills are reached, where the land
improves, and seven miles from Exeter Glengarry, a
farming settlement of thrifty Scotchmen, is met with
lying in the valleys to the right and left of the
traveller as he proceeds. About two miles further
on, the road from Hagley, a mere track via Pour
Springs Plains, is met with on the left, and half a
mile further a similar track from Westbury via
Egmont Bridge and the Black Sugarloaf Hill. From
the Glen the road winds across barren uplands and
gravelly hills for some five or six miles until the fer-
tile but patchy district of Frankford is reached, a


JOHN DUNNING,
GOLDEN FLEECE,
BRISBANE ST., LAUNCESTON,
15 COLEMAN ST., LONDON,
Direct Importer from best Home
and Foreign Manfaeturers.
MONTHLY SHIPMENTS
Of Newest and most Fashionable
DRAPERY,BOOTS, SHOES,MILLINERY
CARPETS, OILCLOTHS, LINOLEUMS,
FANCY GOODS, & GENTS’ OUTFITTING
These goods being bought on the most advan-
tageous terms are in many cases supplied at
ordinaiy Wholesale prices.
Those who have not been in the habit of doing
business at the “ GOLDEN FLEECE ” would
find it to their advantage to give it a trial.
DRESSMAKING & TAILORING ON THE
PREMISES
EXPERIENCED ARTISTES.
Fit Guaranteed.
“GOLDEN FLEECE,” LAUNCESTON.


more lately settled country and chiefly by English
immigrants. From this township to Kermode, at the
head of the inlet known as Port Sorell, and situated
on Green’s Creek, the road runs north-west, following
in the main the course of the Franklin Rivulet, a
distance of ten or eleven miles. This district is de-
scribed in “ N.W. Coast.”
Winkleigh, on a branch road to Frankford, is a
small agricultural settlement a few miles from Bea-
consfield, where the settlers, mostly of Scotch de-
scent, find a profitable market for their dairy pro-
duce.
From Exeter the road passes Gravelly Beach and
Supply River, both picnicking places, then Sidmouth,
and so on to
BEACONSPIELD,
Situated on the west bank of the River Tamar, the
township being three miles from the Beauty Point
Jetty, 30 miles by water and 28 miles by road from
Launceston. Steamers run daily to and from Laun-
ceston and Beaconsfield, and a coach alternate days
by road; fare, by former, ss; by latter, 6s. Cabs
meet all steamers; fare to township. Is. Population
about 2000, about 600 being engaged in gold mining.
The principal mine is the Tasmania G.M. Company,
in 45,000 shares at £5 (market value, .£6 8s); started
operations latter part of year 1877, and up to 80th
November, 1889, had crushed 203,916 tons of quartz,
yielding 274,8550 z of retorted gold, value £989,478.
.£565,875 has been paid in dividends. The area
of the mine is 103 acres, and as yet it has only been
worked to a of 400 ft; 85 head of stampers are
engaged crushing the quartz. The search for other
portions of this reef has been vigorously prosecuted,
and although the deep and wet ground has baffled
Some, fresh trials are being made. Many other
valuable mines are located here, and the yield of gold
for the year ending 30th June, 1889, was 30,8320 z, or
£14,000 worth more than the value raised the pre-
vious year.
Splendid fishing can be- obtained in the river;
boats and fishing tackle can be hired at reasonable
rates. About Middle and Garden Islands the pic-
turesque scenery is really magnificent. At Flowery
Gully you find some large and beautiful caves of a


limestone formation, quite equal to anything of the
kind in Tasmania.
Five good hotels supply ample accommodation.
There is a Mechanics* Institute and library, town
hall, skating rink. Masonic, Odd Fellows’, and Tem-
perance halls, racecourse, rifle club and range, cricket,
football, and tennis clubs, two Masonic Lodges (Irish
and Scotch), Foresters, Odd Fellows, Eechabite, Sons
of Temperance, and Orange lodges, and a branch of
the Amalgamated Miners’ Association of Austral-
asia.
Beaconsfield is within three hours journey, either
by road or water, of Launceston. The Beacons-
field eoach leaves the Post-office, Launceston, every
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday at 11 a.m., leaves
Beaconsfield every Tuesday, Thursday, and Satur-
day at 9 a.m. The steamers leave the wharf oppo-
site Sydney Place daily at 11 a.m., for Beaconsfield
and George Town, and leave Beauty Point Jetty for
town daily, about 9'45 a.m.
SALISBURY (blue TIER),
A promising goldfield in 1880, but soon abandoned
for fresh fields, is now re-opened, a Victorian and
Tasmanian syndicate having in 1889 explored one of
the abandoned reefs, and so far with good prospects,
the reef being massive and proved payable to a depth,
as far as small tests go. Over 40 miners are now
engaged on the field, the alluvial again yielding
satisfactory returns. (See Government Geologist’s
report, 1885, for further information.)
YORK TOWN, ILFRACOMBE, KELSO.
Just below Beauty Point is the inlet of West Arm,
at the head of which is York Town, the site of the
first settlement in northern VaiT Diemen’s Land by
Colonel Patterson. The old Government garden still
retains its name. Near the mouth of the inlet is
Ilfracombe, where the iron works were started in
1872 and .£BO,OOO spent in a vain attempt to produce
a good metal, the presence of chromium in the ore
making it too hard for ordinary uses. Further down
the river is Kelso, but few people reside in this part.
A company is now at work at Ilfracombe, which is
four miles from Beaconsfield, producing excellent
paint from the chromate which abounds there. One


mill is working, but sufficient progress has not yet
been made to point to any noteworthy result.
«EOROE TOWN,
About 35 miles from Launceston by river and 37 by
road, lies on the banks of a little cove on the east
side of the Tamar about four miles from its entrance.
The town is a quiet watering place, and possesses
two hotels, daily steamer communication with Laun-
ceston and Beaconsfield, and numerous comfortable
private residences. Besides the East Tamar road
referred to above, a coast road conducts to Bridport
and Boobyalla Port, about 35 and 65 miles distant
respectively. There is also a road to the Low Head
and pleasant walks along the riverside seawards,
which is quite seaside-like with its shingly and sandy
beaches.
At Low Head, at Bermondsey, superior accommo-
dation for visitors is procurable, and also at a fine resi-
dencehalfway thither called Marion Villa. The attrac-
tions of Low Head are the outlook from the lighthouse
station. East Beach (a splendid beach facing the
ocean), and the various rocky promontories there and
to the eastward, with their attractions of clear pools,
sea weeds, shell fish, etc. Fishing and boating are
also procurable here and at George Town, which can
boast of being the oldest town of Northern Tas-
mania. Steamers leave for river ports and George
Town daily at 11 a.m., leaving George Town for river
ports and Launceston at 9 a.m. Fares, ss.
LEFEOT,
Formerly Nine Mile Springs, is situated 27 miles
from Launceston by road, and is the centre of the
most important gold-field east of the Tamar. From
the first discovery of gold here by Mr. Samuel
Eichards in 1870, and for a period of 12 years, this
field flourished exceedingly, and many thousand
ounces of gold were won (principally from quartz),
entitling the discoverer to the Government reward.
The field has declined since then, but new
discoveries and the re-opening of the Golden Point
lode, which has recently crushed foz. to the ton,
keep alive good hopes of the place. The Chum and
New Native Youth are the principal mines, the total
jield from this field for the last yearly return being


2456 ounces, value J 69446, against 1985 ounces,
value .£7379, of the previous year.
At Back Creek the boring so long proceeding, to
search for a sub-basaltic deep lead, has struck five
feet of quartz gravel wash at a depth of 211 feet, on
a slate bottom, after passing through 119 feet of
basalt. A shaft is to be sunk to further test this
discovery.
A new discovery by boring has been made 10 miles
west of Lefroy and four miles from George Town.
The borings struck a reef giving exceedingly rich
prospects, and a shaft was sunk, but the influx of
water necessitates a proper plant being erected.
For Lefroy, Moore’s conveyance leaves the Royal
Hotel, George street, Launceston, on Tuesdays and
Saturdays about 11 a m., and leaves Lefroy for
Launceston on Mondays and Fridays at 9 a.m. The
road (East Tamar Road) keeps well in sight (f the
river for the first eleven miles (a good pleasant drive
this) and then through bush land. Sixteen miles
from Launceston is Mount Direction, where are two
hotels, and at 28 miles the old George Town road,
now disused, is passed on the left, the main road and
also the telegraph line passing through Lefroy four
miles further on. From Lefroy to George Town the
distance is 10 miles, but there is no regular con-
veyance.
THE NORTH-WEST COAST DISTRICTS.
No person with leisure and means at his disposal
should visit Tasmania without spending some time
in the counties of Devon and Wellington. It is not
enough to pass rapidly by rail or coach through the
towns and villages that lie along the route from La-
trobe to Circular Head, for in doing so the traveller
sees but little of the rare beauties of this part of the
island. He gets a glimpse of the grand coast scenery,
and that is all. The main highways run, as a rule,
through uninteresting country by the seaboard,
where the soil is unsuited for tillage. To understand
the real character of the two Devons and Wellington
the visitor must loiter by the way, spend a few days
at each of the villages, dip into the forest shades
which are the homes of the myrtle and the fern tree,


stroll leisurely along the byways, and call at the
farms of the settlers, who are generally well pleased
to see strangers and to give them a fund of interest-
ing information about the place and people, the
methods of clearing the forest and cultivating the
soil.
There is no part of Tasmania so interesting as East
Devon, West Devon, and Wellington ; no part so
wonderfully rich in productive soil, so temperate in
climate, so well supplied with streams of fresh water
in all directions, with rivers forming navigable ports
at their estuaries ; no part so admirably suited for the
support of a large rural population. The physical
features of this portion of the island are peculiar.
The rivers rise amongst the elevated mountain ranges
to the Suuth, and run almost parallel with each other
in a northerly direction until they fall into Bass
Strait. The country between the rivers is undulat-
ing, heavily timbered with eucalypti, myrtle, black-
wood, red and celery top pine at a certain altitude,
and a dense undergrowth of dogwood, musk, tree
ferns, with tangled vines and-minor shrubs, which
render exploration through the primeval forest very
difficult; but a few hours spent in rambling through
some of those, leafy labyrinths in proximity to a
roadway or settler’s clearing would impress the visi-
tor with surprise and admiration at the beauty of
nature in those lonely wilds. The rivers frequently
run through deep glens which are in some cases
flanked by hills of steep ascent, so much so as to form
an impediment to farming and road making. It is
therefore difficult to form a cross-country road inland
between Sheffield in East Devon and Hampshire
Hills in Wellington, although there are considerable
tracks of rich basaltic soil between each river on the
table lands. The main road and the railway line run
along the low-lying ground near the sea beach,
whereby the uneven country at the back is avoided.
But in every direction there are good roads branch-
ing off from the main line along the coast, and run-
ning into the back settlements between each of the
rivers.
The best way to reach the North-West Coast is by
rail from Launceston via Deloraine. There is a good
coach road; but when the 1 ailv ay was opened coaches


left off running between Deloraineand Latrobe. There
is not much to be seen between these towns, so that
there is no inducement to hire a trap in Delo-
raine for the 28 miles journey to
LATKOBE.
This is a town of considerable importance in East
Devon, on the east side of the Mersey, and about
eight miles from the sea entrance of that river. It is
well situated as the central emporium of a large and
flourishing agricultural district. The navigable tide
waters of the Mersey flow up to an inlet at Latrobe,
where good-sized vessels discharge and load cargo.
Above the bridge, on the main road, there are slight
rapids, which prevent the tide from going further.
In February and March this grand river affords a
carnival of sport to the angler, who can take almost
fabulous numbers of fine fresh-water herring of from
half a pound to a pound weight. At all seasons of the
year the Mersey is a'celebrated river for salt water fish
below Latrobe and fresh-water of various kinds above.
Latrobe contains about 220 houses and 1200 inhabi-
tants. There are Episcopalian, Catholic, Wesleyan,
Congregational, and Baptist churches, public and
private schools, banks, insurance offices, mercantile
houses, general stores, shops, and several excellent
hot sis, where visitors can procure every comfort they
require. The town is lit with gas, and arrangements
are being made for a water supply from the Mersey,
whose mountain-fed waters are clear as crystal, and
of the highest quality for domestic use. Mr. J. M.
Dooley, the old and papular member for East Devon,
lives in the town.
In order to see the surroundings of Latrobe a tew
days’ stay will be necessary. By hiring a trap, North
Down, New Ground, and Green’s Creek can be done
in one day. North Down is a large tract of magnifi-
cent soil overlooking the sea, between the Mersey
and Port Sorell. The principal estate belongs to the
Thomas family. In the early days, when the land
was given in free grants to the colonists, Captain B.
B. Thomas selected land and settled at North Down.
He was the first and only landowner in the district
at that time. He and his overseer, Mr. Parker, were
unfortunately murdered fey the blacks in 1830. Mr.


B. W. Thomas, of Appledore, Formby, resided for a
time at North Nown after his uncle’s death, and
W. F. Wright, who still lives at North Down, settled
there fifty years ago. These gentlemen are the oldest
resident inhabitants of East Devon. Mr. E. H,
Douglas, of Launceston, lived for a time at Frogmore,
near Latrobe, more than fifty years ago, and Messrs. J.
Fenton, of Launceston, and George Hall, of Victoria,
lived at Port Sorell about the same period. These
are the only pioneers of East Devon who survive.
There is a splendid sea view from North Down, with
a sandy beach of eight miles to Port Sorell on the
east, and of the Asbestos Eange, projecting boldly
into the sea between Port Sorell and the Tamar,
Passing on through forest country, the town of
Burgess is reached five miles beyond North Down.
It is situated on the fine harbour of Port Sorell,
celebrated for its fish and the beauty of its natural
scenery, consisting of the open sea outside, the broad
expanse of water in the harbour, interspersed with
small islands, bays, and headlands. The township of
Moriarty lies three miles up the harbour on the same
side, but it is a place of no importance except for
having once been the scene of a desperate fight be-
tween a party of constables and the notorious bush-
rangers Brown and Jefkins, of Britton’s gang. Some
of the contending parties were shot dead and others
wounded. Bullets (if searched for) could be found
in the gum trees on the projecting point of land
where the affray took place. Heidelberg, the Green’s
Creek settlement, lies at the extreme southern end of
Port Sorell, a distance of 12 miles from the sea.
Small vessels go up the whole distance. There is a
hotel, post office, store, etc., on the township, with
several settlers’ homesteads in the vicinity, and a fine
area of good brown agricultural soil. If this place is
too far for the day’s journey the excursionist cam
cross the country on a fair road from Moriarty to the-
“ New Ground,” and then proceed back t© Latrobe
by way of the “ Sassafras.” These splendid settle-
ments are the cream of the agricultural country east
of the Mersey, and will give a good idea of the rich
quality of the chocolate "soil which produces such
heavy crops and pasture for dairy and fattening pur-
poses.


TO TOURISTS AND
OTHERS.
SEMMELHAAGK BROS.,
NAVAL & MILITARY
TAILORS.
IS THE
BEST HOUSE INTABMANIA
TAILOR-MADE GARMENTS-
A Practical and Experienced Cutter
on the Premises.
ALSO,
Hard and Soft Felt Hats,
White Shirts, Under-
shirts, and Pants,
Collars, Ties,
Braces, etc.
SEMMELHAAGK BROS.,
Central George Street,
LAUNCESTON.


KENTISBTJRT.
The next day or the day following you should go
by train to Railton, and thence by coach to Sheffield,
a town in the centre of a magnificent country on the
west side of the Mersey, lying about 18 miles S.S.W.
from Latrobe, The Kentish Plains were discovered
in 1843 by Mr. N. L. Kentish, who, with a large gang
of convict men, had been sent by the Government to
survey and clear a line of road across the then un-
known country between Deloraine and the Y.D.L.
Company’s settlement at Emu Bay. A great change
has taken place in Kentisbury since that period.
There are now about 350 separate properties in the
town and vicinity of Sheffield, most of them culti-
vated farms. The scenery around Kentish Plains is
superb. Mount Roland, with its wild craggy summit,
stands like a sentinel close by, while an infinite
variety of mountain, hill, and rugged gorge dis-
charge their dancing streams into the Dasher and
other tributaries of the Mersey or Forth. There is a
good hotel at Sheffield, and the traveller who visits
the settlementin summertime will be delighted with
the hospitality of the settlers, the extent of their
grass paddocks and fields of grain, the management
displayed in their dairies and homesteads, and the
excellence of their stock. There is a track through
to.the Middlesex goldfields via Mount Claude.
If possible, the return journey should be accom-
plished by way of Barrington, which is a fine agri-
cultural country extending from Kentishbury to-
wards the coast. The River Don takes its rise on
Kentish Plains, and runs almost due north until it
falls into the sea on the western side of Formby,
Barrington lies between the Don and Forth rivers ;
is settled by a superior class of farmers, and is equal
to Kentisbury in productiveness. There is no town
or hotel in Barrington ; but good roads are taking
the place of bush tracks, and there is a tram road
belonging to the Don Trading Company running
from the Don Heads into the heart of the settlement,
a distance of 13 miles, which is of great utility for
conveying produce and passengers. The visitor who
passes over the settlements we have described will at
once see that East Devon is destined to become a
densely populated district; and when he considers


the resources already being developed be will not be
surprised to find himself nearing (either by way of
the Don Heads or Spreyton, which is a railway sta-
tion) two delightfully situated and important towns
at the mouth of the Mersey—one on each side—
namely.
FORMBY AND TORQUAY (dEVONPORT).
These towns are progressing so rapidly that they
promise very sOon to equal, if not surpass, Latrobe
in population and activity. Formby, on the
west side of the river, has the advantage of the
railway; but buildings are going up rapidly
at Torquay,* on the east side of the river, as well as
at Formby. They are eight miles from Latrobe.
Steamboats, for passengers and cargo, piy to and fro
on the river at intervals, and there are good roads on
eaeh side of the river, besides the railway on the
Formby side. There is no difficulty to,find a good
hotel or coffee palace at either of the twin towns at
the entrance of the Mersey. There are post and
telegraph offices at each side, bankers, merchants
and shopkeepers, etc. A stay for a protracted period
at either of these towns would be most enjoyable.
There are ferry boats always available for crossing
the river at a charge ©f 2d adults and Id children,
and there is also a punt for animals or vehicles. (An
opposition ferryman now charges Id. for adults.) In
the course of time, however, a bridge will span the
noble Mersey, and thus more closely connect the
towns. The sea beach is close at hand. There are
two sandy bays on the west side and some very pretty
rocky headlands on the way to the Don Heads, which
is only a distance of two miles. On the Torquay
side there a little sandy beach immediately at the
estuary, then a mile or so of rough shingle, beyond
which there is a most delightful ddve along a sandy
beach for eight or ten miles to Port Sorell. There
are public libraries with open reading rooms at most
of the towns along the coast. The North-West Post is
published tri-weekly at Formby. A large trade is
♦ Mr. Mault estimates that in July last the proposed water
supply would serve 97 houses with 500 inhabitants at Torquay,
and 150 houses with a population of 800 at Formby.


carried on at the Mersey with Melbourne and Sydney
all the year round. In the produce season three or
four large steamers enter and leave with passengers
and cargo weekly, besides a considerable number of
coasting steamers and sailing vessels. Last summer
a steamship loaded in the Mersey with a coal-carry-
ing capacity of 2300 tons. The steam dredge Agnew
is engaged deepening the bar. Land in the chief
business centres sells at the rate of about £IOOO per
acre; and in the suburbs of the towns, where thirty
years ago it was sold by the Government for 20s per
acre, it is now worth from .£4OO to £SOO per acre.
Formby is at present the terminus of the Western
Railway, but in the course of a few months the ex-
tension t© Ulverstone (River Leven) will be opened
for traffic. Formby is distant 81 miles by rail from
Launceston. The return fare is 24s 5d first, 17s 6d
second, available for nine days ; the single fare is
16s 3d first and 11s 8d second. Travellers can secure
their journey through to Mount Bischoff by rail and
coach by paying at the Launceston railway station
as follows :
Launceston to Mount Bischoff, Ist return... £3 5 5
~ ~ 2nd ~ ... 213 6
~ „ Ist single... 1 19 9
„ „ 2nd „ ... 112
Through tickets available for 14 days, and passen-
gers allowed to break journey at any station, a con-
cession which is valuable to visitors. Nothing short
of a week would do to enable a tourist to see the
principal places in East Devon, without which a fly-
ing visit is hardly worth the cost.
Trains leave Launceston at 8 a m. and 3T5 p m. for
Formby and all intermediate stations, arriving at
12-22 and 7’32 p.m. respectively.
The exports at the Mersey for 1888 were valued at
£25,807, and the imports at £59,209.
A mail coach leaves Formby on arrival of the
night train from Launcetton about 7'50, and arrives
at Burnie next morning about l - 30 In going to
Stanley from Formby the passenger changes coaches
at Burnie and Wynyard.


wiseman’s coast coaches.
Miles
Town.
Arrive
Leave
Formby
Don
Forth
Ulverstone
Penguin ..,
Burnie
Wynyard.
7-10
A.M.
9-30
P.M.
11 6
Rocky Cape
10-50
17 6
Stanley
22 6
Returning eastward —Leaves Stanley at 7 a.m.
for Wynyard, and leaves Wynyard at 3 15 p.m. for
Burnie daily. From Burnie to Formby leave the
former place at 8 a.m. and 5 - 50 p.m., arriving at
Formby at 12 noon and 10 45 p.m. respectively.
There
each wa
is one daily coach,
y between Stanley
mail carriage,
and Wynyard
or buggy,
Leaves
Stanley at 7 a.m. and arrives about 2 p m. at Wyn-
yard ; and the one. running west leaves Wynyard
about 6 a.m., and arrives at Stanley about 2 p.m.
WEST DEVON.
Having described most of the inhabited portions
of East Devon, we shall now enter West Devon at
the Don Bridge, on the main coast road. Coaches
leave Formby on arrival of the trains, morning aad
afternoon, and go as far as Table Cape the same
night; but, as we have remarked elsewhere, this fast
method of travelling will not be suitable for those
who want to see the country. The public convey-
ances may, however, be used for travelling short
distances each day. At the Don, two miles from
Formby, there is a hotel on the Formby side of the
river, and the little village of Milton, on the other
side, has a Congregational chapel, post office, general
store, etc. The Barrington tiam passes to the Heads


close by the Don Bridge. Less than a mile further
down is a settlement belonging to the Don Trading
Company, which was the life of West Devon in
former years, before Formby had developed into a
commercial centre. Limestone, in unlimited
quantity, is found four miles south of the main road.
There is a fine waterfall on the Don in the vicinity
of the Limestone, which is worthy of a visit. These
places can be reached by means of passenger cars on
the Barrington tramway, which leaves Barrington
daily at 9 a.m. for the Don, arriving at 11
a.m., and leaves the Don at 2 p.m., arriving at
Barrington at 4’30 p.m. There is a good wharf
at the Don Heads, below the railway bridge. Here
coasters and intercolonial vessels take in farmers’
produce, coal, and lime of excellent quality, which is
delivered by the tramway. The Heads are well
worth seeing. A bold basaltic bluff runs out on the
west side, with caves and blow-holes in the perpendi-
cular cliffs. Fossil woods are found in the bluff.
From the Don Bridge at Milton the main road
ascends a hill and runs westward through a fine
agricultural area, of about 10,000 acres, much of
which is in a high state of cultivation. The road
runs about two miles inland from the sea, glimpses
of which are to be seen at intervals. Four miles
along a good road, with cottages and cultivated fields
on each side, brings you to the town of
HAMILTON-ON-FORTH.
In a pleasant valley stands this little town, with
the Forth Eiver, a large, deep stream flowing
seaward, in the centre, its banks fringed with wattle,
native laurel, prostranthrum (native lilac), and other
beautiful shrubs. There are two good hotels on the
east side ; post, telegraph, and police offices ; a State
school, a flour mill, Epicopal and Catholic churches ;
several stores, tradesmen and private residents. A
good bridge spans the river in the centre of the town,
and on the other side are stores, a tannery, various
trade establishments, a public reading room and
library, town hall. Congregational and Wesleyan
churches, and a resident doctor. Mr. James Smith,
discoverer of the celebrated Mount Bischoff tin
mine, lives on the main road by the bridge. There


is a good road down the east side of the river to the
town of Leith, at the Heads, where there is a railway
station, and a railway drawbridge spans the
navigable part of the stream. There are several
residents at Leith and in its vicinity, but there were
only private dwellings and produce stores until quite
recently, as the business centre had been established
a,t Hamilton on account of the main road and bridge
being there. As soon as the railway is open for
traffic, Leith is likely to become a populous town.
It stands on a good site by the sea, with a sandy
beach on the west side of the port. Across the river,
at Leith, there is a ferry. Mr. Richard Hall, district
surveyor, resides here ; he is always .ready and
willing to give information to land selectors respec-
ting the crown lands of the district. Leith was also
the home of the hon. E. N, C. Braddon, before he
went to London as Agent-General. The first land
sold in West Devon adjoins Leith, and Mr. Fenton,
now of Launceston, was the first settler. He went
there in the early part of 1840. The next block of
land sold was at the Don Bluff, to Mr. Thomas
Drew. At that time the Leven and Penguin were
quite unknown.
From the west side of the bridge, at Hamilton,
there are two roads branching off in a southerly
direction, one along the west bank of the river to
Alma, a township eight miles back, where the
Wilmot flows into the Forth. There is a bridge
here across the Wilmot and a road to a settlement
beyond, where many new settlers have taken up land.
The soil generally is good between the Forth and
Wilmot. This country is said to be one of the most
suitable in the colony for selectors. The soil is
black with grassy patches when a distance of 18 or
20 miles from the coast is reached, and it continues
so for another 20 miles to Middlesex Plains (owned
by the V.D.L. Company) all the rest being crown
land. Near the source of the Wilmot is the Yale of
Belvoir, a pretty park-like spot with a small lake in
the centre. It contains a good extent of rich black
soil, mostly crown land. A red pencil pine grows in
all parts of this back country—the King William
pine (Arthro taxis cupressoides) —highly valued for its
lightness and fissile properties. It grows to a


diameter of from one to four feet. The woodlands,
mounts, and waterfalls in this part of the country are
well worthy of a hush excursion; but a competent
guide, as well as a resolute will and strong constitu-
tion, are necessary for such an undertaking. Settle-
ment has been proceeding briskly in 1889 between
the Forth and Wilmot. The land is heavily
timbered. The other road, which runs in a southerly
direction from Hamilton-on-Forth (west), leads
through the settlement of Kindred Plains, so called
from the circumstance that more than thirty years
ago several families of English farmers settled there
who were, more or less, connected by marriage or
kin. For ten miles back there is a farming popula-
tion along the Kindred road, which was at last, after
years of privation had been endured, macadamised
by means of parliamentary grants. A continuation
of the road leads on to East Castra, with the Wilmot
flowing in a deep ravine to the east. There are some
very fine waterfalls in the vicinity of the Kindred
road, and some magnificent fern-tree gullies can be
visited with the assistance of a guide without
much trouble. Continuing along the main road
you come in two miles to the Clayton rivulet,
where Mr. James Scott has a flour-mill and a good
orchard. The Forth, Wilmot, and Clayton, are well
stocked with native fish, including fresh-water herring
and lobster, blackfish, eel, and trout; also, the brown
English trout grow to a large size in these rivers.
The blackfish is an exceptionally delicious fish,
reaching from 41bs. to 61bs. in weight in unfrequented
places. The Devon Racecourse lies on the west side
of the Clayton, and is now being cleared and prepared
for the Turf Club. Six miles from the Forth Bridge
along a good carriage road, brings the traveller to
Ulverstone. The railway line from Formby to
Ulverstone (12 miles), does not cross, or run close to,
the main road in any place.
ULVERSTONE.
This is the principal town of West Devon. It lies
on the east side of the Leven river, bounded by the
sea on the north, and by a line across the river on
the west. It would be difficult in the space at our
disposal to do justice to this grand part of the coast.
The town stands on an almost level plain, rather


L. SUSMAN & CO.
MURRAY STREET, HOBART,
Wholesale & Retail Warehousemen.
—o —
Importers of Electro-JPlated-
Ware, Jewellery, Watches, Cabinet-
Ware, China & Glassware, Cutlery,
Leather- Ware, Stationery and
Account Books , Toys, Games,
Basket-Ware, Optical Goods.
A Speciality made of SPECTACLES and
EYE-GLASSES, QUARTZ-GLASSES,
COMPASSES, CLOCKS of all Descriptions,
BERLIN and other WOOLS, SILKS.
The Newest Fancy Work of all Descriptions,
Musical Instruments, Pipes and Tobacconists
Sundries, Perfumery and Soaps.
—o —
Agents for W. DUKE & SON’S Celebrated
CAMEO CIGARETTES and SMOKING
TOBACCOES.
The Trade only supplied with Patent Medicines
and Druggists’ sundries.
—o —
Indents executed of all descriptions of English,
Continental, and American Merchandise.


swampy in places, but capable of good drainage.
With a broad expanse of water in the port, and an
extent of low lying land beyond, this town has an
advantage over many of the coast towns which are
shut in by steep hills that impede the view, and seem
to give little breathing room. TJlverstone has a
commanding view of the lofty Dial Kange, a large
extent of country to the west, and the blue expanse
of Bass Strait to the north. The railway station is
in the heart of the town, close to the public offices*
town hall, numerous Business premises, hotels, etc.
There are some good hotels, but we purposely refrain
from directing special attention to individual ones
here, and on the coast generally, as in doing so, others
of equal merit might possibly be omitted, and the
task would thus become invidious. By the exercise
of a little judgment the traveller can soon select his
hotel, and, if necessary, secure private apartments.
The charges are exceedingly moderate ; indeed they
bear no comparison with first-class hotels in the
cities. The coast hotels are remarkable for their
quietness at night, and on Sundays, which as a rule,
may be likened to the undisturbed peace of a private
dwelling. There are numerous large business estab-
lishments at TJlverstone. Intercolonial and coastal
trading vessels lie up to the wharf, which is close to
the principal part of the town, The exports in 1888
were valued at .£9900, and the imports at .£7341..
The bridge on the main road is a lengthy structure,
built on piles. It connects the two sides of the town*
but the eastern side is the principal part. Above
the bridge, which is about a mile from the mouth of
the Leven, there is a long stretch of navigable water,
but only punts are used, as there is no drawbridge.
The Eiver Gawler flows into the Leven on the east
side a short distance above the town. The Gawler is
a considerable stream, branching out into the Castra
country to the south. There is a township reserve
called Allison, south of the Gawler mouth, and the
flourishing settlement of North LJottoa extending
for some miles inland, lies between the Gawler and
Leven rivers. The Gawler road runs southward from
TJlverstone for some eight miles, through farms with
soil of the richest desciiption. The Castra road runs
also to the south, and unites with the Gawler road in


the back country. Where the land has not been
cleared of scrub, the native foliage on these roads is
something when once seen never to be forgotten.
The musk, sassafras, and myrtle trees, are epecially
striking fer the beautiful and varied colour of their
leaves, and the perfume of the former. The country
is well settled eight miles back, nearly the whole
area between the Forth at Alma, and the Gawler
at Castra, being good soil for tillage. A little
beyond this part the Castra road divides int® two
branches, one leading towards the upper Wilmot
and Dooley’s Plains, and the other to the town of
Crawford, and an extensive block of land taken up
mostly by Indian officers, most of whom are absentees.
Lieutenant Col®nel Crawford resides at Castra. The
elevation at a distance 16 or 18 miles south of Hlver-
stone is from 900 to 1300 ft., which is supposed to be
rather detrimental to the growth of cereals and root
■crops. Another branch road leads to Gunn’s Plains,
some 18 miles back in the valley of the Leven. There
is some fine land at each side of the river, generally
low-lying and subject to floods. Here the Leven is
less than 200 feet above the sea level. The Yale of
Bel voir (near the head waters of the Wilmot) has an
altitude of 2930 feet. Between funn’s Plains and
North Motton the country in the Leven valley is
much broken and generally rocky and barren. The
same applies to the country which lies to the south
and west; but there is a continuation of good land
in patches for miles inland at the Forth and
Wilmot rivers. lieturning to TJlverstone, a stroll
round the town and suburbs will reveal the fact that
it is destined to be a place of considerable import-
ance. The railway terminates there for the present,
but ere long it will be connected with the Emu Bay
(Bisehoff) line. Then the traveller can take a con-
tinuous journey by rail from Hobart to Waratah, via
Launceston, a distance of nearly 300 miles. There is
a stipendiary magistrate resident at Hlverstone, and
about a doaen honorary justices reside at Forth,
Leven, and Penguin. Sittings of the Supreme
Hourt are held four times a year at Hlverstone in the
small debts jurisdiction; also quarter sessions and
•Court of Requests monthly. Hlverstone has two
banks, a town board, marine board, two solicitors.


two medical practitioners, a rifle club, cricket club, a
town hall, a farmer’s club, racing club. State school,
several hotels, and churches of various denomina-
tions. Coaches pass to and fro several times daily j
two coasting steamers call each way once a week,
and there is a large intercolonial trade carried on by
means of steamers and sailing vessels. There is a
beautiful beach on the east side of the Leven, where
interesting varieties of shells and seaweod can be
gathered.
Burt’s coach leaves Ulverstene for Castra at 3 p.m.
daily, and Castra for Ulverstone (Leven) at 8 a.m.
PENOETK.
The Penguin township is, without exception, the
most lovely spot in West Devon at which to spend a
quiet holiday. The road from the Leven leads along
the sea side for eight miles, most of that distance
being studded with settlers’ homesteads, pleasantly
situated in front of the headlands and bays by the
seaside. Half way to the Penguin stands the
mansion of General Lodder, close to the sea, looting
out on the eastern line of coast as far as the entrance
to the Tamar. From a projecting headland on the
General’s property there is a magnificent view of the
coast scenery, both on the east and west sides, in-
cluding a stretch of coast from Table Cape to Low
Head lighthouse. The three rocky islets close by,
and the infinite variety of the bays, cliffs, and in-
dented river entrances, with the intervening eleva-
tions running off into the blue distance, give a charm
to this spot which cannot he surpassed in any land.
There are two hotels and Watcombe House, a
private boarding house, of some repute as a favourite
place for summer visitors. There are Episcopalian,
Free Methodist, and Primitive Methodist churches,
a post and telegraph-effice, besides several mercan-
tile establishments, general stores, shops, and private
residences. The principal street runs close to, and
parallel with, a delightful beach, where the waves
roar, dance, or play in gentle ripples, according to
the force of the wind. For two or three miles along
the eastern shore there are numerous indentations
in the coast line, forming little sandy bays,alternating
with tiny headlands and rocky projections, with just


enough of tea-tree, mangrove, and other leafy foliage
to afford shelter from wind and sun—delightful spots
for picnic parties. On the west side of the Penguin
Creek, which is only a small freshwater stream, with-
out any anchorage for vessels inside the mouth,
a breakwater at the foot of a little promontory
protects vessels while they load produce, of which
there is a large quantity grown in the vicinity.
Roads branch off to the south in places—one at each
side of the river and another beyond Preservation
Bay. The Pine road runs inland on the western
side, and is the most important one, as it is well
macadamised for for eight or nine miles along a fine
rich agricultural country, cultivated by an in-
dustrious class of farmers. But the most charming
sight to the visitor is the uncleared portions at each
side of the road, where the leafy foliage of the rich
underwood is still in its native luxuriance. These
patches are rapidly d ; sappearing under the stroke of
the woodman’s axe. Major-General Wilson lives at
Penguin. Beyond the village the main road runs
near the sea, crossing the River Blyth at a wild
picturesque looking place near its mouth. This is
the boundary of West Devon, and we enter the
county of
WELLINGTON.
Wellington is about tbe largest electoral district
in the colony. It sends two representatives to the
House of Assembly and one to the Legislative
Council. Its resources are varied as the district is
large. It produces gold, silver, tin, lead, and copper,
besides being essentially an agricultural country,
with large areas of the richest chocolate (basaltic)
soil, and immense tracks of what is now considered
second-class or myrtle forest land. The latter is
coming into use in some localities, and is found to
grow good crops and English grasses. The stranger
who sees a paddock of grass growing on land which
was once myrtle forest, will be surprised to know
that Tasmania does not grow enough meat for home
consumption, while hundreds of thousands of acres of
myrtle forest are lying idle. Settlement in Welling-
ton dates as far back as the year 1827, when the Van
Diemen’s Land Company (an English chartered body)
received large grants of land in consideration of spend-


ing money in introducing immigrants and improved
stock into the colony, conditions whieh they faith-
fully performed. The fir«t place the visitor comes
to, who travels according to the programme we have
prescribed, is
EMU BAT.
On approaching the Bay you pass along a deep
cutting at the base of Bound Hill, where walls have
had to be built up from the rocky sea beach for the
purpose of forming the read. The goverment town-
ship reserve of Ivanhoe is passed on the east side of
the Bay, and a long bridge over the Emu Eiver leads
you into the town of Burnie, which was originally
part of the Y.D.L. Company’s land. The town is
prettily situated, looking out on the capacious bay,
a deep semi-circular sheet of water, sheltered from
all winds but the east. Formerly when vessels were
at anchor in the bay, and an easterly gale set in, they
had to run out to avoid being stranded ; but now a
substantial breakwater is in course of construction,
so that vessels can lie safely in any weather. Burnie
has the usual appendages of a country town in the
way of hotels, shops, churches, public offices, etc.;
and it is the terminus of the Mount Bischoff railway.
The surrounding country is rich chccwlate soil, with
a fair extent of settlement; but all the west side of
the Emu river to its source in the Surrey Hills and a
vast extent of country beyond, belongs to the
V.D.L. Cempany; so that it las not been available
to selectors on the liberal terms offered by the
Government for crown lands. The company own
200,000 acres of land between Burnie and the
Bischoff 4in mines—so,oo# in the Emu Bay block,
10,000, Hampshire Hills, and 150,000 in the Surrey
Hills block, each joining the other, so that the rail-
way runs for more than 40 miles over the Company’s
land. This railway is under no Government super,
vision whatever, but has been worked by Mr. Norton
Smith on behalf of the T.D.L. Company in such an
excellent manner, without hitches or accidents, that
the management reflects honour on the ability of
that gentleman. Starting at Burnie, the railway
gradually ascends on the west side of the Emu river
through good agricultural country, thickly over-
grown with tree-ferns and 'underwood, except where


clearings hare been made. Approaching the
Hampshire Hills the country becomes more open,
with patches of native grass covering the ground
instead of scrub, until at the Hampshire Hills the
whole area is covered with a grassy sward, with
blackwood and wattle trees thinly scattered about,
giving a pretty park-like appearance to the place.
The station here is 1348 feet above the sea level.
Continuing on through the Surrey Hills block the
country is generally open and grassy, with myrtle
forests in places. The beautiful native waratah grows
luxuriantly on the slopes, covering the foliage with
its brilliant scarht flowers in November. Th« rail-
way passes over a few miles of crown land beyond the
western boundary line of Surrey Hills, and the town
of Waratah is reached at the foot of the celebrated
Mount Bischoff Tin Mine. As the mines in this
direction will be noticed separately we shall leave a
description of Waratah for that occasion, merely re-
marking here, that visitors will find good hotels and
every comfort available in that elevated region. The
Surrey Hills cattle station stands 2106 feet above sea
level. From Waratah there is a road through
crown land to Wynyard at Table Cape, running
through an immense extent of myrtle forest.
For Waratah (Mount Bischoff) a train leaves
Burnie daily at 8 a.m. and leaves Waratah on return
at 2 p.m.
From Burnie the main road proceeds westward for
a distance of 48 miles before Circular Head is reached.
The coast scenery along this fine stretch of bays,
headlands, sandy beaches, and rocky cliffs, is in the
highest degree picturesque, full of striking variety
at every tuin. On leaving Burnie the road is close
to the sea side for six miles, along the Y.D.L. Com-
pany’s ground, with farms down to the beach. You
then cross the River Cam, a small stream, and reach
the little village of Somerset on the opposite bank.
It has a post and telegraph office, state school, stores,
etc., and a considerable extent of agricultural country
at the back. Good roads are now the rule (instead
of the exception) into all the back settlements along
the Coast districts. Another six miles brings you to
to the large and progressive settlement of


TABLE CAPE.
The Inglis flows into the sea at the port of
Wynyard, about a mile on the eastern side of the
Cape, on which is situated a new lighthouse, and the
town of Wynyard stands on the eastern side of the
port. The navigable part of the river takes a bend
to the westward ; so that the town, although on the
east side, lies south of Table Cape. The Inglis has
many tributaries —Camp Creek, which empties close
to its mouth, Big Creek, at the far end of the town
boundary, Blaekfish Creek, and the River Calder (a
considerable stream) higher up on the same side;
and the Flowerdale river, nearly the same size as the
Inglis, falls into the latter on the west side, not far
from the sea. These streams abound in blaekfish
and lobster. The port, like all the rivers on the
North Coast, has a bar entrance. The town of
Wynyard is well situated in many respects, having a
good back country, well watered, and a direct road
to the Mount Bischoff tin mines. There is also a
good extent of gold-bearing country, not far to the
south, which has not yet been fully explored. The
road from Wynyard to Waratah crosses the Hellyer
river in a wild romantic gorge. The late Mr. Sprent
reported favourably of the land along this road,
which is mostly myrtle forest. The length of the
road is about 40 miles, but it is as yet only partly
constructed. Wynyard has a public hall, reading-room,
and library ; Episcopalian, Catholic, and United Free
Methodist churches; four licensed hotels, a coffee
palace, two banks, etc. Two miles south-east of the
town there is an old established saw mill, the pro-
perty of Messrs. Moore and Quiggan. The head of
this firm is the honaurable William Moore, President
of the Legislative Council, who resides in this rural
retreat when not engaged in Parliamentary duties at
the capital. There is a good deal of settlement up
the Mount Hicks road. Six thousand pounds has
been voted towards making a deep water port suit-
able for vessels of any size by the construction of a
breakwater a mile and a half on the east side of the
Inglis. Mr. C. J. Mackenzie, one of the members of
the district in the House of Assembly, lives at Fair-
hill, near the Cam, and the other member, Mr. C. B.
M. Fenton, lives at Norwood, Table Cape. There is


ROBERT GARDNER,
WOOL, GRAIN,& LEATHER MERCHANT
Purchaser of Tin Ore .
—o —
AGENT FOR
S.S. “Warrentinna,” trading to George’s Bay
and Hobart.
S.S. “Linda,” trading to Flinders and adjacent
Islands.
—o —
Tannery— WELLINGTON STREET.
Leather & Grindery Warehouse — CHARLES
STREET.
Office & Store— WILLIAM STREET.
MQMMMT WOI<FK,
DIRECT IMPORTER OF GENERAL DRAPERY, HOSIERY,
MEN’S AND BOY’S CLOTHING.
MOURNING ORDERS PROMPTLY EXECUTED.
DRESSMAKING AND TAILORING
Conducted on the most economical principles.
ROBERT WOLFE, HALL OF COMMERCE,
CENTRAL CHARLES STREET, LAUNCESTON.
WALTER Si BELL A CO,
SHIP, COMMISSION, CUSTOM HOUSE,
INSURANCE, & FORWARDING AGENTS,
BARK and PRODUCE MERCHANTS.
WHARF, LAUNCESTON,
And Bark Mill, Lower Charles Street


a bridge across the Inglis about a mile up on the old
Circular Head road, which leads to the latter gen-
tleman’s estate and a splendid tract of rich cultivated
agricultural land. S«m« remarkable fossils are found
in a bank here near the beach. Another bridge crosses
the Inglis above the junction of the Flowerdale, on
the main road to Circular Head. This road also
crosses the Flowerdale by means of a bridge. A good
branch road runs south from the latter river through a
flourishing settlement. The main road passes through
good agricultural country as far as Detention River,
which falls into the sea about 20 miles from Wyn-
yard, on the west side of Rocky Cape. Some valu-
able sea shells are found on the Detention beach.
There is some rough country between the beach new
road and the old one by the beach. Here grows a
Banksia (honeysuckle or bottle brush), which was
supposed by the botanists ®f the old world to be ex-
tinet, as it had only been found in fossils until Baron
Von Muller pronounced a specimen from Rocky Cape
to be a genuine living tree of the supposed extinct
species. It has also been found on one spot near the
south coast of Australia. The Circular Head road
crosses Detention River about two miles from the
sea There is a township reserve here called Hellyer,
but there are no hotels. Mr. Dallas provides lodging
and refreshments for travellers. About 70 sections
of land have been taken up in the vicinity of the
Detention, most ®f which are occupied and in course
of clearing. We next come to Brickraakers’ Bay and
Black River, on the east side of the Circular Head
block. At Brickmakers’ Bay, east of the Black
River, there is a road running south through a
splendid forest country of rich land for many miles.
Most of this still belongs to the Crown. It is a very
suitable place for land selectors. Settlement on
Crown lands has been proceeding lately along the
Waratah road, and at Wilkinson’s Plains, twelve
miles off.
CIBCDLAK HEAD.
The town of Stanley is 384 miles from Wynyard,
45i from the Cam, 504 from Emu Bay, 554 from the
Blythe, 60 from Penguin, 67 Ulverstone, 734 Hamil-
ton-en-Forth, 77 Den, 844 Latrobe, and 1124 from


Deloraine. Stanley is the nearest Tasmanian port to
Melbourne, being only a run of from 14 to 16 hours.
Many visitors from Australia choose this route on
account of the shortness of the voyage, and travel
overland to and from Launceston or Hobart by way
of Circular Head or Emu Bay. One or more of the
T.S.N. Company’s steamers calls weekly at Stanley.
This town is peculiarly situated at the foot of a pre-
cipitous bluff, commonly called “The Nut,”
500 ft high. A long peninsula of remarkably rich
low-lying soil runs out into the sea on the north and
west sides of the Nut. Stanley lies at the foot of the
Nut on the south, with sandy bays on each side, and
magnificent views of the coast line towards the Tamar
Heads on one side and Cape Grim on the other.
Some very beautiful and rare shells are found on the
beach. Mineral springs occur in the neighbourhood,
the waters of which are found equal in medicinal
properties to the spa waters of England and Ger-
many. The climate is exceptionally healthful and
invigorating, especially in the summer, when cool
sea breezes are nearly always present to temper the
sun’s rays. There are three good hotels, a library,
large town hall, English, Presbyterian, Eoman
Catholic, and Wesleyan churches. Mr. E. W. Ford,
one of the oldest residents, lives at Highfield, once
head quarters of the Y.D.L. Company’s establish-
ment. The pastoral lands on this estate are un-
rivalled for their productiveness. As a rule the
artificial grasses and clover grow all the year round.
A road runs south from Stanley into a good agricul-
tural country, where there are several settlers, and a
track runs south across the Arthur into the mineral
country.
Proceeding westward from Circular Head, you
travel 13 miles to
SMITHTON, DUCK RIVER.
You are now out of the Y.D.L. Company’s block
and enter on a large settlement, where about 100
sections have been alienated from the Crown by
farmers, mostly for the purpose of tillage. There are
Crown lands still available to the selector in this
locality, the settlement being yet comparatively in
its infancy. It may be remarked here that at nearly


all the ports in the north-western districts the fine
timber which grows on the rich agricultural soils is
utilised by saw-mill proprietors before the land is
brought into a state of cultivation. At the Duck
River Mr. J. S. Lee has saw-mills in active operation
turning out a large quantity of blackwood, stringy
bark, and other indigenous woods. In this locality
the blackwood and stringy bark, from their age and
size> possess exceptional merit, the latter being a most
valuable wood when seasoned for flooring, planking,
etc. Mr. Lee, who only started operations about five
years ago, has now 11 miles of railway, and four under
construction, running back into the forest. The
gauge is 3ft 6in, with 241 b steel rails —heavy enough
to run a tern-ton locomotive. There are two of these
and thirty log trucks at Mr. Lee’s works, by means
of which he can run in loads of 20 to 30 large logs in
about 3£ hours. These light railways, costing from
.£IOOO to £I2OO % mile, are as far in advance of mac-
adamised roads as a loeamotive is in advance of
bullock teams, and should they once have a fair trial
they will be found much cheaper, and twenty times
more effective.
The exports from Duck River for 1888 were valued
at £6312 10s.
Beyond Duck River settlement is a small extent of
heathy country and a low-wooded tier with patches
of good land, when you come on the thriving settle-
ment of Montagu. The rich soil here is prescribed
to an area of about 1000 acres, all occupied. Across
the Montagu River is the Y.D.L. Company’s estate
of Woolnorth, containing 100,000 acres, a portien of
which is suitable for sheep and cattle. With time
and inclination the tourist could spend a few pleasant
days visiting the coast scenery, the beautiful head-
lands, bays, and islands in this part of the country.
There is a bi-weekly mail to the township of Mon-
tagu. Cape Grim, on the Company’s block, is the
extreme limit of the north coast of Tasmania, the
shore beyond turning sharply round and running in
a southerly direction towards the Arthur and Pieman
rivers. The township of Montagu is distant 25 miles
from Circular Head, 105 miles from Pormhy, and 187
by the railway line from Launceston.


WARATAH.
The township of Waratah presents the appearance
at this date of a flourishing country township in an
ordinary agricultural district, except that there is no
sign of cultivated land around it, the surroundings
being the dense ssrub and timber which is found all
over the West Coast. The town is generally well
built and well laid out, and but for its climate, which
is as moist and cold as the Highlands of Scotland,
would he a very pleasant place for a few months’
stay, but the elimate, though a drawback in this
way, is a great boon for the successful conduct of its
chief industry, tin mining, which gives employment
to some 500 men, and supports a population of
nearly 2000. That the town, therefore, is flourishing,
goes without further saying. It possesses several
private houses of good class, three churches, a bank,
good hotel accommodation. State school, hospital,
and an excellent Mechanics’ Institute. It is situated
nearly on the summit of Mount Bischoff, from which
the tin mine takes its name, and the view from
which, at an altitude of 2600 feet above sea level, is
one of the finest in the island. From it can be seen
the north-west district to the sea, and away to the
south and south-west a seemingly interminable series
of mountain peaks, raising their crests to a height
of 4000 and 5000 feet, their bare summits making
the forest and scrub which clothe the low hills and
gullies stand out in greater contrast. But the
great mine itself is the chief attraction. It was dis-
covered in 1872 by the Hon. Jas. Smith, now the
representative of the district in the Legislative
Council, and now ranks as the richest tin mine in
the world. Various theories are propounded as to
the nature of the mine, but the simplest and most
reasonable is that it is a huge decomposed outcrop of
a rich lode. The gangue is a peculiar porphyry
known as " topaz porphyry” and is only found here
and in one place in Saxony. It is situated about a
mile from the township, with which it is connected
by rail. The workings are in the form of an open
face, or rather three faces, about a quarter of a mile
in width, carried into the slope of a spur of the
mountain, about 200 yards of which has now been


taken away and treated. The depth of the face is
in no place over 100 feet, and when it is known that
from 2000 to 2500 tons of tin ore are obtained yearly
from stuff which only averages per cent, of ore,
the vast amount of ground worked will be more
readily comprehended. The limits of the present
level seem to be now pretty well known, though it
will take some years yet to work it out, but the rich
formation is proved to extend downwards for another
70 and the next level will probably take nearly
as long to work out as the upper level now working.
The dirt from the present face is conveyed by trams
to the railroad, by which it is taken to the town-
ship, where the batteries and dressing plant are
situated in a very precipitous gorge admiral ty suited
for the tin dressing plant, which so far has proved to
be the most successsful, as well as the largest of the
kind, in the colonies. There are 85 head of stampers
and a most elaborate series of jigger, classifiers,
buddies, and sluice tables, constructed after the
design which Mr H. W. F. Kayser, the manager, has
patented. These are all worked by water power, and
the works at night lit by electric light. The works
at the mine are carried on by day labour only, which
provides sufficient dirt to keep the battery going the
whole 24 hours. Below this extensive plant _is
another series of dressing plant which treats the
taihngs again,and the two together save nearly all the
finest slime tin, which when dry looks like an almost
impalpable powder. The total value of the ore pro-
duced to November 30, 1889, amounts to about
.£2,035,000, of which over £1,021,500 has been
declared in dividends, equal to £BS 2s. 6d. per share.
The area of the mine is 640 acres held in hase
at ss. per acre per annum. With such
a mine it is not surprising that the district should
prosper and the locality become one of the chief
places of interest in the colony.
Strange to say, none of the other tin mines in the
vicinity have proved of special value, only the Stan-
hope and West Bischoff claims appearing to have
lodes encouraging enough to work. The former has
occasionally turned out some rich returns, but is now
only just paying expenses. Tin has also been found
for about 15 miles to the south, but not in payable


quantities, amd als® on the branches of the Arthur
Eiver, about 30 miles north-west. This field is just
commencing to produce payable tin, but has just re-
cently been discovered, and at present work is limited
to only one claim. In this direction also there are
several pitches of good agricultural land, but it has
not yet been thrown open to selection. A train leaves
Waratah daily at 2 p.m. for Burnie. Through return
tickets are issued between Melbourne and Mt. Bischoff
(both ways) via Emu Bay for 555., 505., and 355.
(steerage and 2nd class), or £1 13s. 6d., ,£1 lls. and
£1 Is (steerage) by the T.S.N. Co.
THE WEST COAST.
The country from Waratah westward and south-
westward to the sea coast has remained till quite
recently an unknown district, and even now, though
attracting a good deal of attention on account of the
almost daily discovery of new mineral deposits,
hardly a tithe of its extent has been explored. This
is mainly owing t© the impenetrable nature of the
scrub, of which the visitor can get a very accurate
idea without going further than Waratah. Since
the discovery of the Bischoff mine tracks have been
increased and rendered fairly passable in dry weather,
so that now the tourist can in summer perform a trip
through a bush country unequalled for its rugged
scenery in the whole of Tasmania, and at the same
time inspect the different mining centres which are
speedily attracting the attention of those who are
interested in mining, not only in Tasmania, but in
the other colonies, while the beds of Huon pine ex-
isting in the south-west will form no small attrac-
tion to anyone who is interested in sources of valuable
timber.
These three features—magnificent scenery, won-
derfully varied mineral deposits, and first-class timber
—form the main attractions of this part of the island,
but the agriculturist will find little to his taste, as
though there are pitches of very fair agricultural
land, they are few and far between, and at some
considerable distance from any market. Still, as the
mining population increases, any land in the vicinity
of the mining centres that is suitable for agriculture


will command high piiees if available for t election,
but nearly the whole of such land is at present with-
drawn from selection, pending the development of
the mines, and the Government is always chary in
offering such blocks for selection in consequence of
the possibility of valuable mineral deposits existing
on them. Thus it will be more useful to visitors to
•online our hints regarding this part of the colony to
the three subjects mentioned.
To reach any portion of the West Coast there are
two modes of travelling—the one overland, via
Waratah, and the other by sea, either from Hobart
or Launceston to Macquarie Harbour, to which port
steamers run once a week, and with the commence-
ment of the railway from that port to the Zeehan
silverfield the service will be increased. The con-
venience of the overland route or the sea route will
be found to vary according to the locality it is in-
tended to visit, the former being the speediest for
reaching the Heazlewood, Whyte Eiver, and Long
Plains mining centres, and the latter for Strahan
(the Macquarie Harbour township), Mount Lyell,
and King River fields. Mount Zeehan, and Trial
Harbour. If the overland route is taken, a train
leaves Launceston for Pormby at 3T5 p.m. daily,
arriving there in4i hours. Here passengers are met
by coach, and reach Emu Bay (or Burnie) about 130
a.m.; or, if day travelling be preferred, they can
leave Launceston at 8 a.m. and Formby by the 1 p.m.
coach, and arrive at Burnie at 4 30 p.m.; fare, 8s 6d.
From here, at 8 a.m. daily, the Tan Diemen’s Land
Company’s railway runs inland 70 miles to Waratah,
the fare through frofn Launceston being £1 19s 9d
first-class single, and £1 12s 8d second class, or .£3
5s 5d and £2 13s 6d return respectively. From
Waratah all travelling west must be on horseback or
on foat, as there are no cart roads completed, though a
new road from Waratah to the Hraalewood district,
a distance of 14 miles, will probably be completed
this summer, and having a very easy grade will
supersede the present horse track known as the
« Corduroy.” With this exception there is no cart
road in the whole district except those from Trial
Harbour to Zeehan and from Strahan to the King
River, and in either case it is pleasanter to travel on


Victorian Si Tasmanian Steam Potteries.
JOHN CAMPBELL,
Proprietor.
Manufacturer of every description
of Earthenware .
Ornamental Terra Cotta A Speciality.
ALSO,
DRAIN PIPES, JUNCTIONS, BENDS, CHIMNEY TOPS,
GARDEN AND FLOORING TILES.
ROCKINGHAM, CANE, AND MAJOLICA WARE
WORKS, WELLINGTON ROAD, LAUNCESTON.
HOBAET, SHOW-ROOMS AND AGENCY,
G. S. CROUCH, 58 COLLINS STREET.
D. and M. INGXES,
LAUNCESTON.
TEA AND WINE IMPORTERS.
Proprietors of the Celebrated
ANCHOR BRAND TEAS,
In slb tins, ss. 6d., 75., and 9s.
PURE INDIAN GARDEN TEA,
51b. tins, 7s. and 9s.
SPRING BLOSSOM CEYLON TEA,
51b. tins, 7s. and 9s.
CHINA BUD TEA,
51b tins, 7s. and 9s.
Every Tin Bears Registered Trade Mark ,
An Anchor .


horseback than by drays, the only vehicles available.
Horse hire is a heavy item in expenses, as 15s per
day is considered a moderate charge, and h«rse feed
is still dearer, the charges per night having often
bean 10a, owing to the heavy freight and cartage of
chaff. These charges are, however, gradually being
reduced, and as traffic in the district is rapidly in-
creasing they may be expc cted to decline shortly to
normal rates. The sea route is considerably chc aper
and, to certain portions of the district, a far quicker
mode of travelling. Steamers, with fair accommo-
dation, are run weekly from Launceston and Hobart
to Strahan, and perform the passage in 30 hours from
the former port and in 20 hours fr#m the latter,
landing the passengers about 30 miles from either
Zeehan ©r the King River. The far- s respectively
are 30s from Hobart and 35s from Launceston, but
with the increase of traffic due to the railway con-
struction a speedy reduction is probable.
During the present summer the main number of
visitors to the West Coast will probably ceme with
the object of visiting the Mount Zeehan field, and
for this purpose the sea routes are usually the most
convenient, as by these means the field can he reached
within 30 hours from Hobart and 40 hours from
Launceston ; but if time is no object a stay at Mac-
quarie Harbour may repay the visitor. The trip
round the coast is very enjoyable in fine weather
from either starting point, as after leaving the Der-
went or the Tamar the view of the inland mountain
ranges is one of the finest to be seen in Australia, and
when the West Coast is being passed the wild aspect
of the almost unbroken range of lofty mountains is
a verv fitting harbinger of the rough times to come
that await all those who have the temerity to attempt
an exploration of the interior beyond the limits
already prospected by the earlier pioneers.
MACQUARIE HAEBCUE.
On approaching Macquarie Harbour there is little
indication of the extensive bay lying inside the
heads, but on entering them a land-locked bay of 20
miles in length is found to exist, and whence once
the bar at its entrance is deepened it will form a
harbour as good as any in the island for ships of


ordinary draught. At present th* re is only
of water over tho bar, but the cost of deepening the
channel will be slight, as a wider but shallower
channel exists in the northern side of the rocks
know* as Hell’s Gates, which form the side of the
bar, and this could be piled at slight expense, and
the water which now passes through it would then
assist in scouring the bar and inert asing its depth
three or four feet at least. The harbour entered, an
hour’s run brings the boat to Strahan.so called after
the late Governor, Sir George Strahan. This town-
ship is situated in a quiet little bend in the bay at
the foot of a low hill, which completes the natural
shelter. At present it is not .very imposing, but a
large amount of township allotments have been sold,
and as soo* as the silver fields give a permanent out-
put it is likely to spring up rapidly into a flourishing
and extensive township.
There are already three large hotels and two stores,
post and telegraph office, police station. Commis-
sioner’s residence, and a bank. Most of these build-
ings are situated only a few yards from the shore,
but the allotments recently sold will lead to therrain
part of the township feeing built on the higher
ground behind and to the north, where it slopes
gradually up to some nice-looking agricultural land.
At this point too will be the railway terminus,
and from here a substantial jetty will be built to
accommodate all vessels arriving. For a new town-
ship tbo hotel accommodation is very good and will
be found to equal that of many larger and more im-
portant centres.
Macquarie Harbour was first inhabited in the early
convict days, when a penal settlement was formed at
whit is called Settlement Island, and visitors can
arrange for a comfortable trip in a steam launch to
visit this interesting spot, which is situated towards
the upper end of the bay near the mouth of the
@ordon River—a magnificent river, navigable for a
still further distance of 20 miles, and which, with the
King River (which also empties into Macquarie Har-
bour), forms an excellent means of getting the largest
logs of Huon pine to port. “ The Settlement” is now
destroyed by fire, and but few traces remain of it to
mar the natural beauty of the harbour scenery.


The track to Zeelan is at present not a very attrac-
tive one. The first few miles are northward along
the beach and on this portion a capital gallop can be
enjoyed, but after 10 miles the track turns a little
inland, along soft sand flats bounded by uninterest-
ing sand dunes, which preclude any view to the east.
The thnty River is then mtt with, and here there is
a ferryman’s hut where refreshment can be obtained.
It is not to be supposed, however, that man and horse
can be ferried across. The latter has to be towed
after the beat, and.in winter and spring the river is
icy cold from snow water, and the horses, hot after a
Journey, have to risk the consequences. The river
Crossed, the track continues through more uninte-
resting sand hills until the Little Henty is reached.
Here there is a punt fastened by slings to a wire
rope aero s the river, and the traveller has to pull
himeelf across, the herse swimming behind. A
couple of miles more and
EEMXNE, OR TRIAL HARBOUR,
Is reached. This is lardy deserving of the name of
harbour, as it is an open roadttead, or mere indenta-
tion in the rocks which bound the coast. Still, it
has served the purpose of landing a great quantity
of machinery and stores for Mount Heemskirk and.
Mount Zeehan. The former place first gave rise to
the township, owing to the large outlay of eapital
made on the tin lodes which characterise the slopes
of the mountain for seven or eight miles. These
lodes, however, did not pay, in fact no mines of .ordi-
nary richness could stand the reckless expenditure
and mismanagement which characterised the mining
on. that field. However, the township got a start as
being the nearest place of shipment (only two miles)
from the first mines discovered. There are now two
hotels and three stores there, all doing a good busi-
ness and supplying the main wants of the district.
The United Steamship Company’s small steamers
make frequent trips from Stiahan to the harbour,
though their visits are not regular, from the fact
that it is only in smooth weather that a vessel can
lie at anchor in the bay, and even then it is necessary
to be ready to slip the cables and stand out to at
a moment’s notice, owing to the suddenness with
which the great Pacific rollers get up and sweep


STRAHAN.
THE
MACQUARIE HARBOUR HOTEL
BY GAFFNEY & HARVEY.
Best and Cheapest Accommodation at Strains
Visitors to Strahan and the Mount Zeehan
Silverfield, or King River and Mount Lyell
Goldfields, will find ample accommodation and
comfortable quarters at very reasonable rates at
Macquarie Harbour Hotel,
Immediately opposite the new landing jetty
at Strahan.
Horses and boats are provided for the con-
venience of visitors - , and every facility is given
for enabling them to make their stay pleasant, and
.at a moderate expense, while full information is
available from the proprietor as to all that is
of interest in the vicinity.
MACQUARIE HARBOUR HOTEL,
BEST k CHEAPEST ACCOMMODATIOS IS SIRAHAS
N B- —Hot and Cold Water Baths,
. Billiard Room , etc.


everything before them. Still, for all the trade that
the district commands at present the harbour is suf-
ficient, providing that the road eonnecting it with
Mount Zeehan is kept in fair repair. As bush roads
go it is a very fair sample, in fast far better than
most of the roads leading te Tasmanian mining
centres while in their infancy. Half a mile from
Remine the rugged granite ranges of Mount Heems-
kirk, containing the tin lodes on which so muck
money was thrown away seven or eight years ago,
are passed. The road continues through granite
country and over bleak plains for three miles fur-
ther past Mount Agnew, and then the prevailing
country rock changes to slate, and the surface is
covered with dense scrub and timber, myrtle and the
celery-top pine prevailing. At the same time the
gorges become more frequent and precipitous, and
the scenery generally more picturesque.
ZEEHAN SILTBRFIELD.
After ascending a long but not very steep rise the
first of the Zeehan silver mines is reached. This is
the Comstock, a mine which has already proved the
value of its ore by frequent shipments te Adelaide.
The ore is worth about .£lO to £l5 per ton, and con-
sequently would pay handsomely but for the heavy
cartage and freight charges before it is landed at the
smelting worksl63 tons yielded an average of 660 z
of silver and 50 per cent, of lead per ten. The lode
is a large one and contains numerous veins of solid
ore, which take the form of galena, this being the
general class of ore characterising the Zeehan field.
The percentage of silver is, however, very high some
of it yielding in bulk up to I7oez per ton, while the
general average, according to the manager of the
Dry Creek smelting works, who was employed by the
Government to report on the field, is as high as 69az
per ton, an average which compares very favourably
with those of other silverfields. From parcels of ore
sent to Germany for treatment, the following satis-
factory returns were received early in November,
1889 : From 12 tons of ore from lode No. 1, section
755, Western Company, the net proc eds were .£244,
and from the tunnel lode, section 756, eight tons for
£lso—a total of £*9o for 20 tons, or nearly £2O a


REMINE.
SILVER KING HOTEL,
BY J. D. ROBERTSON.
This hotel is the best and most economical Hotel
at Remine. It is the nearest hotel to Strahan, and
affords excellent accommodation for all visitors to
the Mount Zeehan Silverfields
Horses are obtainable for journeys to the mines in
the district, and every opportunity given to
visitors to accomplish the objects of their journey at
reasonable rates.
BEST WINES & SPIRITS KEPT IN STOCK,
SILVER KING HOTEL,
REMINE.
JAMES BARCLAY,
cornu or Brisbane m or. joboueis,
LAUNCESTON.
IMPORTER OF
FURNISHING AND GENERAL IRONMONGERY.
ELECTRO-PLATED WARE A SPECIALITY.
AGENT FOE WHEELER AND WILSON’S
SEWING MACHINES.
AGENT FOR NOBEL’S HAMBURG DYNAMITE.
Gold, Silver , and Tin Mining Companies
supplied with all requisite Tools, etc.
SUPERIOR FISHING TACKLE.
BREECHLOADING GUNS AND AMMUNITION.


ton. The Silver Crown Co. scat fivetons.the net proceeds
being 4271, or over £l4 per ton. The Comstock ore
was taken from surface workings, but operations are
now in progress for opening up the mine at a depth
by means of an adit, which, if the lode lives down,
will give two or three years’ work in taking out the
ore above its level. This claim is only eight
miles from Heroine, and some idea of the mar-
vellous extent of this field may be formed
by the visitor when Le is told that he will
have to go 10 miles further east before reach-
ing the furthest known silver lode. The extent of
the field north and south is nearly the same, so that
it is not astonishing to find that there are already
some 34,000 acres leased for silver-mining purposes.
The road from the Comstock winds along a pretty
sideling, where the cuttings tell the geologist the
nature of the rock, till the. Silver Queen claim is
reached, between three and four miles distant. Here
permanent wr rks are going on, and the first pumping
erected on the field is at work, consequently
this mine ought to be the first t© maintain a regular
output of Ore, and as the lodes, as far as prospected,
often showed 3ft and 4ft in width of solid ore, yield-
ing ovtr 550 z of silver and 57 per cent of lead to the
ton in a bulk test of tons, great expectations'are
held as to the result when it is in thorough working
order. Hcrdly a mile further on the Mount Zeehan
claim is reached, and cn this claim is situated
Amderson’s hotel, where the visitor will find good
accoarmodation and a good table. This claim vas
the pioneer claim of the district, and was discovered
six years ago by Messrs. Long and Johnston. But.att
that time there was no Broken Hill or Silverton, and
the dhcevery lay dormant fer more than four years,
when a large company was floated to werk it during
the great silver boom. A good plant is now erected,
and the mine is being opened up at the 100 ft level.
All around the claims mentioned a certain amount of
prospecting work is going on, hut with the exception
of some half .dozen claims nothing worth mentioning
is yet commenced, though several .of the surface
shows are very rich and premising. This want of
energy is due partly to want of capital and partly to
the unwillingness of the Government to enforce the


labour clauses of the leases, which empower the
“Governor-in-Council to forfeit the leases unless a
■certain number of men are employed oh each lease,
or an equivalent amount of money spent on them in
machinery, etc. Consequently a general system of
what is known as “ shepherding” has taken place,
-and lessees are letting their ground lie idle pending
the development of the neighbouring leases. Thus,
considering the extent of the field, the amount of
labour employed on it is ridiculously small, and
(Government loses a large amount of revenue by
allowing it to remain more than half deserted. From
the Silver Queen to the Silver King the distance by
road is about one mile and a half, and here a change
of scene is reached, for the country, instead of being
densely scrubbed, is now quite open and becomes
what is known as " button grass plains.” This claim
had a surface shew of 6ft of solid galena, giVing a
very high percentage of silver, and is considered one
of the most valuable claims on the field. It is now
erecting pumping plant, and a start is being made to
work it prbperly. Other mines have excellent pros-
pects,'but these are the chief mines along the main
road, and it will be seen from these instances that
water is the great obstacle in developing the field,
and consequently heavy expense is' required for
pumping plant. With this exception, the field has
ample facilities for working. Timber is plentiful
and communication with the port is fair. The cost
of freight is too much for the transit of ore, but not
for the erection of plant, and en the completion of
the railway to Strahan the ore can be exported
cheaply after smelting, as works will be then erected
on the field as well as at Strahan. The' main road
terminates for the present at the Silver King, and it
is near here, in the open country, that the Zeehan
township has been surveyed ; but for some time to
come business is likely to centre on or about the
jlount Zeehan Company’s claim, as it is the most
Convenient spot for communication with all the out-
lying claims now at work. In course of time as work
goes on at the more eastern claims the township site
•will doubtless be built on and utilised, but that will
be some year or two hence, when the railway is
Completed.


From the foregoing it will be seen that mining is
only juat commenced on the field, and that it is
needless therefore to look forward to seeing any
thoroughly opened up mines for some time.
A site of 16* acres for an assay office, and
subsequently for smelting works, has keen secured
by Messrs. H. Law and Co., of Launceston, and Mr.
Jabez Thorne, an experienced assayer, is now at
Zeehan, and will permanently reside upon the field.
H'UNHY LtAW & CO,,
FINANCIERS, METAL AND MINING AGENTS,
ARBITRATORS, ETC-
BARCLAY’S BUILDINGS,
ST. JOHN STREET, LAUNCESTON.
Branch Assay Office at Zeehan, West Coast.
THE LINDA, KINS, AND QUEEN RIVER DISTRICTS.
These districts are situated about 30 miles east of
Strahan, and for 28 miles, namely, as far as Lynch’s
Creek or the King Eiver Gr.M. Company’s property,
there is a. good read. Large quantities 6f alluvial
gold in the creeks in the vicinity first drew attention
to this field, and for four or five year* supported a
great number of alluvial miners. The King River
Company’s gold reef was then discovered, and has
been working on a large scale, but without payable
results. Close to this the Princess line of reef was
also dr covered, and for a time proved payable and
yielded a few dividends, hut the rich shoot of gold
proved narrow and has not yet been struck at a lower
level. Other-quartz reefs in the vicinity are also
being prospected j but the chief attraction in this
district is the famous Mount Lyell gold mine, about
seven miles to the north. This on the surface was a
huge outcrop of ironstone, and was known as the
<f Iron Blow.” The iron was found to contain a high,
percentage of gold, and there are also vein* of native
cepper occurring, which are also rich in gold. The
place was comparatively inaccessible for some time*.


and even now there is only a pack track to it, and
along this machinery had to be brought. This, how-
ever, was accomplished, and crushing is now.goiag
on regularly, the ore producing a yield on the average
of an ounce of gold to the ton, despite the fact that
the tailings contain a good percentage. The mine is
worked on an open face like a quarry, consequently
the cost of raising the stone is hut slight, and the
return promises to be a handsome one when the
number of stampers is increased and eficient saving
appliances are introduced. Prospecting further to
the east has been limited, owing to the impenetrable-
nature of the country, and the visitor must needs
return to Strahan and seek for fresh fields ; but on
his way it would repay a little trouble if a little time
-were given to inspecting the large amount of Huon
pine available for export in the vicinity of the King
River, and it will be found that there is ample pros-
pect of the development of an important timber in-
dustry.
WEST COAST TRACK, VIA DERWENT VALLET.
Leaving Marlborough and civilization, the cleared
West Coast track crosses the Der went near the south end
•of Lake St. Clair (which is surrounded by mountains),
strikes to the .south-west for about eight miles,
skirls the northern end of the King William Ranges,
where there is an iron store, and passes just south of
the summit of Mt. Arrowsmith, about three miles
further west. About eight or nine miles. further
west-north-west the Franklin river is crossed by a
wire, bridge, below the junction ®f the Alma and
Inkermann rivers. Continuing north-west for five
miles, the Redan Hill, an outlier from the
Raglan Ranges, is passed. Thence up the va'ley,
■crossing the Wardigan river by a bridge about three
miles past the Redan, and then a west-north-west
course for about ten miles and the King River is
crossed at the Long Marsh. About two miles past
this river, the track passing between Mts. Owen and
Lyell, and the Iren Blow is reached to the north of
the track and up the slope of Mf. Lyell. Th* teta.l
distance from the Derwent bridge is about 40 miles,
and from Marlborough 15 miles more, part ®f
which is fit for vehicles. The track is cleared


and bridged, and is not so formidable for parties,,
especially if provisions are pushed well on by horse
packing. As the Derwent Yalley Line is extended,
settlement will be pushed further west, and this will
in all likelihood turn out the main overland track for
the West Coast. Parties attempting the overland
track had better make their final arrangements at
the Ouse, where horses can be obtained to go part of
the distance and return. A compass and good map
are necessary, as to lose the track would be
The difficulty of the country is not measured so much
by distance as by the mountains, roeby gorges, swift
rivers, and dense scrub that prevail in many places.
THE HEAZLEWOOD RIVER DISTRICT.
The alternative route to Zeehan and Macquarie'
Harbour is via Bischeff and the Whyte, Heazlewood,
and Pieman rivers to Corinna, a surveyed township
about 14 miles from the mouth of the Pieman, and
about SO miles from Eemine. This route has been-
avoided as much as possible by travellers to Zeehan
and Strahan whenever a steamer was available, owing
to the length ©f the journey to the latter place from.
Bischoff (90 miles), and to the usually impassable
condition of the track in wet weather. The track
was originally cut as a pack track *to the Pieman
alluvial gold diggings and those of Long Plains and
Eocky Eiver, but for the last two years the silver
discoveries at the Heazlewood and Whyte rivers have
caused a large increase of traffic, which has led to the
commencement ®f what will be a good cart road to-
the Whyte Eiver when completed. At the latter
place about 16 miles from Waratah a large and to all
surface appearances a very rich silver-bearing forma-
tion was discovered in 1888, and has since been
floated into the Qodkin Silver Mining Company. It
is situated on the slope of a hill some 800 ft high, at
the junction of the limestone and sandstone country.
The lode formation is 200 ft wide, carrying more or
less silver all through, and in places some very rich
veins. The limestone, which, forms one boundary or
wall of the lade, is impregnated with galena, and the
lode itself consists of veins of kaolin, oxides of iron,
and manganese, gossan containing veins of sulphate,,
phosphate, and carbonate of lead, carrying as much-


as 4000 oz of silver to the ton, as well as some veins of
rich galena yielding up to ,800 oz of silver per-ton.
On other leases in the same line ruby silver has been
■discovered yielding a high percentage, and work is
now going on for a considerable distance along the
line of reef, which will net only be found of great
interest to the geologist and mineralogist as contain-
ing some rare lead ores, but prt_ mises to become a
▼ery important silver-producing area. .£25,000 is
already available for developing the mine, and work
has just commenced in earnest, so that ere winter
sets in the original claim should have a fair amount
done to prove its permanence and average value.
Three miles further on a hotel is met with, and
it is as well to put up here for the night, as a long
day's work is before the traveller if he wishes to see
the various mines in the neighbourhood. A good
many bands of serpentine are now met with, and in
connection with these are found several indications
of nickel ore, chiefly in the firm of carbonates, and
also as oxide of nickel incrustations on magnetite ;
so far, however, little work has been done to test the
deposits, the assays not proving them to be very rich
in metal. About a mile from the hotel, however,
there has been a large amount of work done in prov-
ing some galena lodes belonging to the Heazlewood
and Heazlewood Extended companies. These were
the first lodes dis.oyered in the district, and though
but mere strings of galena on the surface they are
improving in size and richness with depth, and show
every sign of permanence. Prospecting work has
been carried on partly by shafts and partly by tunnels
on the lodes, so that a very fair idea can be formed
of them by the visitor during a brief, inspection.
Here, too, the mineralogist will find some very fine
specimens of a rare mineral, chromate of lead, an ore
which is met with in very few mines. The country
is comparatively clear, and the tracks at this point
fairly good, especially that leading to Long Plains,
the next place of interest in the otherwise dreary
track commencing a few miles south-west of the hotel,
when the bush terminates and the eye meets a long
vista of button-grass plains, seemingly terminated
only by the sea. What timber there is is only in
small patches on the creeks, and the view is practi-


cally unlimited, except by the magnificent chains of
mountains risible in nearly every direction. The-
creeks descending from these plains have for some-
years yielded a considerable amount of alluvial gold,
but they are now werked out, and attention is being-
turned to reefing. The country i©ck is micac'eous
schist, containing bands of ‘chlorite schist traversed
by small quartz veins. The decomposition of the
schist has left the quartz on the present surface,,
making it appear as if it was eovered with a heavy
alluvial wash. The gold-bearing veins are feund in
the chlorite schist, and in some cases have yielded
very high prospects. Work has been going on re-
cently on Weetman and Crockford’s sections, but as
it. was found that the gold-bearing veins were very
limited in extent work has been suspended. From
here to Comma, on the Pieman, a large number of
creeks have proved gold-bearing, but the scrub has
been so impenetrable that prospectors have not pene-
trated far from the track which led to where provi-
sions were obtainable, and evon the limited amount
of prospecting done required about four days out of
a fortnight to be spent in transporting provisions.
Amongst the richer creeks may be mentioned one on
the Eocky Eiver, which produced nuggets up to 400 oz
in weight, the largest weighing 2430 z Idwt, another
390 z lOdwt, and a third 9oz lOdwt, besides a number
of others, aggregating 60oz, all found by a party of
three. In the same district two men discovered
another nugget weighing 1440 z. Many thousands of
ounces of fine gold were also obtained from the dis-
trict.
At Corinna the Pieman will be found to be a very-
fine navigable river, the only difficulty being at its
mouth, where the head are very narrow, and a vessel
has to risE a Scylla and Charybdis in the shape of a
sandspit on one side and some overhanging rocks on
the other. With these removed, Corinna would be-
come a very easily- accessible point, and as it is
navigable for some 25 miles the pine forest on its
banks could be rendered easily available. After a
night’s rest at Corinna a start is made a l ong a very
poor track for Eemine, about'3o miles distant, along
a very bleak coast, with the long but interesting
range of Mount Heemskirk on the traveller’s right.


SALISBURY, SCOTT & GO.
NEW FOUNDRY AND ENGINE WORKS,
ESPLANADE AND WILLIAM STREET WEST,
LAUNCESTON.
ENGINEERS, BOILER MAKERS, IRON & BRASS FOUNDERS,
AND BLACKSMITHS.
The Business comprises General Engineering work, and the
Manufacture of Steam Engines, and all kinds of Mining and
Pumping Machinery, including Quartz Crushing Batteries of
various designs.
Manufacturers of Flour Mill, Saw Mill, Brick Mill, and
Agricultural Machinery, Horseworks, Ovens, Ranges, Orna-
mental and Plain Castings.
Sole Manufactory in the Australian Colonies for Kayser’s
Patent Tin Dressing appliances.
Only agency in Tasmania for Seymour’s Patent Safety Cages
and Warehouse Lifts.
Plans and Specifications prepared, and estimates given fon
any description of Machinery.
! Complete assortment of Verandah Brackets and other
Ornamental Ironwork.
Repairs to all classes of Engines and Machinery executed
with despatch.
Full stock of Requisites for Machinery users.
ROBERTS & COHPAHT, Limited,
AUCTIONEERS.
STOCK, PROPERTY, AND GENERAL AGENTS,
HOBART.
Bi-weekly sales of Stock at Slaughter-yards.
EDWARD ASH & SON,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
CHEMISTS & DRUGGISTS
Homoeopathic Medicines.
Photographic Chemicals.
PRESCRIPTIONS DISPENSED,
ELIZABETH STREET, HOBART


There are a few alluvial tin claims on the creeks at
the northern end of Mount Heemskirk, but beyond
these there is nothing worthy of mention till Remine
is reached, whence thg journey to 2eehan or Strahan
may be completed as described elsewhere.
THE MIDLANDS
Is the pastoral district lying between the Eastern
and Western Tiers, between Perth and Antill
Ponds on the main road, and lying east and
west of that road and of the railway, which keeps
well in the same direction. Here is the home of those
famous merinos which supply the flocks of the main-
land with the fresh blood that experience has proved
to be so necessary, and they are valued accordingly.
For instance, Mr. Herbert Gatenby’s stud ram
Hercules was sold in Melbourne in 1885 to Mr. J. H.
Angus for 1150 guineas, whilst 700 guineas, 600
guineas, 500 guineas, and 400 guineas have been ob-
tained by Messrs. Wm. Gibson and Son, Jas. Gibson,
W. A. Gatenby, and others on several occasions. In
1888 4140 sheep were exported, of the value of
-856,045; and 4000 is about the average annual export,
the produce being disposed of at the Sydney, sales in
July, the Melbourne sales in September, and at Bris-
bane in August.
The chief pastoralists in the Midlands are the
Archers, of Brickendon, Longford Hall, Woodside,
and Panshanger; the Gibsons, of Scone amd Native
Point, of Fairfield and Belle Vue; the Gatenbys, of
Pisa, of Woodbourne, and of Rhodes ; Messrs. W. C.
Grubb, of Barrowville ; C. B. Grubb, of Strathroy ;
R. Kermode, Mona Tale; G. W. Keach, Chiswick;
Thos. Parramore, Beaufront; Eobt. Headlam, Yau-
cluse; Chas. Headlam, Eghston; D. M'Kinnon,
Dalness; D. Cameron, Fordon; John Taylor, Win-
ton ; C. Parker, Selma; Jas. Cox, Clarendon; Rod.
O’Connor, Connorville; *F. O’Connor, Benham ; Jas.
Thirkell, Saundridge; C. Toul, Symmons Plains, etc.
Many of these families have occupied their present
estates since the early days ©f the colony, and held
their own against marauding natives and bush-
rangers, and now the sons have to deal with the


marauding bunny, which seems to be the only real
drawback to the pastoral interest, here as else-
where.
CAMPBELL TOWN
Is in the heart of the Midlands, and is a very quiet
but prosperous-looking town, situated 42 miles from
Launceston, or 91 miles from Hobart, by rail. It
possesses four churches and only three hotel's; a
public library of 3000 relumes, and hospital.
Mechanics’ Institute, banks, stores, etc.,.and is the
largest town on the main road, or on the Main Line
Hallway. Hunn’s coaches leave here for Swansea.
BOSS,
Eight miles further south on Main Line Railway and
main road, is a small but neat township on the
Macquarie River, which is here spanned by a fine free-
stone bridge. Very fine freestone is procured from
this locality, and about three miles further south is
Horton College, the Rev. James de Q Robin, M.A.,
president, whose scholars successfully cultivate
literature and athletics under the supervision of an
excellent staff. The charge is from .£5O to JB6O per
annum, and con-idering the appetites of growing
boys in that pure atmosphere is exceedingly moderate.
Mona Vale House, the seat of R, Kermode, Esq.,
seen from the railway, is perhaps the finest mansion
in the colony, and is beautifully situated.
SALT PANS PLAINS
Lie between Mona Vale and Tunbridge some two
miles east of the railway, the salt pans being salt
water lagoons, which partly dry up in the summer,
leaving a coating of pure salt on the surface. One
season over .£lOO worth was removed. The salt and
the fine grasses in the neighbourhood contribute to
the excellent condition of the sheep reared here.
It is impossible with the space at our disposal to do
justice to the Midlands, the district being one of the
earliest settled and best known in the colony, and
requiring no further notice, so we will go no
further than
TJ7NBBIDOE
A small town on the Mam Line Railway, and the
best point of departure to reach the Lakes from
Launceston and the north generally.


THE LAKES DISTRICT.
This district occupies nearly the centre of the
colony, and. extends for a distance of about 50 miles
east and west, to a varying,width of from 20 to 40
miles north and south, the western portion having
the greatest breadth. The general elevation is from
2000 to 3000 feet high, the highest part being north,
next the Western Eanges, which form a wall or
barrier ( ; n one place cadel'the China Wall), from the
rich agricultural plain extending north-westward*
from Cressy to Chudleigh. Having arrived at the lakes
plateau, it is seen at once that there are still moun-
tains around'and beyond, besides numerous smaller
hills intervening, some wooded, but mostly with
rough and rocky summits. To the north Brady’s
Look-out (4497 feet), and Dry’s Bluff (4257 feet), are
the highest and most conspicuous, while to the west
arise the highest mountains and ranges in the colony,
where the Derwent, and the rivers of the north-west
and west «oast, nearly all take their rise The whole
district declines towards the south by terraces, the
streams from the lakes, as the Clyde, Shannon, Ouse,
and Pine rivers, as well as the Jordan, all forming
tributaries of the Derwent. The Great Lake is 13
miles long, with a varying width of from two to eight
miles across, and has an area of 28,000 acres. Lakes
SoreTaud Crescent cover an area of, 17,000 acres, St.
Clair 10,000, and Arthur’s Lake* and Lake Echo
about 8,000 acres each. Numerous smaller lakes and
lagoons exist, as well as marshes, the whole district
being very wet,and bleak in winter,"and principally
used as a summer feeding ground for the flocks from
the lowlands. Besides grassy plains there is a con-
siderable extent of open forest of small gums and
honeysuckles, besides the rocky tiers and marshes
already mentioned.
Under the head of Hobart, the route to the Lakes
via Bothwell is toushed upon (p. 25), and now, space
will only permit a brief description of the route via
Tunbridge, the most direct and best route for tourists
from the north. To Tunbridge, on the Main Line
Railway the distance from Hobart is 7 fares,
16s. 9d. and 11s. 3d.; return, available for eight days,
255. and 16s. 9d. From Launceston the distance is


59 miles ; fares, 13s. 3d. and Ba. 9d.; return, available
for a week, 20s. and 13s. 3d.
From Tunbridge to Interlaken the distance is 17
miles, by a road, level at first, then rising by a fairly
easy ascent, so that a buggy can be driven there with
ease. Arrived at the top, it is usually with surprise
and admiration one sees the expanse of Lake Sorell—
surprise at such an expanse of water on a mountain-
top, and admiration at its prettily indented and
wooded shores. Lake Cresent is not 16 large, and
partly overgrown with weeds, and is fed from Lake
Sorell by a small stream about 400 yards in length,
which is crossed by a bridge to Interlaken, the hotel
on its banks. From Interlaken the track leads in a
westerly direction, past Weed’s Lake, and the Lagoon
of Islands, until at a distance of about 18 miles the
residence of district constable Wilson is reached,
and here the track from Bothwell is met with. From
here to Arthur’s Lakes, which are very beautiful, the
water shewing blue, and the shores deeply indented,
is a distance of four or five miles in a northerly
direction. Thence to the Great Lake is another 12
or 15 miles, through flat and uninteresting country,
the-main track leading from Mr. Wilson’s to Swan
Bay, at the south end of the lake, where the river
Shannon emerges. There is a hut here occupied by
a constable, and shepherds’ huts are built at intervals
about the district, whese occupants are courteous and
hospitably inclined. A track skirts the eastern side
of the lake, and after a walk of about ten miles a
shepherd’s hut is met with. Hire if you have had
enough of it, and have no horse or vehiele waiting,
you can descend by the Sledge Track, a very steep
track, where after ten miles, a settler’s house will be
met with, the owner of which will direct you the 1 4
remaining miles to Cieasy, whence there is a brake
twice a day to Longford. 'J here is a vast extent of
level country near the Great Lake, as Barren Plain,
Central Plain, Skittle Balls Plain, etc., and for over
20 miles to the westward a wilderness of marshes,
lakelets, and rivers, stud and intersect the plain. A
track through Skittle Balls Plain conducts to the
Pine Eiver, and down to Marlborough, where the
road for the West Coast passes. From Marlborough
to Lake St. Clair a stout chaise cart may be driven.


This is said to be one of the most beautiful of the
lakes. Mounts Ida and Olympus guarding its north-
ern end—the former showing a marked basaltic
columnar formation, similar to that of the Organ
Pipes of Mt. Wellington, but without any other bleak
in the sky line than the jagged rocks which spring
almost perpendicularly hundreds of feet from the
scrub at its base. Wildfowl are plentiful on this
little-frequented lake, which is the source of the
Derwent.
THE DERWENT.
Abeve New Norfolk, whi h we hare visited, the
reads run up both sides of the Derwent, the country-
on the north-east side being generally more open and
level, while on the south-west side the, high ground
approaches pretty close to the river, leaving only
narrow strips of fertile ground, but in places ex-
tending up the valleys, as in. the- new settlement of
Fentonbury, which is extending up the Russell River
to the vicinity of the celebrated waterfall of that
name. Taking the north-east side of the river, it is
best to take the coach at Macquarie Plains station at
10-10 a.m. (on arrival of the 8a m. train from Hobart)
for Hamilton and the Ouse, which arrives at Ouse at
2 p.m.; leaves Ouse daily at. 9 a.m., Hamilton 9 - 40
a.m., and arrives at Macquarie Plains station at 12 40
p.m., in time for the 12 45 p.m. train, which arrives
in Hobart at 3 p.m, Hamilton is-.distant some 14
miles from Macquarie Plains, and in this neighbour-
hood and on to Ouse are some of the finest lands of
the colony, long ag© passed into private bands. From
Hamilton, on Clyde (and Derwent), to Bothwell, on
Clyde, there is a g r .od road, the distance being about
20 miles, mostly uphill, the country passed through
being a fine pastoral country, declining towards the
Derwent in beautiful undulations, the bush in many
places being exceedingly open and well grassed.
BOTHWELL
Is in the highlands, bleak and cold in winter, hut a
compact and neat town of some 1200 inhabitants.
There are three good hotels, public library, schools
and churches of all denominations, conspicuous among
which the church in the heart of the town with well-


kept burying ground, also th 6 grand new Episco-
palian church just boilt. The town is surrounded
with a wide; expanse of open pastoral and Agricul-
tural land, of which it is the centre. From Hobart
it is best to take the 8 a.m. train to Brighton, arriv-
ing at 8'45 a m., thence coach on, arriving at Both-
well at 2 p m.
Return. —Leaves Bothwell at 3 p.m., and arrives
at Brighton station at 9 55, to catch the local train
arriving in Hobart at 11 TO p.m.
A weekly mail cart goes through to the lakes (36
miles te Great Lake), and arrangement can be made
with Mr. Reynolds, of Green Ponds, to be driven
thither, supplied with all necessaries and shelter,
and driven back again. A branch railway is now in
construction from Brighton to Apsley, some eight
miles short of Bothwell, which nearly follows the old
main road, and where a greater extent of good land
exists than along the Main Line railv. ay, some 12
m les further east. But to return to the Derwent.
Beyond Ouse the country is sparsely inhabited, and
the distance to the out-post of Marlborough is some
40 miles, which can be covered on horseback or by
vehicle from the Ouse or Hamilton. Some good land
is still available for selection in this direction, but it
would be best first to consult the district surveyor,
Mr. T. Frodsham ; address, Hobart,
Returning to the other side of the Derwent, and.
having passed Bushy Park and the Salmon Ponds,
and arrived at Glenora, the place of most interest
further west is Russell Falls, situated on an affluent
of the Russell River, near the new settlement of
Fentonbury, a out eight miles from Glenora, the
falls being three miles further. Good Crown land is
still available for selection in this neighbourhood.
Russell Falls.
Leaving the Derwent road near Fenton Forest, the
road to the falls diverges towards the tiers, and a
walk of about three miles along an easily-ascending
horse track leads to a spur, whence there is a view of
the de p gorge in which the Russell flows. The steep
hills on each side are thickly wooded, and on the
west the snow-clad summit of Mount Field (over 4000
feet high) bounds the landscape. Unexpectedly the


homestead and hop grounds of Mr. Belcher are met
■with here, and a mile further, following the right
side of the gully, we come to a tributary of the
Russell, and here are the celebrated falls. The falls
are about 150 ft. high and 100 ft. broad, but are broken
by a ledge half-way down, thus forming two distinct
falls. From the pool below the lower ledge is seen
to overhang seme distance, and in this space is a
perfect fairy bower of delicate ferns and mosses. The
tall trees around and groves of immense tree ferns,
all combine to render this spot one of the “lions” of
Tasmania.
THE HUON. /
The Huon District forms a part of Tasmania which
every tour’st should make a point of visiting. It is
a somewhat extensive district, lying to the south-west
of Hobart, and intersected by the noble river that
gives to the district its name. The Huon River
in its lower reaches is really an estuary, being several
miles in width at its confluence with D'Entrecasteaux
Channel, near Huon Island, and varying from one
to two miles in width from there until Shipwrights*
Point is reached, about fifteen miles from Huon
Island. As far as Shipwrights’ Point it is easily
navigable by any of the intercolonial steamers that
visit Tasmania, and from Shipwrights’ Point to
Huonville, a distance of ten or twelve miles, it is
navigable by small steamers, and vessels of light
draught. Between these two points the river
gradually contracts for some two or three miles of
its course, being divided into two channels by the
north and south Egg Islands. The river scenery is
very fine; occasionally, in the lower reaches, the
bends in the somewhat hilly shores give to the river
the aspect of a series of .lakes, with occasional
glimpses between the hills of distant and often snow-
capped mountains; while in the face of the hills, and
in the flats and valleys that approach the shore, the
handiwork of man is seen in the clearings, orchards,,
and pleasant homesteads, which have been won from
the almost impenetrable forests. In the upper
portion of the river, as the voyager passes Franklin
and proceeds to Huonville, he will be struck and
charmed with the beauty of the views that at every


j&JFSOK,
Wellington Bridge, Hobart.
LARGEST ASSORTMENT OF
VIEWS OF SCENERY
FROM ALL PARTS OF THE ISLAND.
Prize Medals from the following
Exhibitions :
Silver Medal, Paris, 1889: hightest award for
Australia.
Silver Medal, Melbourne, 1888 ; highest award
for Tasmania.
Silver Medal, Calcutta, 1883-84.
Silver Medal, Hobart, Industrial.
Bronze Medal, Melbourne’ 1880-81.
Bronze Medal, Sydney, 1879.
The best record in Tasmania.
Views mounted in Elegant Albums.
Views mounted singly.
Views unmounted from 6d. each.
An Inspection will repay the Visitor.
Only place in Tasmania for Stamp
Portraits, 10s. per 100 splendid
Portraits.
SOLE AGENT FOR LAUNCESTON,
R. MOWBRAY, BRISBANE STREET
A large stock kept at Hobart prices.


turn of the river meet his eye; and on reaching
Huonville, if he be favoured with bright sunshine,
while he looks out over the extended va'ley, and sees,,
awfay over the smiling orchards, and cosy dwellings
of the settlers, the grand chain of mountains of which
the “Sleeping Beauty” (so named because of its
striking re emblance to the well-formqi face of a
woman), forms the most prominent part, he must
confess that .he has dropped into one of the moat
charming bits of scenery that ever man looked on.
To reach Huonville by va'er the. tourist starts
from Hobart at half-past eight in the morning in the
steamer Huon, which runs regularly tw.ice a week
to the Huon River; and after steaming down the
River Derwent for a dozen miles turns into D’Entre-
casteaux Channel, which separates Bruni Island from
the mainland, and thence proceeds, usually in smooth
water, along the channel, which is from two to five
miles in width, for a distance of thirty miles, when
Huon Island, at the confluence of the Huon River, is
reached. All along the channel, on both sides, but
chiefly on the mainland, thriving little settlements,,
principally of fruit-growers and farmers, are seen,
among which are, on the mainland, Margate, Oyster
Cove, Woodbridge, Long Bay, and Gordon; and on
Bruni, Denn’s Paint, Barnes's Bay, and Taylor’s
Bay. Nothing can well surpass the piotu-esqueness
of some of the views obtained along this channel, that
seen about the pleasant little village of Woodbridge
being perhaps the loveliest of all. After passing Huon
Island, by diverging a little from' the direct river
course to Huonville, and proceeding four miles up an
arm "of the Huon, the pretty and thriving township
of Port Cygnet is reached, about fifty miles by water
from Hobart. Thence, returning to the main course
of the Muon again, it is followed as above described,
to HuqnT'.lle, making in all a seventy-mile trip,
which affords as pleasant a day’s outing as can be got
in any part of the world.
The same point, Huonville, can be reached by road
from Hobart in twenty-three miles. There is a daPy
coach leaving Hobart at nine and arriving at Huon-
rille about half-past one. The drive is through
mountainous forest country, immense gum trees,
graceful sassafras, silver wattle, fragrant musk trees.


spreading fern trees, and a great variety of shrubs,
ferns, and wild flowers, making the road most
attractive ; while from the higher points of the road
can be occasionally seen glimpses of the Southern
Ocean, and bits of D’Entrecasteaux Channel, which,
lying at the foot of the mountain, might make the
traveller fancy himself looking down on some of the
lakes in the Highlands of Scotland.
The round trip, going by road and returning by
river, or vice versa, is the correct course to take to see
the district properly. Hotel accommodation can be
found at Huonville, Franklin, Shipwrights’ Point,
and Port Cygnet, for those who wish to spend a few
days in the district.
There is good fishing in the river; acclimatised
salmon and trout are becoming plentiful, and in the
lowtr parts of the river native fish also abound.
The fruit industry, including the growth of apples,
pears, plum?, and the various small fruits, is largely
carried on, the produce now going into hundreds of
thousands of bushels a year, arid yearly increasing.
In apples an export trade with England is springing
up, which promises to be lucrative.
Grazing and agriculture are also followed to some
extent; but fer its product in fruit the district is,
and is likely to be, most famous.
There has been a large output of sawn timber,
palings, posts and rails, shingles, etc., but this, in
the portions of the district described, is being super-
seded largely by the cultivation of the soil.
Geeveston, about nine miles from Franklin, and
thirty-seven from Hobart, is, however, a thriving
settlement in which' both the timber industry and
the fruit and grazing and general agricultural
industries are all flourishing together. Here we come
into the region of sawmills, where the logs, fresh
from the virgin forests, are cut up for the market;
and from this point southwards, and getting beyond
the Huon towards the south end of D’Entrecasteaux
Channel, the mills become numerous, there being
some fifteen or twenty of them, each of which employ
from twenty to thirty men.
Port Esperance, Southport, and Recherche, are
centres of this milling interest, the two former places
being well worth visiting, the bays upon which the


townships arc placed, that of Esperance particularly,,
being very beautiful. There is regular steam com-
munication with these places from Hobart, and hotel
accommodation is provided.
Certainly a visit to Tasmania is not properly done
if it does not include such a run through the Huon
as has here been indicated.
Pares by Webster's coaches, 9s. single, 13s. return.
For times and fares by steamers see page 27.
THE STRAITS ISLANDS.
The most important of the islands in Bass Strait
are the Eastern or Purneaux group, with Kent
group, the latter stretching away within sight of the
Victorian coast, and seemingly more Victorian'than
Tasmanian. The islands are well lighted for navi-
gation, a regular chain of lighthouses within sight of
each other, from vessels, existing from Eddystone
Point to Wilson’s Promontory, Victoria, the series
running via Swan Island, Groese Island, and the Kent
Group light. Flinders Island, the largest of the
group, is from 30. to 35 miles in length by about 15
miles in width, and contains an area of 513,000 acres
of land. Towards its eastern coast it is low and
swampy, the rest being mainly mountainous ; but in
the extreme north-north-east of Mount Killiecrankie,
where valuable topazes are found, there is a large
extent of good ground estimated at about 11,000 acres.
Eastward of Settlement Point too, where the cap-
tured natives were located, there are about 12,000
acres of good land, and the whole south-west border
of the island is called good land according to the
“'Crown Lands Guide,” the island having recently
been surveyed. The Strzelecki Peaks, 2550 ft. high,
are the most remarkable natural feature in Flinders
Island, bearing a resemblance to the peaky or ser-
rated appearance of the mountains ®f the East Coast
of Tasmania from Schouten Island northwards.. The
inhabitants of these islands number some 200, whites
and half-castes, and depend upon the mutton bird or
sooty petrel for the main source of their living, a bird
about the size of a sea gull and of a dusky or grayish
black colour. They make their appearance with
marvellous regularity about the 21st of September,


seldom a day later or earlier. Flinders computed one
of the flocks he saw to be 40 miles loug, and to con-
tain as many birds as would require 16 square miles
for their nests, and it is believed their rookeries in
these islands would cover fully that space. The
produce of the-birds is first oil from the young birds,
obtained by squeezing, fat from the skins of the older
birds, obtained by “ trying out,” and the birds them-
selves salted in brine as an article of food. Whole
families camp out on the rookery islands for “ the sea-
son” and pull the birds out of their holes, etc., as
they are easily taken. Seals used to abound about
the islands, but, like the whales on this coast, have
been all but exterminated. Game is plentiful on
Flinders Island, as kangaroo and wild fowl also are
plentiful. Shells, too, of the Mariner kind are strung
and prepared by the half-castes, and beautiful pearly
necklaces they make.
Tin is found on Cape Barren Island, the next
largest, and is being worked, but no great results are
reported so far. A steamer trades to these islands
from Launceston once in three weeks, fare £1 ; R.
Gardner agent. Time will not permit us to dwell
longer this time on this interesting group.
Further information concerning Tasmania may be
obtained by consulting Fenton’s History; the Geology
of Tasmania, by E. M. Johnston, Government Statis-
tician ; Mrs. Meredith’s works; the Official Hand
Book ; Shell’s Handy Book of Tasmanian Mines and
Mining ; Crown Lands Guide ; Walch’s Red Book ;
and Hopwood and James’s Almanac, etc. I will
also gladly receive or give such information as I
possess relating to parts of the colony not mentioned
in this book, also concerning board and lodging in
Launceston.
Readers who receive pleasure or useful information
from a perusal of these pages will do me a favour if
they will call on the advertisers (who are the best of
their classy for any necessaries, and refer to this book.
E. MOWBRAY,
Editor and Publisher.
Brisbane street, Launceston,
• Opposite Launceston Hotel.


TASMANIA.
CAPITAL - - - -
£150,000.
PAID UP £100,000.
RESERVE FUND
£18,000.
TIEEIEj
NATIONAL BANK OF TASMANIA, LIMITED
Directors —RICHARD GREEN (Chairman),
JOHN GUNN, ROBERT GARDNER.
Head Office:
ST. JOHN STREET, LAUNCESTON.
GEORGE HORNE, Chief Manager,
ARTHUR EYANS, Accountant.
Branches:
Beaconsfield—Hutcheson Ingledew, Manager.
Moorina—F. E. Bomford, Manager.
Ringarooma— J. H. Heathorne, Manager.
Sheffield—C. C. Spotswood, Manager.
Stanley (Circular Head) —C. Stackhouse, Manager.
St. Mary’s—C. A. Collins, (Acting) Manager.
Waratah (Mount Bischoff) —J. Seagrave, Manager.
Wynyard (Table Cape)—R. H. Rudge, Manager.
Derby (Brothers’ Home) —R. Casboult, Manager.
Strahan (MacquarieHarbour)—B.C.Basstian,Manager
Zeehan (Silverfields)—Robt. Hogarth, Manager.
Agents:
London —Commercial Bank of Australia (Limited).
Tictoria —Commercial Bank of Australia (Limited).
New South Wales —Commercial Bank of Australia
(Limited).
Queensland —Commercial Bank of Australia (Limited)
South Australia—Commercial Bank of Australia
(Limited).
Northern Territory—Commercial Bank of Australia
(Limited),
New Zealand—Colonial Bank of New Zealand.
Receives Deposit*, issues Notes and Drafts, Discounts
Bills, makes Advances on approved Securities, and
transacts every other description of Banking
business in Tasmania and the other coloniea.


APPENDIX, TIME-TABLES, INDEX.
CROWN LANDS FOR SELECTION.
Throughout this book I have mentioned various
places where settlement was mostly proceeding. The
map shows where good unalienated Crown Land is
mostly available and there are thousands of acres of it.
Any person aged 18, or upwards, may s lect up to
320 acres at £1 per acre cash, or £1 6s. Bd. on
credit (14 yearly payments), the survey fee being
£3 2s. 6d. for 25 acres, .£5 for £5O acres, £8 15s. up
to 100 acres, £lO up to 150 acres, £ll ss. up to 200
acres, £l2 10s. up to 250 acres, and £l3 15s. up to
820 acres.
No selector may hold more than one selection at a
time on the credit system, but may, if paid for, up to
320 acres, which is the limit for one.
Half of the purchase money is applied to the con-
struction of roads in the vicinity of lots purchased
immediately on 500 acres being selected in not less
than five lots. Hoads and railways are also being
pushed on out of public funds.
For further information apply to Crown Land
Office, Hobart, or to district surveyors, and then
procure a local guide who is a judge of bush land.
'Y HE OF "J' ASMANIA.
The produce of Tasmania available for export
during 1888 was chiefly— value
Tin, 3775 tons £426,321
Wool, 6,977,038 lbs £306,930
Gold. 33,560 oz £127,562
Green Fruit, 309,657 bushels ... ... £83,982
Sawn and unsawn timber, etc ... ... £69,445
Bark, 7814 tons ... ... £61.829
Sheep, 4140 £56,045
Potatoes, 13,003 tons ... ... ... £35,258
Jam, 1,640.811 lbs £30,669
Pulp Fruit .' £4,600
Hides and Skins ... ... ... ... £21,410
Rabbit Skins, 1,961,576 £12,661
Hops, 486,964 lbs £13,802
Coal, 9412 tons £9,191
Horses £7,327
Sperm Oil, tons £2,570
And numerous smaller items


PRIVILEGES, ETC., OF MINERS.
(Condensed from Summary of Mining Acts and
Regulations, hy the Secretary of Mints.)
These are under the control of the Minister of Lands
and Works through the direct supervision of the
Secretary of Mines, under whom are appointed Com-
missioners of Mines and Goldfields for each division
of the colony, who act indicia 1 ly in the settlement of
disputes and conduct all business matters connected
with the mining industry. These reside at Launces-
ton, St. Helen’s, Scottsdale, Waratah, and Strahan,
and, with the Eegistrars of Mines at Hobart,
Launceston, St. Helen’s, Ellesmere, Gladstone,
Moorina, and Branxholm, issue miners’ rights to
applicants. Some postmasters, etc., are also
authorised to issue these.
Conditions and Privileges of Mining (Gold).
Miners’ Eights.—For the annual payment of
five shillings the holder is entitled to search and
mine for gold upon any Crown Land and to use a
quarter of an acre (or if abandoned ground previously
worked, one acre) of land for mining or residence,
and also to use firewood, or timber for mining.
Prospectors’ Protection Orders, costing five
shillings, are obtained from a commissioner, protect-
ing the holder in the use of from 10 to §0 acres in a
new locality far 12 months, and should a discovery
be made to secure a.claim free of rent up to 15 acres
of alluvial or 20 acres of quartz mining ground.
Business Licenses cost annually £4,. Space,
quarter of an acre.
Leases of areas up to ten acres are issued for ten
years, with right of renewal at j6l per acre per
annum (but amalgamation is allowed up to 60 acres)
with privileges similar to those of holders of miner’s
rights.
Leases op Machinery Sites are granted for the
same term at the same rental.
Grants of Water rights, entitling holders to
divert water, cut races, and build dams, are issued
for periods of ten years at an annual rental of ill per
Bluice head of 16 square inches.
Easement Liases for the construction of neces-
sary drains, roads, channels, tramways, or shafts on


Crown land, to enable lessees to conveniently work
their leases, are issued for a term of ten years free of
rent.
On Mineral Lands other than Gold.
Business Licenses, costing 10a per annum, en-
title the holder to occupy a quarter acre of land for
business or residence.
Prospectors’ Licenses, costing 10a per annum,
entitle the holder to prospect upon 20 acres of Crown
land.
Leases at an annual rental of 5s per acre for
any term up to 21 years, renewable, of areas from 20
to 80 acres, entitle the holder to mine, cut, and re-
move timber, stone, clay, or gravel for building on
the leased claim, and to build and reside thereon.
For lands containing coal, shale, slate, freestone,
or limestone, the area shall not exceed 320 acres, and
the rental is 2s. 6d. per acre. Discoverers of the
above minerals may be granted leases at peppercorn
rent of areas from 100 to 320 acres, or from 20 to 80
acres of any other mineral, according to the distance
from known similar minerals.
Leases of Machinery Sites, also, are granted up
to five acres, at £1 per acre for 21 years, renewable.
Grants of Water Eights for 21 years, renew-
able, at the rate of £1 per head of 16 square inches,
with right to construct races, dams, and reservoirs.
Easement Licenses, for the conveyance and
deposit of sludge, construction of roads, tramways,
shafts, etc., are granted for 21 years, free of rent,
renewable. Provisions are further made for acquir-
ing easements through or upon private land.
Disputes, etc. The regulations provide for
settlement of disputes and partnership questiens,
etc., and provisions are made for appeal to the
Supreme Court against decisions of the Commis-
sioners in mining cases. This refers to all mineral
lands.
Fees for Applications, Registration, Surveys,
For amalgamation, £1 each lot; for consolida-
tion of leases, ,£] each lease. Application for lease,
JEI ; for machinery site, j6l ; for water-right, j6l ;
transfer or assignment, .£1; but if only for interest
in application, 10a, and for gold, 20s ; the insertion


of another as joint applicant, 10s; if for gold, ss;
objection fee, 10s ; preparation of lease, £l.
The Survey Scale for ordinary land up to two
acres is 25s ; two and under 10 a res, 40s ; 10 to 20
acres, 575; 20 to 50 acres, 80s ; 50 to 100 acres, 140 s ;
and .£1 for every additional 50 acres, and .£ll for 320
acres. For densely wooded or scrub land the rate
is increased to 325., 505., 725., 100 s., 1755., respec-
tively, up to a hundred acres, and then one-fifth is
added up to the limit, 320 acres. If no survey nec-
essary, plan and report cost .£2 25., but for gold
leases ,£1 Is. Water races Is. to Is. 3d. per chain.
The West Coast survey scale is for under 2
acres, 40s ; 2to 10 acres, 755.; 10 to 20 acres, 100 s.
Rigistration of claims, protection, amalgamation,
applications, etc., cost from Is. to 55., and certificates
of ditto 2s. 6d. to ss.
Mean temperature and rainfall Jan. and July, 1841-75
„ „ Jan.,63T7; mean diurnal'range, 21-04
~ „ July,46 - 44; ~ ~ 1556
Mean rainfall, July, 2T5 in. Rain fell on 13-67 days
„ Jan., 1-54 in. „ „ 8 50 days
EDWARD MACE & CO.,
HOBART
STOCK & SHARE BROKERS,
MINING, ESTATE, AND GENERAL
COMMISSION AGENTS,
98 AND 95 COLLINS STREET,
HOBART, TASMANIA.


Tasmanian Main Line Railway. ToLaun oeston
Leave Stations
as under ;
CO
ce
2-a
* g
W OJ
3 «*
Ph
JJ oo
1h ”
rfi CO
.^Ph
40 M
“pS
I'S
W eg
»7 -HI
£f‘S
la
J 1
A) *
S *
in 4>
c 3 &0
fM
Hobart
i« m a m p m p
8 0 10 30 S 0 I
) m a
8 0 \
8 12
Eisdon Eoad
10 42 5 12
N.Town (Cooley’s)
Glenorchy
Berriedale Eoad
Austin’s Ferry ...
S. Bridgewater ...
Bridgewater J. A.
„ ... Lev.
Brighton
10 48 5 18
8 14 10 55 5 25
11 2 5 32
11 9 5 40
11 18 5 50
11 22 5 55
8 3411 25 6 0
8 45 11 45 6 20
Tea Tree.
p m
12 0 6 35
Eichmond Eoad
Campania
12 15
9 10 12 30 7 32 10
Lower Jerusalem
Jerusalem
12 50 7 50 10
940 120820 11 5 840
10 10 2 0 9 0 11 55 9 10
Ehyndaston
Jericho E ad
Parattah J.... Ar
2 20 9 20 12 15 ...
a mlO 35 235 9 35 12 30 935
65011 0 3 0 ... 15010 0
Lv
Eastern Marshes
York Plains
3 10
3 30
3 55
4 3
Anbill Ponds
7 45 11
2 45 10 30
A. Ponds P. Office
Tunbridge
Eoss ... Ar. 8 35 11
Campbell Town...
Conara J. ... Ar
~ ... Lv,
Cleveland
Epping Forest ..
Snake Banks
Clarendon
Evandale
Evandale J.
S L . Leonards
Launceston ... Ar.
8 45 11
P
9 10 12
9 40 12
9 5012
10 20 12
10 50
11 20 1
11 25 1
11 50 1
12 0 1
3 50 11 0
4 16 11
4 50 11
5 1011
6 10 12
6 25 12
* Euns on
Sunday only.


THE LAUNCESTON HOTEL,
LAUNCESTON,
CT. HUSTOLT,
PROPRIETOR.
Visitors to Tasmania can get the best accommo-
dation and attendance at this Hotel.
Private Suites of Apartments.
Ladies’ Drawing Rooms.
Large Commercial Room.
Dining Hall unequalled in the City.
First-class Sample Rooms.
Hot and Cold Baths.
TELEGRAMS PROMPTLY ATTENDED. TELEPHONE NO. 58


Tasmanian Main Line Railway
To Hobart.
Leave Stations
as under:—
Launceston
St. Leonards
Evandale June. ...
Bvandale
Clarendon ...
Snake Banks
Epping Forest
Cleveland
Conara June. Ar,
Campbell Town
Eoss
Tunbridge ...
A. Ponds Post Office
Antill Ponds
York Plains
Eastern Marshes ...
Parattab June. Ar.
Jericho Road
Rhyndaston
Jerusalem ...
Lower Jerusalem
dampania ...
Richmond Road
Tea Tree
Brighton
Bridgewater Jun. A
S. Bridgewater
Austin’s Ferry
Berriedale Road
dlenorchy ...
•
Cl CO
'S. co
be cS
'«CM
pR
rj CO
Pr*3
I S |l
§s* gPM g* | ®
* ** £§ £
k m p
8 30 3
m p m p m p ra
0 4 0 830 4 0
.. 4 10 8 40 ...
30 4 35 9 10 4 30
8 40 ... 4 10 8 40
9 10 8 30 4 35 9 10 4 30
9 20 3 38 4 45 9 20 4 88
935 ... 5 0 935
9 54 ... 5 19 9 54
10 20 4
10 30 ,
10 40
8 5 45 10 20 5 8
.. 5 55 10 30 ...
65 10 40
50 4 23 6 20 10 50 5 23
15 4 38 (3 45 11 15 5 38
40 5 0 7 10 11 40 ...
55 ... 7 2011 50 6 0
R. Town (Cooley’s)
Risdon Road
Hebart ... Ar
* Runs on Sunday only


MAIN LINE LOCAL TRAINS.
In addition to the trains mentioned in the Main
Line and Derwent Valley Line tables, the following’
local trains run, stopping at all intermediate stations
except the Botanical Gardens (3 - 10 p.m. train) :
Down trains, leave Hobart for Brighton at 6 20 a m.,
for Glenorchy at 7'30 a.m. and 3'lo p.m. (this train
runs on to South Bridgewater on Wednesdays and
Saturdays, and on sale days to Bridgewater
Junction); for Glenorchy (Saturdays only) at
9 45 p.m.
Up trains, leave Brighton at 7'55 a.m., Glenorchy
at 8-15 a.m.,J4 35 p.m. (on Wednesdays and Saturdays
from South Bridgewater at 4 10 p.m.), and 6 55 p.m.*
and on Saturdays only, from Glenorchy at 10’15 p.m.
RAILWAYS IN CONSTRUCTION.
Deloraine to Mole Creek ; Formby tc Ulverstone r-
Brighton to Apsley; Bellerive to Sorall; Strahan
to Zeehan.
NEW HIGH-ARM DAVIES
SEWING MACHINE.
VERTICAL FEED.
SIMPLICITY.
DURABILITY.
EFFICIENCY.
W. HART AND SONS,
AGENTS
DATIES SEWIM& MACHINE.


Launceston
St. Leonards
Breadalbane*
Evandale Junction
D.p
Perth
Longford...
Arr
ss
Dep
Wilmore's Lane*
Little Hamptun*
Bishopsbourne ...
Oaks*
Glenore ...
Hagley
Westbury...
Arr
„
Dep.
Exton
Deloraine...
Arr.
Dep.
■Chudleigh Road...
Dunorlan...
Whitefoord Hill...
Kimberley
Railton ...
Dulverton*
Latrobe ...
Air.
Si
Dep.
Tarleton
■TASMANIAN GOVERNMENT RAILWAYS.
Western Link.
Launceston to Deloraine and Formby.
,a
2 fl
,«H O
CQ
<D <X>
« a
a g
08 a
I-
CO
03
o 8
IM d 3
UJ .
STATIONS.
m
ns 2
£
c 3 O
3 § w
Vo CO
H 4
. M
a-2 *
‘Ss
rH rH
am p m
Spreyton
Formby
8 0 12 401
4 81012 50
7i 8 20 1 0
Hi ... 1 15
... 8 32 1 20
14| 8 42 1 31
I7f 8 50 1 40
8 55 1 50
21i 9 6 2 1
22f 9 9 2 5
24f 9 14 2 12
26i 9 19| 2 18
28i 9 25 2 26
Qll Q CM I O QC
314 9 34 2 36
35 945
9 50 2 48
4H 10 5 3 7
45 10 15 3 20
... 10 25
48 10 34'
53i 10 50
55 10 57
6HII 17
67 11 32
69 4 11 39
75 11 55
11 57
77 12 4
P
3
3
in p m
15 5 0
25 5 10
35 5 20
3 47 5 32
3 57 5 42
4 5 5 50
4 7 5 55
4 18 6 6
4 21 6 9
4 25 6 14
4 30 6 19
4 35 6 25
4 44 6 34
4 55 ...
5 0 6 45
5 15 7 0
5 25 7 10
79|12 14
82 12 22j
Trains stop at stations marked * only when passengers offer.
These must gire notice to the guard at preceding station.
Passengers for the West can also travel as far as Evandale
Junction by the ,8-30 a.m., 3,4, and B‘3o p.m. trains from Main
Line station, A conveyance meets every train. The 8 a.m., 12'40,
and 3T5 p.m. trains from Launceston connect at Evandale June,
with Main Line trains fromHohart and intermediate stations.


Paid-up Capital, £1,500,000; Eeserve Fuuds,£1,000,000;
together £2,500,000
Eeserve Liability of Proprietors 3,000,000
Total Capital and Eeserve Fuuds £5,500,000
The Union Bank of Australia limited
Estahlithed 1837# Incorporated 1880.
Head Office: 1 Sank Building's, Lotbbury, London.
COLONIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
General Manager—David Finlatson, Esq.
YlCTOElA.—Melbourne—South Melbourne, Collingwood,
Fitzroy, Brunswick, —Geelong, Portland, Ballarat, Sandhurst,
Stawell, Daylesford, Clunes, Egerton, Eochester, Maryborough,
Alexandra, Tarnagulla.
NEW SOUTH WALES.—Sydney—Oxford Street, George
Street, Newtown, Leichardt, —Newcastle, Wagga Wagga, Junee,
Hay, Deniliquin, Young, Parkes, Burrowa, West Maitland,
Orange, Broken Hill, Grenfell, Forbes, Greta, Cootamundra.
QUEENSLAND. Brisbane South Brisbane, Fortitude
Valley,—Mackay, Gympie, Maryborough, Eockhampton,Towns-
ville, Toowoomba, Bundaberg, Charters Towers.
SOUTH AUSTEALIA.— Adelaide, Port Adelaide, Port Pirie.
WESTEEN AUSTEALIA. —Perth, York, Albany, Gerald-
ton, Fremantle, Bunbury, Eoebourne, Cossack.
TASMANIA. Hobart, Launceston, Oatlands, Latrobe,
Scottsdale.
FIJI-Suva.
NEW ZEALAND.—Auckland, Napier, Palmerston North,
Port Ahuriri (Napier), Gisborne, Wellington, Blenheim, Hast-
ings, Nelson, Hokitika, Greymouth, Christchurch, Ashburton,
Eangiora, Southbridge, Lyttelton, Timaru, Waimate, Dunedin,
Oamaru, Invercargill.
Agents and Correspondents in all parts of the world.
LESLIE JOLLY
WHOLESALE AND EE TAIL TOBACCONIST,
CENT UAL BRISBANE STREET, LAUNCESTON.
Largest assortment of Tobacconist ware.
The best brands of Cigars and Tobacco in the city.
AIJIED E. IXTTEEIX
ARCHITECT,
CAMERON STREET.
Plans forwarded on approval to gentlemen in-
tending to build free of charge.


Formby ...
Dep.
Spreyton*
...
Tarleton*
•..
Latrobe
Arr.
... ...
Hep.
Dulverton *
Eailton
Kimberley *
Whitefoord Hills*
Dunorlan ...
Chudleigh Eoad ...
Deloraine ...
A rr.
%y ... 44%
Dep.
Exton
Westbury
Arr.
%y ... ...
Dep.
Hagley
Gdenore* ...
Oaks*
Bishopsbourne
Kittle Hampton* ...
Wilmore’a Lane*...
Longford
Arr.
if • • • •••
Dep.
Perth ... > ...
...
Evandale Junction
Breadalbane*
St. Leonards
. •.
Launceston
Arr.
Western Line,
l Deloraine to
Formby and
Launceston.
cn m
3 * i
■g| §6
P— 1 fn -M
09
rH
WOQ CO CO g
ri r') S 00
U o O Tj w
CqO *,O
rH * * «
STATIONS.
2*
5
7
am p m p m
7 10 ... 2 15
7 18 ... 223
728 ... 2 33
735 ... 2 40
7 371 ... 2 45
7 53 ... 3 1
80 ... 3 8
8 17 ... 3 25
841 ... 349
848 ... 3 56
9 3 ... 4 11
9 12 ... 420
9 22 12 0 4 30
9 32 12 14 4 40
9 47 12 33 4 54
47 ... 94712 33 4
... 7 55 9 49 12 34 4 56
50£ 8 5 10 0 12 46 5 6
53* 8 14 10 9 12 57 5 15
554 8 22 10 17 1 6 5 23
5718 27 10 22 1 11 5 28
5918 32 10 27 1 17 533
60*8 35 10 30 1 22 5 36
6418 45 10 40 1 34 546
8 50 10 42 1 44 5 51
6718 58 10 50 1 53 5 59
70f 9 9 11 0 2 4 6 9
74f 9 21 11 12 2 19 6 21
78 9 31 11 21 2 30,6 31
82 9 40 11 30 2 40 6 40
Passengers from Hobart or the West can also reach Laun-
ceston from Evandale Junction hy the 6 - 24, a.m. 1P26, PIS, and
7 - 45 p.m. trains. The 7'30 a.m. and 13 noon trains from
Deloraine connect at Evandale Junction with Main Line trains
for Hobart and intermediate stations.
• See explanation foot of page 155,


ALFRED HARRAP k SON,
WHARF, LAUNCESTON,
Custom House, Insurance, Ship, and General
Forwarding Agents.
Goods cleared and forwarded to any part of
Tasmania.
Shipping clerks attend the arrival of all inter-
colonial steamers.
Agents, s.s. Centennial, which leaves Laun-
ceston every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday
at 11 a.m., for Beaconsfield, George Town, and
all parts of the Tamar, returning from George
Town every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday,
at 9 a.m.
The Centennial makes an excursion to
Rosevear’s every Wednesday afternoon, leaving
Launceston at 2’30 and returning by 6 p.m.;
also Moonlight excursions : see advertisements
daily papers
alpred haerap m son,
CAMERON STREET, LAUNCESTON-
WOOL, GRAIN, AND GENERAL
PRODUCE STORES.
Large storage accommodation.
Agents for the Deering Reaper and Binder.
Agents for Carlyle Iron Windmill.
Agents for Lough’s Patent Woolpress.
Agents for Long Island Guano.
Agents for Little’s Sheep Dip.


Glenora Dep 6 50
2 Macquarie Plains ... Arr. 6 57
ditto Dep. 7 0
6* Plently Arr. 7 15
ditto Dep 7 17
9* Hamilton Road* ... ... 7 27
11 Falls* ... ... 731
12* New Norfolk ... ... Arr. 737
ditto Dep. 7 40
14* Rocks* 7 46
20* Dromedary* ... ... ... 8 3
24* Bridgewater Junction ... Arr. 8 15
fArr. Hobart ... 9 20
£ ~ Brighton 8 45
•to I „ Parattah 10 35
H S j
I „ Conara (late Corners)f 12 23
I „ Evandale Junctionf ... 115
pp L » Launcestonf 145
Down Trains amp
Leave Hobart 8 0
p m
„ Launcestonf ... 830
„ Evandale Junctionf... 910
6
O-
-14 S
a *
»
«
•{ „ Conara (late Corners) flO 50
a m
I ~ Parattah ... ... 3 0
10 50
„ Brighton ... ... 755
Bridgewater Junction... Dep. 840 2
3f
10
Hi
Dromedary* ... ... ... 852 2
Rocks'
New Norfolk* ... ... Arr. 9 15 2
ditto... ... ... Dep
Falls*
Hamilton Road*
9 28 3 3
Plenty Arr
ditto Dep.
Dep. 9
Glenora ... Arr. 10 5
f Following morning.
f Previous night.
* See explanation foot of page 155.
8 0 1 10
9 9 2 44
9 18 2 53
9 24 2 59
9 38 3 13
9 40 3 15
Macquarie Plains ... Arr. 9 56 3 31
ditto... ... ... Dep. 9 58 3 33
12 35 4 5
12 42 4 12
12 45 4 15
1 0 4 30
1 2 4 32
1 12 4 44
1 16 4 50
1 22 4 55
1 25 5 0
1 31 5 6
1 48 5 23
2 0 5 35
3 0 6 40
10 50


K. NEWET & SONS,
SEEDSMEN,
HAY AND CORN MERCHANTS,
Have always on hand—
A large and varied assortment of Grass Seed and
Seed Corn, cleaned by special machinery.
ALSO,
Clover, Agricultural, Vegetable, and Mower Seeds,
Flowering Bulbs, and Seed Potatoes of all de-
scriptions in their respective seasons.
Priced Catalogue and Amateur’s Guide post
free on application.
General Storekeepers.
Oats, Peas, Beans, and Linseed crushed. Chaff cut
by steam power on the premises, and screened
free from all dust and impurities.
Telephone 88.
GEORGE STREET, LAUNCESTON,
Opposite old Custom House.
FROST & ORPWOOD’S
OLD-ESTABLISHED
Drapery, Clothing, and Millinery
Business
Is next the handsome new buildings,
CENTRAL CHARLES STREET, LAUNCESTON.
Hew Zealand Insurance Company,
Fir© and Marla©.
Capital, £1,000,000, Losses paid, over £2,000,000
Policies settled without reference to
Head Office,
Claims issued within one hour’
notice.
W. S. SOUTHWELL, Agent, Launceston.


g Monday, Tuesday,
STATIONS Wedn’day Thursday*
. Friday Saturday
pm pm ampm
... Hobart dep. M.L.Ey. ... BOf BOf
Launceston ditto am 30 8 30...
... Conara Dep. 5 45 4 30 10 55 1 0
8 dtoney Creek* ,6 13 4 58 11 23 1 28
11 Hanleth* 6 26 5 8 11 36 1 41
12£ Eastbourne* 6 33 5 15 11 43 1 48
16f Avoca 6 54 5 35 12 4 2 9
24 Ormlej* ;7 20 6 5 12 30 2 35
29f Tullochgorum* 7 41 6 25 12 51 2 56
33f Fingal 8 0 645 1103 19
40 Break o’ Day* S2l 7 6 1313 40
42£ Mount Nicholas* ... ...8 33 7 18 1 43 3 48
Cullens wood 8 43 7 28 1 53 3 58
46f St. Mary’s Arr 8 50 7 35 2 0 4 5
Up Trains
g Mondays, Tuesdays,
STATIONS Wedn’day Thur’days
Fridays Saturdays
a mpm a mpm
... St. Mary’s ... Dep. 9 5 1 10 7 30 225
Cullenswood* ... ... 9 15 1 21 7 41 2 36
4j Mount Nicholas* ... ... 9 27 1 33 7 53 2 48
6f Breako’ Day* 9 39 1 45 8 5 3 0
13 Fingal 10 0 2 6 8263 21
17 Tullochgorum* ... ... 10 15 2 25 8 45 3 40
22f Ormley* ... ... 10 40 247 9 7 4i 2
30 Avoca 11 8 3 16 9 36 4 31
34i Eastbourne* ... ... 11 25 3 34 9 54 4 49
35| Hanleth* 11 32 3 39 9 59 4 54
38f Stony Creek* 11 42 3 52 10 12 5 7
46f Conara ... ... Arr. 12 10 4 15 10 35 5 30 1
82 L’nceston arr. per M.L.R. 8 45 8 45 1 45 8 20;
145 Hobart ditto 1 45 8 20 6 40 7^lo
fPrevious Night. JNexfc Morning. Particular
attention is directed to the fact that the above
services run on alter nate days.
♦' SflA P3mla;r:n;hion fftof, of op.cta
* See explanation foot of page 155,


DERWENT WOOLLEN MILLS,
GORE STREET, HOBART.
JOHNSTONE BROS. AND GO.
MANCrACTCBERS OF
Plain aud Fancy Tweeds, Indigo-dyed
Blue Serges, Blankets, Flannels, and
every description of Woollen Goods.
U. 2L
DECORATIVE PAINTER,
Paperhanger, Writer, Grainer, and Imitator of
all kinds Wood and Marble.
Trevallyn, or care of H. C. Spotswood,
Brisbane Street.
JOHN G. FERGUSON,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL IRONMONGER,
WME, SEIM, & CHARLES STS., LAUNCESTON.
IMPORTER OF ENGLISH & AMERICAN HARDWARE,
Agent for M'Cormick’s Reaping and Binding
Machines, Lennon’s Agricultural Implements,
Nobel’s Dynamite, the best, cheapest, and safest
Explosive Compound, Allcock’s Best Fishing
Tackle, Greener’s B.L. Guns and Ammunition.
MACHINERY STORE
OFF BELL’S RIGHT-OF-WAY, YORK ST.


Scottsdale Line.
Down Trains
STATIONS
Launceston ... Dep
2 Mowbray*
4f ißocher’s Lane*.
13i Turner’s Marsh
Karoola
Lilydale... ... ... ... Arr.
„ Dep.
25f Tunnel ... ... ... • ...
28 Lebrina ... ... ...
Qolconda
Lisle Road*
Lietinna’
Scottsdale
a m p m
i
7 30|4 30
7 38 4 38
7 51 4 51
8 28 5 28
8 41 5 41
93 6 3
98 6 8
9 82 6 32
9 41 6 41
10 I 7 1
10 16 7 16
10 33 7 33
10 45 7 45
Dp Trains
STATIONS
Scottsdale ... ... ... Dep
7 25 4 25
3*Lietinna* ... ... ... Arr
7 34 4 34
~ ... ... Dep
7 37 4 37
9 Lisle Eoad*
7 55 4 55
13 Golconda
8 10 5 10
19 Lebrina
8 35 5 35
21* Tunnel ) 8 47 5 47
20 Lily dale ... .... ... Arr. 9 2 6 2
~ ... ... ... ... Dep. 9 9 6 9
30* Karoola ...
33f Turner’s Marsh
42* Rocher’s Lane*,..
45 Mowbray*
47 Launceston ... ... ... Arr
9 28 6 28
9 43 6 43
10 11 7 11
10 19 7 19
10 25 7 25
PABATTAH AND OATLANDS LINE
Trains leave Parattah for Oatlands at 10 50 a.m
on arrival of express from Hobart; at 3 - 5 p.m. after
arrival of ordinary trains from Hobart and Launces-
ton ; and 6 15 p.m. arriving at Oatlands at 1115 a.m..
330 p.m., and 6QO p.m. respectively.
Trains leave Oatlands for Parattah at 10 a m. in
time for express train for Launceston ; at 155 p.m,
in time to join theordinary trains for Hobart or
Launceston; and at 550 p.m. in time for the
express train for Hobart; arriving at Parattah at
1025 a.m , 2 20 p.m., 550 p m., respectively.
* See explanation foot of page 155.


MAYHEAB’S
CIRCULATING LIBRARY
Cbntains a good assortment of new and standard
novels, to which is added weekly the latest
books.
Terms, 2s. deposit and 3d. exchange. Next
door to the Launceston Hotel.
A, W. MAYHEAD,
BOOKSELLER & STATIONER,
CENTRAL BRISBANE STREET,
LAUNCESTON.
Agent for English, Colonial, and American Newspapers
and Magazines.
COUNTRY ORDERS RECEIVE PROMPT ATTENTION.
E F. ARMSTRONG k CO.,
WHOLESALE TIMBER,
SHIPPING, AND GENERAL MERCHANTS
AND COMMISSION AGENTS.
Blue Gum Railway Sleepers and all descrip-
tions of Hardwood supplied on shortest notice
and at lowest rates.
CASH PURCHASERS ALL COLONIAL
PRODUCE.
Agents for Messrs. John Geeves and Sons,
Speedwell Sawmills, Geeveston.
H. F* AFMSTFONG & G 0„
36 NEW WHARF, HOBART,
AND AT 219 CLARENCE STREET, SYDNEY*


The M of Van Diemen’s Land Limited,
TASMANIA.
Established 1823. Incorporated Ist De-
cember, 1880,
Paid-up Capital £200,000
Reserve Fund ... 17,000
Reserve Liability of Shareholders ... 200,000
£417,000
Office, Kotmrti,
Directors;
John Pearce, Esq., Chairman ; Peter Facy, Esq.,hon.
W. H. Burgess. W. G. Browne, Manager.
Launceston Branch.
Local Directors : Hon. William Hart, Thomas
Corbett, Esq. John Hudson, Manager.
Formbt Branch: W. J. Lovett, Manager.
Bubnie Branch : J. G. Bindley, Acting Manager.
Zeehan : C. A. Littler, Acting Manager.
Agents :
London. —The London and Westminster Bank
Limited, English, Scottish, and Australian
Chartered Bank.
New South Wales. —The Commercial Banking
Company of Sydney, Australian Joint Stock Bank,
City Bank, English, Scottish, and Australian Char-
tered Bank, Queensland National Bank Limited.
Victoria. —Colonial Bank of Australasia, English,
Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank.
Queensland. —Queensland National Bank Limited,
Australian Joint Stock Bank, Commercial Bank-
ing Company of Sydney.
South Australia, —English, Scottish, and Aus-
tralian Chartered Bank.
New Zealand. —The Colonial Bank of New Zealand,
Bank of New Zealand.
Fiji. —Bank of New Zealand.
Maub tius. —Ireland, Fraser, and Co.


M. I. EMPORIUM,
Corner of George and Brisbane Streets.
Established for the sale of
CHINA, GLASS, AND EARTHENWARE.
A large variety of other goods, useful and ornamental,
suitable for presents for all occasions.
Goods ordered by post carefully selected and packed
free of charge.
GEORGE HUBBARD,
Corner of Brisbane and George Streets.
BOOTS I BOOTS II
S. J. WOOLLEY,
BRISBANE AND GEOR6E STREETS.
Importer and Manufacturer of Boots & Shoes.
A Large and Well-assorted Stock always on hand to
select from.
STRANGERS BEWARE!
To get the Best Value for your
money in
FURNITURE, etc.,
“Try more than one shop,” and don’t
omit to call and see
THE LARGE STOCK OF
D. STORK EH,
IMPORTER AND MANUFACTURER,
ST. JOHN AND YORK STREETS


INDEX
Aborigines 3.
Asylums for insane... 13,
Avoca...
Barrington
Beaconsfield
Bellerive. 24,
Ben Lomond 72,
Boodyalla port
Books of reference
Bothwell
B ran x holm
Bridport
Brother’s Home..
Brown’s River
Burnie
33 Gad’s Hill 59
77 Gawlor 7 104
67 Geeveston..,
9,145 Gem Stones,
138 George’s Bay 82
69 George Town 90
66 Glengarry 86
70 Glenora 14
21 Gould’s C Country 82
108 Green’s Creek 94
Cab Fares 31, 52
82, 144
Campdell Town
Carrick
a
Galena, tests of 124 6
Campdell Town 135 Hagley 58
Carrick 67 Hamilton (R Clyde)..'. 138
Cascades (Hobart) 14- (R. Forth) .. 99
(R. Forth) .., 99
Cataract (S. Esk).4B
Heazlewood 118, 130
Caves 60, 88-9 Heemskirk 122, 134
Channel (D’Entre.)... 27, 140 Historical 33-6, 38
Climate 6 Huon 24, 27, 140-4
Coaches 24, 31, 33, 58, 76, Hobart and vicinity 9-36
vaiaiaui J .
Caves 60,
Hobart and vicinity 9-36
78, 80, 83, 85, 86,’ 89,* 99;
100, 106, 118, 138,’ 139’ 144 Islands (Bass Strait)... 144
Coal mines 78
Corinna 132 Kangaroo P. (Bell’rive) 24, 33
Corra Linn 50 Kentishbury 96
Crown Lands... 147 King River 128
Circular Head (Stanley) 112
Lakes 25, 136-8
t ••• M< ifi IOU'O
Deddington 55 Land, terms of purchase ,
Deloraine, etc 59, 61
Denison Gorge 62
Derby..,.
Derwent River 9,
Don
Eagle Hawk Neck...
Ellesmere
70 Lefroy 90
138 Leith 101
Emu Bay 1'
Errata (end of index)
Exports.
Falmouth
:rn-tree gullies.
Launceston, etc.... 38-55
62 Latrobe 93
99 Leven 102
Lisle 64
23 Longford 53
66 Lymington r 65
Macquarie Harbour 120
168 Mangana 77
Mathinna 77
... 81 Marlborough 129
18, 50[Meander Falls 61
1 508 om ■
PAGE PAGE
34-5 Fingal 77
3, 14 First Basin (Launceston) 48
71 Flinders Island 144
Formby 97
96 Frankford 86
88


Middlesex Goldfield.
Midlands
Macquarie Plains.
Mineral Lands
Leases.
Miners’ Privileges.
Moorina
Mount Bischoff,
Lye 11......
Nelson.,..
Nicholas.
PAGE PAGE
59iSheep, valuable 134
134 Sheffield 96
ISSjSilverfields 124-6, 130-1
149 Smithton 113
149 Somerset (River Cam)... 109
148 Sorell 24 5, 33
.tO OUICU.,, *•••••• “A t»j
70 Springfield 66
115 Springs, Mt. Wellington 18
128 Stanley 112
30 Statistics . 8,9, 147
78 Steamers... cover, 1, 22, 24,
30 26-30, 40, 44, 67 , 89, 90,
68 113, 117, 120, 122, 145
15-20 Strahan 121
Rumney 30
Victoria 68
Wellington....
New Norfolk.
New Town (Hobart).
N.E, District
12, 28 St. Mary’s Pass 80
.. 12 Survey Fees
62-71 Swansea 83-6
Northdown 94
N.W. Coast 91,
Oatlands
Omnibuses.
32, 51 Timber 101, 114, 117
St. Helen’s 82
Oatlands (Railway tables)
Ouse .
117 Table Cape 110
Tamar River 5, 40
Third Basin (Launceston) 47
Penguin.
Perth
) Tin Mines 68-71, 73 6, 82,
138 115, 134
Torquay 97
106 Trevallyn 46
53 Trial Harbour 122
Pieman River 132 Tunbridge 135
Port Arthur 21-3
Produce of Tasmania... 147 Van Diemen’s Land Co. 107-8
Punch bowl (Launceston) 43
Waratah 115
Railways 151-163 Waterworks (Hobart)... 20
Remine 122 (Launceston)... 55
Richmond 86 Weldborougfi 70, 82
Ringarooma District... 67-71 Western District 57-61
Ross ... 135. West Coast 117-34
Russell Falls..
139 Weslbury 58
Railways in construction 154 Wilmot 101
Whyte River Goldfield 130
Salisbury 89 Winkleigh... 88
Salt Lagoons 135 Wyniford River.. 71
Scottsdale
66 Wynyard 110
49 Zeehan Silverfield 124-8
Ry. and road 62-6
Second Basin (L’ceston) 49
ERRATA
Pape 70, Weldborougfi is in Thomas Plains,
Page 108, for Ivanhoe read Wyvenhoe.




- 'M - • v ft -?■&* t J '
- « •?,•■.. . ‘ ,' l . .
V / > , .. '. , ; # . ■ ->• -vf,/ ■ ■’ ' •<;?•:- ‘dp'Ij/
&' * .'></• :#** . - ' ijkp St. id
■ : , . " % 1 . /. : ;. «
■
,
■ " > , * f, ' > v s *
* ** : \ / X'f ’
7 1 -,w'/ J f
>
■*■ -j [ y m w** '
