

The silver guestion considered from an Australian
Stand point.
MUL HOLLAND, Philip J


THE
SILVER
QUESTION.
CONSIDERED ranM
An Australian Standpoint.
Price Sixpence.
BY PHILIP J. MULHOLLAND,
(Hon. Sec, N. S, W Silver League.)


CENTRAL OFFICE : 812 GEORGE ST. Telephone 424.
at.ro (Near Christ Church.)
474 & 718 HARRIS ST. (Near Redfern Sfn.)
Telephones 1x60 & 3063. ■*'
37 CASTLEREAGH STREET.
Telephone
Boland’s Corner, O. -v? \W V' 1
&
*
Enmore
TO* 6
C©* 1
*v
*
»etS
tv^
et
REFORM
FUNERALS
At REFORM CHARGES.
The management and employees having had long experience in the business, patrons can rely upon
all Funeral Arrangements being well and faithfully carried out under the personal snpervision of the
principal partner, Mr. J, T. Cokfill, of the Metropolitan Carriage Bazaar,
Mrs. J. T. Coffill is the only Certificated Lady Embalmer in Sydney.
The Largest Selection of CARRIAGES and ERA OS
For Hire in the City at Lowest Rates.
ASK FOR
4
*
0**
WHISKY.
THE I LEADING $ SCOTCH $ BRAND.


OPPOSITE
NEW
MARKETS.
ESTABLISHED
1884.
G. C. CULLEN
TEA AND
Provision
Merchants,
470 George St, Sydney.
TRADE
MARK.
“FULL
WEIGHT
TO ALL/'
The Australian Nation.
Office: Clarence and Oruitt Streets, Sydney.
Policy-Liberal, Democratic, and Progressive.
Publication Day every Friday Afternoon.
Price Threepence. 10/- Per Annum, in Advance.
NEWSY, CRISP, FEARLESS, FAIR.
Correspondence Invited.
Aim:—“A National Australia for The Australians.”
Advertisements Received up to Friday Morning in Eeab Week.


PURVEYORS TO THE QUEEN.
SILYERSTREAM
Is the Oldest, Purest, and Best
SCHNAPPS.^-.
Tucker & Co., Sydney, Agents.
IP YOU WANT THE BEST
ASK
WILLIAMS
4*
WHISKY.
Distilled from Pure Malt only and very Old.
Tucker & Co., Sydney, Agents.


A REMARKABLE PROPHECY.
M. Eekest Setd, in 1871, wrote the following remarkable prophecy :
“ It is a great mistake to suppose that the adoption of the gold (stand-
ard of value) by other States besides England will be beneficial. It will only
lead to destruction of the monetary equilibrium hitherto existing, and cause
a fall in the value of silver from which England’s trade and the Indian
silver valuations will suffer more than all other interests, grevious as the
general decline of prosperity all over the world will be.
The strong doctrinarianism existing in England as regards the gold
valuation is so blind that, when the time of depression sets in, there will
be this special feature :
The economical authorities of the country will refuse to listen to the
cause here fore-shadowed; every possible attempt will be made to prove
that the decline of commerce is due to all sorts of causes and irreconcilable
matters ; the workman and his strikes will be the first convenient target;
then ‘ speculating ’ and ‘ overtrading ’ will have their turn ; many other
allegations will be made, totally irrelevant to the real issue, but satisfactory
to the moralising tendency of financial writers.”
THE SILVER QUESTION.
Viewed from an Australian Standpoint.
AUSTRALIA’S APATHY AND IGNORANCE ON THE
CURRENCY QUESTION.
We all know of the great principle—cause and effect. Eor every
effect there must be a cause. Before embarking on the troublous seas I
may encounter whilst dealing with the Reform of the Currency, I have
first of all to comment on an effect which makes such a reform necessary.
Australia is a country rapidly attaining such puissance, that the day is
not very remote when she will be regarded as a power. That being so is it
not deplorable, that we are so apathetic on a question which affects us
more than perhaps any country in the world, and that other countries less
affected, are making such gigantic strides towards the accomplishment of
this great reform, whereas we remain inert ? America, the home of
bimetallism or currency reform, has been convulsed for years, and although
nearly all are in favor of the double standard, they (her 70,000,000
subjects) are only divided on one little detail as it were. Allusion to this
detail will be made later on. England is shaken to her very foundation
by the protestations of her labour organizations. France, that has always
retained silver as legal tender within her own boundaries, is still in want of
that which she lost in 1873, viz :—Free Coinage of Silver ; but which she
is unable to regain single-handed, India with a fifth of the population of
the wotld, has suffered horribly, and is still agitating for reform. Yet
Australia remains apathetic and torpid. Still reformers have gained a foot-
hold in Victoria, as they have done in South Australia: but New South
Wales is practically dead. That is the effect oi which I speak, and now
to the cause .
THE CAUSE OF AUSTRALIA’S APATHY.
Australians know—none better, that there are times in life, when the


steady tramp of progress is accelerated, and receives an impetus from such
great minds as those of scientists and great inventors, each of whom by their
various devices and machines, cause an advance in the growth per acre of
wheat, and other cereals, and likewise of wool. This increase of
production applies to all commodities in a like manner. Then again there
is an increase of production due to the world’s increasing population, for
never in the world’s history has the human intellect been so fruitful in
invention as in the past three decades. Asa matter of “ balance ” our
currency should expand and increase in volume, in proportion to the
expansion of the world’s consumption and supply of wool, wheat, maize,
etc ; more commodities being sold to-day than there were five and twenty
years ago.
There are times when reforms are advocated and fought for by
prominent and conscientious politicians, though unfortunately not always
secured, and again when the fancy is excited by dreams, suggested by
sordid and time-serving agitators, of ideal laws, ideal wages, ideal hours of
labour, and all that gives promise of making life a bed of roses, impossible
to be attained by any of the means suggested, and which are enunciated in
would be eloquent orations. These dreams, translated by these adventurers,
poison the minds of the electors of this country, and form a strong contrast
to the steady uphill battle for legislation fought year after year, by
politicians of integrity ; for oily tongues and golden promises had their
inception in the Gfarden of Eden, and will always carry the field before
honest work, unless stupendous work in combating them is effected. All
subjects that sound argument or statistics will prove to be fallacies, they
will religiously eschew, and romance for the future.
The fiscal policy has long held N.S.W. as on a see-saw ; first the free-
trade end would be up, and then protection would take its turn. In no
other country in the world has there been such a vacillating state of
affairs ; it has completely blinded the public to other events of equal, nay
greater importance, and what an excellent theme it has been for these
agitators to romance upon, and give vent to lying tales to gain their own
ends. Anyone these many years could mount a bench and orate at length
and find an audience. But when the few people talked about currency
reform, bimetallism, or anything one may deem fit to call it, what a
Sisyphean and so far hopeless task it has been. Whilst efforts have been
made to teach the public the nature and evil effects of a burden they have
long borne in silence, for they knew it not, these accursed agitators have
been at work misleading all. We had a striking illustration of the necessity
of this reform too, had we been alive to our own interests, only a year or
two back, for it convulsed the whole of the United States. The election
of McKinley, an international bimetallist, over Bryan a national bimetallist
was reduced to such a fine issue, that had some twenty-five thousand votes
out of a voting strengh of 14,000,000, been distributed over the various
States, the result of the election would have been reversed, and America
would now be a free silver country. The details of the election just over
are not to hand.
These remarks I hope, will suffice to explain the cause of
Australia’s Apathy.
4


OUR PRESENT SYSTEM OE CURRENCY.
Our present system of currency is a “ Gold Standard”—
that gold is the only means of exchange between nations, (and
even within the borders of too many unhappy countries), and is therefore
the only legal tender. Silver is now a subsidiary coin, having legal tender
power of only 40/-. Suppose one man owe another £lO, in this city at
the present time, it would not matter in which metal that was paid, for
these transactions are of such trifling importance as a matter of legal tender,
that although it exceeds the 40/- maximum by law prescribed, no objection
would be raised. Objection could be raised however if silver were
proffered, and if taken to the court for adjudication, the debtor would
certainly be surprised to find himself in the wrong. It is the fact of this
point never having been raised, which has so long held the curtain down in
front of the eyes of the public. But if a debtor for instance owe a creditor
£lO,OOO, he could not pay that creditor in silver, for he would justly
refuse to take it, but would pay him in gold.
Under our present state, a miner gets his 100 ozs out of the ground
and takes or sends it to the mint. He receives nearly £4OO in sovereigns
or half sovereigns, at the fixed and immovable standard of £3 17s 10£d
peroz. No matter how this production may fluctuate, he still procures
the same_ amount of legal tender money for his raw metal. But another
miner gets silver out of the ground, and takes it to the mint where they may
laugh at him for his pains, as the mint is not open to silver now.
The efficacy of this gold standard is manifest in the destitution and
poverty we see around us every day. In the alleys and slums, and in the
parks, and in the domain the ranks of the poverty-stricken people are
daily swelling, and misery reigns ; in the once prosperous business, in the
warehouse, and the many factories closed of late, —the pall of inert enter-
prise has fallen over them. No smoke from the chimneys, no
streams of working men passing to and from their labours
with happy and contented faces that could have been seen 20 or 25 years
back. Paucity of enterprise, and scarcity of money, solve the
problem.
THE ADVANTAGES OE METALLIC CURRENCY.
One of the doctrines of rabid socialism is the abolition of metallic
currency, and the adoption of paper money. That this is absurd in the
extreme it is my intention to try and prove. Commodities to be procured
require some scale, or yard sticks, or weights to measure them by ,* and
which weights or yard sticks shall be recognised as a standard. If one
man go to make “ a deal ” with another, one takes the goods, the other the
money. Haggling and argument are often brought into these discusion
which are finished when one has agreed with the other on the amount of
money which is to be paid. This standard weight, or measure, or money
is necessary; for unless we possess this standard common to all, it would be
impossible to come to a bargain. If there were no measure of standard,
such a cataclysm would result, that the confusion of Babel would pale into
insignificance beside it. Now to make paper cents or half-pence, is
thoroughly ridiculous in this much—it would invite the ingenuity of


unscrupulous individuals to forgery, for paper is much more easily ‘ faked ’
than metal. Added to this the paper would become indecipherable and
crumpled in the pocket, and danger of huge quantities being burnt feared.
Certainly before the p&per currency could be obtained, an upheavel in
society would eventuate in an open rebellion, the lambent light of which
would however on its first appearance be instantly extinguished. Both
gold and silver are pretty, portable, fireproof, i.e., that if affected by fire
the metal remains, They are malleable, without odor, and pleasant to
handle. Their scarcity however is the grand feature, and besides causes
much labour to procure it. Since the world was inhabited they conjointly
have answered the question of this standard measure until 25 years
ago, when one was deprived of its majesty and power. Taking all these
advantages into considerfttion, together with their convenience, it is no
wonder that the world from time immemorial has always been content to
use them as the medium of exchange. Workers, and friends of workers,
beware! beware of these false financiers, who would draw you on to
destruction with their false and platitudinous promises. Those who
profess to be able to finance the world with paper alone are at fault, and
their knowledge of economics is about on a par with that of a gentleman
who hailed from Erin. Boarding a railway car at Eedfern, he excited
great amusement by giving vent to pent up laughter. On being asked the
cause of his hilarity, he knowingly closed one eye and said “ Faith! I’m
chating the commissioners. I’ve bought a return ticket to Bourke, and
I’m not coming back. Ha ! ha ! ha !” On the journey a discussion arose
on the bank crisis which took place about this time. Pat became so
worked up with the imfamy of these banks as he regarded it, and rightly too
that he pulled out a £1 note from his pocket, and exclaimed, “ Shure Oi
can’t affoord much , but Oi’ll chate the banks out of wun pound euny’ow,”
and forthwith tore it into bits. Now if the workers, and friends of
workers seek to solve the cause of depression, they must avoid such puerile
arguments, and look to the correction ot our present currency, which
must and shall be re-established to what it was before ’73, and before
which period the word unemployed of all others was unknown.
THE CEIME OF ’73. HISTOET OF THE CUEEENCY UP TO ’73.
We can only judge and arrange for the future by the experience of the
past, and this being so we must look back through the dark
vista of almost forgotten ages. From time immemorial —certainly for the
past 3,000 years,—and that period for which we hold records, i.e., 1257 to
1816, gold and silver were legal tender in England to any amount,
and the debtor could - pay the creditor in either gold or silver coin to any
amount, and at his own convenience. From that period, 1816, although
the alteration of the currency of England deprived silver of its legal tender
power in that country, which of course equally effected Australia.-
America, the Latin Union, (France, Switzerland, Italy, Greece, and
Belgium), silver using countries, and the East, kept the price of silver up
to its proper standard price, viz, 5/2, or thereabouts per oz. ; and gold and
silver formed legal tender at a certain rate of 15|ozs. of silver, to answer
equally as well as one oz. of gold all over the world except England • but


that one country made no difference. And this answered right up to ’73.
Reflect deeply on this now. This arrangement answered the purpose right
up to 1873 from 1257, over six centuries, for which we have authentic
records. Our “ Intended Currency,” is to return to what was in vogue
during this long period, and which will be brought about by certain laws
being passed by an international agreement, or conference, and then
carried into effect. The bond-holders, money-lenders, etc., are those who
oppose it, for it will make twice as much legal tender money in the world
as we posses at present, and which answered so excellently before 1873,
when we were robbed, I say robbed of it by these creditor capitalists I
refer to, and which is hidden from the general public by the press who are
bribed to oppose, conceal, and sneer at this reform. We must realise that
twice as much legal tender money being in the world as there is at present,
will reduce the purchasing power of these gold-bugs, as there will be twice
as much money to purchase with, and to bid with for anything that may
be required, and consequently our wool, wheat, and every other com-
modity will fetch a higher price, the same price as 1873, double what they
are now, aud which state of things was due to the fact, which I repeat,
that there was twice as much legal tender money in the world in ’73 as
there is now. To return to this is our desideratum.
Germany after her victory over France avariciously claimed an
indemnity of £200,000,000, and Bismark decided to adopt a gold standard.
It was the advice of so called experts that made Bismark do this. She
then began to melt down her old silver coins, and this in its raw state
found its way to the French mint, as they were open to the free coinage of
silver, whereas Germany’s were then closed. Smarting under defeat in
the then quite recent campaign, and anxious about the movement in
America, which shall be shortly explained, she decided to close her mints
to the free coinage of silver, which had the effect of taking away the legal
tender power of silver internationally, though both France and Germany,
and most countries in Europe still retained silver as legal tender within
their respective boundaries. Bismark some six years afterwards said,
“ When I was in power I had a predilection for the double standard but I
was misled by so called experts, who assured me it would be putting
soup in our kettle, but it turns out to be hot water after all.”
About the time of Germany’s action, or just after, a bill was adroitly
sneaked through the American legislature, taking away the legal tender
power of silver. It has been spoken of as going through like the “ silent
tread of a cat.” Mr. Alexander Del Mar, late director of the bereau of
statistics, thus describes the process:—
“In 1873, when people had forgotten all about coins, and had relaxed their
customary watchfulness concering mint laws, one little man who had determined in
his own little mind, from what motives I know not, that the long time monetary
laws of the union should be changed, proceeded to change them, by blotting out a
word from the law.
By surreptitiously omitting the word ‘ dollar ’ in the list of coins the mint
was authorised to coin upon the application of the holders of bullion, it foully
degraded and demonitised that coin—the silver coin previously open to unlimited
and gratuitous coinage. In the following year this garbled mint law was incorpor-
ated in the revised statistics of the United States It was still further garbled by


Population (90)
and Wealth
of Nations in Millions (96)
Pop.
Gold.
Silver.
Paper.
United Kingdon, ...
38,000,000
85
24
41
Prance,
39,000,000
187
140
139
Germany,
48,000,000
132
45
61
Russia,
92,000,000
92
10
189
Austria
40,000,000
26
25
68
Italy
30,000,000
20
7
65
Spain and Portugal /
17,000,000)
9
35
47
1
13 5 1 '
4,000,000 /
•
Scandinavia
7,000,000
7
3
13
Holland
5,000,000
6
12
17
Belgium
6,000,000
12
10
18
Other States of Europe
22.000,000
8
8
13
Canada
5,000,000
4
1
8
Australia
4,000,000
29
1
4
The East
• • •
56
205
41
Other States of the World
18
51
110
United States
63,000,000
130
131
243
£821.
£708.
£1077.
surreptitiously degrading the legal tender function of the outstanding silver dollars
to five dollars in any one payment. Its demonitization was thus completed. These
acts were not those of the American nation; they were not those of American
statesmen. The people had no knowledge of them, their rulers had no voice in
them. They were done by intrigue—an intrigue which I more than fear had its
origin on this side of the ocean. (Europe.) No suspicion of what had been done,
no discovery of the momentous change that thus had been secretly and treacherous-
ly effected, took place until 1875, when I made the discovery of it myself. Having
discovered the wrong, I took immediate steps to set it right, and these steps resulted
in an elaborate presentation of the subject to the public, the formation of the
Monetary Commission, and eventually of the passing of the ‘Bland Act’.”
At the time the United States were under suspension of specie
payment, and the bill was inoperative for years on this account. But
when the people found out what was the matter, they tried to get the legal
tender power of silver restored. But then as now the gold bugs, or creditor
capitalists, were too strong, and happy in the mischief they had wrought,
only affected a compromise—the Bland Act,” which has always been
pointed out as bimetallism on its trial; whereas it did a great deal of harm
to the cause.
I have before alluded to France retaining silver as legal tender within
her own boundaries It is that which gives her that financial solidity and
solvency which no other country in the world enjoys, and that too in view
of the fact that she had more troubles to face, entailing great expenditure.
See appended table from Mulhall ’96.
During the last 90 years the system in vogue in France, has success-
fully withstood three revolutions, and after the last one, which included a
destructive war, she paid the victor an indemnity of £200,000,000,


(besides the expenditure o£ a similar sum in conduction of the war). In
that space of time, three armies have been encamped within her capital,
and yet the bank of France has only suspended specie payment twice.
What greater proof is required of the folly and false financiering of this
single gold standard, when we compare one country with the other. The
one (France) devastated by war and revolution, has in 90 years suspended
specie payment twice, whilst the other (England), the hot bed of gold
standard, with neither a revolution nor an armed enemy on her shores, has
within the last 70 years suspended specie payment no less than seven
times, and this with the Bank Act of 1844 to help her.
HISTORY OF THE CURRENCY IN INDIA.
I will first quote from Mr. Pearse in the Australian Economist:—
“I now direct your attention to the movement on foot for the purpose
of establishing a gold standard for India; this is called by some news-
papers The Indian Currency Muddle. The currency of India at present
consists of a huge inconvertible token currency, theoretically on a gold
standard, but without a gold currency or even a gold reserve. Our more
intimate acquaintance with Indian currency begins in the last century,
when the East India Company was beginning that expansion of the range
of its authority which has brought the whole of India beneath the bene-
ficent sway of Queen Victoria.
At that period every petty state had its own coinage and currency,
and there were no less than 280 different kinds of gold coins and 700
varieties of silver coins in circulation among the different states. This
chaotic confusion of coins called by some ‘ Bi-metallism,’ was an incessant
vexation to all who transacted business of any kind with the natives, and
the Company was soon compelled to substitute its own coins in all states
subject to its authority. In the year 1818, the Government out of this
choas adopted a system consisting of one standard coin of gold, and one
standard coin of silver, with subsidary coins or tokens of silver or copper.
This system worked fairly well and continued unaltered in any particular
until 1835, when the silver rupee wag declared the sole legal tender
throughout India. The gold coin was still allowed to pass current and was
accepted at the public treasuries at its market value in silver. I should
like to point out that this was no radical change : it was merely substituting
one form of bi-metallism for another.
In my humble opinion this was as good a system of currency as could
possibly be devised. It gave to the people, both English and native, a
stable standard of value with a convenient and simple basis of exchange.
8o long as it was permitted to escape the meddlesome interference of
incapacity and inexperience, neither difficulty or discontent was ever
associated with it. And we may safely assert that, if it had never been
tampered with by incompetent officialism, it would to this day have con-
tinued to merit the same satisfaction which marked the whole period of its
existence.
But that is just exactly where the trouble commenced. It was not
permitted to escape the tampering fingers of authority lacking intelligence.
In the year 1853, after 35 years of proof and trial to the complete


satisfaction of all India, this system was upset by the Ticeroy, Lord
Dalhousie, who persuaded himself that gold was about to become of little
value on account of the great quantities then being: found in the mines
of California and Australia. In excessive haste to display his wisdom and
forethought, without testing the soundness of his opinion in any way
whatever, he forthwith issued an official order that, after a certain date, no
more gold would be received at the public treasuries. The effects of this
rash unjustifiable action soon began to make themselves manifest. In the
words of a member of the Gold Standard Defence Association, Mr. H. D.
Macleod. ‘ The demonetisation of gold by Lord Dalhousie was soon felt in
India to be a disastrous error, and a strong feeling grew up in favour of its
restoration.’
-Now, mark and remember this highly important fact: What the
people of India wanted was, not a gold standard of value, but simply a gold
currency, such as had existed blamelessly for 35 years previous to Lord
Dalhousie’s unwarrantable interference. They had the silver rupee as a
standard of value and as full legal tender, and all they now asked for was
that gold should again be received as currency, as it had been up to 1853.
Memorials and petitions in favour of this demand were presented in
1858 and 1859, and again in 1864, but the one thins: the people asked for
was not given to them. ‘Nevertheless,’ H, D. IVlacleod observes, ‘the
failure of the scheme tn restore a gold currency to India did not dishearten
its advocates. In 1875 Mr. Hollingberry addressed a most able report to
the Government on the consequences which the fall in the value of silver
had then produced on the finances and the general progress of India. The
rupee continuing to fall in 1876, the Bengal Chamber of Commerce
addressed a memorial to the Government of Lord Lytton to suspend the
coinage of silver. This was probably the first public occasion when the
device of closing the mints to silver was suggested, but this mad scheme
was not paid much attention to at that time.”
But notwithstanding all this India has been to all intents and purposes
solely a silver using country —the vast majority of the people seeing little
or nothing of gold. These people poor in knowledge of finance, almost
one fifth the popolation of the world, and all under British rule, knew, or
in fact know nothing of insurance and banking, their only method of
saving being to make their silver into armlets, bracelets, and other
ornaments, and when they required money, part of these would be taken to
the mint and coined into rupees. The infamous act of taking away the
silver mints from India in ’93, before which many atrocities pale, was
perpetrated by the same old rogues of 73, or their brethren: the brother-
hood of gold. Now the act of a British government allowing the standard
of a country, a fifth of the world’s population, to be taken away from it, to
struggle along for five years with virtually no standard, is deserving of the
highest censure. But they are augmenting their ignomony, for they now
want to endow (?) her with a gold standard.
On the memorable day this took place silver dropped 15 per cent. The
rupee was worth in England about 2/- up to 73 England supplied India
with her manufactures, taking her rupees in payment, at the rate of (10)


ten to the sovereign, and business was transacted with certainty and
satisfaction. But after ’73 when the price of silver fell, the price of the
rupee fell in value also, i.e.: that if India after selling her products for the
year, and not having enough to meet her obligations for that period of time,
would have to pay away in rupees until the deficiency was met, and which
were only accepted by England then by weight,—as raw silver in fact.
This created a drain on her resources, which increased each year, and the
rupee had reached the state of being worth only lOd. But the mints being
taken away in ’93, and no more rupees flowing into circulation, added to
which the rupees were gradually leaving the country, a “ scarcity value ”
was created, and the increase bringing them back from other countries,
caused them to advance in value to the extent of 16d, and rose the rate of
interest on borrowed money to 10, and even 20 per cent; but yet we hear
quoted by some, the wisdom of taking away the mints.
Now the number of rupees in the country had diminished to such an
extent, that a few months back a Boyal Comission was appointed, to
consider the advisability of India adopting a gold standard, and was com-
posed of individuals officially connected with the Home, or Indian
Governments. Lord George Hamilton refused to alter the personnel of
the commission, although appealed to by the leading merchants of London,
and petitioned by all the principal manufacturing centres of Britain, and
India. Then the inability of these gentlemen to cope with the task was
freely discussed ; and the advisability of appointing commercial men
strongly urged. Thus we see that unfortunate India was made the
scrapegoat for the rest of the world. First America reviled England for
purchasing silver from her at its steadily declining price, and with that
silver purchasing cheap Indian wheat, and thus crushing the American
farmer ; and then England kicked up a row that the displacement of
English cotton by India, is due to the fact that her mills are in close
proxmity to her cotton fields and markets, and that her labour is infinitely
cheaper than that of English. But after an exhaustive enquiry by
a commission, extending over months, the true cause for the complaint was
shewn, and the report was finally adopted in Dec. ’BB that:—
“While India enjoyed these advantages, they were set off by the
increased cost of English steam, coal, machinery, and European supervision,
and the comparative inefficiency of her (Indian) labour, and that England
could compete with her,were it not for the practical advantage she enjoys
ot 30 per cent silver being legal tender, and only currency in India.”
When India was a silver using country with her own silver mints,
so much did tie fall in silver give her an advantage over the English cotton
yarn manufacturers, that she eclipsed her altogether. From England to
China, Hong Kong, and Japan, the export was as follows :
1876, 29 millions 1888, 44 millions.
1886, 26 do. 1890, 38 do.
From India to China. Hong Kong and Japan.
1876, 6 millions. 1888, 109 millions.
1886, 88 do. 1890, 145 do.
Great Britain as we all knew is the greatest exporter and importer in


Gold Tons.
Silver Tons.
Period.
Coinage
Manu-
facture.
The
East.
Total.
Coinage
Manu-
facture.
The
East.
Total.
1831-40
50
180
10
240
2700
2000
2200
6900
1841-50
350
200
28
578
4800
2200
2400
9400
1851-60
1633
280
100
2013
nil.
2700
11300
14000
1861-70
1008
570
300
1878
nil.
3100
12300
15400
1871-80
849
840
120
1809
1200
4500
10800
16500
50 years
3890
2070
558
6518
8700
14500
39000
62200
the world, and money being the basis upon which international trade is
conducted, has to measure the relative value of commodities, and of the la-
bour which produces them. When the fact is reviewed that two monetary
standards, England (Gold), and India (Silver), as an instance, without any
legal relation to each other, which must lead to embarrasing results, and act
as a hindrance to trade, we realise the necessity of currency reform. The
conclusion arrived at by the Gold and Silver commission, after long and
careful enquiry was : “ That the great fall in the Eastern Exchange since
1874. (consequent on the demonetisation of silver), enabled the Bombay
spinners to supersede those of Lancashire in the Great Eastern Markets.”
PRODUCTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS
When silver was rejected as currency, the world’s supply of legal
tender coin was reduced one half, and this contraction of the currency
caused the fall in prices, from which we at present suffer. If fixed charges,
taxes, interests on mortgages, and other obligations fell with silver and
commodities, we should not be so badly off, but the tremendous extra burden
which the producer has to bear, as prices of his products fall, while stand-
ing charges remain stationery, or advance, is a burden too heavy to be
borne. A variable standard of currency like false weights, enables the
unscrupulous to take advantage of the unwary. It induces gambling
speculations and gives rise to those financial crises which spread ruin, and
bankruptcy broadcast; and recollect this: that which we advocate has
been maintained three thousand years, notwithstanding enormous fluctua-
tions in production of the precious metals Gold monometallists, and
opponents of this cause, assert that the great increase in the production of
silver of latter years, has been the cause of the fall in silver and in prices.
Here is something in connection with this statement. The world’s pro-
duction up to 1600 shewed that there were 27 tons of silver to every 1
ton of gold, and to 1700, 34 tons to 1 of gold ; and now mark the decrease
in rates from this period :
tons. tons.
1800. 32 to lof gold. 1890. 18 to lof gold.
1884. 31 ... 1894. 16|
1880. 18 1897. 8|
Further from 1493 to 1850 there were £660,000,000 of gold, and
£1,170,000,000 of silver. Now from 1851 to 1888 there were £890,000,000
of gold, and only £479,000,000 of silver.
Mulhall quoting Soetbeer gives us this :
12


Period.
Eatio of Silver
Pence per oz,
to Stock of Gold.
1821-40.
33—1.
60.
1881-88.
18—1.
107.
1831-80.
Gold Tons.
Silver Tons.
Production.
6,358
57,273.
Consumption.
6,518
62,200.
Deficit.
160
4,927.
The stock of silver is relatively much lower now, as compared with
gold, than in the early years of the present century, when there were 33
tons of silver in the world to one ton of gold. If the price of silver were
ruled by ratio, it would have been as follows :
If the foregoing estimates be correct, there has been a dearth of both
gold and silver, the production falling short of the consumption viz :
The deficit was probably met by melting down old plate.
Notwithstanding the increasing production of gold to silver, 1848, the
commercial ratio of the two metals was never lower than 1 of gold to 14
of silver, and never higher than 1 of gold to 16 of silver, and this for a
period considerably over 200 years, for which accurate figures are obtain-
able. This meant that on the average, 1 oz of gold, or 14 to 16 oz of
silver, did exactly the same duty, and there was no wish nor desire
shewn to separate and render one of no value, by act of demonitization.
This shows a variation of two points, which is accounted for by the
difference in ratio fixed by various governments, and the cost of exchange.
The following diagram will show that with free coinage, no trouble is
encountered in keeping the two metals at a proper level and ratio, despite
the variations in their production :
Now the water in one of the
reservoirs represents silver, and the
other gold. The connecting pipe makes
them virtually one metal. So long as
that connecting pipe remains, the water
in the reservoirs will remain even—the
same height. Do away with the con-
necting pipe, and the feed pipes at 4
and 5 will soon destroy the equilibrum,
as their quantities vary from time to
time.
To further render myself explicit about this “ increased production of
silver (?)” I will give the following few figures. Our opponents say that
the decline in the value of silver was not due to demonitization, but by
reason of over production of silver as compared with gold, beginning and
since 1873. During the first 50 years of this century, the world produced
78 per cent more silver than gold; during the last twenty-five years the
production of silver over gold has been less than 5 per cent. Continuing
their asinine line of argument, these monometallists assert that there has


been an over production of the commodities of life, and this accounts for
the fall in prices. Over Production ! Oyer Production !! Can any-
body possibly imagine there could be such a thing ? when we see
thousands starving and in want every day of our lives. Some people
confuse an Increase of Production with Over Production, It is the dearth
of money and enterprise, which is the true cause of the fall in prices.
UTTERANCES OE PROMINENT AUTHORITIES.
Mb. Balfour. In ’92 said: “In the great and fundamental
requirements of currency, our existing monetary system totally and
lamentably fails.” ... ,
Professor Eawcett’s favourite illustration was : “imagine two
piles of unequal size—the one pile representing the commodities of life,
and the other the money. If the pile of money was much smaller than the
other, commodities would be cheap, but reverse the position, and commod-
ities would be dear.” . .
Hume in his essay on money says: “If money depreciates and prices
rise, everything takes anew face. Uabour and Industry life, the
merchant becomes more enterprising, the manufacturer more diligent and
skilful and even the farmer follows his plough with more alacrity and
attention. If it appreciates, and prices fall, then poverty, beggary, and sloth
are easily foreseen.” • .no i. j *
Ade Rothchild a monometallist at a conference in Dec 92 nad to
admit that: “If this confernce break up without arriving at any definite
result, there may be a depression in the price of silver frightful to
contemplate, and out of which a monetary panic may arise, the far
spreading effects of which it is impossible to foretell. ’
Archbishop Walsh of Dublin, who is supposed to control the seats
of 70 or 75 Irish M. P’s, wrote about the same time : “ The question
there under discussion (Brussels) lies at the very root of our Irish Land
Question. If the bimetallic view, as I have stated it is sound, then to
continue on our present lines means absolute ruin sooner or later, to the
whole agricultural body in Ireland. Whether that view is sound or not,
there is the significant fact, that eighteen governments have felt themselves
called upon to send representatives to an International Conference.”
The monometallic members of the royal commission on gold and
gjjyyjjji, Lord Hirschell, Sir C. "W . Ereemantle, Sir John Lubbock, Sir
Thomas Earrar, Mr. J. M. Brich, Mr. Leonard, and H. Courtney, (who is
now a bimetallist), reported that : “That in many conditions fairly to be
contemplated in the future, so far as we can forecast them from the
experience of the past, a stable ratio might be maintained, if the nations we
have alluded to were to accept and strictly adhere to bimetallism, at the
suggested ratio. We think that if in all countries, gold and silver could
be freely coined, and thus become exchangeable against commodities at the
fixed ratio, the market value of silver, as measured by gold, would
conform to that ratio, and not vary to any material extent.”
THE HOPES & OPPORTUNITY OE AUSTRALIAN SILVERITES.
Having reviewed the history of currency, and realised what our


present system is, it behoves us to see the advisability of a change, or
rather a return to that which was in vogue prior to 1873, in its connection
with Australia, i.e. ; that England although not bimetallic since 1816,
reaped the benefit caused by the universe adhering to the double standard,
up to the eventful period of ’73.
There are two classes of bimetallists in the world, the national, and
international. The former are those who advocate the free coinage of silver
without waiting the delay of an international agreement, and are in
America chiefly, being ardent disciples of Bryan, and other notable
democrats. These radical bimetallists have very nearly secured their object,
but have for their nonce been frustrated by colossal bribery. If McKinley
had not been a bimetallist he would have been defeated by millions of
votes.
The latter class are those in favour of international agreement, if
America, the Latin Union, India, and England, agree to it, . . England
and India however are not yet settled on the question.
The crushing, squeezing, and racking, inflicted on us of latter years
by the brotherhood of gold, reached such a state some few months ago, that
the last few twists of the screw, caused such an angry glitter to appear
in the eyes of the people, that the pressure was momentarily relaxed, with
the result that Australia now has her own silver mints. Our mints are to
be opened to the coinage of silver, as the coin will be required by the
government— not free coinage though. An Australian coin will now be
struck, which will be distinctive from any other nation’s coins. Thus we
have an excellent opportunity of purchasing a quantity of silver, and
having it struck into coin which must be got into circulation. That this
should be easy I have no doubt, for on referring to MulhaU’s figures we
find that Australia possessed in ’96 £29,000,000, worth of gold, and
only £1,000,000 of silver. 29 of goTS to lof silver. France has 5 to 4,
United Kingdom 3 to 1, Germany 3 to 1, Kussia 9 to 1, Austria equal
parts of the metals, Italy 3 to 1, Spain and Portugal Ito 4, Scandinavia 7
to 3 Holland 1 to 2, Belguim equal, other European States equal, Canada
4to 1, The East 1 to 4, and the United States equal parts. We will
further analyse these figures.
France and the United States have about equal parts, Germany and
the United Kingdom 3 to 1 each, whilst Australia has 29 to 1. The
£320,000,000 of legal tender money in France has to finance about
40.000. of people, £8 per capita. Those there are who wish to write
down the stability of France, for what purpose it is hard to tell. No
country however has during the last century encountered such tribulations
or disasters, nor a drain on its resources withstood, as has unhappy
France. The raft, which has tided her over these troublous seas, has been
the plentitude of money —legal tender money, she has maintained. A
loan of £8,000,000 was asked for a few days back, and was subscribed
thirty- six times oyer. Yerily Bankrupt France !
The United States is now drawing money (gold) from England and
Australia. It is fast leaving their shores. The financing of her
70.000. subjects is conducted at £4 per capita. Germany is able to inun-
date England, the pioneer of gold monometallism, with her manufactures


for the reason partly of her largeness of money England whose trade has
fallen off in comparison with the progress of other nations during the last
25 years has to finance 38,000,000 with £109,000,000, £2 10s. per capita,
—an insufficiency of money. . . ,
It will be apparent from this, that countries who enjoy a large
metallic currency, with about equal amounts of silver and gold, such as
United States, and France,, must have a financial solidity most desirable.
The United States, United Kingdom, Russia, France, and Germany, are
the only countries in the world with more gold than Australia. And yet—
No country in the world has such a small amount
of silver. It is the money of the masses, and Austialia
should have £30,000,000 equivalent to her gold, and not 29
to lof silver as it is now. Silver now being 2/3 per oz,
which oz. coins 5/6 facial value, it will not be hard to discern
the profit, or seignorage, to be derived by the states minting
it. This is a matter of great urgency, and should be accom-
plished at once under our present system, and should further
be done quietly, while the world is discussing the advisability
of international agreement, If the price of silver go up
through United States, or the Latin Union becoming bimetal-
lic, 'or on the restoration of the Indian mints, or a move of any
country, Australia will have lost its opportunity, and will
have to pay a far heavier price for silver when she finds she
has to have it on the Internationial Bimetallic Basis.
The declaration of this silver to be legal tender throughout Australia,
would instantly have the effect of its being accepted, as readily as gold is
now.
Of a certainty, the argument may be adduced, that if a debt of £SO,
or 250d015, were being paid, the bulkiness of so much silver would be
a matter of inconvenience. In reply to this I commend the issue of a 10/-
note by the state.
The result of such actions would be, that silver would glide like a
silver stream, watering the aridness of our parched up plains, by faciliating
the conservation of our waters. Its glorious influence would be felt in our
great marts; labour and industry would gain a fresh impetus. The bloom
of prosperity would appear on the face of Young Australia. Horrible
expressions emblematic of evil, such as retrenchment, unemployed, and the
“ Labour Bureau,” would lapse into desuetude. Our ears would cease to
be assailed by complaining labour organizations. The farmer would tread
his rich brown earth with a lighter heart, and a heavier pocket—two things
which invariably go hand in hand. The squatter would pay better wages,
and with a smiling face, and all would undoubtedly be better paid for their
labour. This is only one step towards bimetallism. The other step “Free
Coinage,” must wait; Australia being to small to try that. But she may


co-operate with America.
Such an excellent use of the powers we possess now, would bring about
the happy results predicted above; and an example would be set to the
rest of the universe that Australia was inclining towards bimetallism ;
which is the grand feature of the project.
FIXED CHARGES ETC.
What does it avail a man if he recieve £2 a week and his meals cost
1/-, than if he were in recieipt of £1 a week, and all other commodities
were half the price of what they were in the former case, and his meals
cost 6d ? This now is the crux of the whole affair. If the fixed charges and
rates came down all would be well. Compare ’9B to ’73. Our Governors’
salaries, the premiers’ the mininistries’ our judges and their expenses;
penalties in our law courts, are all the same as ’73. Land and Income Tax an
increased fixed rate. Payment of members —additional. The government
have had to keep the pot boiling, by the imposition of fresh taxes, and
raising of new loans. But over and above all, the interest on our national
and private debts remains the same. And all this happening with our wool
and other produce falling in value,
A squatter in ’7O conceived the notion of extending his run, and
importing fresh breeds of sheep and cattle. To accomplish his purpose, he
entered into negotiations with a wealthy creditor capitalist in England—
Lombard St. to be precise, which were conducted with such satisfaction,
particulary to the creditor capitalist, that £IO,OOO was lent at 10 per cent.
£I,OOO per annum had to be paid away. At that time 40 bales of
wool sufficed to pay the interest, but to day that unfortunate squatter
realises what a millstone of debt is around his neck, and he is vainly
struggling in the whirlpool of disaster and trouble, and paying instead of
40 bales, 100 for the same old debt. That is a fixed charge, and all
mortgages contracted bring just the same interest that they did in ’73 ;
showing that gold—the gold advanced to the mortgagee, appreciates in
value, as it can procure more wool, wheat, etc —twice as much, as it did in
’73
AUSTRALIA’S GOLDEN FLEECE
On all occasions when destitution and poverty have prevailed, when
“ hard times ” have been experienced, the cause has always been traceable.
War has accounted for more of these periods throughout the world’s
history, than anything else. Tet there have been periods when it was
due to the yield of nature, in the shape of gold and silver, not being
adequate to keep pace with the march of progess and increase of different
kinds of commodities. Thus a contracted or inadequate currencey causes
bad prices, and consequently bad times. During the past 25 years we
have been suffering from a contracted currency; but in this instance
Nature is not to blame. It is the scheming money-lenders of Lombard St.
So great and marked has been the increase in trade commerce, manufactures
inventions, etc. these last 50 or 60 years, that Nature came to the assistance
of the world, by bountiful yields of gold and silver, the former especially.
It seemed like a dispensation of providence that this should be obtained
at the time it was most needed. It was then that the great financial




experts devised the means of enhancing the, value of their gold, by
depriving silver of its legal tender power, reducing the volume of money
by a half, and being thus enabled to obtain twice as much in commodities
as before.
The diagram here shown represents the world’s production of gold and
silver from 1841 to 1898 inclusive; and production from N. S. Wales,
Victoria, S. Australia and Queensland of wool during the same period.
The price of wool and silver being also shewn. The gold of this country
is the golden fleece with which we have to meet our obligations abroad.
Where it took bay 100,000 bales of wool to pay our debts in ’73, it now
takes 200,000 bales for the same amount. If then the old price of £24
per bale could be obtained, it is computed by competent authorities, that
£33,000,000 would return to our shores, whereas only five and a half
millions return now. An analysis of the diagram will evince some startling
facts. For instance from 1841 to 1850 the production of wool increased
300 per cent, and the price in ’4l was the same as in ’SO, viz: 14d per lb.,
although during the decade the price fluctuated to the extent of sfd per
lb. This was the period of grievous stagnation and depression before the
gold discoveries of California and Australia. In the next decade and a
half, from 50 to 65, the production of wool increased nearly 200 per cent,
but the gold discoveries of California and Australia when the production
of gold increased 300 per cent, and silver 80 per cent, had such an effect
that the price of wool increased 50 per cent; although during the 15
years the price fluctuated to the extent of lOd per lb. This is where the
soundness of the quantitative theory is dearly discernible —the amount of
money in the world being augmented by about £100,000,000. The effect
of this expansion of the currency forced the price of wool up to 2/- a lb,
and all commodities rose in a like manner. But the “ Sea of Fortune
doth not ever flow,” and the output of gold from ’65 to ’73 fell off about
20 per cent. Added to this bad harvests were experienced, and as a result
of the previous prosperity, when the gold fever was raging, “ overtrading
and speculation,” its component parts, brought about the inevitible
result, viz:—failures, the London crisis, and trade depression. A gold
corner was formed in New York, and the Franco-German war played its
part in the disturbance of the world’s commerce. During this period of
eight years, from ’65 to ’73, the production of wool only increased 60 per
cent, and yet the price fell 7d, about 25 per cent. So “ over production ”
did not account for this fall in prices. But from ’73—the year of the
demonitization of silver, a gradual fall in the price of wool took place at
the same ratio as the fall of silver, which may be seen by reference to the
diagram,—all commodities being similarly affected. There have been
occasions when the price of wool took an upward tendency, but it has been
but momentary. The figures for ’97 and ’9B cannot be procured yet, with
the exception of the gold production for ’97 which was Ilf million ozs, ’9B
14f million ozs, and silver 183 million ozs. The production of wool
in ’9B must have fallen off in a marked degree, as no less than 20,000,000
sheep died through the drought. The natural consequence was that a
“scarcity value” was created, and wool brought a higher price. The cause of
this rise in price however was accentuated by the fact that silver went up


from 1/11| per oz, to 2/3| per oz, through Spain adopting a bimetallic
standard in April last. By throwing her mints open to the free coinage of
silver she averted what threatened to be a financial panic. When silver
rises in price commodities follow suit. So gold-standard-advocates need
not become so extravagantly excited over a rise in prices when it was
realised at the cost of 20 million sheep, and droughts.
CORNERING, SHIRTING, AND THE INCREASING
DEMAND EOR GOLD.
The great and fundamentel duty of currency, and its principal object
is, —or rather should be, the preservation of steady prices for commodities
as far as possible. Droughts, bad seasons, war, extraordinary, and many
causes, have great bearing and influence on the fluctuation of prices ; but
if the currency be large, and naturally more difficult to corner than now,
it is less likely to be disturbed by large finds of gold or silver, or on the
other hand by a dearth in the production of the precious metals; and the
rise or fall in prices would be so gradual that the good, or ill effects, would
be almost imperceptible. Were the currency like the ocean which not-
withstanding the streams which feed it shews no disturbance, we would
be in Utopia as far as equilibrium of currency could make us, for the yields,
or dearth of yields from natures breast, would have very little effect.
Prices of commodities are disturbed quite enough by droughts, bad seasons,
etc, without the sharp financiering of the Lombard St. gentry being called
into requisition, and this abuse of their cunningly obtained power it is
our intention to frustrate. Since the currency was contracted from
£1,600,000,000 to £800,000,000 in ’73 the least scarcity of gold has been
felt in the increase of poverty and want. The Lombard St. gentry have
seen their advantage, and grasped the opportunity of cornering the gold.
This is all the more easily accomplished when we consider that all the gold
in the world could be put into a twenty-two ft cube. The mischief is thus
wrought:— A withdrawal from any country of a large amount of money
causes consols to “ go down ” —to fall in value, and has the effect of
forcing them up in the country to which it is shifted. The manipulators
of this scheme of displacement have the consols, in the country selected
for the purpose, bought up at the previously low figure, and when they
sell it is with a sure and quick profit; and reinvigorated prepare for fresh
mischief. The President of the N. S. Wales Silver league writing some
18 months ago on this question, viewed it as follows: —
“ The Jews hit upon a plan for cornering gold, which has had a
disastrous effect upon the financial world. To day there is more gold than
ever, but notwithstanding this, in many countries it is scarce indeed,
the most of it being vaulted in a few names and in a few favoured
banks.
Gold enriches a country and the absence of it impoverishes a country.
The millionaiiies reap a rich harvest by faking the consols, which is a
greater swindle than by deadening a favourite for an outsider to win.
What makes the consols go down is the scarcity of gold, which, bear in
mind, has been cornered in most cases by the Jews. When the consols are
at a minimum the millionaires buy in, the next performance is that the


gold is taken to that part and circulated freely, the consols go up, and
they sell out, this being the principal way the millionaires multiply their
millions. While they are down in Vienna they are up elsewhere, hence
the millionaire scores every time. To illustrate this we can take the
Sydney Morning Herald of June 12th, 1897. The paragraph
runs as follows: , *' w *
“ It is stated that the gold shipments from New York to Europe was
having a bad effect upon financial and commercial circles in America. In
the fortnight ending May 7th, 1897, £1,750,000 was shipped, the bulk of
it for the continent of Europe, and further shipments were expected to be
made to meet Austrian demands.”
“You will obsere that the bulk of the gold was for the Continent of
Europe. This is where these financial gambling dens are a flourishing
concern. You will likewise notice that it was having a bad effect upon
the financial and commercial circles. Anon back to New York it will go ;
and so the game goes on.”
His words have been prophetic, for gold is being shipped to day from
Australia and England to America, and according to the Sydney
Morning Herald of February 16th, 1899, the following is the
result;— *
“ The great activity in the stocks and shares in New York has sent
prices at the close of 1898 to figures higher than they had been seen for
years—this feature ofTheT business corresponding with the movement of
our Australian Stock Exchanges. The abundance of money favoured
this activity and rise in prices. The extending business was giving
increased value to the seats on the stock Exchanges. ‘ Bradstreet’s ’
mentions that one changed owners in New York at a little less than 30,000
dol in a month. The last transfer of a membership on the Boston Stock
Exchange represented 20,000dol.”
Gold momonetallists assert that under bimetallism gold will leave the
country. Can it leave any quicker than this ? In Australia there has
been unearthed £400,000,000. In ’96 Mulhall computed that Australia
had £29,000,000 in gold. In ’9B she had £20,000,000. Notwithstanding
the great wealth of gold produced in Australia departing from our shores,
the fact of our reserves being tampered with, to the extent of £9,000,000
in two years, is a most significant item, and demands a Eoyal Commission
to inquire into the cause, which will be easily traceable to those who are
manipulating the gold. Should this apathy of our financiers and politicians
continue, we shall experience a worse crisis than this country has ever
known. The outlook is appaling when we consider India now going on a
gold standard, will cause a fall in price of our commodities, and a further
demand for our gold.
And now a “ pill ” for those who support these gold-bugs, creditor
capitalists, bond-holders, and money-lenders,—call them what you will.
The millionaires of America have made profits dnring-’OS to the tune of
£54,000,000, part of which is distributed as follows:—J. D. Rockefeller
£6,000,000, Cornelius Vanderbilt £4,000,000, W. K. Vanderbilt
£4,000,000, Russell Sage £3,000,000, and so on. Profits for one year
through gambling in stocks and shares • Who pay the


piper for this ? Let our present poverty answer.
The currency is still further contracting as the struggle for gold is
increasing. The gold produce of the world from 1873 to ’92 was about
£400,000,000 ; two thirds of which were required for use in the arts and
sciences, and to compensate for the wear and tear of the world’s stock of
gold. Of this, £130,000,000 remained to be added to the world’s wealth.
Gold niono-metallism has now been adopted by about 300,000,000 people,
whilst prior to ’73 only 40,000,000 people recognised it. It is estimated
that £364,000,000 should have been coined for the extra people who have
gone on a gold standard: thus the annual supplies have fallen short in 19
years to the tune of £234,000,000, and India is now to be placed on a gold
standard with 300,000,000 subjects. God help us all ! when this is
accomplished, and we stumble along to misery and perhaps revolution.
One point for Australians to remember. France to day has more gold
than any other country in the world—lß7 millions and almost the same
amount of silver. She has experienced more trouble than any other three
countries put together ; but depending on and using silver as well as gold,
has tided her over her difficulties.
EECENT MOVEMENTS OF BIMETALLISTS.
One square mile in the universe obtrudes itself as the only impediment
to bimetallism. It is situated in London, and is known as Lombard St.
A perusal of the following publication of the bimetallic league will open
the eyes of a few regarding the chances of obtaining bimetallism, and that
the English government wire pulled is the only obstacle :
“As an evidence of the feeling of the industrial classes in this country,
a ‘ protest ’ was signed last month by upwards of 1,000 trade societies in
which the unanimous resolution of the House of Commons in March,
1896, was quoted to show that the demonetisation of silver had ( proved
injurious to the best interests of the Empire, ) and the government were
vigorously denounced for not having done, as they promised, ( all in their
power,) to arrange an international agreement. . . A proposal was
brought forward last year by the governments of France and the United
States that the mints of those countries should be reopened to the free
coinage of silver on condition that the Indian mints were also reopened.
This proposal was submitted by the English Government to the Indian
Executive. In October last their refusal to concede in such an arrange-
ment at the old ratio between gold and silver was received, and the British
Government at once accepted this answer as final, without, so far as has
appeared, taking any further steps to ascertain whether, in view of the
attitude of the Indian Government, it would be possible to contiuue
negotiations on the basis of a modified ratio.
The present position is that the Indian Government, abandoning its
traditional policy, has sent to England proposals for the establishment of
a gold standard in India, and these proposals are shortly to be submitted
to a committee of enquiry, the members of which have been nominated by
the Secretary of State for India, who has expressed a hope that the legisla-
tion of 1893 will be carried to a successful issue by the adoption of gold
standard in*lndia. It appears, therefore, almost certain that a report will


be made in favor of this policy, and that unless strong and effectual
protests are made during the next few months, it will be finally adopted.
In England, even among the opponents of bimetallism, there is a
strong feeling that this Indian experiment, if made, will endanger the
British gold reserve, which is already barely sufficient for its purpose. To
the colonies it will mean a further increase in the burden of debts.
We therefore appeal to Australia to make her voice heard before it is
too late, and to assist the public protests from her citizens and legislatures,
the work of those who are opposing in this country the extension to India
of a gold standard, which if established, will inflict incalculable injury
upon the Australian producer, ”
President McKinley said last December :
“ You can say that I stand throughly for monetary legislation, and that
I am determined that every pledge the Republican party ever made along
this line shall be kept.”
Here is one of their pledges—The Republican’s monetary plank in the
ptatform adopted by that body at the St. Louis Convention July ‘96
reads:—
“ We are unalterably opposed to every measure calculated to debase
our currency or impair the credit of our country. We are, therefore,
opposed to the free and unlimited coinage of silver except by International
agreement between the leading commercial nations of the world, which we
pledge ourselves to promote.”
How one of the most prominent of these Republicans, Senator Chandler
says:—•
If by 1900 nothing has been accomplished in the direction of
International Bimetallism, I am almost willing now to say that I would
advocate independent coinage by the United States. . . I should try to
convince my Republican friends that such a course was the one
to pursue ”
The Democrats of America are becoming more sanguine every day of
returning their gallant leader, W, J. Bryan, at the next Presidential
election: albeit the press represents that the “ silver cause is dead in
America.”
SILVER MINE OWNERS AND INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISTS.
It is alleged that the silver mine owners of the United States, are the
cause of the “ silver cry ” being raised. This is not true ; but even if it
were, why should they not clamor for their rights ? There are many who
have tried to obtain silver from mother earth, and have lost their little
all ”or “ big all ”in the attempt. All who go in for mining, no matter
what it may be, may not receive a prize. There are very many, many
blanks. Of course people do not remember these failing speculatros, and
only think o£ those who have succeeded. Before the “ Shy lock crime of
’73,” silver mine proprietors always obtained their 5/- or thereabouts per
oz. and as they only get 2/3 now, through a wicked act, —a point, an
intrigue, they are justified in clamoring for its financial restoration.
But Australian coinage besides assisting silver mine owners would
help the Australian people, in this much, Mr. Pearse Secty. of N. S. W.


bimetallic league says: “If a colonial dollar were coined at the
Melbourne and Sydney mints, it would supply a currency for an immense
trade which would eventually arise between these colonies, the Southern
Archipelago, China, and Japan.” Our government would annex the
segniorage until international agreement had been obtained, and to
consummate this Australian workers should combine, and lift their voices
in eloquent appeal to England, which is the only obstacle in the way of
bimetallism, and ask her to consider Australian producers. Many people
there are who look upon the industrial capitalist as a man of wealth, with
eyes of envy and aversion ; and yet if they knew it, he is the workers’ very
best friend, for without him they would have no work at all. It is very
well to assert that the government should own all, and employ all labour.
But while Socialists are romancing for the future: very much for the
future—for Plato had ideas like this some 2,000 years ago, why not advocate
some reform for the “ immediate present,” The factories, wool stores,
warehouses, and businesses, the station with its broad acres and millions
of sheep and cattle, are run, or at least were run, by industrial capitalists.
Many of them are now ruined, and those who have survived obtain only small
prices for their productions. Were they to obtain fair prices for their
Isbour and investment of capital, it would enable them to pay better prices
for their hire of labour, and as the business grew extensive to engage
more artisans and employees. The prevalence of these low prices is the
cause of capital being with-held from enterprises—which are no sooner set
going than they have to be closed. A question however here arises. We
currency reformers contend that wages are not so good to day as they
were 25 years ago—in fact have been reduced almost one half. There is
no demand for labor, and the man who obtaines a fair wage for three
months work, has to walk round another two or three months looking for
a “ job The average man does not earn half as much in a year now, as
the average man did in ‘73.
THE YILLANT OE THE PRESS.
Existent in the world is a power, which can accomplish good or evil as
it wills. This power is the Press, and when it is apparently bought
over, as at present, to frustrate the ends of justice in connection with the
currency question, great evil, misery, and poverty, must ensue. Those of
just minds contemporaneous to Caxton, could they have foreseen the
evil of to day caused by the Press misrepresentations and abusive satires
to defeat reform, would have crushed and mangled his press out of
existence. I was present one night when addresses were delivered to a
crowded house which was comprised of many intelligent men, by the
bimetallic and silver leagues of N. 8. "Wales. The question seemed to
rouse the audience, who previously had a vague idea of the subject. The
next day one of our papers blossomed into a critique, which might be
termed, an untrue, and abusive pasquinade. In the quarter of a column
which they devoted to this, allusion was made to Mr. Spencer (“ Phil
Argent ”), who gave a very able and earnest address. It was written of
him that “ he hurled chunks of bimetallic and abstruse ideas ”, such as
“ much money meant much prosperity.” Indeed it does ; for such is the


teaching of all professors of political economy, and notwithstanding the
sublime insolence of the Press, I leave this issue for Australians to decide.
Bribery, abuse, and ridicule, are the only weapons of our antagonists,
and they shun arguments and figures with the same aversion, that the
dark prince of evil evades holy-water. But of all the press in the world,
the press of Australia as a body excels and thrives most prosperously, and
a^ 8 S ° condemnation of the reform. Apropos of the perfidy of
the press, an American writer says of the press in his country The
proprietors of a certain paper wishing a successful lecturer to be cut
up on the silver question by their journal, gave instructions to the editor in
accordance therewith. Next morning their scribe excelled himself in an
editorial of about 20 or 30 lines, teeming with epithets such as these ;
u fraudulent free silverites,” “ blatant orators,” “ blatherskites,” “ thieves,”
(i swindlers, “ repudiators,” “dishonest, triekey, brazen, charlatans,”
malignant lunatics, ’ “ cranks,” repeating each of these terms more than
f^ ,Ce ?'^ e . a 7 one the infuriated proprietors called his attention to
his editorial, and asked him in indignant terms why he did not write an
argument. “ Argument!” said he, that’s the only argument there is.
OPPONENTS OF THIS REFORM.
Our opponents are the Lombard St. and Walls St. gentry gold
monopolists, and money lenders, and nearly all highly paid officials. As
a rule government servants, whose purview of this case is, that while
prices will advance, their salaries will remain fixed ; quite forgetful of the
* a ®.» under such circumstances each department or institution in
which they may be employed, would increase its volume of profit
proportionately with the advent of “ better times ”; and to this extent
their salaries would be determined. The Press of the world, with only
isolated exceptions, is against the reform, and have the audacity to point
out that it is against their individual interests-
OUR SUPPORTERS.
But on the other hand who are our supporters. The leading living
professors of political economy in Europe, England, and America. Indian
statesmen and finance ministers; the principal exchange bankers, and
merchants who have a profound and practical knowledge of the subject.
shades of politics, from A. J. Balfour, Sir. W. Houldsworth,
and Mr. Chaplin, to Mr. Jacob Bright, Mr. George Howell, Mr. 8. Smith,
r£ r ‘ . -^ vere fr> Mr. S. Montague, Mr, Yessey Knox, some one hundred and
fifty in all; three ex-governors and present directors of the Bank of
England, the finance ministers of nearly all the leading nations of the
world. The manufacturers of Lancashire and Yorkshire, of Dundee,
Leith and Glasgow; the most enlightened agriculturalists like Mr. Heneage,
Mr. Clare, Mr. Sewell, Mr. Read, and Mr. R. L. Everett; the leaders of the
trades unions in Lancashire and elsewhere.
The Manchester Guardian, Manchester Courier, and the Financial
News ; the editors of which understand the question, but are unfortunately
the only leading organs (in England )as yet on our side.
The United Textile Factory Workers (one of the largest Labour


Organizations in the United Kingdom), in January, 3,895, at a General
Meeting, voted £SOO to tllfe Guarantee Fund of the Bimetallic League.
The General Council of the Amalgamated Association of Operative
Cotton Spinners have passed the following resolution: “ That justice to
those engaged in the cotton industries of England imperatively calls for
the removal of the present serious disadvantages, caused by there being no
fixed connection between England’s gold standard and the moneys of our
silver-using customers.”
And the General Council of the Northern Counties Amalgamated
Associations of Weavers have passed the following resolution : “ That the
interest of those engaged in the manufacturing industries of Great Britain
demands the freest interchange of trade between ail
Countries) and it is therefore essential that the moneys of the gold and
silver using peoples of the world should have a fixed and definite ratio
established between them by International Agreement, so as to
remove one of the present great hindrances to trade •
The following important representative Labour Organizations have
joined Deputations of the Bimetallic League to government, or passed
Eesolutions in favour of International Bimetallism :
The Parliamentary Committee of Trade Union Congress, Amalgamated
Association of Card and Blowing Boom Operatives, The Manchester and
Salford Trades Council, The Stalybridge Trade Council, The Preston
Trades Council, The Hyde Trades Council, The Newcastle-on-Tyne and
Gateshead Trades Council, The Bradford (Yorks) Trades Council, The
Organized Trades Council of Nottingham, The Nottingham Federated
Trades Council, The Building Trades Council of Nottingham, The South-
port Trades Council, The Wolverhampton Trades and Labour Council.
The Oldham Trades Council, The Liverpool United Trades Council, The
Bury Weaver’s Association, The Bristol Trades Council, The Darwen
Trades Council, The Accrington Trades Council, The Huddersfield Trades
Council, The Lancaster Trades Council, The Macclesfield Trades Council,
The Barrow-in-Furness Trades Council, The Staffordshire Trades Council,
The Derby Trades Council, The Burton-on-Trent and District United
Trades Council, St. Helens Trades Council, Sunderland Trades Council,
Middlesbrough-on-Tees Trades and Labour Council, Leeds Trades and
Labour Council, Haslingden and District Trades Council, York and
District Trades and Labour Council, Coventry and District Trades and
Labour Council, North St. Philip’s Branch of the Liberal Operatives’
Association, Bristol, The Mina Road Branch of the Liberal Operatives’
Association, Bristol, and others.
Subjoined is a list of those whom our opponents persistently term
“cranks,” “ currency mongers,” “faddists,” “ madmen,” etc.


BIMETALLIC LEAGUE.
“ The object of the League is to urge upon the British Government
the necessity of co-operating with other leading Nations for the establish-
ment, by International Agreement, of the free coinage of Gold and Silver,
at a fixed ratio.”
PRESIDENT.— LORD ALDENHAM.
CHAIRMAN OF GENERAL COUNCIL. — H. R. GRENFELL.
VICE-PRESIDENTS.
The Duke of Abercorn, K.G.,C.8.
Lord Ashburton.
Thomas Ashton (Oldham).
The Marquis of Abergavenny,K.G.
John Addison, Q.C., M.P.
The Marquis of Ailesbury.
George W. Allen, C.I.E.
Right Hon. A. J. Balfour, M.P.
Eight Hon, Gerald W. Balfour, M.P
Sir David Barbour, K. 0.5.1.
Thomas Baring (London).
Joshua Barrows (Padiham).
William W. B, Beach, M.P.
The Duke of Beaufort, K.G.
H. R. Beeton (London).
Gilbert Beith, M.P.
Lord Henry Bentinck, M.P.
Lord Charles Beresford, C.B.
Commander Hastings Berkeley, R.K
Thomas Bertwistle (Accrington).
Colonel the Hon. F. C. Bridgeman,
M.P.
Eight Hon. Jacob Bright, M.P.
Eev. H. F. Burnaby, M.A.
Eight Hon. Henry Chaplin, M.P.
Alfred L. Cohen (London).
The Marquis of Carmarthen, M.P.
The Earl of Carlisle.
Lord Castletown.
C. W. Cayzer, M.P.
E. B. Chapman, C.SL.
Lieut.-General Sir Andrew Clarke
G.0.M.G., C. 8., C.I.E.
Admiral Sir J. E. Commerell, K.C.B,
C. A. Y, Conybeare, M.P.
The Marquis of Conyngham.
J. Corbett (Droitwich).
A. H. Cottam (Blackburn).
Sir W. J. E. Cotton (London).
Eev. Canon Cromwell, M.A,
Joseph Cowen (JSTewcastle-on-Tyne).
The Earl of Crawford and Balcarres,
LL.D., E.E.S.
Alexander Cross, M.P.
Sir Henry S. Cunningham, K.C.I.E.
Coningsb7 E. Disraeli, M.P.
Earl of Donoughmore, K.C.M.Q-.
Sir H. E. De Trafford. Bart.
Sir E. Eobert P. Edgcumbe.
The Earl of Ellesmere.
Lord Elcho.
Sir J. Whittaker Ellis, Bart.
Baron Emile Erlanger.
E. Lacey Everett.
The Marquis of Exeter.
Captain H. T. Eenwick, M.P.
The Earl of Eeversham. •
The Duke of Eife, K.T.
The Earl Eortescue.
Thomas Eielden (Todmorden).
CL H. Einch, M.P.
Professor H. S. Eoxwell, M.A.
Moreton Ere wen (London).
Lord Q-erard.
Alban a. H. Gibbs, M.P.
Yicary Gibbs, M.P.
Professor E. C. K. Gonner, M.A.
The Marquis of Granby, M.P.
C. W. Gray.
Sir Edward Green, Bart.
H. E. Grenfell.
W. H, Grenfell.
Earl Grey.
Sir Lepel H. Griffin, K. 0.5.1.


James Guthrie (London).
W. Murray Guthrie.
Lord Claude J. Hamilton.
Lord F. Hamilton, M.P.
Thomas Hanbury.
Frank Hardcastle.
Sir Hector M. Hav, Bart.
A. Eaymond Heath.
Augustus Helder, M.P.
Eight Hon. E. Heneage.
J. P. Heseltine (London).
Sir Alfred Hickman, M.P.
Eight Hon. A. Staveley Hill, M.P.
Charles Hoare (London).
Alfred Hoare (London).
J. Saneroft Holmes.
David Holmes (Burnley).
Sir T. C. Hope, K.C.5.1., C.I.E.
Sir W. H. Houldsworth, Bart., M.P
James Houldsworth, Wishaw, N.B.
Isaac Hoyle.
Sir Henry H Howorth, K.C.1.E., F-
E.S., M.P.
George Howell.
Sir F. Seager Hunt, Bart., M.P.
Sir Guyer Hunter, K.C.M.G.
J. Henniker Heaton, M.P.
Eev. J. F. A. Hervey, M.A.
Henry Higgs, B A., LL.B.
W. Jacks.
Eight Hon.-Sir Henry James, M.P
A. Weston Jarvis.
A. Johnstone - Douglas (Euthwell,
N. 8.)
J. Jordan, M.P.
Gen E. H. Keatinge, V C., C.S.I.
George D. Kelley (Manchester).
H. Knatchbull-Hugesson, M.P.
J. Boyd Kinnear (Lady Bank, N. 8.).
Lord Knightley.
Edm, F. Yesey Knox, M.P.
The Marquis of Londonderry, K.G.
Sir J. C. Lawrance.
Edward Langley (London).
Joseph Larmor, D.Sc,, F.E.S.
Elliott Lees, M.P.
Sir Eoper Lethbridge. C.I.E.
Eobert Livingstone.
Hon, and Eev. Edward Lyttelton,
M.A.
Sampson S. Lloyd, (London).
Wilson Lloyd, M.P.
Sir Alfred Lyall, K.C.8., K.C.I.E.
Sir Leonard Lyell, Bart, M.P.
Hugh M. Matheson.
Cuming Macdona, M,P.
Sir Donald H. Macfarlane.
John Wm. Maclure, M.P.
Sir Joseph IST McKenna.
Elphinstone V. A. Maitland.
J. H. Manners-Sutton (Newark).
Earl Manvers.
Professor James Mayor.
James Mawdsley (Manchester).
Edward Mellor (Oldham).
Sir H. M. Meysey-Thompson, Bart.,
M.P.
T. Milvain.
A. B. Freeman Mitford, C. 8., M.P.
Sir Guilford L. Molesworth, K.C.I.E.
Sir Samuel Montagu, Bart., M.P.
E. Jasper More, M.P.
Wm. Mullin (Manchester).
John Musgrave (Whitehaven).
Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart.
Ernest Noel (London).
T. O’Hanlon.
Edward Howley Palmer (London).
Herbert B. Praed (London).
Sir Eichard H. Paget, Bart., M.P.
J. Pinkerton, M.P.
W. Pomfret Pomfret.
The Duke of Portland.
L. L. Price, M.A.
A. D. Provand, M.P.
Sir John H. Puleston.
The Earl of Eadnor.
Lord Eowton, C.B.
Lord Eookwood.
Lord Eendlesham.
E. M. Hutton Eiddell.
Et. Hon. Sir M. White Eidley, Bart,,
M.P.
Sir George Eussell, Bart, M.P.
James Eankin, M.P.
Thomas Salt.


Col. T. M. Sandys, M.P.
Sir Albert A. David Sassoon, C.S.I.
Sir George R. Sitwell, Bart, M.P.
Lord Sherborne.
H. Seton-Karr, M.P.
J. W. Sidebotham, M.P.
T. H. Sidebottom, M.P,
William Smart, M.A., LL.D.
Samuel Smith, M.P.
Lord Suffield, K.C.B.
J. E. Spencer.
Lord Stanley, M.P.
The Duke of Sutherland.
Sir T. Sutherland, K.C.M.G., M.P.
Professor J. E. Symes, M.A.
Sir Charles Tennant, Bart.
W. E. M. Tomlinson, M.P.
New South Wales :
Head Office, Sydney.
Hon. Sec., A. W. Pearse, 6 Spring
Street.
Victoria :
Head Office, Melbourne.
Hon. Sec., John L. Menzies, 59
Temple Court.
0. E. Howard Vincent, C. 8., M.P.
Viscount Valentia, M.P.
Professor Robert Wallace.
Edmund Waller (Gloucester).
Colonel Cornwallis West.
George Whiteley, M.P,
Philip H. Wicksteed, M.A.
Stephen Williamson.
W. H. Wilkinson (Accrington).
The Marquis of Winchester.
Colonel Mildmay Wilson, M.P.
R. Grant Webster, M.P.
Sir George 0. Womb well, Bart.
Caleb Wright.
Sir Thomas Wright (Leicester).
George Wyndham, M.P.
The Earl of Yarborough.
South Australia :
Head Offices, Adelaide.
Hon. Sec., G. Eowler Stewart, 14
King William Street.
Australian Branches.
New Zealand Branch.
Head Offices, Dunedin. Hon. Sec., David Reid, Jun.
PROMINENT MEMBERS OF THE BRITISH LEAGUE.
BANKERS.
Charles Hoare.
Alfred Hoare.
Thomas Salt.
Sampson S, Lloyd.
John Nutt Bullen, Director of the
London and Westminster Bank
Limited.
E. E. Duncanson, Director of the
London and County Banking Co.,
Limited.
James Parlane, Manchester and Sal-
ford Bank, Limited, London.
James Eckersley.
Sir Horace B. T. Earquahar, Bart.
Sir Thos. Sutherland, K.C.M.G.,M.P.
Director of the Bank of
Australasia.
J. Howard Gwyther.
Isaac Hoyle.
Marquis of Ailesbury.
Henry Wethered.
J. R. Heaven.
Alfred Crewdson.
Robert Neill, Jun.
Sir Samuel Montagu, Bart., M.P.
The Hongkong and Shanghai Bank-
ing Corporation.
The Chartered Bank of India, Aust-
ralia and China (London).
Sir Charles Tennant, Bart.


Duke of Abercorn, K.G.
A. Ton Andre.
The Bank of China, Japan, and the
Straits (London)
F, B. Blake.
Sir Henry Cunningham, K.C.I.E,
The Delhi and London Bank, Limited,
London.
Henry Coke.
Baron Emile D’Erlanger.
Sir E. Robert P. Edgcumbe.
Thomas Glaister.
Sir Lepel H. Griffin, K.C.S.I.
Alban G. H. Gibbs, M.P., Director
of the Bank of Australasia.
Yicary Gibbs, M.P., Director of the
Queensland National Bank.
Augustus Holder.
J. E. Horley.
The Imperial Bank of Persia
(London).
Wm. Jackson.
Andrew Kingsmill.
Wm. Keswick.
The London Bank of Mexico.
David McLean.
E. C. Morgan.
Sir James Mackay, K.C.I.E.
John Musgrave.
J. A. Maitland.
Herbert B. Praed.
Wm. Patterson.
W. Pomfret-Pomfret.
Henry M. Read.
E. M. Hutton-Riddell.
E. P. Squarey.
I. Seligman.
C. I. Sassoon.
Edward Sassoon.
M. G. Schilizzi.
John Thomson.
Col Mildmay Wilson.
Sir Alexander Wilson.
Y. Nakai.
Merchants.
Rt. Hon. Wm. Lidderdale (London).
Hon Evelyn Hubbard.
Thos. Baring.
Herbert C. Gibbs.
Sir Robert Jardine, Bart.
Hugh M. Matheson.
Edward Howley Palmer.
Reginald E. Johnstone.
Sir Albert A. David Sassoon, C.S.I.
Reuben Sassoon.
J. E. Ogilvy.
W. Murray Guthrie.
A. Zimmern.
Sir John Muir.
Jasper Young.
W. M. Strachan.
Henry G. Hayter.
Erancis G. Hayter. •
H. D. Stewart,
David Murray.
E. Iveson.
G. A. Batchelor.
H. Bill.
Alexander Adam.
John A, Beith.
Robert Barclay,
Arthur D. E. Culbard.
W. E. Dorrington.
Geo. Handasyde Dick.
John S. Dods.
W. and C Dunlop.
H. T. Gaddum.
Robert Gladstone.
Thomas Henthorne,
J. Arthur Hutton.
Henry Lathbury.
J. McLaren.
John W. Miller.
Charles Macdonald.
Duncan Matheson.
Samuel Ogden.
T. O’Hanlon.
A. E. Rodewald.
Edward J. Reiss.
J. W. Southern.
Walter A. Sandeman.
J. Schack Sommer.
William Sargant.
Manufacturers, &c. (not otherwise Classified).
Alfred Arnold.
Ely Andrew
30


Edward Cox.
Alfred Emmott.
Sir Edward Green, Bart.
Edward H. Greg.
George C. Haworth.
Frank Hardcastle.
Lewis Haslam.
Thomas Heginbottom.
Walter J. Houldsworth.
J. H. Howell.
Howard Asten Allport.
James Houlds worth.
Joseph Jackman.
W. C. Jones.
John King.
Joseph Lees.
Charles H. Neville.
P. H. Normand.
David Spence.
W. A. Secretan.
J. L. Thackeray and Son.
¥m, Taylor.
George Walthew.
Sir Thomas Wright.
I. Crewdson Waterhouse.
E. W. Wrigley.
S. Bourne.
Labour Organisations And Labour Leaders
Oldham Operative Cotton Spinners’
Association, Oldham.
The Amalgamated Associations of
Operative Cotton Spinners.
Northern Counties Weavers’ Associa-
tion.
Weavers’ Association, Blackburn.
Bristol Trades’ Council.
United Textile Factory Workers.
Huddersfield Trades’ Council.
Manchester and Salford Trades’
Council, and Lithographic
Printers’ Association.
Oldham Cotton Spinners’ Associat-
ion.
United Textile Factory Workers,
Manchester.
Card and Blowing Room Hands’
Operative Association, Manchester.
Northern Counties Weavers’ Asso-
ciation, Accrington.
The United Textile Factory Workers
Northern Counties Weavers’ Asso-
ciation.
Landownees and Ageiculttjeists (not otheewisb classified.)
Lord Ashburton.
Marquis of Abergavenny, K.Q-.
The Dube of Beaufort, K.G.
Thos Bell.
The Marquis of Conyngham.
Earl of Carlisle.
Lord Castletown.
The Earl of Crawford and Balcarres,
KT, LED., E.R.S.
The Earl of Donoughmore, K C.M.G-.
Marquis of Exeter.
The Earl of Ellesmere,
Duke of Fife, K.T.
The Earl Eortescue.
The Earl of Eeversham.
The Earl Grey.
Lord Gerard.
W. H. Gibson.
Antony Gibbs.
C. W. Gray.
Sampson Hanbury.
A. Eaymond Heath.
J. Bancroft Holmes.
Lord Knightley.
Capt. E. C. Loder Symonds.
The Marquis of Londonderry, K.Q-.
H. Liversidge, Jun.
Earl Manvers.
H. L. B. McCalmont.
Tonman Mosley.
The Duke of Portland.
Lord Penrhyn.
Lord Eendlesham.
The Duke of Eichmond and Gordon,
K.G.
The Earl of Eadnor.
Lord Eowton, C.B.
Clare Sewell Eead.
Lord Brookwood.
Lord Sherborne.
Lord Suffield, K.C.B.
The Duke of Sutherland.


The Earl of Yarborough.
The Marquis of Winchester.
Sir Geo. 0. Wombwell, Bart.
Members oe the House op Commons (not otherwise Classified).
Wilson Lloyd, M.P.
Sir Leonard Lyell, Bart., M.P.
Elliott Lees, M. P.
Sir H. M. Meysey -Thompson, Bart.,
M.P.
A. B. Ereeman Mitford, C. 8., M.P.
John Wm. Maclure, M.P.
Gumming, Macdona, M.P.
B. Jasper More, M.P.
Hon. J. Scott Montagu, M.P.
Sir Donald H. Macfarlane, M.P,
J. Pinkerton, M.P.
Sir. Richard H. Paget, Bart, M.P.
A, D. Provand, M.P.
James Rankin, M.P.
Sir. Geo. Russell, Bart,, M.P.
Rt. Hon. Sir M. White Ridley,
Bart., M.P.
Lord Stanley, M.P.
J. E. Spencer, M.P.
T. H. Sidebottom, M.P.
J. W. Sidebotham, M.P.
Sir George R. Sitwell, Bart., M.P.
Col. T. M. Sandys, M.P.
Sir Mark J, Stewart. Bart., M.P.
Samuel Smith, M.P.
W. E. M. Tomlinson, M.P.
Yiscount Yalentia, M.P.
C. E. Howard Yincent, C. 8., M.P.
R, Grant Webster, M.P.
George Whiteley, M.P.
Stephen Williamson, M.P.
George Wyndham, M.P.
John Addison, Q.C., M.P.
Gilbert Beith, M.P.
Wm. W. B. Beach, M.P.
Colonel the Hon. F. 0. Bridgman,
M.P.
Et. Hon. Jacob Bright, M.P.
Gerald W. Balfour, M.P.
C. A. Y. Conybeare, M.P.
The Marquis of Carmarthen, M.P.
Alexander Cross, M.P.
C. W. Cayzer, M.P.
R. Lacey Everett, M.P.
Lord Elcho, M.P.
Coningsby E. Disraeli, M.P.
Capt. H. T. Fenwick, M.P.
G. H. Finch, M.P.
Marquis of Granby, M.P.
Et. Hon. E. Heneage, M.P.
George Howell, M.P.
Sir W. H. Houldsworth, Bart., M.P.
J. Henniker Heaton, M.P.
Sir Henry H. Howarth, K.C.1.E.,
F.E.S., M P.
Et. Hon. A. Staveley Hill, M.P.
Sir Alfred Hickman, M.P.
Et. Hon. Sir Henry James, M.P.
Sir F. Seager Hunt, Bart., M.P.
Lord F. Hamilton, M P.
J. Jordan, M.P.
Wm. Jacks, M.P.
H. Knatchbull-Hugessen, M.P.
H. Seton-Karr, M.P.
Edmund F. Vesey Knox, M.P.
Economic Authorities.
Professor H. S. Eoxwell, M.A.
E. J. Earaday.
Professor E. C. K. Gonner, M.A.
Henry Higgs, 8.A., LL.D.
J. S. Mackenzie, M.A.
Professor Mavor, M.A.
Professor J. S. Nicholson, D.Sc., M.A.
L, L. Price, M.A.
Professor J. H. Poynting E.R.S.
D.Sc., &c.
Professor J. Ryan, D.Sc, M.A.,LL.M.
J. Barr Robertson.
Professor Henry Sidgwick, D.Litt.
William Smart, M.A , LL.D.
Professor J. E. Symes, M.A.
Philip H. Wicksteed, M.A.
General.
The Peninsular and Oriental Steam
Navigation Co.
The Most Eev. Archbishop Walsh,
Dublin.


Abraham Haworth,
Geo. W. Allen, C.I.E.
W. Lockett Agnew.
John Andrews.
Eev. Martin Anstey, M.A.
H. E. Beeton.
Walter M. Blackey, Glasgow r .
The Eight Hon. Lord Charles
Beresford.
Eev. H. F. Burnaby, M.A.
Lord Henry Bentinck.
Commander Hastings Berkeley, E.N.
Sir David Barbour, K.C.S.I.
Col. Thomas Brooks.
Fred. S. Bishop.
Eev. 0. A. Barlow.
Sir W. J. E. Cotton.
Lieut.-Gen. Sir Andrew Clark,
G.C.M.G., C. 8., C.I.E.
Alfred H. Cohen, Trustee and'Man-
ager of the London Stock
Exchange.
Admiral Sir J. E. Commerell, K.C.B.
Eev Canon Cromwell, M.A.
John Corbett.
A. J, W. Douglas.
Ernest Cassel.
Frank C. Capel.
A. Cassella.
J. T. Calvert.
E. B. Chapman, C.S I.
A. Cotterell-Tupp.
W. H. Duignan.
Sir John Whittaker Ellis, Bart.
Thomas Fielden.
H. C: Field.
James Guthrie.
W. H. Grenfell.
H. E. Grenfell.
E. S. Gundry.
J E. Hall.
Cornelius Hanbury.
Capel Hanbury.
Sir Hector M. Hay.
J. P. Heseltine.
Sir W. Guyer Hunter, K.C.M.G.
Sir T. C. Hope, K.C.5.1., C.I.E.
Thomas Hanbury.
Lord Claud J. Hamilton.
Alex. T. Hunter.
Andrew K. Hichins, Trustee and
Manager of the London Stock
Exchange.
C. J. Harcourt.
A. Johnstone-Douglas.
J. Boyd-Kinnear.
Peter Kevan.
Gen. E. H. Keatinge, V.C., 0.5.1.
Hon. and Eev. Edward Lyttelton,
M.A.
Edward Langley.
Arthur Lee.
Joseph Larmor, D.Sc.; F.E.S.
John Mark.
W. S. Miller.
J. H. Manners-Sutton.
Sir Guilford L. Molesworth, K.C.I.E.
Eeginald E. Middelton.
Sir Joseph N. McKenna.
H. J. Manton.
Elphinstone T. A. Maitland.
Ernest Noel.
Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart,
William Noton.
T. E. Powell.
J. F, L. Eolleston.
A. G. Eenshaw.
W. T. Eothwell.
J. D. Sandars.
D. E. Stephens.
A. G. ScbifE & Co.
J. B. Stanhope.
Hermann Schmidt,
Ernest Seyd.
Lieut.-Gen. Eichard Strachey, C.S.I.
J. C. Taylor.
H. S. Trower.
Colonel Cornwallis West.
Edmund Waller.
Thomas A. Welton.
H. E. Wollmer.
James Dundas White, M.A., LL.M.
Professor Eobert Wallace.
Eev. J. F. A. Hervey, M.A.


SUBSCRIPTIONS TOWARDS THE GUARANTEE FUND
Eoe Extea. Woek in Developing the Oeganisation oe the League.
Antony Gibbs & Sons £2,500 0 0
Sir Wm. H. Houldsworth,
Bart., M.P. ... 2,500 0 0
H. McCalmont ... 2,500 0 0
Heseltine, Powell & Co. 2,500 0 0
James Dilworth & Son 2,500 0 0
Eobert Barclay ... 1,000 0 0
P. Spence & Sons ... 1,000 0 0
I. C. Waterhouse ... 1,000 0 0
Crosses & Winkworth 1,000 0 0
Duke of Sutherland ... 1,000 0 0
Thomas Hanbury ... 1,000 0 0
Duke of Portland ... 1,000 0 0
Alfred Crewdson ... 1,000 0 0
Ernest Cassel ... 1,000 0 0
Antony Gibbs ... 1,000 0 0
W. H. Grenfell ... 750 0 0
S. Smith, M.P. ... 500 0 0
Smith, Edwards & Co. 500 0 0
W. T. Eothwell ... 500 0 0
Duke of Eife ... 500 0 0
Charles Hoare ... 500 0 0
Davies & Eckersley ... 500 0 0
Geo. Eraser, Sons & Co. 500 0 0
Lewis Haslam ... 500 0 0
E. E. Haslam ... 500 0 0
Eeddish Spinning Co. 500 0 0
Joshua Hoyle & Co. ... 500 0 0
C. H. Neville ... 500 0 0
Earl of Yarborough ... 500 0 0
Lord Ashburton ... 500 0 0
Matheson & Co. ... 500 0 0
Jardine, Matheson & Co. 500 0 0
United Textile Factory
Workers ... 500 0 0
G. Handasyde Dick ... 500 0 0
John A Beith ... 500 0 0
Thomas Baring ... 500 0 0
J. E. Heaven ... 500 0 0
Balfour Williamson & Co. 500 0 0
Sir Chas. Tennant, Bart. 500 0 0
“AEriend,” per the Et. Hon.
Henry Chaplin, M.P. 500 0 0
D. Sassoon & Co. ... 500 0 0
E. Haworth & Co. ... 500 0 0
Sir Horace Earquhar ... 500 0 0
Sir H. H. Edwards, Bart. £BOO 0 0
J. E. Hutton &Co. ... 250 0 0
E Hardcastle ... 250 0 0
James Houldsworth ... 250 0 0
Aid. Thomas Glaister 250 0 0
Hay ter & Hay ter ... 250 0 0
Woolston & Beeton ... 250 0 0
Marquis of Londonderry 250 0 0
Earl of Lonsdale ... 250 0 0
Earl of Eadnor ... 250 0 0
Alfred Emmott ... 250 0 0
Steward, Thompson & Co. 250 0 0
Lord Penrhyn ... 250 0 0
A. G-. Eenshaw ... 250 0 0
Iveson & Co. ... 250 0 0
Eicardo Holier ... 250 0 0
W. M. Strachan ... 200 0 0
E. J. Eeiss ... ... 200 0 0
David Murray ... 200 0 0
Lord Stanley ... 200 0 0
E. Tuck 200 0 0
Eodewald & Co. ... 150 0 0
J, Schack Sommer ... 125 0 0
J. Nuttßullen ... 125 0 0
J. H. Gwyther ... 125 0 0
W. Patterson ... 125 0 0
Earl Grey 125 0 0
E. W. Wrlgley ... 125 0 0
E E. Symon ... 100 0 0
J. Beckett ... 100 0 0
W. B. Secretan ... 100 0 0
M. Corgialegno & Co. 100 0 0
Geo Harrison ... 100 U 0
David McLean ... 100 0 0
E. Crewdson ... 100 0 0
Llewellin & James ... 100 0 0
W. E. Grace & Co. ... 100 0 0
Theobald Crewdson ... 100 0 0
E. T. Mallett ... 100 0 0
Lathbury & Co. ... 100 0 0
Dods. Ker & Co. ... 100 0 0
Sir Alex. Wilson ... 100 0 0
MacDonald, Miller & Co. 100 0 0
W. A, Sandeman ... 100 0 0
M. G. Schilizzi ... 100 0 0
E. B. Chapman ... 100 0 0


A. Zimmern ... ... £IOO 0 0
A. Cotterell Tupp ... 100 0 0
Sidebottom & Hardie ... 100 0 0
E. B. Blake 100 0 0
J. D. Sandars ... ... 100 0 0
Marriage & Pinnock ... 100 0 0
R. Wilkinson ... 100 0 0
Rt. Hon. Henry Chaplin,
M.P 100 0 0
A, D. Provand, M. P, 100 0 0
Sir David Barbour ... 100 0 0
H. R. Grenfell ... 100 0 0
J. D. Sandars ... 100 0 0
J. Dickinson & Co ... 100 0 0
T. W. Shaw 100 0 0
C. H. Shaw 100 0 0
J. A. Maitland ... 100 0 0
W. S. Young ... 100 0 0
C. J. Whittington ... 100 0 0
E. E. Duncanson ... 100 0 0
John Nelson ... 100 0 0
Joseph Lees ... 100 0 0
J. & T. Harnett ... 100 0 0
W. L. Agnew ... 100 0 0
Hon. Evelyn Hubbard 100 0 0
Reginald E. Johnston... 100 0 0
Robert Greg & Co. ... 100 0 0
Rt. Hon. Wm. Lidderdale 100 0 0
C. H. Clegg ... v . 100 0 0
G. M. Boissevain ... 100 0 0
And sums under £IOO, bringing
the total to over £50,000.
Special Donations foe 1895.
Peninsular & Oriental
S.S. Co 500 0 0
The Chartered Bank of
India, Australia and
China 100 0 0
George D. Rowe ... 25 0 0
C. H. Clegg ... ... 20 0 0
A G. Schiff ... ... 10 0 0
M. G. Schillizzi ... 10 0 0
J, C. Kelley ... ... 5 0 0
And other sums.
RECENT INTERESTING ITEMS.
Many there are, who at great pains illustrate in diverse forms, the
great amount of currency there is in the world. As an instance, one
paper commenting on the wealthiest man in America, computed that his
sixty odd millions— that of 0716 171(171, would require 600 carts to shift
it from one house to another. Well and good. Here is an opposite view. His
income or profit for last year was £6,000,000. In engineering
phraseology, four-horse power would suffice to raise this amount in gold,
one foot from the ground. Such a small power necessary to move its
bulk, but representing such a power ! It could purchase 500,000 bales of
wool sufficient to clothe many millions of people ; 55,000,000 bushels of
wheat which would feed the same; or 1,000,000,0001bs of good meat
which would serve the same good purpose. And still there are thousands
starving—rotting in disease, habited in wretched rags, and stifling in the
corruption, both physical and mental, which such poverty engenders.
Their hungry, pinched, wild, hunted faces, seldom emerge from their
hovels, or haunts of infamy, where crimes of disgusting monstrosity in
all manners and shapes prevail—from murder and thieving from one
another, to that dreadful step, starving their young to get drink with the
few pence which should provide food, and goes to the adjacent pot-house
for the alcohol, by which these devotees of Bacchus drown their hideous
wretchedness.
One Man made this £6,000,000 clear profit last year. One Year.
Six millions (which would lift millions out of this slough of horror) made
by gambling speculations, and by the creation of trusts and monopolies.


It means another of the great blows which have been struck at the rest of
the human race by the men of wealth, and the destroyal of the industrial
capitalist, who cannot compete against monopolies and the ever appreciating
gold, Eeduce and contract the currency, and the millionaires power will
increase accordingly. Expand the currency—make more money so as it
can be easier obtained re-instate silver, and our labour will be
enhanced in value, while their profits are lessened.
Our papers, speaking of this Rockefeller, say that he made £4,000,000
in ’98, and that he was not sure of his wealth to a million or two. He
made £6,000,000 profit, and they knew it, when they wrote and tried to
screen the fact, that his £60,000,000 returned him ten (10) per cent. Ten
per cent, and yet we see in another part of the same paper that money is
cheaper than it has been for many a long day, i.e., that if one go to
borrow a sum of money now, he will obtain it at a cheaper rate of interest.
Quite right! for money goes a begging. Why ? Because Enterprise
is dead! Business is dead ! Everything is dead ! Except —the great
gambling which goes on in the world’s big stock exchanges. Eancy
£6,000 for a seat on the New York stock exchange. Oh Hod ! £6,000
which enables one, to become one of the select group of thieves and
fleecers. When Christ said “ The poor you will always have with you,” he
surely never meant they would exist in the huge numbers we see and
know of to-day ; but that there would be a per centage which will be with
us, no matter what the state of prosperity reaches. The same great friend
of the poor said: “Itis as difficult for a rich man to enter the kingdom of
heaven, as for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle.” So creditor-
capitalistic robbers and money-lenders, wreakers of misery, poverty, and
crime, beware of the day which may be soon at hand, when the people will
rise and kick your money pots over. Once before, history tells us, that
Hod’s house was used by the money changers. But we know of the
treatment meted out to them when Christ kicked their money pots over
and drove them from the temple. Enlarge our currency which will make
money cheap—easier to procure with our produce and labor, and we
curtail their purchasing power—which means that one grand blow at any
rate has been dealt at their money pots.
Japan who has recently gone on a gold standard finishes up the year
’9B with a deficit of £4,000,000.
Pope Leo XIII some time ago said : “ After many scourges the rain
of money is now upon us,” and continuing, viewed it in this phase : That
the lawlessness of men was increasing as the power of the church
was affected by this last and creullest scourge of all.
Erratum. —On page 12. ozs. of silver to 1 oz. of gold should read 13 to
1 of gold.
Printed Markets, Sydney.


■•LI FT YOUR FAULTY WOOLS °o D . T THE RUCK
By Sending them to
THE LAKESIDE WOOL SCOURING CO.
(WRIGHT & ABBOTT),
6 SPUING STREET, SYDNEY.
Works! Water Reserve, Botany.
NOTE.—It is a significant fact that SCOURED WOOLS, from the
Work* of Wright and Abbott, Lakeside, Botany, “TOPPED ”
the Sydney Market in every month between November, 1896
and September 1897.
NOTE.—The top price obtained in the Australian markets during the
ALSO past season for scoured wool was secured at auction for the
COMBADERY clip from Walgett, scoured by WRIGHT &
ABBOTT. The price realized for this wool was 18fd per lb, a
ten years record in the Sydney market.
nlWllrgKii
WRIGHT & ABBOTT beg to announce that they have now added an
EASTWOOD and AMBLER Wool washing machine to their existing
plant. This is the latest English Invention of its kind, and the only
Machine of its kind in the Colony.
Referring to this splendid invention, one of the largest firms of
Woolcombers in Bradford writes: —“The Eastwood and Ambler Wool
Washing Maehiness are the best, because the staple of the wool is
undisturbed and consequently combs and cards better. We use no other
machines now.”
Other prices recently realized in Sydney are ; —J.B.W. over BRUNDAH
(Grenfell), fleece from 17id to 18|d per lb; G. C. & C. over
DEEPWATER 17d ; G.H.G. over lANDRA (Grenfell), Crossbred fleece
17J (the record for the season in this class of wool), Merino l7d; 8.8. over
B. (Byrock) 17d; K. over COOLIBAH I7d ; GINGIE 17*d ; E.W. over
BURRO WAl6|d; A.L.S.N, over CANNONBAR 16*d ; WEILMOR-
INGLE 15ld to 16i; E. BROS over BENDININE (Burrowa), Locks
lid; Y in diamond, Queenbeyan locks lid i LANYON (Queenbeyan),
locks Hi; RIYERINA (Wagga), locks ll^d.
Prices recently paid in London incIude:—CHEVINAL over LAKE-
SIDE, 178 bales, crossbred at 16|d, 17|d, and 18| for fleece, and up to
15|d for pieces ; T.C. (Barraba), locks 13id ; C .& Co. (Stanthorpe),
combing I7d, pes 15d, locks 13d; CUPPACUMBALONG (Queenbeyan)
com l7d, pes bellies 15|d, locks 12d per lb.
SEND Mill FAULTY WOOES TO MIGHT AND ABBOTT.


The Platform of the j
N.S.W. Silver League.
1. To demand the opening of our silver mints.
2. To strike a distinctively Australian coin,
3 For Australia to build up her silver reserves
proportionately to those of other nations.
4. The adoption of a ten Shilling (10/-) note —of State
issue.
5. To declare silver to be legal tender within the borders
of the United States of Australia.
6. That Australians join in the protest with the great ma-
jority of the English people against England’s recent attitude
in not doing “ all in her power ” to bring about International
Agreement, and re-opening the Indian mints to silver —the
Mouse of Commons having passed a resolution to that effect
two years ago.
The Silver League being a purely patriotic and political organization—(for
which the conditions of membership require no fee,) all who have an
interest in the country’s welfare are invited to enrol as members,
and do all in their power to establish branch leagues. We therefore exhort
the public to pay more attention to this all important question.
It may be well to mention that members of the Central League, will
be only too happy to arrange for addresses to be given at any newly
organized silver league.
President—W. H. GOCHER.
Vice Presidents—REY. Dr. ZILLMANN, 8. A. ROSA, M. A. DOYLE,
W. MARTIN, J. GALLAGHER.
Hon. Sec.—P. J. MULHOLLAND, Commercial Hotel, 294 Elizabeth
Street, Sydney.




