





Colonial and Indian Exhibition ,
1886.
THE INDIGENOUS
VEGETATION OF AUSTRALIA,
WITH
SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE EUCALYPTI.
A LECTURE
DELIVERED IN
THE CONFERENCE HALL OF THE COLONIAL AND INDIAN
EXHIBITION , SOUTH KENSINGTON.
BY
JOSEPH BOSISTO, C.M.G., M.P., J.P.,
PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION FOR VICTORIA.
LONDON:
WILLIAM CLOWES & SONS, Limited,
printers anti publishers to tlje &oga! Commission,
13 CHARING CROSS, S.W., and at THE EXHIBITION.
xSB6.


LONDON :
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.


THE INDIGENOUS VEGETATION OF AUSTRALIA,
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE EUCA-
LYPTI.
BY JOSEPH BOSISTO, M.P., J.P.
President of the Royal Commission for Victoria.
The subject of my paper, namely, the Vegetation of Australia,
cannot be better introduced to your notice than by quoting the
fable of the “ Lauristinus and the Rose-tree.”
In the quarters of a shrubbery where deciduous plants and
evergreens were intermingled with an air of negligence, it
happened that a Rose grew not far from a Lauristinus.
The Rose, enlivened by the breath of Time and attired in all
its gorgeous blossoms, looked with much contempt on the
Lauristinus, which had nothing to display but the dusty verdure
of its leaves. “ What a wretched neighbourhood,” cried the
Rose, “is this : and how unworthy to partake the honour of my
company! Better to bloom and die in the desert than to
associate myself here with such low and dirty vegetables. And
this is my lot at last, whom every nation has agreed to honour,
and every poet conspired to reverence, as the undoubted
sovereign of the field and garden ! If I really am so, let my
subjects at least keep their distance, and let a circle remain
vacant around me, suitable to the state my rank requires. Here,
gardener, bring thy hatchet, prithee, cut down this Lauristinus,
or at least remove it to its proper sphere.” “Be pacified, my
lovely Rose,” replied the gardener ; “ enjoy thy sovereignty with
moderation, and thou shalt receive all the homage which thy
beauty can require. But remember that in winter, when neither
thou nor any of thy tribe produce one flower or leaf to cheer
me, this faithful shrub which thou despisest will become the
glory of my garden. Prudence, therefore, as well as gratitude,
is concerned in the protection of a friend that will show his
friendship in adversity.”
The indigenous vegetation of Australia is evergreen. In
England it is deciduous —that is, trees that annually lose
their leaves. England may therefore be compared to the Rose,
Australia to the Lauristinus.
The fresh green scenery of June over the face of England
is ever absent in primitive Australia ; the daisies and buttercups,
primroses and cowslips, do not deck her pasture lands, neither


do her people behold the mayflower hedges or view the
chestnut leaf, or the glossy dark copper foliage of the beech ;
and yet Australian flowers are gay in colour, and the plant life
is varied and pleasing. Sundews and orchids, wild geraniums
and native fuchsias, heath blossoms in almost endless coloured
tints abound in many parts in reckless profusion ; these and
many other flowering and foliage plants intermingle their varied
hues over the surface of the land. Along the side of the creeks
and watercourses may be seen during many months of the
year the mimosa trees in full bloom, the tufted bunches
hanging like golden balls, and perfuming the air with the sweet
scent of the cassie. Even in the forests around, evergreen
fern trees grow in luxuriance and beauty under the shade of tall
timber trees, where can be seen pretty tiny flowers peeping up
between the broken pieces of the fallen shed bark from the gum
trees. Parrots and cockatoos scream their wild notes, wrens and
robins and other gay-coloured birds twitter about the scene, and
over all reigns a bright sunny sky. These and other tropical and
subtropical beauties greatly compensate for the absence of
England’s native flowers.
But lively scenery and the pretty flowers of Australia are not
so much the object of this paper as it is to give you some inte-
resting facts of a peculiar vegetation known as the Eucalyptus,
which exists and reigns almost supreme over the greater portion
of Australia and Tasmania, although entirely absent in the
other islands of the south, with the exception of a few species in
New Guinea. There can scarcely be a doubt but that at some
period of the world’s history Tasmania and New Guinea formed
a part of Australia ; hence the eucalyptus may be considered as
a vegetation purely Australian. Strong evidences exist proving
that the eucalyptus is an ancient Australian vegetation. River
beds of great antiquity have been met with, at depths varying
from xoo to 200 feet, and even deeper, in various alluvial gold
mining districts of Victoria, revealing occasionally massive timber
trees without any sign of decay, belonging to the family of the
Eucalyptus, chiefly those of the red gum ( Rostrata ) and the iron
bark ( Leucoxylon ) species. Some species growing at the present
day on the alluvial flats, mountainous ranges, and in the valleys,
attain a prodigious size, both as to girth and height, bespeaking
their longevity, possibly contemporaneous with the Cedars of
Lebanon.
The word “ eucalyptus,” from Eu , “ well,” and kalypto , “to
cover,” is aptly chosen to distinguish this splendid family of
plants from all others. This characteristic is observable in the
limb of the calyx, completely covering the flower before expan-
sion ; and during its gradual development, the operculum, or lid,
is uplifted in shape like an extinguisher, which falls off ifnmedi-


ately the flower becomes matured. The chief characters of all
cucalypts are in the firmness of the calyx, the absence of petals,
the numerous rows of stamens inserted close to the edge of the
calyx tube, the stamens being nearly always fertile, and also the
many form variations of the anthers in the different species.
This systematic arrangement was made by the late venerable
Bentham, and acquiesced in by our Government botanist, Baron
von Mueller, as being the wisest to adopt.
The eucalyptus is an evergreen ; it casts its bark annually, but
this does not take place, like the falling leaf of England, at one
given period of the year, hence there is always a rough and
ragged appearance on the trunk of the tree.. In those pictures
in the Victoria Court which depict Australian bush scenery this
is to be noticed, and is not therefore the fault of the painter,
as some persons have imagined.
In the vegetable kingdom the eucalypti belongs to the myrtle
family, so placed on account of its bearing certain botanical
outlines to that of the garden myrtle of England ; but the
physical characters, as well as some peculiar botanical features of
the eucalypts, place them as a distinct genus in the myrtle
family of plants. Considering the vast area of the Australian
continent, consisting of something over three millions of square
miles, and measuring 2,500 miles from west to east, and 2,000
miles from north to south, it is surprising to find one tribe of
trees forming at the present day four-fifths of the whole of the
indigenous vegetation. An Australian traveller frequently feels
the monotony of the scenery, but this is greatly dispelled by
noticing tire interesting variations in the leaf formation, in the
colour both of leaf and flower, in the appearances of the tree-
bark, and in the shape and varied stature of the trees.
Of the 150 kinds or species found existing over Australia, it
can easily be understood that the variations must be very great
indeed.
On the mountains and in the valleys, and on alluvial flats
where the woodman’s axe is but seldom heard, stand gigantic
eucalyptus timber trees, in girth varying from 16 feet to 80 feet,
and in height from 200 to 420 feet, and that often without a
branch, the top being capped with radiating branches (like the
ribs of an umbrella) full of foliage.
The undulating lands, although bearing many acacias and a
variety of other kinds of trees, the prevailing feature is the
eucalyptus ; no matter where the traveller journeys, this vegeta-
tion is generally present.
Throughout Australia it may be viewed as a firm friend to
man and beast. To the cattle depasturing and to the tens of
thousands of sheep grazing over the pasture lands of the country
it gives them shelter from the midday sun, and from dewy night.


The wandering swagsman, or the travelling bushman, reaching
no homestead at sundown, finds rest under its wide-spreading
branches, and often shelter within some patriarchal gum-tree,
which, although standing firm and erect, has become, through
old age, hollow in the centre, sufficient to give him, or even
half a dozen other persons, a comfortable rest-house for the night.
To many of the early pioneers of Australia have these trees
given a nightly home, and many a meal of damper and mutton,
and many a smoke pipe of peace have been partaken inside
their cavernous recesses.
In the scant rain tracts of Australia there are many millions
of acres on which grow a scrub or dwarf eucalypti, averaging in
height not more than eight feet; this scrub is so dense that it
almost shuts out the sight of sun and sky. Once an untutored
traveller loses the tract, and gets entangled but a small distance
in this forest of sticks and leaves, the chances are that he never
returns either to kith or kin again. Many persons travelling
through this country have died for the want of water, and yet
there is always a supply sufficient to sustain life close at hand,
did they but know it; for in one kind of this dwarf vegetation there
is lodged in the stem about half a pint of pure water ; and as
bushmen generally carry a tin pannikin and a small tomahawk,
he has nothing to do but to cut down one of these stick-like
stems and place the lower end of it into this vessel, when he will
in a short time obtain water. The question of interest that
arises here is, whence comes this fluid, and how is it so stored ?
To this question I will endeavour to give the answer presently.
This strange tract of country I have traversed ; there is not a
sound of life to break the solemn silence, scarce a bird to be seen,
and not a stone or a pebble to be obtained the size of a marble ;
a few dingoes or wild dogs prowl about here and there at
night. Native wells scattered far apart over an area extending
some thousands of square miles are to be met with, but they are
more frequently found dried up than otherwise, and yet the soil
in many parts is well adapted for wheat growing ; it is a mixture
of sand, decomposed ironstone and vegetation, with a substrata of
limestone. Weird is the scene ; still the vegetation found growing
jungle like over these lands contain health principles both for
climate and for suffering humanity.
The Government of Victoria is, I am happy to say, fully alive
to the advantages of irrigation. Only in last Saturday’s London
papers appears a cable message from Melbourne, stating that
the Hon. Alfred Deakin, Chief Secretary, has introduced a bill
in the Home of Assembly providing for a system of irrigation
embracing an area of 3,250,000 acres, to be carried out under
the management of the Water Trust, but vesting the supreme
Control of the works in the Government. The system is ex-


pected to prove of immense benefit to farming interests. Ihe
expense is estimated at .£3,800,000.
Thus far I have taken you rapidly over the general aspect of
Australia in relation to its plant life ; to end here would leave
out the most interesting portion of the peculiar characteristics
of Australian chief vegetation, which covers so vast an area,
almost as large as the whole of Europe, the eucalyptus, which
has given character to Australia, both in climate and in the
health and comfort of her people. From the heavily timbered
eucalyptus forests down to the scrub I have Just mentioned,
every variety of wood is obtainable ; whether it be for ship or
house building, or for docks, or bridges, for carriages or waggons,
for land fencing or garden ornamentation, or for fuel, its variety
is unbounded, and its durability is in many cases equal to its
longevity. In the several Australian courts the timber trophies
consist chiefly of the many species of the eucalyptus, or, as they
are termed in Australia, gum-trees ; an examination of these
will satisfy any person that I have not exaggerated the timber
value of these trees.
Although the leading forest timbers of Australia consist of
the eucalyptus, yet there are a variety of other kinds. In the
eucalyptus the wood varies in character quite as much as do
other kinds obtainable from other timber trees ; for instance,
the well-known blue gum {Eu. globulus ) is a hard light-coloured
timber of great strength and tenacity, as well as durability ;
extensively used for beams and joists in buildings and for
railway sleepers, also piers and bridges —a test of which has
been made between some blue gum, English oak, and Indian
teak. The blue gum carried 14 lb. weight more than the oak,
and 1 lb. more than the teak per square inch again.
“ The red gum tree {Eu. rostrata) is a very hard compact
wood, possessing a handsome curled but short grain, red in
colour, well adapted for many purposes in ship-building, such as
heavy framing, beams, and knees ; it is also used in the con-
struction of culverts, bridges, and wharfs, and by wheelwrights
for the felloes of heavy wheels, and is employed in Australia for
railway sleepers and engine buffers ; and owing to an acid it
contains, termed ‘ Eucalyptic acid,’ it resists the attack of the
Tei'edo Navalis, or sea-worm. The iron bark gum-tree is one of
the hardest and heaviest of our native woods.
“ The stringy bark tree {Eu. obliqua) is an easy-splitting wood,
and is usually employed for palings, shingles, and posts ; in like
manner do all the varieties change. Many varieties of tree
acacias are met with in all the forests of Australia, such as the
myall and the wattles, also pines, banksias, casuarinas, pittos-
porums, eugenias, melaleucas, and others too numerous to
mention.


It is to be deplored that just now the country is being sub-
jected to a wasteful destruction of many kinds of the eucalyptus.
Some of the best varieties in various districts are totally dis-
appearing, and without some determined and immediate action
on the part of the Governments of Australia, but few decades
will pass before a timber dearth sets in. The subject of forestry
has attracted the attention of most countries of the world ; even
in Australia, botanists, builders, contractors and legislators have
uttered a warning voice. The lands of Australia at present are
full of the seed of timber trees ; the selectors of our lands know
this right well. Let them but neglect to cultivate their farms
for a season or two, they find it covered over with a growth of
young timber plants consisting of the eucalyptus and acacias ;
but timber seeds, although covered with an epicarp in order to
protect the germ from an early loss of life, yet the seed cannot
retain its power of germination for many years when the lands
are kept under cultivation. Vegetation aids materially in
equalising the temperature and climate of a country. There
can be no doubt that the climate of Australia, speaking in
general terms, is not so hot as it was forty years ago. The
modification is produced by cultivation and the opening up of
lands which formerly were covered with dense forests, tangled
bushes, ferns, climbing plants, lichens and mosses. But the
climate of an extended area like Australia cannot be dealt
with in one general statement. The highest mountain is less
than 10,000 feet high, and few exceed 6,500 feet in height.
Majestic alpine chains of ranges stretch through many parts.
The snow line of Australia is less in altitude than most other
countries, arising probably from the cold Antarctic winds
receiving their first break on these bleak mountain ranges.
Aerial, oceanic and terrestrial magnetic currents produce many
changes over so vast a continent. The rainfall of Australia
varies considerably in many parts : in the lull districts approxi-
mately it may be stated to be fifty inches per annum ; in the
undulating woodland districts, from thirty to fifty inches ; the
adjoining plains twenty inches ; over the wide expansive plains
away from mountains or hills, from five to fifteen inches ; and
farther on into the interior, rain has been known to be absent
for two or three years together. All these things affect climate,
but there is nothing in the physical features of Australia to
promote miasma. Its lagoons and swamps are not extensive ;
most of them are dry during the summer months ; and even
where they remain otherwise, there are surroundings of a
healthy character, especially the tan barks and leaves of the
eucalyptus, which fall in, obviating thereby any ill effect.
The physical geography of Australia does not differ in its
general outline from that of other countries. The first Victorian
o


geologist—now Professor Selwyn, the Government geologist of
Canada —reported that: “In general structure, character, and
composition in geological sequence, and in physical and
palaeontological relations the rock formations are in all respects
analogous to those of other regions.” But there is a factor at
work throughout Australia which makes the climate so accepta-
ble to human life, and that is the eucalyptus vegetation, belong-
ing, as I have before intimated, to the myrtle family of plants. It
is full of aromatising odours ; the sense of smell when in our
forests, or even travelling in the country, bears ample testimony
to the presence of its volatile bodies in the air, for there is no
mistaking the odour, as it is different from all others. There is
not a single species but what possesses in its leaves a volatile
essence; each kind varies in percentage of yield, but still of the
vast number they can be reduced for practicable illustration
under eight types, or species, namely;
The Viminalis, or manna-yielding eucalyptus.
The Odorata, or sweet smelling.
The Rostrata, or red gum-tree.
The Obliqua, or stringy bark.
The Leucoxylon, or iron bark.
The Globulus, or blue gum.
The Dumosa, or mallee.
The Amygdalina, or peppermint-scented eucalyptus.
(Samples on the table.)
The eight kinds I have mentioned supply the minimum to the
maximum, the minimum yielding 7 fluid ounces of the volatile
essence, and the maximum 500 fluid ounces, or 25 imperial
pints from every 1,000 pounds weight of fresh leaves. No
vegetation occupying so vast a country contains so much volatile
odour in its leaf portion as the eucalyptus ; assessing alone the
whole colony of Victoria (being that part of Australia in which
most of my experiments were made) at the low average of
supply of 20 ounces, or 1 pint to the acre, we have 9,730,500
gallons of an essential and volatile substance held at one and
the same time in the eucalyptus vegetation.
So far as I have been able to proceed in this investigation
over the continent of Australia, similar conditions exist; so that
it may be safely asserted that in the whole of the leaf surface of
the eucalypts in Australia there is continually 96,877,440,000
gallons of this volatile material. If therefore the whole of the
odorous principles were retained in the leaves until set free by the
art of man, in that case its effect on climate would fail ; but if they
are given up freely by the natural forces of the tree under the aid
of light, heat, or electricity as existing around, or by some or all of
these forces in combination, then we have good reason to value
•the eucalyptus vegetation beyond all others in being capable of


influencing the climate of a country for purposes of health.
Leaves of trees necessarily are in close connection with the roots ;
together they keep up a continuous action of exhalation and
replenishment; evergreen trees, especially the eucalyptus, unlike
deciduous trees which sleep during many months of the year,
work constantly, but at times less energetically. Deciduous
leaves generally perform their functions on one side only, that is,
they change the sap juices of the plant on the side turned upward
to the sun ; but in the case of the eucalyptus it is quite different,
these have a double action. There is no difference in the
anatomy of the two sides of the leaf, breathing pores abound on
each side, and the cells containing the volatile oil run through
the leaf. These oil cells in most cases are visible to the naked
eye, and can be counted in hundreds. Light and warmth
operate alike on both sides of the leaf; each being suspended in
a line with the axis of the tree, giving facility for the remarkable
and interesting movement of the petiole or leaf stalk, which is
continuous in its action under the warm currents of the air, or
the direct rays of the sun, keeping one side or the other of the
leafs surface to face the sun or the warm air current, and so
establishing perpetual leaf operation. Now it is by the natural
forces of the tree and the leaf action acting in unison that the
watery and odorous bodies are continually set free in the air, and
in such minute and diffusive atoms that they may be expressed as
the fragrant breath of the tree, requiring as it does thousands of
its compound particles to form a single drop. Under such
circumstances, these odorous bodies speedily change their
molecular condition, and supplies to the atmosphere an extra
amount of active oxygen. The root action of all eucalypts as
an absorbent of moisture from the earth is very powerful. In
parts where there is a fair rainfall the roots run for the most
part laterally and for a considerable distance at a maximum
distance of 3 feet below the surface. In the dry districts espe-
cially, i.e. the interior of the country, the roots descend longitu-
dinally for a long distance obtaining their moisture under many
difficulties. For purposes of retaining the moisture these roots
combine and form a large wooded corm or bulb, thus furnishing
a store-house for water. It is these unceasing health factors
throughout Australia which make it on the whole the finest
climate in the world.
Victoria, the colony in Australia with which I am more par-
ticularly identified, possesses a low death rate, owing greatly to
its pure and invigorating air. Formerly, in the days when the
gold fever was at its height, during the years 1851, 1852, and
1853, when rapid colonization set in from Europe and America,
typhoid and other fevers hovered over the dense population
residing in the tented cities and towns ; the insidious organic


poison germs held high festival amongst the people, and for a
time baffled the efforts of our then sanitary reformers. The
remedy which then came to our rescue was a strong hot air
current that had travelled hundreds of miles over the vast areas
of our eucalypt vegetation. The hot winds came with their
withering blast and entered into every habitation, destroying or
attenuating the fever germs, speedily giving relief, and in most
cases restoring the sufferers to a condition of health.
At the present day the severe virulent fever types but seldom
take hold of the people. Sanitary laws are not so openly
violated, and the population suffers more from the ills of life,
either the result of inheritance, or from their own individual
transgression of one or more of Nature’s laws. .
Ladies and gentlemen, I have endeavoured to briefly describe to
you the vegetation of Australia ; the limited time to night at my
disposal does not enable me to do full justice to the subject, still
I trust I have made clear to you that the country is full of be-
nignant surroundings. The early pioneers who still remain, to-
gether with their children, young Australia, live contentedly and
happily on its soil. In the words of one of our best writers on
Victoria, Mr. Julian Thomas : “ During the gold fever, the brains
and the blood, the mental courage, as well as the bone and muscle
of Europe, flocked hither, and the fittest survived. Victoria has
ever been a pioneer colony, it owed nothing to Government aid ;
in fact its early prosperity was retarded by Government
interference. It was founded solely by individual energy, and
its people have ever remained pioneers; it is in their blood.
Victorians, Burke and Wills, were the first to cross the continent
in iB6O. They lost their lives, but made their names immortal;
a massive monolith of granite was placed over their graves in
Melbourne cemetery, and a fine bronze statue of the two
explorers, from a design by Charles Summers, was for years the
chief sight of Collins Street, an object lesson for our youth.
The Burke and Wills expedition cost the people of Victoria
ijS7,OOO. The end justified it, for within two years of the death
of the leaders from starvation, ‘ tierces of beef were displayed in
Melbourne, salted down from cattle pasturing on the spot where
they perished.’ Far away in the ‘ back blocks ’in the centre of
the continent, in the sugar lands of the north, on every new gold
field, Victorian muscle and energy and capital are to be found.
In the South Sea Islands, in the pearl fisheries of Torres Straits
and Western Australia, Victorian pioneers are foremost ; and
Victorian enterprise has done much towards the exploration of
New Guinea. Although they claim Victoria to be the richest, the
most populous, the most prosperous, and the most energetic of all
the Australian colonies, yet Victorians were the first to raise their
voices for the federation of the colonies, the political unity of


Australia. Then the people of all the provinces, at present
divided by absurd local prejudices and jealousies, will be joined
together for defence, and, if need be, for defiance ; and some day
in the future, following out the manifest destiny of the British
race with the dear old mother country and her eldest bom, the
United States of America will be linked together in a strong
bond, ruling land and seas, and giving laws to all the world.
LONDON! PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.




