



V«SV*.t<A*
‘ Q> ' r^ %jL ***
QrVl , vtj\* wrw **
o***. a L m (A*<
Uu.#t
•«»*,
(s*^U
CsLA/J i C* <«*»-* i *- |* JJ
*-<* o. a^*/l
jr~~U* ****"*&
c>~A*'V** A * ee^~ d
l -


THE
PEARLING DISASTER.
1899.
A MEMORIAL






PEARLING SCENE.
OPENING AND CLEAN ING SHELL ON [?] OLIVE


THE
Pearling Disaster,
1899.
A Memorial.
fl?::censlanii:
OUTRIDQK PRINTING Co., 39S QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
1 8 9 9.






CONTENTS.
Preface ... ... ... ... ... 6
Pearling Industry—General Description ... 7
Tabulated Statement —Vessels Wrecked and Lives
Lost ... ... ... ... ... 10
Weather Report and Charts ... ... 11
The Hurricane —Vessels under its influence—
Description—Experience of Constable Kenny 15
Experiences of the Different Schooners 20-31
Tarawa—Meg Merrilees—Wai Weer—Olive—^Aladdin—
Admiral Silvery Wave Sagitta—The Lightship—
Crest of the Wave —General Observations.
Some Statements of Survivors ... ... 31
Assistance to the Wrecked ... ... ... 30
Salvage Operations... ... ... ... 42
Goode Island ... ... ... ... 45
Biographical Sketches ... ... 46-64
A. J. Outridge—H. A. Outridge—E. C. Atthow—E.
Jefferson —J. H. Nicholas—R. B. Murray—R. Cameron
—W. Powell—G. 0. Fuhrman—D. Lee—H. Karr—D.
Crowley.
Sympathy with Bereaved ... ... ... 64
Monument ... ... ... ... ... 68
Conclusion... ... ... ... ... 71




PREFACE.
“ One touch of nature makes the whole world kin.”
“ A fellow feeling makes us wondrous kind.”
The nearest relatives of the late Alfred St. John Outridge and
Harold Arthur Outridge, being desirous of having in a convenient
form the information obtainable of the recent Pearling Fleets'
Disaster, with some account of the Europeans wlm were lost
therein, have decided to print this volume and to issue it to the
immediate relatives of the deceased and to others interested. The
information has been compiled from Press and official reports,
and from the testimony of survivors.
We take this opportunity of thanking all who have assisted
us in the work.
We also, on* behalf of the bereaved families and the distressed
pearlers, thank most heartily the Government, the shipping com-
panies, and the numerous private friends who so readily and
promptly assisted in the search for and relief of the distressed.
The Government lost no time in doing all that lay in their power
to search for the missing vessels, to assist the needy, and to
inter the dead.
Our thanks are also due and are hereby recorded for the
wide sympathy expressed for the bereaved by all classes of the
community.




Pearling Industry.
So much has been written about the general conditions of
the pearling industry that readers must have a fairly accurate
idea of how operations are carried on. A short description of
the fishery, written by one engaged in the industry, may not be
out of place in this brochure. The modus operand I of pearl-
shelling has altered considerably since its inception some forty
years ago in Torres Straits by a fisherman from Sydney. Search-
ing for beche-de-mer (holothuria) on the Warrior Reefs (a long
line of coral formations extending about forty miles across Torres
Straits towards New Guinea) the fisherman picked up at low
water a large number of splendid pearl-shell. The shell w 7 ere
opened, and found to contain pearls ; a quantity of these, besides
a trial lot of shell were sent to Sydney to ascertain what com-
mercial value they possessed. Information was sent back from
Sydney that quite altered the original object of the beche-de-mer
fisherman, for instructions were given to get as much pearl-shell
as possible, instead of obtaining fish, and bring it' to Sydney.
This was a comparatively easy matter, for the shell was so plenti-
ful that it was picked up at low water in hundreds. Soon the
schooner was filled to the hatches, and she sailed for Sydney with
a very valuable cargo. Other vessels were fitted out, and had
such success that records of the voyages read like old-time sea
romances, when the ships of old England sailed for the Indies
and China, and returned with valuable cargoes. The pearl-shell
on Warrior Reef was worked by so l many vessels that it- began
to get scarce, rendering it necessary that search be made for
further beds just off the reef. This was done by swimming divers,
men from the South Seas, and natives of the islands in Torres
Straits. As time went on shell in the shallower water got scarce,
the swimmers then got further and further away from the reefs
and the shore, till the water got so deep that diving apparatus
had to be used. The more intelligent of the South Sea Islanders
donned the diving dress, became expert divers, and secured large
quantities of shell. The new men were called divers; the others
swimmers. Divers and swimmers never work in the same locality,


or at any rate, close to one another. The swimmers assert that
sharks always follow the diving boats, being attracted by the fat
from the salt beef, which is thrown overboard from the boats. If
a swimming boat be working and a diving boat comes near, the
captain always sails away till he considers he is at a safe distance.
Sharks do cause loss of life among the swimmers, but not to any
great extent. The divers being entirely encased, except the hands,
are not troubled by the voracious monsters, and if a shark ap-
proaches too close, a sudden release of air from tne escape value
always frightens the undesirable visitor away. Divers occasionally
spear fish, crawfish and turtle on the bottom of the sea, but before
attempting to secure any of these delicacies he carefully looks
round to ascertain if any sharks are near, for it is a well-known
fact that these cowardly brutes always attack anything in trouble;
and the diver would, in all probability, get bitten by the shark as
it attempted to secure a meal. The divers, as a body of men, do
not fear sharks, but they are dreadfully frightened of groper.
These fish are found on rocky bottoms, and in tropical waters
attain a large size. If a diver suddenly comes near a groper, the
fish opens its immense round mouth as wide as possible, and
puffs its head up to an unnatural size, in a defensive attitude.
This is magnified by the face glass in the diver’s helmet, the
spectacle presented to the man being like a horrible apparition.
The diver immediately ascends to the surface, and b}' signals to
other boats that may be working near, advises them that he has
seen a dangerous sea monster. The whole fleet will sail away,
and nothing will induce a diver, who knows of the marine ghost,
to work in the vicinity again. Probably the groper is more
frightened than the diver at the strange intrusion into his domain.
The diving gear dealt a blow to swimming diving, but did not
do away with it entirely. Quite a number of men go out in small
boats, and swim for shells in the shallower waters surrounding
the islands and reefs. They are as a rule very successful, and are
able to see shell better than a diver, being assisted by a pair of
goggle-shaped glasses fitting tightly round the eyes to prevent
the water from reaching the organs of sight and interfering with
the vision. So much for the Torres Straits diving. In West
Australia the method was somewhat different. In the early
days of pearling there, a schooner was fitted out with six or eight
dingies, and as many men as could be engaged, for swimming




PEARLING SCHOONER, ALADDIN,
Beating into Badu.
PEARLING SCENE.
Boats cleaning copper at Flinders Island.


The schooner anchored on the beds ; at sunrise the dingies with
the swimmers on board were sculled by the boat-steerers over the
banks, when the swimmers dived for shell, bringing it when found
to the dingies, which were sculled all day backwards and forwards
over the banks. At sundown the dingies returned to the schooner,
transferred their catch and were hoisted up in the davits for the
night. The rivalry between the various boats, and indeed between
the schooners, was conducive to very profitable results for the
owners.
In 1885 pearling in Torres Straits was very unsatisfactory
to those engaged therein, a general exodus, therefore, taking place
to Western Australia. The Queenslanders introduced the system
of apparatus diving, and at the same time adopted the plan of
having a schooner as the centre from which operations were
directed. The combination proved most successful, and it is by
this method that pearling is worked at the present time. Various
fleets were working in West Australia in 1890, but shell getting
scarce there, Mr. James Clark left that colony and introduced the
schooner plan of working into Torres Straits, where up to that
time the boats had been worked from shore stations. The ad-
vantages of floating stations are obvious. By this method the
scene of pearling operations is practically unlimited, for if shell
become scarce in one vicinity, all the vessels can be moved off
hundreds of miles with the necessary stores and material for
carrying on operations for a lengthened period. It was in follow-
ing this plan that so many schooners with their fleets of luggers
were together in Bathurst Bay on the 4th of March last, and
which led to such disastrous loss of life and vessels. The
schooners and their working boats had sailed from Thursday
Island for grounds 250 miles away towards Cooktown, and while
on that voyage were overtaken by the fearful hurricane and its
consequent loss which we commemorate.
On the 4th and sth of March, 1899, the East coast of Queens-
land, in the neighbourhood of Princess Charlotte Bay, between
ISdeg. SOmin. and 14deg. SOmin. S.L. was visited by a terrific
hurricane, which destroyed vegetation on the shore, wrecked a
lightship, schooners, and caused the loss of over 300 lives.
The tabulated statement shown will give some idea of the loss
of life and property, and enable the reader to more fully compre-
hend the descriptions which follow. ■
B


Large Vessels.
Whites
Lost.
Luggers Totally Lost.
Luggers Wrecked, rut
liE - FLOA TED.
Colored
Men
Lost.
“ Sagitta,” believed to have
4 Kathleen, Estelle, Zanoni, Zoe ..
5 Zephyr, Here’s Luck, Sea-
foundered in Bathurst Bay ..
4
breeze, Nellie, Sybil
51
“ Silvery Wave,” foundered at
11 Pearl King, Narellen, Kirkham, Vailele,
4 Boomerang, Lily, Johnny, En-
anchorage off Cape Melville ..
3
Ehime, Flora, Gipsy, Endeavour,
terprise
108
Clara Merriman, Daisy, Jessamine..
“ Admiral,” foundered in Bath-
urst Bay..
0
5
“Crest of the Wave,” dismasted,
10 Little Bill, Pearl Queen, Maggie, Gitana,
2 Vera, G. P.
88
but kept afloat ..
0
Leopold, Endymion, Vision, Pert,
North Star, Carrie
“ Meg Merrilees,” totally wrecked
0
4 Givarra Peres, Sprig, Jenny, Yamota ..
9
1 Pegasus, belonging to “ Aladdin ” fleet.
1 Waratah — to “ Olive ” fleet ..
0
“ Tarawa,” wrecked, but re-floated
0
4 Xarifa, Pmsa, Martha, Two Brothers.
“ Wai-Weer” (tender), re-floated
0
“ Channel Bock ” Lightship
4
1
1 North Wales
4
Summary: —
5 large vessels totally lost.
2 wrecked, but re-floated.
19 Swimming boats, cutters, and small
1 dismasted.
luggers
.. about
80
85 diving boats totally lost.
19 swimming ,, ,,
—
—
—
12 diving boats, re-floated.
12
54
12
295
807 lives loSo>
TABULATED STATEMENT OF VESSELS WRECKED, AND LIVES LOST IN HURRICANE
Op 4th and sth MARCH, 1899.


Weather Reports.
Clement L. Weagge, Esq., E.R.G.S., F.R.M.S., Queensland
Government Meteorologist, issued on March. 3rd the following 1
advice in his “ General Remarks " ;
“ Conditions are again becoming suspicious between the
Louisiades and the North of New Caledonia, and although no
new danger yet threatens the Queensland coast, we must needs
keep a bright look out.
Mr. Wragge, whose forecasts have been the means of putting
so many mariners on their guard, and whose weather charts are
so anxiously studied throughout the Australian colonies, was onlv
able, no doubt through deficient information, to refer in the
above somewhat indefinite manner to the disturbance afterwards
named “Mahina, which in conjunction with “Nachon,’’ produced
the hurricane whose fatal effects we chronicle.
But even if a more definite forecast had been possible it could
not, under existing means of communication, have reached the
scene of the subsequent disaster in time to be of service.
After the hurricane, but before the information had reached
Brisbane, the following report was issued from the Chief Weather
Bureau on March 6th ;
“ A new tropical disturbance, which we have named
‘Mahina,' is about 350 miles south-east from Sudest, and as it
is not improbable that it will make south-westing, shipping along-
our coast will do well to be on the alert. Now, ‘ Mahina ’ is a
girl's name, culled from fair Tahiti with its coral strand, waving
palm-groves and mountain peaks, the loveliest of all the lovely
islands in the wide Pacific, and mothers will agree that no infant
daughter can bear a softer or prettier name What
is evidently a new monsoon has made its appearance over the
Gulf of Carpentaria. This we have named ‘ Nachon,’ and further
squalls and heavy rains are almost certain toi occur over the
peninsula and Gulf districts generally, extending north-westward
to Port Darwin; and we have sent special warnings to Thursday
Island and Gulf ports accordingly.’'


Again on Bth March ;
“Generally over the Northern Division this morning the
weather is unsettled with rain falling. Strong south-east to east
winds are still being experienced in the Gulf districts under the
influence of the monsoon ‘ Nachon. Our chart to-day, so far as
the north-east of Australia is concerned, has a very ominous
aspect. First, we have the monsoon ‘ Nachon, possessing very
considerable energy, and reaching from Cambridge Gulf across
the Territory and Gulf of Carpentaria to the base of Cape York
Peninsula. Then there is the tropical disturbance ‘Mahina,’ the
centre of which is about 300 miles South from the Louisiades,
while its western edge very nearly touches the Queensland coast
between Bowen and Princess Charlotte Bay. We fear that
‘ Mahina ’ will not prove so soft and gentle as the Tahitian
maiden of that name, for it is likely to give us some trouble.
Special warnings have been sent to all coast towns, and the storm
signals have been hoisted for the benefit of shipping
Conditions, so far as Queensland is concerned, have a more
serious aspect than when we wrote yesterday. The tropical
disturbance is about 400 miles east-north-east from Townsville,
and is making southing; hence gradients are steepening for bad
weather from between south-south-east and east with rain between
the Tweed and Cape Cleveland, and again we have despatched
special warnings to the coast towns, and to our friends in New
Caledonia. The south-eastern edge of ‘ Mahina’ has already
made itself felt in ‘La Nouvelle,’ for fierce squalls are reported
from Noumea and heavy rain at Gomen. The monsoon ‘Nachon’
still overlaps the Northern territory and stretches over the Gulf of
Carpentaria into north-west Queensland The
threatening aspect of ‘ Nachon '" and ‘ Mahina," like most
other things, including the minor events of life, are due to the
inflexible laws of the Great Master, Energy. Thus our
Northern friends must make the best of existing con-
ditions, and since it is a fact that ‘ talk and thought create force,’
far more potent than many are aware of, we trust that they will
take heed to our remarks and forecasts and not be caught napping
should ‘Mahina’ on the one hand or ‘Nachon" on the other
cause ugly cyclonic squalls in our fair tropics.”
And again on March 10th:
“ The tropical disturbance ‘ Mahina is still north-west from
Gomen, and conditions between New Caledonia, the Louisiades


and Sandy Cape are exceedingly suspicious, so that shipping-
bound to Northern ports cannot be too' careful. Let captains
bear in mind that if the barometer falls 0.05 in half an hour,
especially if the wind be from between south-south-east and
north-north-east, it will be a sure warning of the approach of
‘ Mahina,’ and we cannot be too emphatic in shipping interests in
making this statement. Let it not be supposed that we wish in
any way to frighten intending passengers by sea, for it is yet
possible that the threatening disturbance may pass away nearer
to New Caledonia than the Queensland coast; and although it is
an undeniable fact that by depending upon the Supreme Power
increased serenity and repose to mind are certain to accrue, yet
must we be guided by the laws of science (and hence the fore-
casts), which that Power has enabled mankind to formulate, and
not forget the terse remark of Cromwell, “ To keep the powder
dry.” The extreme western edge of ‘ Mahina’ it was, when the
centre was nearer the Louisiades, that evidently caused the disaster
off our north-eastern coast,, and the eastern side of the moonsoon
‘ Nachon ’ was also a factor. Much indeed do' we regret that we
have no means of advising the lightships and pearling fleets of the
approach of storms between Cooktown and Torres Straits. The
monsoon £ Nachon ’ still covers the Northern Territory and Gulf
district, but has somewhat decreased in energy.”
Note. —Reference to the Chart (kindly supplied by the Meteorological
Department) will enable readers to better understand the above remarks.
Again on March 15th:-—■
“At last with thankful hearts the inhabitants of our sea-
board districts can breathe freely, for the long-sought relief has
come and all danger from the threatening disturbance ‘ Mahina'
appears to have passed away. Hence our storm signals have
been hauled down. Truly we are grateful since, had ‘Mahina"
continued to make southing, weary hours of worry would have
awaited us.”
Mr. H. P. Beach, postmaster at Thursday Island, and an
amateur meteorologist of considerable ability, writes :
“I remember the nights of the 2nd and 3rd of March very
well. They were uncommonly hot and generally oppressive. The
Eastern part of the horizon was terribly lit up with distant
lightning, which disclosed a black, leaden, fierce-looking sky or
background. The lightning was singularly severe, and an almost


continuous electrical discharge, although not the slightest sound
of thunder reached the ear. I concluded New Guinea was in for
heavy weather, and thought no more of the matter. The next
night, however, the 4th, whilst sitting on the verandah facing the
East, I remarked a similar uncanny appearance of the previous
evenings, and stated, ‘ Something tells me we will have a heavy
storm. I will go down and see to- the moorings of my boat.' I
re-moored the craft, which was riding quietly on an almost dead
calm sea. I returned to the verandah, and admired the- beautiful
display of the distant lightning, similar to that of the two previous
nights, but certainly nearer on this occasion. The night was
even closer, and more oppressive than on the 2nd and 3rd, and a
monotonously quiet night it was. At about midnight I turned
in—the night still beautifully calm, hot, and illuminated to- the
Eastward. Next morning, the sth, a strong S.E. wind set in,
and at 9 a.m. Cape York reported, ‘No communication South of
the Coen/ To be brief, we heard nothing of the cyclone until
some days after, when news reached us that the islands about
Cape Melville had been devastated by a cyclone, and that the
Lightship and pearling fleet had suffered severely.
“I am convinced that the terrific display of lightning on the
2nd, 3rd, and 4th March had something to do with or bore some
near relation to the approach of the cyclone.”
The above is a reliable description of the aspect of the
heavens and the weather at Thursday Island, some 250 miles
away from the centre of the cyclone. At midnight on the 4th at
Thursday Island it was calm; at the same time at the scene of
the disaster it was blowing a fierce gale from the S.W. On the
morning of the sth it was blowing strong from the S.E. at Thurs-
day Island, while at Cape Melville it was blowing a hurricane
from quite the contrary direction, the N.W.


The Hurricane.
VESSELS UNDER ITS INFLUENCE.
On the 4th of March, 1899, there were anchored at the
north-west end of Princess Charlotte’s Bay the following pearling
vessels and their fleets of luggers :
The schooner “Tarawa,’’ 124 tons, Captain D. Jones, with
the tender “AVai Weer ’’ and 18 luggers, belonging to the Queens-
land Pearl Pishing Co.
The schooner “ Meg Merrilees, ' 143 tons, Captain W. N.
Thompson, with a fleet of 14 luggers, Bowden and Doyle, owners.
The schooner “Olive,’’ 92 tons, Captain Steve Clark, with 14
luggers, James Clark and Co., owners.
And the schooner “Aladdin," 102 tons, Mr. E. Munro hi
charge, Munro, Outridge and Co,, owners, with 14 luggers.
In Bathurst Bay, some 45 miles distant from the above,
there were :—•
The schooner “Sagitta," 84 tons, James Clark, Outridge
Bros., and other owners, Captain R. B. Murray, Alfred St. John
Outridge, managing partner, Harold Arthur Outridge and Robert
Cameron also on board, with a crew of 14 coloured men. Of the
fleet of 10 luggers, 9 were anchored near —viz., Here's Luck, Kath-
leen, Estelle, Zoe, Zanoni, Zephyr, Sea Breeze, Nellie, and Sybil,
manned by 55 coloured men. The Mabel, another lugger belong-
ing to this fleet, was not in the hurricane, having been under-
going repairs at Goode Island, and being at the time just on the
northern edge of the cyclone.
The schooner “Silvery Wave.’’ 98 tons, owners, James
Clark, E. Jefferson, and others. Captain, E. Jefferson, manager;
John Nicholas and Edward Charles Atthow being on board
with a crew of 14 coloured men. The fleet of 15 luggers
anchored near consisted of:—The Pearl King, Kirkham, Narel-
lan, Enterprise, Ehime, Flora, Gipsy, Endeavour, Lily, Johnny,
Yailelo, Clara Merriman, Boomerang, Jessamine, and Daisy,
manned by 90 coloured men.


The schooner “Crest of the Wave," 112 tons, Geo.
Smith, J. Clark, and others, owners. Captain W. F. Porter in
charge, with Mrs. Porter, infant, and T. de Lange on board,
with a crew of 16 coloured men. This schooner's luggers anchored
near were: —G.P., Vera, Kate, Carrie, Little Bill, Pearl Queen,
Maggie, Ghana, Leopold, Endymion, Vision, Pert, and North
Star, the whole manned by 78 coloured men.
The small schooner, “ Admiral,” 25 tons, tender to the Clark
Combination, was also anchored near the above three schooners,
having just arrived that morning with a full cargo, and a number
of passengers from Thursday Island.
The Channel Rock Light-ship belonging to the Queensland
Government was anchored about two miles north-west of Cape
Melville, there being on board ;
Gustaf Oscar Fuhrman, master.
Douglas Lee, mate.
Henry Karr and Daniel Crowley, seamen.
.The lugger, “North Wales," Aplin, Brown and Co., owners,
Captain W. Powell with a crew of Manilla men, was anchored at
Noble Island, near Barrow Point.
The cutters Spray, Jamaica, Caledonia, La France, Dackle,
and Yunyo were anchored near Howick Islands.
Other cutters were anchored in various places within the hurri-
cane area.
The schooner “Wanetta,” with 11 luggers, was further
North, quite out of the storm belt.
The 4th of March was a Saturday, and as usual on this day
the luggers had collected near their respective schooners for the
purpose of renewing stores, getting water and fuel, repairing
damaged gear, delivering shell, and for the divers to report to the
managers of their success, and to receive orders for the ensuing
week. It was a time of joviality, rest, and companionship. The
prevailing wind for the previous three weeks had been from the
south-east, and consequently most of the vessels, especially those
in Bathurst Bay, were close in to the land for shelter, and for
convenience in getting wood and water. This Saturday after-
noon and Sunday’s sociality is almost the only break in the some-
what monotonous life of the pearlers attached to floating stations.
The consequence is that when the coloured men thus meet after


a week's or a fortnight’s hard work, they give free and full ex-
pression to then 1 delight, gaiety, and frolicsome dispositions, and
the noise, laughter, music (instrumental and vocal), dancing, and
conversation shouted from one vessel to another must be seen and
heard to be thoroughly understood. Most of the coloured men
are but “ children of a larger growth,’’ and they enjoy their holi-
day with just such abandon as children let loose from school.
The officers take care that liberty does not degenerate into license
At 7 p.m. there was a moderate breeze from the east-south-
east, and it gradually increased in force till about 11 p.m., when it
suddenly changed, blowing with hurricane force from the south-
west, and working round to west, and then north-west, it finally
died away about 10 a.m. on Sunday morning.
It was accompanied by torrents of rain, vivid lightning,
reverberating thunder, which could scarcely be heard amidst the
noise of the wind, the swish of the spray, the dashing of the waves
against the doomed vessels, the groaning of the planks and the
straining of the cordage and spars. Between the hours of 3to 5
a.m. a tidal wave swept along the coast, in many instances com-
pleting the ruin the hurricane had begun. The thick, murky,
lowering clouds obscured the sky, and nothing could be seen
except when the lightning flashes lit up with a sickly glare the
angry foaming, resistless billows that in never ending succession
seemed to hurry with cruel impetuosity on their death-dealing
career.
And it was during this warring of the elements that
hundreds of valued lives were lost and bereavement brought
home to thousands. When we think of the lives lost and the
homes bereft we are lost in awe and wonder. The Almighty’s
methods are inscrutable :—“ For My thoughts are not as your
thoughts, neither are your ways My ways, saith the Lord; for as
the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are My ways higher
than your ways and My thoughts than your thoughts.” We can
only bow our heads and say, “Thy will be done.”
From what we can gather, all the Europeans lost had had
a religious training; they knew the storm was coming on, they
experienced its gradually increasing force for some hours before
they were overwhelmed, and we have no doubt, in their terrible
trouble they called upon God for help, and we feel assured that
Our Father, who has said, “ Call upon me in the day of trouble.


and. I will deliver thee,” and again, “ When thou passest through
the waters I will be with thee,” heard and answered them, and
was with them in the dark hours of their terrible struggle
“ through the waters,” and finally took them to Himself. We
take comfort then looking forward to meeting our loved ones in
Heaven, where there shall be “no more sea,” and where all that is
now incomprehensible shall be made clear.
“ God moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform,
He plants His footsteps in the sea and rides upon the storm.”
God is His own interpreter, and He will make it plain.”
EXPERIENCES OF CONSTABLE KENNY.
Constable J. M. Kenny, constable in charge of the Eight-
mile Police Station, Cooktown, relates the following ; —Left the
Eight-mile on 28th February, with four native troopers and ten
horses. Proceeded to the Munburra goldfield, on the Starcke
River, and then struck the coast and went searching for the mate
of a South Sea Islander. These two islanders (the survivor said)
landed in a dingey near Barrow Point (supposed to have deserted
from the pearl fleet). The blacks speared his mate, and he
escaped, reaching the Munburra in an exhausted state. Kenny
reached Barron Point on Saturday, 4th March, and camped
about 6 p.m., on a ridge fully 40ft. above sea level, and about
half-a-mile from the beach, with scrub and a high sand ridge
between the camp and beach. On Saturday afternoon a light
south-east breeze prevailed, with a drizzling rain. About half-
past 11 p.m. it came on to blow very stiff from the south-south-
east, increasing every minute. At 12 p.m. the troopers' tent was
carried away, and they came into Kenny's tent; and about ten
minutes after this was demolished by a limb falling right across it,
and smashing through Kenny's hammock. Luckily he had left
his hammock, as the rain was pouring on it, caused by a tent
peg pulling up. When the tent collapsed all hands made for the
biggest open space near, guided by very vivid lightning which
occurred at intervals. Here it was necessary to cover up face and
hands in a blanket to keep off the pelting rain, which seemed to
hit as hard as hail. About 2 a.m. the wind veered a couple of
points, and blew with hurricane force. At 5 a.m. it shifted to


north-east, and, if possible, blew harder than ever, with torrents
of rain. Shortly after the wind shifted to the north-east an
immense tidal wave swept in shore, and reached waist deep on the
ridge with the camp on it, completing the misery of the constable
and troopers, also spoiling Kenny’s watch. Here the wave
stretched between two and three miles inland. Judging from the
appearance of the sun, it was not properly daylight till about 10
a.m. on Sunday morning, the sth. Spent Sunday looking round
and picking up fragments of camp gear, and putting same in a
place of safety, as it was found impossible to travel with the
horses on account of the rivers. On mustering the horses, four
were found to have been killed by trees. On Monday morning
a start was made for Munburra on foot. Saw no boats, and very
little wreckage, but saw a dingey on the beach. Dead fish of all
kinds were piled up, including porpoises, sharks, dugong, sea-
snakes, also sea birds, land birds, and wallabies. When these
animals and fish began to decay the stench was pretty con-
siderable. Reached Munburra on Friday, 10 March, having only
native tucker (including yams, wallabies, iguana, carpet snake,
and sugar-bag) for four days. Horses were procured at Mun-
burra, and Eight-mile was reached on Monday, after an experi-
ence that Constable Kenny says he would not like to have re-
peated. The force of wind was so terrific that the trees had
leaves, twigs, branches, and bark stripped clean off, and tne
country presents a brown and desolate appearance. On Monday
the party had to swim thirteen rivers, creeks, and gullies, next
day six, next two, and next four, swims which in themselves were
a pretty tidy day’s work.”


Experiences of the different Schooners.
The schooner “Tarawa,” Captain Jones, was anchored It,
miles on the east side of Pelican Island, some 30 miles from
Capo Melville, on Saturday, March 4th. After withstanding the
hurricane for some time with two anchors down, both cables
parted at 3 a.m. on Sunday, and the schooner was driven ashore
on the only sandy patch on the island. With great labour she
was floated on the following Thursday, her bottom having been
considerably damaged. She was subsequently sailed to Thursday
Island and repaired.
Out of the “Tarawa's” fleet of 15 diving boats or luggers,
four—Xarifa, Rosa, Martha, and Two Brothers —were totally
wrecked, and the others more or less damaged; but fortunately
no lives were lost.
THE “MEG MERRILEES.”
This schooner was anchored about a mile to the east
of Pelican Island on the Saturday afternoon. She experi-
enced a moderate breeze from the east, commencing at
7 p.m., which, changing to the south-east, increased in force, work-
ing to the south-west at midnight, and from then till daylight
working from west to northwest, blowing with hurricane
force all the time. About 3 a.m. several large waves struck the
vessel, washing away the whale-boat (since picked up). Tire
schooner dragged her anchors for ten miles—the masts were cut
away to try to save the vessel, but she still dragged as if she had
no anchors down until 6 a.m. on Sunday when she grounded on
a high reef and filled with water. All hands were saved, and
subsequently many of the stores. Attempts were made to float
her, but they were unsuccessful.
Out of 14 luggers belonging to this schooner, four—Giavarra
Peres, The Sprig, The Jenny, and Yamota —were totallv lost, and
nine coloured men drowned.
The small schooner “Wai Weer,” belonging to the “Tarawa”
fleet, was wrecked close to the “ Meg Merrilees,” but was subse-
quently re-floated.


SALVAGE OPERATIONS. OLIVE RAISING WARATAH.—No. 1, Hooked on.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS.-OLIVE RAISING WARATAH.—No. 3, Waratah afloat.


SALVAGE OPERATIONS.- OLIVE RAISING WARATAH.—No. 2, Deck just awash.
[?]ER ALADDIN OFF BADU. One Shell Collecting Boat hanging astern. Another under sail.


THE SCHOONER “ OLIVE.”
The “ Olive,” Captain Steve Clark, was anchored at 6 p.m.
on Saturday, 4th March, to the north of No-. 1 Claremont Island.
(Burkitt Island.) The gale started from the south-east, and at
10 p.m. the ship’s glass was 29.60, and fell rapidly to 29.10.
The wind then changed and blew with hurricane force from the
south-west, and at daylight veered round to* the west, still blowing
stiffly, and finally died away at 10 a.m. on Sunday from the
north-west. The schooner dragged with both anchors down from
her original anchorage right round to the south-east side of the
island, then holding.
The “ Olive ” fleet had no boats totally wrecked, although the
“Waratah” was sunk by one of her companion boats. During
the night she drifted down on to the “ Edith,” the latter giving
the “ Waratah” several heavy bumps under the quarter. A large
hole was knocked in her, in fact the counter was almost entirely
carried away. The “Edith” rescued the crew of the sunken
boat, and although her treatment of the “Waratah” was very
rough, she escaped without a scratch. Less than a week after-
wards the “Waratah” was raised and taken to Flinders Island,
where she was repaired. A series of three pictures illustrates the
“Waratah” being raised by the schooner “Olive.” The first
where the diver of the “Isabel” has arranged the slings and
hooked on the “ Olive’s ” tackles. The second, viewed from astern,
shows the “Waratah” just awash. The third shows the boat
out of the water, partially afloat, and exhibits the large hole
made by the “Waratah” colliding with the “Ethel.” The opera-
tions were successfully carried out under the direction of Captain
Steve Clark. Remarkably fine weather prevailed, and from the
appearance of the sea in the pictures it would seem that pearling
must be carried on under very calm conditions. Appearances,
however, are deceptive in this case, for, but a few days before the
pictures were taken, the violent hurricane was blowing, the results
of which we chronicle.
The “Waratah” was built in Brisbane in 1891 by Mr. H.
Anderson, and was used by Mr. James Clark as a pleasure yacht
for some months.
THE “ALADDIN.”
The “ Aladdin ” was anchored near the “ Olive,” and dragged
towards the reef, but slipping her chains she missed the island,


dropping another anchor sire still drifted towards D reef. She
also escaped this danger, and her anchor gripping, she held on till
daylight, when the hurricane abated.
Only one lugger from this fleet was lost, the “ Pegasus," an
old boat.
THE “ADMIRAL."
This little vessel was a fore and aft schooner yacht of 25 tons
register. As pretty and shapely a little vessel as ever floated.
She was designed and built in 1892 by Mr. Walter Reeks, the
naval architect of Sydney. She was used by the pearling fleets
controlled by Mr. James Clark and his partners as a tender.
The “Admiral’’ had very fine lines, was of deep draft, with
several tons of lead on the outside of her keel. She had just been
overhauled at Goode Island Slip, and had only arrived at
Bathurst Bay on the morning of the hurricane, 4th March, 1899.
She had a full cargo, and a number of passengers for the fleets,
who. with her crew of five, were all lost. She was in charge of
Marcos Peres, an excellent sailor and an old diver—he with his
crew were lost, and their names go to swell the numbers of un-
fortunate working pearlers lost. The “ Admiral’s" name will
disappear from the Register of British Shipping.
THE “SILVERY WAVE."
The “ Silvery Wave " was a brigantine of 98 tons, built at
Port Stephens, New South Wales, in 1876. She was a hardwood
vessel, and was particularly strong, well built, and well preserved.
She was caulked and re-coppered in 1897 at the Goode Island
Slip. For many years she was owned by Messrs. James Camp-
bell and Sons, Brisbane, and had the reputation of being a fast
sailer, a reputation upheld by the very smart passages made when
sailing between Brisbane and North Queensland ports. In 1895
she was purchased by Mr. James Clark for the pearling - business,
and was fitted up to make her as comfortable as possible for her
new employment. She was always a favourite vessel, and was
admirably adapted for pearl-shelling work. On the day of the
hurricane she was anchored in Bathurst Bay, off Cape Melville,
and there her bones now lie. The experience she went through
22




LARGE VESSEL IS SCHOONER SILVERY WAVE (Totally Wrecked). Three Boats of Aladdin Fleet.


must have been very trying for the crew. She possessed excellent
ground tackle, and this appears to have been the cause of her loss.
Had she drifted with the south or south-westerly wind out into
deep water it is possible that she would be afloat at the present
time, but the anchors held. When the wind changed to north-
west with a sweep of about 20 miles of clear sea, the waves rolled
in with greatly increased size. Anchored in three fathoms of
water the vessel had no chance, she was just overwhelmed, and
probably bumped herself to pieces on the bottom. Sugimoto, the
only one of the crew saved, gives a graphic account of the vessel
foundering. From an examination of the wreck, made a few
weeks afterwards, it appears that both chains had parted, one
just outside the hawsepipe, and the other about five fathoms
further out. It is impossible to say when they carried away.
The wreck is lying on the bottom heading north-east, the bow-
sprit, stem, and a few of the forward timbers are standing, besides
a little forward planking; the windlass is a few feet away from
the vessel, and the tanks are fully fifty feet away almost em-
bedded in mud. Above the water the bowsprit just shows, also
the stumps of the fore and main masts; the cargo derrick is half
afloat, being held by some gear which prevents it drifting away.
The stumps of the masts show no signs of being cut. It does not
follow that the rigging was not cut, probably the lanyards were
severed, and the masts went by the board. The mainmast has
become unshipped, and is lying at opposite angles to the foremast.
Both appear to be held down by some portion of the rigging. At
the wreck the depth is two and a half fathoms at low water.
A diver examined the wreck on several occasions with a
view to recovering anything of value. Nothing whatever was
seen of any of the six or seven tons of shell which were on board.
It must have become embedded in the mud. A coil of coir rope
and a case of jam were recovered, but nothing else. Amongst the
wreckage which went ashore at Bathurst Bay were a number of
diving dresses, and most of the books of the company, with the
latter was a file of Captain Jefferson's private letters and papers.
One of the schooner’s whaleboats was picked up on the beach to
the southard of Bay Hill, in Bathurst Bay. It was almost com-
pletely broken up. And so ends the career of the “ Silvery Wave.'’


“SAGITTA'S” HISTORY AND EXPERIENCES.
The “ Sagitta ” was a taut little topsail schooner of 84 tons,
built at Gosford, Brisbane Water, N.S.W., in 1887, and was
never engaged in any other trade but pearling, although not
specially built for it. She was purchased by Captain W. R.
Mogg for pearling in West Australia, before her sails had been
bent for the first time, and was engaged on that coast for two
years under the command of the purchaser, trading as Mogg and
Co. In 1890, Messrs. James Clark and P. P. Outridge were
admitted -into partnership, and the firm was then called Mogg,
Outridge and Co. In 1891, the “Sagitta” and her fleet arrived
at Thursday Island from West Australia to try their fortune in
Queensland waters. In 1894, Mr. P. P. Outridge being in charge
of the “ Olive ” fleet, Mr. Edwin Munro became managing partner
of the firm, which has since been styled Munro, Outridge and Co.
The “ Sagitta ” did excellent Work, all the time engaged, and was
particularly adapted for pearling. In 1897 it was decided to
replace her by a larger vessel, and the “ Sagitta ” was sent down
to Brisbane for sale, the firm meanwhile having purchased the
schooner “Aladdin,” a larger vessel—a picture of her appears
among the illustrations. The “ Sagitta ” was moored in the Bris-
bane River for some months, till the Outridge Bros, and Mr.
James Clark took her over, and started a fleet under the title of
The Sagitta Pearling Co. She had been engaged for about
nine months under the new ownership, when the hurricane totally
wrecked her. How she foundered no one knows, for not one of
her crew of nearly twenty was saved. Pieces of her deck, one of
her spars, and several portions of her deck fittings have been
seen on the beach near Cape Melville. Comparatively very little
wreckage drifted ashore from the “ Sagitta.” It is believed that
she sank in deep water. Probably a collision took place between
the “Silvery Wave” and “Sagitta,” and Captain Porter's state-
ment tends to support this theory. Whatever the cause, the effect
is there, and the favourite “ Sagitta ” is no more afloat, and her
name has been struck off the Register of British Shipping.
THE LIGHTSHIP.
The Channel Rock Lightship, Captain Fuhrman. was last
seen by Captain Porter at 11 p.m. on the 4th; in the morning
she was not to be seen. In all probability she had been over-




SKITTY BELLE. SAGITTA. OLIVE.
THE SCHOONERS OLIVE, SAGITTA, AND SKITTY BELLE.


whelmed by the enormous waves, and had sunk at her moorings,
and all on board drowned. Portions of her cabins and deck
fittings were found strewn on the beach by the relief parties
which subsequently searched the shore. The bodies of Captain
Fuhrman and Douglas Lee were found and buried near Cape
Melville—a photo being subsequently taken of the graves by Dr.
Roth.
Opinions differ as to the direct cause of the loss of the Light-
ship. The vessel was particularly well found. Some mariners,
well qualified to give an opinion, say that the wind got under
the wooden awnings of the ship and threw her on her beam
ends; others again assert their belief that the vessel was riding
with too little chain, and when the hurricane wave struck her
she was overwhelmed, and could not recover. Whatever the
cause, the loss of the vessel emphasizes what has been written
about the terrific force of the wind. A patent fact which has to
be faced is the unsuitability of a lightship at that particular
spot, and although a relieving vessel has been sent to Channel
Rock, steps are being taken with a view to the erection of a lights
house on Pipon Island. Such intention will be commended by
all, for a recurrence of such a disaster as the loss of the Light-
ship and the valuable lives of her crew, must be prevented.
SCHOONER “CREST OF THE WAVE.”
The following account is from information supplied by
Captain Porter:—The schooner “Crest of the Wave, 7 ’ Captain
W. Field Porter, having on board Mrs. Porter and daughter
(some eighteen months old), T. de Lange, and a crew of 16
coloured men was anchored in Bathurst Bay on the lee side of
Cape Melville, on Saturday, March 4th, 1899, with a south-east
wind blowing. Cape Melville is on the east coast of Northern
Queensland in latitude 14° 10' S., and 144° 32' east longitude
The schooners “ Sagitta, 77 “Silvery Wave, 77 and “Admiral 7 ’ (a
tender) were anchored near by, and some forty luggers were
anchored nearer the shore.
This was a convenient place to anchor on account of the
fresh water on shore, which could be procured for their tanks, and
on account of the shelter from the prevailing south-east winds.
As night came on a light rain set. in, the barometer at sunset
registering 29.60.
c


Between 11 and 12 p.m. the wind began to increase, and the
barometer to fall. So powerful was the wind that the “ Silvery
Wave” dragged her anchors and drifted down close to the
“ Sagitta.” It was difficult to see the positions of the different
schooners on account of the intense darkness, only lightened by
the occasional flashes of lightning, and there was very great
danger of collisions, so gun shots were interchanged to give
some idea of their relative situations. The “Silvery Wave” still
continuing to drag, the “ Sagitta ” moved, it is believed slipping
her cable to do so, and took up a position nearer the Cape, Cap-
tain Jefferson on the “ Silvery Wave ” letting go another anchor
about the same time. The wind continuing rapidly to increase
in force from the south-east, the “ Crest of the Wave's " anchor
began to drag. The full length of chain was given out, still she
dragged, drifting out into the open channel. When six fathoms
of water was reached, the lead being kept going, the other anchor
was let go, but even with all the ground tackle out the vessel
continued to drive before the increasing gale. The intense dark-
ness and driving rain prevented anything being seen of the other
boats or the land. The sea by this time was very rough and enormous
waves broke time after time on board. The stern dingey and
port whale boat went over the side, and the bulwarks were
washed away. The glass continued to fall until 4.30 a.m. on
Sunday, the sth March, when it reached 27 inches; then there was
a lull for about ten or fifteen minutes, when the wind suddenly
came from the north-west with such terrific force that the
schooner was thrown on her beam ends and almost buried in the
raging sea. The cabin windows were smashed in, and the cabins
began to fill with water. To prevent the vessel foundering the
masts were cut away, a matter of no small difficulty as she was
lying on her beam ends, and with enormous waves washing over
her. She then righted, losing the starboard whale boat, which
left the schooner without a boat. It was noticed that the vessel
was getting deep in the water, which was but six inches below
the deck, so the pump was set going, and two gangs of men
were also told off to bail out with buckets, while others searched
for the leak. The water was found coming in from the rudder
tmnk, and the leak was soon stopped up with blankets, bags of
flour and other things that came handy. Pumping and bailing
were continued until the vessel was out of immediate danger.
The wind and sea took off as the day went on, although it was




The Lightship sent to replace the vessel lost
at Channel Rock.
SCHOONER CREST OF THE WAVE, DIDMASTED IN HURRICANE.
The only Vessel out of 45 anchored near Cape Melville which weathered the hurricane.


still very rough, and the exhausted men were able to get some food
of which they stood much in need after battling against such fear-
ful odds for some ten or twelve hours.
At 7 p.m. on the same day (Sunday), the “ Duke of Nor-
folk,’’ from London, rounded up alongside in answer to the
signals of distress, and sent a boat. Mrs. Porter and child were
taken on board the steamer, where they were well cared for and
made comfortable. Captain Jenkins very kindly lent Captain
Porter a boat, and anchored near him all night. So far nothing
had been seen of the other vessels or luggers, and it was also
noticed that the lightship had disappeared. The days that fol-
lowed were sad ones. Thirty men were picked up off the beach ;
these had saved their lives by swimming. Thirty-two bodies had
been buried, and others were seen floating in the sea. Mr. Alf.
Outridge’s body was buried and two white men from the light-
ship. In all about eighty bodies were accounted for out of 280
men drowned. All the luggers were sunk, as well as the
schooners “ Sagitta,” “Silvery Wave,” and “Admiral.”
The “Crest of the Wave” was towed into the Flinders by
the s.s. “Victory,” and later on taken to Thursday Island by the
s.s. “ Parua ” to be repaired at the Goode Island slip, belonging
to James Clark and Co.
Too much praise cannot be given to Captain Porter for his
indomitable pluck and ready seamanship under the' extraordi-
narily trying circumstances in which he was placed. He has well
upheld the character of the British sailor for endurance, fearless-
ness, readiness of resource and attention to duty in a time of the
greatest peril. He not only kept up his own courage, and would
not give up hope or relax his endeavours to keep the vessel afloat,
even when he told his wife that they were sinking fast, but he
infused his own brave spirit into his coloured crew, and would
not let them give way to despondency, as they are so prone to do,
and infecting them with his own activity, he kept them at work,
commanding, directing and assisting until the danger was past.
And in the midst of it all he was able to rush in occasionally to
cheer his distressed wife. Truly his six foot of body covers a
manly soul. Undoubtedly the safety of the “Crest of the Wave,”
and all on board is due, under Providence, to the' splendid sea-
manship of the Captain and to the drift to deeper water.


William Field Porter was born in Auckland, New Zealand,
on April 25th, 1865, his father hailing from Liverpool, and his
mother from Nova Scotia. He early evinced a fondness for the
sea, which no doubt was hereditary, his father and grandfather
being sailors. He has now been twice nearly drowned—the first
time while sailing a toy boat from a floating tub. As the Captain
quaintly remarks, “It would take a large tub to hold him
now,” as he stands 6ft. lin. in his stockings and weighs 15 stone.
Eventually he took to the sea as a profession, trading on the New
Zealand coast and among the South Sea Islands. He came to
Queensland in 1892, and has been pearlshelling ever since. The
recent hurricane was the first he had experienced, and he hopes
it will be the last. Still he means to profit by the experience,
will still follow the sea life, and should he be in another hurricane
the knowledge recently gained will be of great value to him.
Captain Porter was married in 1896, at Thursday Island.
Mrs. Porter and her young daughter dwell on the schooner with
him, and their experience is narrated in the following account
from Mrs. Porter's pen :
“ It is difficult to describe in words what a terribly anxious
time we put in on board the “ Crest of the Wave ” on the night of
the late severe hurricane. I often think now of how thankful we
should be to have been saved so miraculously. We had gone
through the usual routine that evening, and I had devoted a
quiet hour to letter writing, although the schooner began to toss
too much to allow me to finish. We were not anxious at all, as
we had so often experienced a rough sea before, and I retired for
the night at about 9.30 p.m. I could see my husband was watch-
ing the barometer more closely than usual, which made me ask
him if he anticipated anything unusual. He said it looked as if
we were going to have a rough night, but that as long as the
wind did not change we were quite safe. At about 10 p.m. I
began to feel uneasy, and could not lie comfortably in my berth
on account of the dreadful rolling of the schooner, so got up and
put on a gown. My husband was out on deck then with all the
men doing what they could to try and save the boats, and to
keep things as well as possible. It began to sound very dreadful,
and Ito feel anxious. I stood beside the berth all the time to
save baby from rolling out. She had wakened several times, but
fell asleep again when finding I was with her. By that time the


water was coming into the cabin very quickly through every little
opening, and soon the bed and we were all very wet. While
standing in my cabin trying to- hold myself up and baby
from falling, dreadful things seemed to be happening on deck, and
I was always thankful if my husband made his appearance for
only a second. My cabin got so full of water, and everything
into such disorder, that with Tommy de Lange’s help, baby and
I got into the next cabin, where we were much drier for a time.
My poor little girl was very frightened, but did not cry much, she
clung to me and hid her face under my arm. fehe and I both
got sea-sick, as the storm grew worse, and it was almost more
than I could do to help her while being ill myself. Things were
washing against my feet and nearly carrying me away I don’t
know how often. The worst of all for us in the cabins was when
the windows were washed in with one sweep, and the cabins filled
with water. Baby was washed away from me, and I groped in
the dark until I found her dripping wet and gasping for breath.
My heart ached for her. I couldn’t stand with her in my arms,
and was just falling when my husband rushed in just in time to
help us to a seat in the dining cabin, where we remained until
morning, clinging on to whatever would help us, the seas washing
over us all the time. We had all given up hope long before
daylight, as my husband had told me we were sinking fast, and
in great danger. All the boats had gone, and the sea and storm
were too fierce to allow of anything struggling long in them. I
tried to feel resigned, but couldn’t, to the thought of my little one
being tossed into that dreadful sea. I clung to hope all through,
and was rewarded when daylight came and we were still afloat.
The leak was patched up and the water bailed out until we were
out of danger, although all that day too was terribly rough. The
‘Duke of Norfolk’ passing, saw our signals of distress, and anchored
near us for that night. I don’t think any steamer ever looked so
grand to us as she did with all her lights alongside of our poor
disabled schooner. They got baby and me on board, and were
very kind indeed to us, lending us clothes, and doing all they
could for our comfort. I was very stiff and ill through being in
the water, although I had managed to change for a blanket and
singlet, the only dry garments we could find; baby's attire being
the same. I put on wet clothes to go on to the steamer in. The
steamer seemed so comfortable after all we had gone through,
hut I couldn’t sleep thinking of my husband and the others on


board, and hoping for their safety. The next morning when
leaving for Cooldown we met the ‘ Duke of Portland ’ coming to
Thursday Island, so I transhipped into her, and arrived here the
following afternoon.
“ I shall never in all my life forget the experience, and lam
glad my little girl is too young to remember it for long. Her
little nerves were upset for some time afterwards. We lost a
great deal in the way of clothes and other belongings, but this
is nothing since we ourselves were spared such a fate as befell so
many others.”
What a sad commentary on our pride in improved appliances
and scientific knowledge does this disaster supply. Here were a
number of vessels, well found with all that was thought necessary
to render them secure from the assaults of wind and wave. Yet
the most modern barometers gave no indication (beforehand) of
the severity of the coming storm, and the very soundness and
sufficiency of the ground tackle proved a calamity instead of a
blessing. Had the “ Sagitta,” “Silvery Wave,” and “Admiral”
dragged their anchors (as the “Crest of the Wave'’ and other
schooners did) during the early hours of the storm, they would
have drifted to deeper water, and probably have been saved; had
the anchors dragged or the cables parted when the wind changed,
blowing with extreme force from the north-west, the schooners
would have drifted on shore, where there was a wide sandy beach,
and most of the crew, if not the vessels also, would, in all pro-
bability, have been saved. Truly at the best our apparent safety
is but insecurity, and our boasted power is but impotence. We
speak at times as though we were conquering Nature, and point
to our telegraph instruments, electric motors, and dynamos,
claiming in grandiloquent language to have enchained the light-
ning, and made it subservient to our will; to our steamers and
railway systems, which enable us almost to annihilate distance
and to rob time of half its restrictive force; to our nautical instru-
ments, of such delicate construction that they register the
slightest change of weight, moisture, or movement in the
atmosphere, and enable us to take precautionary measures, which
rob storms of their terrors. But the God of Nature speaks, and
what is the result ? Our safety proves to be our greatest danger,
and our scientific knowledge of no avail to enable us to escape


the gathering storm. We have to come to the same conclusion
as Cardinal Wiseman ; —“ The more we study the laws of Nature,
the more we see how powerful it is, how superior to man, how it
is the exponent and exhibitor of magnificent wisdom, of might
with which we cannot cope. We must not pretend to too much;
but in spite of boasts that Nature has been overcome by man,
let us ever keep this in mind, that she will always in the end, if it
should come to a conflict, vanquish; and that her laws and
powers, illimitable and irresistible, represent to us a Higher
Power than that of man—the Power that gives us our own
moral strength, and lays down our moral laws.”
SOME STATEMENTS OF SURVIVORS.
AN ACCOUNT OF INDIVIDUAL EXPERIENCES.
Willie Tanna was one of seven, the crew of the “ Zoe,"
his boat had been working off Barrow Point on Friday, 3rd
March. On the evening of that day they anchored near the
“ Sagitta,” about one and a half miles off the watering place at
Cape Melville. On Saturday morning they went ashore for water,
coming out again in the afternoon, and getting the usual fort-
nightly supply of provisions and stores. While on the schooner
he saw and spoke to Mr. Alfred Outridge, Captain Murray, Mr,
Harold Outridge, and Robert Cameron. The schooner had plenty
of shell on deck, the week just finished having been a good one.
About 6 o'clock the diver gave orders to take the boat close in to
shore; there was not much wind, but it was raining. About 9 or
10 o’clock a south-west wind came; they slacked 45 fathoms of
chain, and had more on deck, but allowed the boat to drift,
hoping to clear the rocks. They drifted for some time, the boat
twice hitting the bottom; about 12 o’clock the boat hit Boulder
Rocks close to the Point. All hands, except one, jumped on to the
rocks. The waves were very high, and one man, Charley, a
Malay, was frightened to jump, being unable to swim, although
we urged him to come. As soon as the six men got on to the
rocks a big sea came and knocked everybody oft. All scrambled
back again, but Waller had to be assisted. Everyone sat down close
with their heads together. Daylight came, and they remained all day
and that night on the rocks. On Monday morning they swam ashore
to Cape Melville. One Manilla man, belonging to a “ Silvery


Wave” boat, came on to the same Boulder Bocks during the
night. Willie, who is a big powerful man, was uninjured, but
his mate Waller, who hurt his thigh, would undoubtedly have
perished, but for Willie’s assistance. In Willie’s opinion the body
of Mr. Alfred Outridge came ashore on Wednesday, the Bth, or
Thursday, the 9th of March.
Sugimoto, a Japanese sailor, who was the only man saved
from the schooner “ Silvery Wave,” made a statement as
follows :—“ I was on the sick list, and was in my bunk in the
forecastle all day Saturday, the 4th March. I did not go up on
deck as I was too sick. About midnight Captain Jefferson gave
orders for another anchor to be dropped, as the schooner was
dragging with the gale which was blowing. The anchor was
dropped, but I could not assist, being sick. About half-past
seven on Sunday morning I went on deck as the schooner was
filling fast, and I expected her to sink at any moment. I saw
some of the crew, but the masts had gone, and the bulwarks
were all broken. The house aft, where the Captain and officers
had their quarters, was also carried away. Just then a big sea
struck the vessel, and I was washed overboard, but succeeded in
getting on to a plank, with which I supported myself. Im-
mediately after I had been washed overboard I saw the schooner
sink; the big sea had swept right over her and filled her up. I
was blown and driven by the wind and sea mther and thither,
and at last landed on the mainland at Bathurst Bay.”
It was reported that a. Malay was also saved from this
vessel. Investigation showed that the man certainly was one of
the crew of the schooner, but had not been on the vessel at all
during the night of the 4th March; he had gone ashore on the
oaturday afternoon, and had not returned, spending the night
with the Binghis under the shelter of the hills. It is strange
that Sugimoto should have been the only man saved from the
“ Silvery Wave.” He was a sick man, and was not of a very
powerful constitution. Other members of the crew were fine
big, strong men, quite at home in the water. The brave fellows
must have been worn out with the fatigue and exposure of the
trying night. After battling so hard to save the ship, when she
sank from beneath them, they had not sufficient strength left to
reach the shore, a distance of about two miles. Sugimoto suffered
considerably from his exposure; he was sent to the Hospital at


Thursday Island, but two months after had not quite recovered
from the trying ordeal through which he had passed.
Glentaro was a Japanese diver employed on the “Zanoni.”
Three of the crew were drowned, but he and two others were
saved, a comparatively large number, due to the fact that the
lugger was wrecked close to Boulder Rocks, Cape Melville. Dur-
ing the storm, when the waves were found to be breaking over the
boat, the crew shut all the hatches, but one was incomplete, and
the water got down below, and swamped the boat. She sank in
three fathoms about 3.30 a.m., the mainmast breaking at the
time. The big waves afterwards drove the boat on to the rocks,
where she broke up. The illustrations, from photos taken three
months afterwards, show the rocks off the cape where the boat
broke up, the sweep of the north-west sea had driven the wreck
up on the sand beach.
Seto was a Japanese diver of the “Estelle.' He reports
that about midnight on Saturday an extra strong gust of wind
struck his boat, and the foremast went over the side. No sail was
set at the time, the wind was fierce and powerful enough to blow
the mast away. The boat dragged her anchor, and was drifted
about in different directions, according to the varying winds.
The diver steered all through the dreadful night, endeavouring to
keep the boat’s head to the big seas that frequently broke aboard
and threatened to overwhelm her. The boat was in a sinking con-
dition, when between 5 and 6 o’clock there was about ten
minutes’ calm, advantage of which was taken to pump out the
water. Then the wind started from north-west, the opposite
direction, blowing directly on shore, and appeared quite hot. It
was much stronger than when from the south-east or south-west,
and caused a very heavy confused sea. The boat sank in about
half an hour after the change of wind. Seto was the only man
saved; sometimes he had a plank and sometimes not, being fre-
quently washed away from his support by the tempestuous sea ;
then he would be driven against other wreckage, and held on as
long as possible. Eventually he was washed ashore on the sandy
beach to the west of the watering-place in Bathurst Bay, about
noon on Sunday, having been six hours battling with the waves.
No wonder that when he reached the shore his over-wrought
nerves gave way, and he became unconscious; he was found in
this state by other survivors.


Albert and Moses, natives of Ware Island, in the South
Seas, two strong young fellows, had a hard struggle for their
lives. They have fine physiques, and most exceptional powers of
endurance. Their boat, the “Little Bill,” was wrecked about 12
o'clock; they swam from Boulder Rocks, and in attempting to
reach the mainland were driven by the wind and sea to Pipon
Island. They stayed on the Island on Sunday and Monday, and
then swam to Cape Melville on the Tuesday. They had existed
on plum pudding, a case of which had gone ashore on the beach.
These two men buried a number of bodies, some being recognized,
amongst them being two Manilla divers, belonging to the “Crest
of the Wave " fleet, and a large number of the crew.
Douglas Pitt, June;, with a Murray Island native and their
wives, swam from No. 8 Howick, where their boat was wrecked,
to the mainland off Mount Bowen, a distance of 11 to 12 miles.
They landed at Noble Island on the way, and had a spell, but the
performance was wonderful, and it is remarkable that the two
native women were able to swim with the men, but no doubt the
latter assisted their wives. The women of Murray Island, in
Torres Straits, are tall and well formed. They differ from the
natives of the mainland in this respect, and appear to' possess
great stamina. The four wrecked people walked North along the
beach to Cape Melville, where the other survivors had congre-
gated, subsisting on provisions that had been washed ashore in
large quantities from the wrecked vessels.
A pathetic incident is that of two women, also natives of
the Torres Straits Islands, who, with their husbands, were
thrown into the water, when their small swimming boat sank and
left them struggling for their lives. Each woman had a child on
her back hanging on to her hair, and all through the night, the
devoted mothers were swimming trying to reach land. In the
morning they reached Flinders Island, but alas, the children had
died from exposure during the night, and the mothers landed
with the dead bodies.
Readers can picture the anguish of the poor mothers,
how during the long hours of the night loving little messages
were exchanged between mother and child, how the responses of
the latter would become fainter and fainter, and how, when no
answering pressure was received, what the feelings of the mother
would be. The skin of the mothers was black, but their hearts


were filled with maternal love and solicitude ; and no white mother
could have done more to preserve her offspring than these brave-
tender-hearted women.
Captain D. Jones, of the schooner “Tarawa,’ picked up a
man and woman, natives of Darnley Island, in Torres Straits,
who had been in the water almost continuously from Sunday to
Thursday. They were picked up near F Reef, in Princess
Charlotte Bay, and had been swimming from reef to reef, living-
on what they could pick up. They belonged to a swimming boat.
The woman showed less signs of fatigue than the man. Five
Murray Islanders swam from outside Flinders Island towards
Cape Melville, a distance of 12 miles. The sea and current drove
them past the islands, and compelled them to make for Cape
Melville. They were expert swimmers, and had been engaged
collecting black lip pearl-shell off the reefs.
Numbers of other cases are known where men were in the
water from the time their boats sank, between midnight Saturday
and daylight Sunday morning, till Sunday night floating about
on pieces of wreckage. Of the sufferings of the poor fellows, who
floated about for hours, but were not rescued, nothing will ever
be known.
Some aboriginals from a camp near Cape Melville were
assisting shipwrecked men out of the water. A change of wind
or a sudden gust swept round the hills and blew the natives into
the water. They struggled hard, but were unable to reach land
again, and were driven out to sea and drowned.


Assistance to the Wrecked.
On the sth the British-India Coy.'s steamer “ Duke of Nor-
folk,” Captain Jenkins in charge, from London to Brisbane,
passed the scene of the disaster. She did not stop to assist
those wrecked near Burkitt Island, as there were several sailing
vessels under way near by, and no distress signals were shown;
but about dusk the dismasted scnooner, “Crest of the Wave,” was
seen two and one-third miles north-west from the Channel Rock,
flying distress signals, so Captain Jenkins anchored near and
sent a boat to the wreck. Captain Porter reported the hurricane
and its effects upon his and other vessels, and asked for assistance.
Mrs. Porter and child were taken on board the steamer, and a
boat was lent to the Captain of the dismasted vessel, but the
request to be towed to the Flinders could not be complied with
on account of the tempestuous weather. The steamer remained
at anchor all night, and proceeded on her way early next morn-
ing. Meeting the steamer “ Duke of Portland ” shortly after-
wards, Mrs. Porter and her child were transferred to her for
conveyance to Thursday Island. Captain Jenkins, on arrival off
Cooktown the same evening - , the 6th, signalled the loss of the
Lightship to the signalman at Grassy Hill, but was unable to do
more on account of the prevailing thick weather and increasing
darkness as night set in. The news was wired to Brisbane to'
Captain Almond, who immediately instructed the harbour-master
at Cairns to despatch a steamer as soon as possible to search for
the Lightship. Thereupon the small steamer “ Victory ” was
provisioned and sent out, reaching the “Crest of the Wave” on
the 10th.
Captain Jenkins proceeded with all speed to Townsville,
arriving there on the Bth, when he immediately reported to' the
harbour-master what he had seen and heard from Captain Porter,
and thle alarming news was wired to the authorities in Brisbane.
It is a great pity that relief parties in boats were not sent
from this steamer to search for survivors, as there is evidence to
show that at the very time the steamer was anchored near the
“ Crest of the Wave,” men, women, and children were floating on


wreckage, some of whom subsequently got safe to land, but others
(the children) were brought ashore dead from exposure, and there
may have been, and in all probability were, others floating at the
time but subsequently drowned, who would have been saved had
search parties been immediately despatched.
The Japanese steamer “ Kasuga Maru,” Captain Haswell,
next arrived at the locality of the wrecks on Wednesday, the Bth
March, stopping to communicate with the dismasted “ Crest of
the Wave,” at 7 a.m. Captain Porter re-affirmed his previous
statement to the Captain of the “ Duke of Norfolk,” and reported
further that the schooners “ Sagitta ” and “Silvery Wave” and
“ Admiral ” and three fleets of luggers were lost. The “ Kasuga
Maru ” then proceeded on her way south with all speed, passing
Cooktown at 4 p.m. the same day, but being unable to report
fully owing to the thick weather. The steamer reached Towns-
ville on the 10th, when a full report was given and wired to
Brisbane. Thus it happened that the “ Warrego’s” report, wired
from Cooktown the previous day (9th), conveying the first definite
news of the great loss of life, was received and read by the anxious
relatives of the pearlers a day before the “ Kasuga Mam’s,”
although the latter vessel passed the wrecks some hours before the
former.
On Wednesday, the Bth, the A.U.S.N. Coy.’s steamer
“ Warrego,” Captain King, arrived at the Claremonts from
Thursday Island, and being signalled from the “Tarawa,” stopped
and was boarded by Captain Jones of that schooner and Captain
Thompson of the “ Meg Merrilees.” They reported the loss of
the schooners and luggers and eleven lives, and brought telegrams
to be wired on arrival at Cooktown. Proceeding on her way
the “Warrego” passed the “Crest of the Wave,” totally
dismasted, near the Channel Rock. The steamer passed close to
her, but no signals being shown, did not stop, the vessel appearing
to ride easily. Anchoring off Howick Island all night on account
of the thick weather, and proceeding next morning she arrived at
Cooktown on the 9th, and immediately reporting the serious
news, it was wired to the portmaster at Brisbane.
Captain Almond communicated with the Treasurer, and
arrangements were made with the A.U.S.N. Company to
forward the steamer “ Warrego,” with provisions, stores, etc., to
render whatever assistance was required to the surviving crews


of the wrecked vessels, and to search for the missing schooners
and the Lightship. After coaling as speedily as possible, the
“ Warrego ” started on her voyage of rescue at 11.30 a.m. on
Friday, 10th March.
On that day the “ White Star,” a small steamer from Thurs-
day Island, arrived at the Claremont Islands, having been des-
patched by the Hon. John Douglas, C.M.G., Government Resi-
dent, who had heard of the loss of lives and vessels by the “ Duke
of Portland.” She had on board Mr. G. H. Bennett, sub-
collector, at Thursday Island, and Mr. George Smith, the Thurs-
day Island representative of what is known as the Clark Combina-
tion Pearling Fleets. Mr. Smith also brought provisions, stores,
and materials for repairing the damaged vessels.
On the same day, the 10th, the steamer “Australian/’ bound
north, passed the locality, speaking the “ Crest of the Wave,”
which had the small steamer “ Victory ” in attendance. The
“ Victory ” towed the dismasted schooner to Stanley Harbour, in
the Flinders Group.
“WHITE STAR.”
The “ White Star ” reached Hannah Islands on Friday after-
noon, where she found four luggers on the reef, the men being
camped on shore. Proceeding she anchored off Pelican Island,
finding the lugger “ Givarra Peres ” wrecked on the east side of
the island. Mr. Bennett learnt here that the schooners “ Meg
Merrilees” and “ Wai Weer” were wrecked on an uncharted
reef bearing north-north-east from Pelican Island about 91
miles, all the hands being saved, and plenty of provisions. Leav-
ing this place early on the 11th, the “White Star'’ anchored in
Stanley Harbour, Flinders Group, at 10.35 a.m., where were the
“Tarawa,” “Olive,” “Aladdin,” and about 50 luggers at anchor.
At 3.15 p.m. the anchor was weighed and search was made
in Bathurst Bay. An hour after starting the “Warrego” was
sighted, and the “ White Star ” returned with her to Stanlev
Harbour, where they anchored for the night. Stores were dis-
pensed to about 40 men, who were camped on shore, and who had
previously received provisions from the pearling schooners. Mr.
Bennett chartered two luggers to take the shipwrecked men back
to Thursday Island. On Sunday, the 12th, the “White Star”
again searched along the coast, finding six luggers sunk about


two miles south-west from Boulder Rocks, off Cape Melville.
The tops of their masts were visible above water, and also the
masts of a schooner, supposed to be the “ Silvery Wave.'' Pro-
ceeding along the coast to Ninian Bay she passed several masts
and spars—passed Bewick Island, or Howick No. 5, at 0.5 p.m.
This appeared to be the southern limit of the cyclone. At
Newton Island, south of Bewick Island, there appeared no indica-
tion of the storm, the vegetation being untouched, whereas
between Bewick and Hannah Islands everything in the shape of
trees and grass had been swept clean. Coal falling short it was
necessary to make for Cook town, where the “White Star" arrived
at 3 p.m., on Monday, the 13th. Mr. Bennett communicated to
Captain Almond the result of his search, and after coaling the
“ White Star ” left Cooktown at 6.45 a.m., on Tuesday, the 14th,
and aided by a strong south-east wind was able to- anchor again
at Stanley Harbour at 6.15 p.m., on Wednesday, the 15th.
Search was made through the reefs to- the eastward, but no
wreckage was seen in that direction. Next day the outer reefs
were searched, but nothing was found. At 12.10 p.m. the
steamer got within a mile of the wreck of the “ Meg Mcrrilees,"
but could get no nearer, the reef being covered with high ghibbers.
After searching M reef the steamer sailed for Thursday Island,
which she reached at 3.35 p.m., on Saturday, the 18th. She
brought in from Stanley Harbour some twenty islanders and
aboriginals whose boats had been lost.
SEARCH BY THE “WARREGO.”
The A.U.S.N. Coy.’s steamer “ Warrego," Captain George
King in charge, with Captain Graham as pilot, being chartered
by the Government to go in search of the missing pearling
schooners, left Cooktown for that purpose on Friday, the 10th
instant. Mr. Ogilvie (Sub-Collector of Customs at Cooktown),
Mr. A. R. Yidgen (brother of H. G. Yidgen of the “Olive"), Mr.
Ross Smith (nephew of Mr. Geo. Smith of Thursday Island), and
Mr. J. Fowler of the “Cooktown Independent,” were on board.
In the afternoon two small cutters were seen anchored between
the Lizards and Newt Islands. They proved to be the “Jamaica,”
in charge of a West Indian named Douglas Pitt, sen., and “Loafer,”
in charge of Charley Lifu. Pitt reported having fallen in with


two cutters, the “ Caledonia” and “La France,” manned by
nine coloured men. On the way he saw the Channel Rock Light-
ship safe. He believes the bodies seen by the “Warrego” on
the down trip to have been those from the “ Caledonia ” and “ La
France.” He experienced the hurricane while anchored at the
Lizards. Losing both his anchors he was blown between two
islands, and fortunately made fast to the “Loafer.” He was
very anxious about his three sons engaged in the fleets, two of
whom were subsequently found to be drowned; the third,
Douglas, was saved by swimming ashore near Noble Island.
The “Warrego” proceeded and anchored off the Howicks. On
the 11th the cutters “ Spray,” “Hackle, and “ Yunyo” were seen
anchored off Ingram Island. Mr. Hanson, of the “Spray,” reported
that a Japanese cutter had been broken up on the reefs off
Stapleton Island; his own cutter was carried right into the
mangroves, but after great labour was floated on the following
Tuesday. Provisions were and the steamer pro-
ceeded. At noon on the same day (11th) the lugger “ Isabel,”
of the “ Olive ” fleet, was seen, and Mr. H. G. Yidgen came
aboard, being warmly received by his brother and friends, who
had been in doubt as to his safety. He reported the loss of the
schooners and luggers with their crews, particulars of which are
given elsewhere. He also reported that after picking up Captain
Porter he had gone ashore on the Bth and found 27 live men.
The natives were burying the dead, and boasted of having driven
back the bush tribes to keep them from plundering. (It has
since been ascertained that this boast was only a boast; there
were no bush natives near Cape Melville or Bathurst Bay at the
time of the disaster). Up to that time 30 bodies had been buried.
He learnt from Captain Porter that young Douglas Pitt, having
been wrecked on the Howicks, had swum ashore with two
native women, then swimming to Noble Island, and thence to the
mainland, a marvellous performance, a distance of 10 miles.
The party then walked along the coast to Cape Melville, seeing a
number of dead bodies, including those of two- white men. The
beach was strewn with dead gulls, birds, snakes and fish. Mr.
H. G. Yidgen took his brother aboard the “ Isabel,” returning to
the Flinders the day the “Warrego” left. The “Warrego” arrived at
the Flinders about 4 p.m., speaking to the steamer “Victory ” on
the way. Here Captains Clark, Porter, Thompson, and Jones
came aboard with Mr. Bennett, of Thursday Island, and Mr.




CAPTAIN W. F. PORTER OF CREST OF THE WAVE. MR. ARTHUR OUTRIDGE (Father of Harod Outridge) IN DIVING DRESS.


Geo. Smith. Reports were given, the substance of which is
recorded elsewhere. The “ Olive ” came alongside and shipped
166 cases of shell, and the steamer then left for Cooktown, where
she arrived about midnight on Sunday, the 12th. There being
no further need of her services for searching, the “Warrego”
resumed her voyage South.
The trips of the “Warrego’’ and “White Star” did not
result in any actual rescue work being done in the way of saving
life. Both steamers arrived at the scene of the disaster too long
after it had occurred, but the greatest credit is due to the authori-
ties for promptly despatching the steamers with provisions for
relief of the distressed when news of the cyclone came to hand.
The most favourable opportunity was lost when the mail steamer
failed to send out search parties on the day following the hurri-
cane.
D


Salvage Operations.
A few days after receipt of news in Brisbane, Mr. James
Clark made arrangements to visit the scene of the disaster, ascer-
tain the damage done, and re-organise the pearling fleets. He
left Brisbane on March 11th for Cooktown, taking with him
Captain James Duncan, who had been in Brisbane on leave from
the schooner “Aladdin,” and Mr. Peter Wood, the well-known
boat builder. At Cooktown they transhipped to the pearling
boat “Gleam,” on the 18th March, and next day arrived at
Cape Melville, the centre of the scene of the hurricane, where a
most desolate state of affairs was revealed. Under the direction
of Mr. Clark parties were organized to bury the dead, and search
parties despatched along the coast. Attention was then directed
towards the wrecked vessels. Quite a number were in sight, and
steps were taken to refloat those which were worth it. The
assistance of the s.s. “ Christine Gollan,” which had towed the re-
lieving lightship to Channel Rock from Townsville, was secured,
and with the diving boat “ Sana,” of the “ Olive ” fleet, the follow-
ing boats were raised, and beached at Cape Melville for tempor-
ary repairs:—-“Sea Breeze,” “Sybil,” “Nellie,” and “Here’s
Luck,” of the “Sagitta” fleet; “ Boomerang,” “Lily,” “Johnny,”
and “Enterprise,” of the “Silvery Wave” fleet; and “Vera” and
" G.P.” of the “Crest of the Wave” fleet. After having tem-
porary repairs effected the boats “Sybil,” “Nellie,” “Boomerang,”
and “ Vera ” sailed for Thursday Island to be thoroughly re-
paired at the Goode Island Slip belonging to James Clark and Co.
The small steamer “ Parua,” which had been chartered to assist in
salvage operations, towed the disabled schooner “Crest of the
Wave” and four boats to Goode Island, arriving there on Tues-
day, 18th April. The boats were overhauled by the carpenters,
repaired, and very soon sent out to work again. The salvage
operations were under the direction of Captain Steve Clark, and
great credit is due to him for the successful results. Much hard
work was necessary, and the absence of appliances in the way of
gear made the work very difficult—on one day no less than four
boats were raised and beached. All were more or less damaged.


WRECK OF ZANONI.
Boulder Rocks in sight, off Cape Melville.


ZEPHYR.
On beach at Flinders Island, raised eight weeks
after the hurricane.
WRECK OF ZANONI AT CAPE MELVILLE.


except the “ Sea Breeze,” which was practically uninjured. This
boat had been blown out into deep water and had swamped. All
her crew being drowned, particulars of her experiences are not
obtainable, but her discovery was very, very remarkable. Sailing
along one day from Cape Melville to Flinders Island Captain
Porter saw about 18 inches of a spar sticking up out of the water.
He stopped to investigate, and found the main gaff acting as a
buoy for a boat sunk in eight fathoms. The main sail had
become detached from the gaff, the peak halliards had unrove,
and the throat halliards held. It was a fortunate combination of
circumstances, and resulted in the recovery of the “ Sea Breeze ”
without having sustained a scratch. About ten boats cannot be
accounted for, and these probably shared the same fate as the
“Sea Breeze,” but the expanse of water was too great to permit of
search being made with any prospect of success. The “Estelle,”
belonging to the “ Sagitta ” fleet, sank in deep water; the diver,
Seto, being saved, gave an account of his experiences, which are
embodied in his statement appearing elsewhere. Eight weeks
after the hurricane the “ Zephyr,” a new boat, built by W. Miller,
of Breakfast Creek, Brisbane, was re-floated by the “ Olive.” The
“ Zephyr ” had sunk in 13 fathoms in Stanley Harbour, and was
only found after most dilligent search by Captain Steve Clark.
She had foundered quite close to the edge of the reef, and had
practically sustained no damage. Raising her proved to be the
most difficult of all the salvage operations. She was a hardwood
boat, consequently very heavy, and having been so long under
water was nearly full of mud. Two divers worked at getting out
the diving gear and ballast, but only a portion of the latter
was thrown out. Several times the gear broke, and on one
occasion, when near the surface, the chain slings carried away,
and the boat fell a distance of ten fathomSj striking the bottom
with her counter piece, which was carried away. The next attempt
was successful, and she was safely floated and beached at Flinders
Island. Her masts and spars were riddled with teredo, and the
decks were also attacked, but not seriously, her planking and
timbers were untouched, being of hardwood. The greatest credit
is due to Captain Steve Clark for raising the “Zephyr,” she was-
very heavy, was in 13 fathoms, was full of mud, and in an ex-
posed position on a lee shore. Had a man possessed of less per-
severance and readiness of resource been in charge of the opera-
tions, the boat would never have been raised. All the boats re


covered close to the shore had their masts carried away just above
the decks. From this it would appear that the boats had been
rolled over and over along the bottom. Other evidences are
visible which tend to. strengthen this belief. The force of the
waves must have been tremendous to turn the boats over and
over, and it is fortunate that the bottom of the sea was, at that
place, composed of mud, otherwise the boats would all have been
chafed to pieces.
To visit the scene of the disaster some weeks after the cyclone
was the painful duty of one of the heaviest losers. Approaching
Bathurst Bay from the Northward, Flinders Island and Bathurst
Head are passed. On the former, the trees were all stripped of
leaves and branches, and were, in many places, torn up by the
roots; and to the Southward of Bathurst Head, along the shores
of Princess Charlotte Bay, some square miles of mangroves have
been destroyed. This is a serious calamity for the natives, the
fruit of the mangrove being their principal food.
Proceeding towards Cape Melville from seaward the wreck
of the “Silvery Wave” is plainly visible, stumps of the two masts
are seen, besides the bow and a portion of the bowsprit. A little
further in shore, and closer to Boulder Rocks, remains of the
“ Ehime,” “ Flora,” and “ Kate ” are visible, and within a hundred
yards of the beach at the watering place, is the wreck of the
“ Little Bill.”
Walking along the shore, South-west from Cape Melville,
many evidences are seen of the heavy loss caused by the hurri-
cane. First is the wreck of the “ Zanoni." Views are given show-
ing the wrecks and the Boulder Rocks where the “Zanoni,” “Zoe,”
and others were so completely broken up. A little further along
the beach is a piece of a vessel’s combing showing the figures
“ 106172. 10.17 tons.” This was the official number and tonnage
of the “Zoe,” and much wreckage of this once fine boat is in
evidence along the shore. About two miles from the Cape,
wreckage is most plentiful, and in some places is a quarter of a
mile inland from the seashore. The “ Leopold,” “ Pearl Queen,”
“ Pert,” “ Pearl King,” and many others too much broken up to
recognise, have found resting places for their remains in this
vicinity. Fittings of the schooners, portions of the Lightship,
deck houses of the boats, pieces of dingies are scattered all round
with here and there spars and masts; but the saddest sight of all


GOODE ISLAND, TORRES STRAITS. All the Boats in the Picture were lost in the Hurricane.


is the large number of planks placed in the ground indicating the
graves where working pearlers had been buried, “ unknelled,
uncoffined, and unknown.”
GOODE ISLAND, TORRES STRAITS.
The view of Goode Island Pearling Station with boats
anchored near is a typical picture of a pearling station of by-
gone days. The photograph was taken one Christmas Day several
years ago, and shows the boats lying idly at anchor, while the
crew are ashore enjoying themselves. The station was purchased
in 1895 by Mr. James Clark, and was transformed into a boat-
repairing establishment. The boats were attached to the “ Silvery
Wave ” fleet. What a different scene to that shown in the picture
was presented in May of this year. What a desolate, forlorn pic-
ture was exhibited when the steamer “Parua” arrived with the
dismantled “Crest of the Wave” and several of the recovered
boats. Already the “ Sybil,” “ Nellie,” “ Boomerang,” “ Lily ” and
“Vera” had sailed up under jury rig, and when the “Crest of
the Wave,” “ G.P.,” “Johnny,” “Here’s Luck” and “Enterprise”
arrived the scene was saddening in the extreme. The schooner,
shown in another illustration, was dismasted, her bulwarks and
whaleboats lost. Some of the diving boats had no masts standing,
others had one, and all were battered about, bare of paint, and
covered with mud.
On shore portions of wreckage, broken masts, spars, and
dingies were to be seen. They told a pitiful tale. Here, were
masts showing signs of being cut; there, were spars with pieces
of rope attached to them, unmistakeable evidence that some had
endeavoured to lash themselves to the spars. These silent wit-
nesses of the disaster would tell a heart-rending tale could they
but speak. To view the wreckage was sufficient to carry one’s
thoughts to the poor fellows who fought so hard for their lives;
how some of our loved ones probably clung to those very spars;
how, when in their perilous position, they thought of home and
friends; how, when they realized their efforts were of no avail,
their thoughts would be “ Thy will be done.”


Biographical Sketches.
We much regret that more particulars of some of the deceased
are unobtainable. We were desirous of publishing full accounts
of the lives and careers of all the Europeans lost. Very little, how-
ever, is known of some of them, and the friends of others seem
averse to supply the information required.
ALFRED St. JOHN OUTRIDGE.
The subject of this memoir was born at Collingwood, near
Nelson, New Zealand, on 24th June (St. John's Day), 1859.
His father, the late Richard Pitman Outridge, was well known in
commercial circles in Brisbane 38 years ago, having been con-
nected with several of the leading mercantile houses; his mother,
Mrs. R. P. Outridge, of New Farm, still lives to mourn her
additional loss-—■
“ With pensive memories as we journey on,
Longing for vanished smiles and voices gone.”
He was the sixth son and seventh child of his parents. Two
brothers pre-deceased him; George Edward, who died of typhoid
fever in Nelson in the year 1876, and Herbert, who died in
infancy in 1863.
The family removed from New Zealand to Sydney in 1859,
and after residing there two years journeyed to Brisbane in 1861.
Alfred was educated at the State Schools, and proved an intelli-
gent and docile scholar, gaining the goodwill of his teachers.
After leaving school he was engaged at different times in several
warehouses, until an injury to his hand necessitated about a year’s
abstention from work of any kind. He had been suffering from
an injured knee, and needing a support, the walking-stick used
bruised the palm of his hand, one of the phalanges subsequently
decaying and gradually coming away. This caused him great
agony; for months he was unable to use his hand, and for a
lengthened period he required to have his hand strapped to a
board and fixed above his head to keep back the blood. This
caused him to remark: “ The Bible says, ‘lf thy right hand


offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee,’ my hand has given
me so much pain that if anyone were justified in cutting it off I
would be, although that is not what the passage means.”
He went to Sugar Loaf, near Stanthorpe, in 1879, working at
tin-mining, and also at engine-driving, and residing with his
brother, A. H. Outridge. They two had fine times together,
frequently hunting the numerous kangaroos, going on shooting
and fishing expeditions, and camping out in various places.
When the silver mines at Boorook, N.S.W., were opened, he went
there, and was engaged at a battery and amalgamating works.
He had some hard times, the country being very rough, and food
ALFRED ST. JOHN OUTRIDGE.
(Sagitta).
at times difficult to procure. He used to relate that he and his
companions, having complained of the quality of the beef supplied
by the one butcher in the place, the latter for a time neglected to
serve them. They were too independent to ask him to call, so they
lived on rock wallaby and damper for a fortnight. At the end of
that time the butcher sent a supply of good meat fearing they
were getting their supplies by pack-horse from Stanthorpe. The
silver mines being worked out, he paid a short visit to Brisbane,
and then left for Cairns in 1882. He was employed there by Mr.
L. Severin for years on and off, at times mining at Herberton,
and running a cutter up Cairns Inlet. He then went to the


Russell River with Mr. Fred. Brown, taking up and working with
a number of miners alluvial deposits at the head of this river.
This was a matter of no small difficulty, entailing considerable
engineering skill, much perseverance, and a good deal of hard
work. The ground was worked by hydraulic sluicing, several
races having to be cut (one for a length of seven miles) to bring
the water on to the claims. A picture of the hut which was his
home for six years is given herein, and some idea can be got
therefrom of the picturesque surroundings.
A picture of the house at Kiandra on the head waters of
the Russell River is given, in which Alfred Outridge lived for
some years. The site was originally covered with dense scrub,
similar to that seen in the background, and the same luxuriant
tropical vegetation covers the surrounding mountains. It stands
in a central position to most of the gold mines in the district,
being but a quarter of a mile from the celebrated Union
Hydraulic Sluicing Claim. Some four miles away to the east
stand Mounts Bellenden-Ker and Bartle Frere, a large land-slip
on the former being plainly seen from an elevated position near
the house, while between these same mountains and the house
are the famous Mulgrave Falls.
Mr. F. G. Brown, of the Russell River, writes :—“ I cannot
find words to write what I would like of Alf.; if I wrote for a
week I could not express all I feel. Suffice it to say that no man
had the respect of a community like Alf. had, both at Cairns,
where he lived for some ten years, and at the Russell Goldfields,
where he worked for some five years. He was liked by all—no
man had a word to say against him, and the expressions of regret
at his untimely end were both general and sorrowfully sincere.
Where he lived is, and always will be, spoken of as Alf.’s humpy,'
no matter who occupies it or what changes take place.
“ In his personal relations with me he was a. true mate—one
that could always be relied upon, and one that it was an honour
to call such. No matter where I was (and during the eighteen
years that we were mates we were at times separated) I could
always depend on getting assistance by wiring to Alf., and this
applies also to others whoi were not SO' well known to him—if he
( were in a position to do- so it went against the grain to refuse to
lend a helping hand to those in want. I do not suppose I will
ever have another mate, certainly it is an impossibility for me to
have such another as Alf.


House occupied by Alfred Outridge when mining on Russell River, 1897.


“It is not for me to speculate on the future, but of one thing
lam certain : If there is a Hereafter, and anybody gains ad-
mittance to the Golden Shore, Alf. will be amongst the front-
rankers if justice is done; and if by any chance I get there, there
is no man I will be better pleased to see than my old mate Alf.”
The following is reprinted from an “ Extra ” edition of the
Cairns “ Morning Post ” :
“Brisbane, March 13th.—Word has been received from
Cooktown that 400 coloured men and 11 white men were drowned
during the recent hurricane. Eighty-six luggers and five
schooners and a lightship also wrecked.
“A. Outridge and his nephew were among the white men
drowned.
[“Let us hope that the news conveyed in this ‘Estra’ may
yet prove wrong, and that our widely-respected old friend, Alfred
Outridge, is not amongst those who were drowned in this cyclonic
disaster. Mr. Alf. Outridge holds a warm place in the affections
of all those who know him well. A truer hearted friend no man
ever had, and the ‘ Morning Post ’ would sacrifice all its interests
at the present moment in order to be able to truthfully report
that he is still well, and amongst the living. Mr. Fred Brown
and the Russell River miners (all good fellows) with whom Mr.
Alf. Outridge has of late years been intimately associated will
readily join with us in hoping that our old friend Alf. is still in
the land of the living.—Ed. ‘ Morning Post.’ ”]
He left the Russell at his brothers’ request to look after their
pearling interests in Torres Straits, subsequently being appointed
manager of the Sagitta Pearling Coy. His management was
eminently successful, both financially and generally. His business
acumen was pronounced, his tact in dealing with the coloured
men was remarkable, showing firmness without harshness, and
geniality without undue familiarity. He was much liked by all
who had dealings with him. one friend writing, “ He was the most
popular man in the fleets.” Neither the writer nor others of the
family can give adequate expression to their appreciation of his
many estimable qualities. He was generous, and said his eldest
brother, “Alf. is the most liberal of our crowd.” He was kind,
affectionate, patient, thoughtful, and unselfish. His thoughtful-
ness of and care for his mother was most marked. He would


frequently send a cheque with a letter containing some jocular
remarks; and shortly after his relatives had perforce given up
hope of ever seeing him or his nephew Harold again in this world,
his mother received a letter written by him three days before the
hurricane, with the remark inside, “ I think it is time you had a
new bonnet, so send this” (a cheque), Walla, a South Sea Islander,
was the last man now alive, so far as known, to converse with the
late Mr. Alfred Outridge and his nephew Harold. He belonged
to the “Zoe,” one of the “ Sagitta’s ” boats; and being on the
schooner before the storm came on went to Mr. Outridge and
wanted to say “ Good-bye.” Mr. Outridge said, “ Why, Walla,
what is the matter?” He replied, “You and me shake hands,
master, this time, big storm come up. You look that cloud blow
across.” (Walla had experienced a hurricane, locally called a
willy-willy, in West Australia. He had been for some time with
Mr. P. P. Outridge at New Farm, and knew the family well.)
They shook hands, and Walla left for his lugger. This was
wrecked on Boulder Rock, and Walla, after a fearful knocking
about, was rescued by Willie Tanna, his mate, one of those
already saved, catching him as he was thrown on the rock by a
big wave. When Walla saw Mr. P. P. Outridge in May last, on
the occasion of the latter’s visit to Thursday Island, he was very
much affected, grasping and holding on to his hand for several
minutes, weeping bitterly, and expressing in broken accents his
grief at the loss of his “good master.”
When young, Alfred Outridge was religiously inclined, and
although the latter part of his life was spent where
“ The sound of the church-going bell
These valleys and rocks never heard,
Never sighed at the sound of a knell
Or smiled when a sabbath appeared ”
Yet we know that he never forgot the training of his earlier
years; and we have confidence that “ God who knows the
thoughts and intents of the heart,” has received him unto
Himself.
“Let not your hearts be troubled ... in My Father’s
house are many mansions . . . Igo to prepare a place for
you.”


His nearest surviving relatives are ;
Mother—
Mrs. R. P. Outridge, New Farm.
Brothers—-
Richard, of Sydney.
Arthur H., Nundah.
Frederick A., Brisbane.
Collingwood J., of Brisbane.
Percival P., Brisbane.
Sister —
Mrs. A. H. Barlow, of Ipswich.
HAROLD ARTHUR OUTRIDGE,
eldest son of Mr. A. H. Outridge, of Nundah, and grandson of
Mrs. R. P. Outridge, of New Farm, and of Mr. W. A. Noble, of
Toowoomba, was born on the 25th of April, 1875, at Sugar Loaf,
near Stanthorpe. His boyhood was spent in the bracing air and
invigorating climate of his birthplace, which no doubt had much
to do with his having such a sturdy frame and sound constitution
that he never had a serious illness in his life. At the age of 11 he
with his parents removed to Nundah, where he resided until he
left for the North. He was educated in his father's schools, finish-
ing with 18 months at the Brisbane Grammar School, where he
invariably received favourable reports. After leaving the Gram-
mar School he was a pupil-teacher for some years, but he never
cared for the work. He was then apprenticed to Mr. George
Watkins, of Brisbane, doing very well here, and gaining the
goodwill of his employer and fellow assistants—Mr. Watkins
writing : —“ Harold has been with me long enough for me to-
esteem him highly.’’ He left at his uncles' request to engage in
the pearling industry. His experience as a chemist enabled him
to- relieve many sufferers, and even to successfully combat serious
diseases. Coloured men when ill speedily give way to despon-
dency ; homely medicines then become non-effective because not
believed in, but physic from the medicine-chest (which he took
up with him) in a proper bottle with directions written thereon
as by a regular physician became effective by the hope it en-
gendered as well as by the potency of the ingredients. He left
Brisbane in the new lugger “Ibis,” on Monday, July 4th, 1898,




en route to Thursday Island, having an unpleasant trip until he
reached Townsville, as the weather was rough, and all on board
were sick but himself. At Townsville his uncle, Mr. P. P. Out-
ridge, took charge, and they two, with the assistance of a coloured
man, safely navigated the vessel through the dangerous inner
passage to Thursday Island. Thence he proceeded to the
“ Sagitta,” where he was under the direction of his uncle, Alfred
Outridge. He paid several visits to Thursday Island on business,
and appreciated the kindness and hospitality of Mr. and Mrs. Geo.
Smith and other friends of that place. He also visited New
HAROLD ARTHUR OUTRIDGB.
(Sagitta).
Guinea with his friend, H. G. Yidgen, of the “ Olive,” and
thoroughly enjoyed the trip. For years he had desired to engage
in this occupation, and it was only out of deference to the wishes of
his parents that he refrained from doing so earlier. Of a retiring,
reserved disposition he kept himself in the background as much
as possible, and only to his immediate friends and relatives did
ne unbend, showing then by his dry humour and caustic wit that
he was a keen observer, and could accurately appreciate the
motives and distinguish the foibles of those around him. He
was affectionate, but not effusive. His letters to his relatives at


home breathed a tender regard for their welfare, and a thought-
fully expressed gratitude that could only proceed from genuine
goodness of heart. In a letter to his father, dated 10th January
last, he wrote : —•“ I only hope I may live to repay a part of the
anxiety and care I have caused you.” He belonged to the Nundah
Wesleyan Sunday School as scholar, and then librarian up to
the time of his leaving home, receiving a Bible suitably inscribed
from the teachers as a mark of their esteem. He was much
averse to anything like ostentation in religion, but those who
knew him best have no doubt as to his having a saving knowledge
of Our Saviour. Harold has gone! but he has left a fragrant
memory behind; and we look forward with joyous expectation to
see him again, “ When the seai shall give up its dead,” and when
“ We shall never part again.”
The Rev. G. Warren Payne, of Roma,, formerly of Nundah,
and an intimate friend of his, wrote as follows ;
“ Wallumbilla, 15th March, 1899.
“ Dear Mr. Outridge,—On my way from Roma this morn-
ing I read the account of the disaster to the pearling fleet, pub-
lished in yesterday’s “ Courier.” Mrs. Payne and I had both
been eagerly watching the news day by day hoping that the
schooners at least would have escaped or grounded in such a way
as to admit.of saving the crews. I need scarcely say how deep
is the sorrow with which we have found our worst fears con-
firmed. Will you please accept our united sympathy. Words
are of little use at a time like this, save to express something of
the fellowship in sorrow that one feels. Still, perhaps, I may
be able to help in more ways than one to brighten the shadow
that has so suddenly darkened your home life. On the occasion
of the last birthday anniversary which came to the one who has
gone I wrote a letter to him full of friendly interest and good
will, and also spoke once more to him concerning the serious
issues depending on the life of to-day for final result. In a letter,
which I am afraid has not been retained among my correspond-
ence, Harold spoke freely of his religious experiences and convic-
tions. What he said in that letter confirmed an impression
formed in my own mind previously. He was trying to serve God
in his own secret life, and I feel sure had a saving knowledge of
the truth. You know, perhaps better than I, his peculiar tem-
perament, and how he hated anything like goodi-goodiness. But


beneath it all there was something that rarely displayed itself. In
one or two conversations with Mrs. Payne and myself, and again
in the letter referred to', this hidden side of his thinking came up.
I want, therefore, to say to you all, don’t sorrow as those who
have at best only a dubious hope. I feel sure in my own heart
that God was near the lad in that awful tempest, and that one
may safely leave him with the Love that has never failed. May
that same everlasting Love be your comfort and strength in the
present hour of sorrow. With sincere and earnest sympathy.—
“I am,
“Yours faithfully,
“ (Signed) G. W. Payne."
Mr. W. A. Noble, senior, writes ;
“ I feel that I should like to contribute a, few thoughts upon
the lamentable subject as touching upon the character of one of
the lost ones, albeit that one be my grandson —I refer to Harold
Outridge.
“Needless to say I have known him from his birth, and,
therefore, can bear testimony to his sterling worth. I am of
opinion that some who were partially acquainted with him did
not really know him. When a child he was of a retiring disposi-
tion and of few words. It needed some tact to draw him into
conversation, and this characteristic followed him through youth
and up to young manhood. This caused him to be very much
misunderstood, for though not a, great talker, yet he thought
much. It was only a few select friends to whom he may be said
to have revealed his inner self, and these ever found him to be
genial, affable, courteous, and friendly—ever ready to do a kindly
act. I have every reason to believe in his heart of hearts he was
a deep lover and earnest and sincere follower of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and I have no hesitation in affirming it to be my strong
belief, that when so' suddenly called away from all who loved him
here, he was ushered into the presence of One who loved him with
a perfect love, and whom Harold also loved. There were few
who really understood him—his retiring disposition led some to
doubt whether he ever decided for Christ, simply because he was
not forward in proclaiming himself. My belief is, knowing him
as I do, that he could not do> so' in the manner those friends
would have had him do- —his sensitive nature prevented him.
Yet He who sees deeper into the inner life of his children than


we with our imperfect vision could see that Harold’s heart was
right, although he could not comply with certain formalities
prescribed by some good-meaning Christians. He made few
friends, but those few who really understood him valued and
loved him. One of the few was with him in the great catastrophe
—they lived and loved, and in death were not divided. I allude
to Edward Atthow. I have often admired the more than friendly
relationship which existed between these two young men—they
loved each other, and they love still, for such love cannot die.
Here there is pressed home upon me the thought: —Why were
these two bright and promising young lives SO' early and so
suddenly quenched? Was it that the Master had need of them in
the many mansioned home above? Perhaps so, not to be silent
adorers of the Great and Holy One only, but to use their activi-
ties in the greater life beyond.” —
“ For ever with the Lord,
Amen, so let it be.”
EDWARD CHARLES ATTHOW,
eldest son of Charles Atthow, was born in Brisbane in December,
1878. Soon after he removed with his parents to Nudgee. When
14 years old he entered the public service as a pupil teacher
at the Nundah State School, but on account of a severe illness he
resigned the position. He then entered the office of his father in
the fruit and produce business, where he remained till October,
1898. But life on land was not to his taste, his ideal was the sea,
his dreams were to make it his home. When a boy most of his
time was spent in drawing yachts and ships, and later on model-
ling, rigging, and sailing toy boats on the bay and river near his
home. When he grew up he, with Harold Outridge (his bosom
friend) became part owner of a sailing boat. Most of his holidays
were spent on excursions in Moreton Bay. His intention at this
time was to ship in a sailing ship on a voyage round the world.
His friend Harold having been appointed to a position on the
pearling fleet he changed his mind, and applied to Mr. Jas. Clark
for a vacancy, which occurred on the “Silvery Wave” fleet. He
was appointed, and left Brisbane by the schooner “ Wanetta” on
15th October, 1898, and joined the “Silvery Wave” under Capt.
Jefferson, a few weeks after. His friend Harold being on the


"Sagitta” they were again together. These two had been com-
panions in life, and now they were companions in death. Edward
Atthow was by birth a Queenslander, as were many of those who
lost their lives in the disaster. Queensland should be proud that
her native born sons are not afraid to risk their lives in pushing
her industries.
Edward Atthow was a member of the Wesleyan Church,
Nundah; he attended the Sunday School from his childhood up
to the time of his leaving for the North. He and Harold were
joint librarians of the Sunday School.
EDWARD CHARLES ATTHOW.
(Silvery Wave).
When writing home he expressed his love for a sea-faring
life, and he gained the goodwill and confidence of his captain, and
the respect of the other officers with him.
To his mother he wrote, “ Tell Millie (his sister), I often read
the Bible she gave me.” To his Sunday School chum he wrote,
“ Harold and I read our Bible on Sunday, and often think of what
you are all doing at the Sunday School.'’ These were among his
last letters to home. His vessel was lost on the sth March, and
side by side on that day he and his companions passed over to the
land that knows neither storm nor night. He had loved the sea,
and through it he passed to where there is no night, but one
eternal calm.


The following is an extract from the “ Methodist Leader ” :
“ A loss most keenly felt befell us through the pearling fleet
disaster. Messrs. A. H. Outridge and C. Atthow, each lost sons.
Promising young men they were. Both had been trained in our
Sunday Schools, and at the time they went North, were officers
of the Nundah Sunday School. Mr. Edward Atthow decided for
God at Nudgeo. Mr. Harold Outridge never came out publicly.
He was of a reserved, retiring disposition. But to those who
won his confidence, he gave assurance he had entered upon the life
and service of God. Many indications are to hand that growth,
not decay, characterisea their spiritual life whilst up North. Just
at the threshold of manhood, God opened for them a pathway
through the waters to the heavenly shore. The Rev. W. Brown
conducted an in rnemoriam service at Nundah, on Sunday, March
26th. The church was quite full. The pulpit was tastefully draped
in white, and white flowers were in the vases. ‘ The Dead March
in Saul’ was played by the organist, Mr. J. A. J. Ferguson. It
was a most impressive service and will, we are sure, be productive
of lasting good.”
EDWARD JEFFERSON
son of Reuben Jefferson, now residing in Bradford, England, was
born in Hull in 1862. At an early age he decided to go to sea,
and appealed to be a born sailor. After serving his apprentice-
ship he passed his various mates’ examinations, and at the early
age of 21 had passed and obtained his certificates for foreign-
going master. In his early teens he served on board various sail-
ing ships, and then joined Wilson’s line of steamers as a junior
officer. He eventually rose to the position of chief officer, and
was employed in this capacity on board the s.s. “ La Plata," trad-
ing principally between Hull and the Baltic. In 1887 he left
England for the colonies, and obtaining a position with Burns,
Philp and Co., of Thursday Island, stayed with that firm till
April, 1895, when he joined Mr. James Clark in pearling,
and was placed in charge of the schooner “ Silvery Wave ” and
fleet, eventually becoming managing partner. In 1897 he visited
his parents in England, and was due for another holiday home in
July of this year. It was, however, ordained otherwise, for the
hurricane, which destroyed, the pearling fleets, ended Edward
E


Jefferson’s earthly life. As a master mariner he was a general
favourite with all under his command, sailors being always eager
to engage with him. Jeff, as he was familiarly called by everyone,
was deservedly popular with all the residents of Thursday Island.
He was gentle, retiring, and unobtrusive, simple in Ins tastes,
methodical in his habits, staunch to his friends, and did not
possess an enemy.
JOHNHENRY NICHOLAS,
(Silvery Wave).
CAPT. EDWARD JEFFERSON.
(Silvery Wave).
JOHN HENRY NICHOLAS
was the son of Captain H. Nicholas, Government wharfinger of
Thursday Island, and the grandson of John Cheyne, of Mary-
borough. He was born at Sydney on the 27th of July, 1879.
At an early age he removed with his parents to Queensland,
living at different times in Brisbane, Maryborough, and Thurs-
day Island. He was educated at various State schools, and
proved a remarkably apt scholar and obedient pupil. After
leaving school he served with Brown, Campbell and Co., P. J.
Hoyle, and the Silvery Wave Coy., each giving favourable refer-
ences, the following, sent to his father, being a sample .
“Silvery Wave Pearling Coy.
It may afford you a little consolation to know that
I (in fact all of us) had the highest opinion of Jack. He had


plenty of ability, was honest and trustworthy in the highest
degree, and I am sincerely sorry at his loss,
‘ (Signed) James Clark.”
Jack Nicholas was recognised as a very clever and intelligent
youth, and gave promise of being very successful in business.
Anything he undertook to carry out was done thoroughly. He
was remarkably quick in understanding orders from his superior
officers, and never failed to carry out instructions promptly and
faithfully. His loss is felt most keenly by all those who knew
him, and general regret expressed that such a promising career
was so suddenly cut off.
CAPTAIN MURRAY.
The late R. B. Murray was the eldest son of the late Captain
Murray, the first examiner of navigation in Queensland. He was
36 years of age, and unmarried. He had great experience on the
Queensland coast. His first command was the “ Bannockburn,”
barque, at the early age of 21. Latterly he held various positions
CAPT. R. B. MURRAY
(Sagitta).
under the Government, in dredges, etc. He left the ill-fated
Channel Rock Lightship to take charge on the “Aladdin’' (Munro,
Outridge, and Co.), and then he took charge of the “Sagitta, He
leaves a widowed mother, two brothers, and two sisters to mourn
their loss. He was an affectionate son and brother, a faithful
friend, and a reliable officer.


ROBERT CAMERON,
aged 23, was born in Scotland, and was the son of Mr.
W. Cameron, West End, Brisbane. He was of a roving
disposition, and although he tried his best to adapt himself
to his father’s trade of a bootmaker, he was unable to do so, and
leaving Brisbane took to droving in Western Queensland, and also
R. CAMERON.
(Sagitta).
for a time was mailman. He was a good Christian lad, con
nected with the Brethren, a total abstainer, and very musical.
He went to Thursday Island in the lugger “ Zephyr,” and failing
to get suitable employment was taken on as A.B. by Mr. Alfred.
Outridge to assist on the “ Sagitta.
WILLIAM POWELL.
Captain of the “North Wales,” was a native of Dublin. He was
at different times in charge of the vessels, Zodiac, W entworth,
“ Mary Ogilvie,” “ Meg Merrilees,” “ Zephyr,” and others; and
he has taken various luggers up to Thursday Island. He leaves
a widow, a daughter of 16, and a son of 12, who are being
assisted by the Shipwreck Relief Society of New South AAales.


GTJSTAF OSCAR FUHRMAN
was bom at Gothenburg, Sweden, on the sth of March, 1853.
Leaving home at the early age of 14 he took to sea life, and.
visited many parts of the world, eventually settling in Queensland
when 18 years of age. Entering the service of the Government,
he joined the Pilot cutter, running between Normanton and
Burketown, and subsequently served at Cooktown and Moreton
Bay. In 1876 he was sent to Piper Island Lightship, staying
there for a considerable time until he went to England. On his
return he went into the Island trade, first as mate, and then as
master. He married at Brisbane in 1883. He then went to
CAPT. FUHRMAN.
(Lightship).
Sydney, taking several vessels from that port to Thursday Island
for the pearling trade. Re-joining the Queensland service, he
took charge of Piper Island Lightship for five years, when he was
transferred to Proudfoot Shoal, and then to the Channel Rock
Lightship as master. It is strange to note that the hurricane
occurred on his 46th birthday. He was a good husband, a kind
father, a firm friend, and a man of quiet and unassuming
manners. He belonged to the Masonic craft, being a member of
the Victoria Lodge, No. 1186, E.C. He left behind a widow in
very delicate health, two sons, and three daughters—the eldest
14 and the youngest 3.


DOUGLASS LEE,
Mate of the Channel Rock Lightship, was born on the 14th
July, 1868. He came of an old Scotch family on his father's side,
and from an English family on his mother’s. He was educated in
Edinburgh, ran away to sea when about 14, and worked his way
up to be third mate. He then entered the American Navy, and
after serving for several years, came to Queensland, entering the
water police at Thursday Island. He then became a warder in
Townsville Gaol, and afterwards tally-clerk for four years with
Burns, Philp and Co. Thence he went into the Pilot service, he
and his wife living on Curtis Island until the latter’s health
gave way, when they removed to Rockhampton. The last three
years of his life he spent in the lightships on the coast of Queens-
land. He had the American flag tattooed on the right arm.
Captain John Mackay, Harbour Master, Brisbane, speaks very
highly of Lee, who must have been, from all accounts, a, superior
man. His widow states that in losing her husband she has lost
all that made life worth living.
DOUGLASS LEE
(Lightship).
HENRY KARR.
(Lightship).
HENRY KARR (KASSUER)
was about 28 years of age, and was a native of Germany. He
was a fireman on one of the Shire boats, but leaving on account


of sickness he landed in Townsville in the latter part of 1894.
After being in Townsville Hospital for a short time he was
employed casually at different work until he joined the Channel
Rock Lightship about two and a half years ago. Mr. R. H.
Bartlett, of the launch “ Teal,” who supplied this information,
further states that Karr was painstaking, industrious, and well
liked by all who came in contact with him. He was in constant
communication with his parents, who live in Germany, and of
whom he thought a great deal.
DANIEL CROWLEY.
The subject of this memoir had only been a few months on
board the ill-fated Channel Rock Lightship when the hurricane of
4th March wrecked the vessel. He had very few acquaintances,
and no relatives in the colony. From information obtained from
DANIEL CROWLEY.
(Lightship).
the former, it appears he was an unmarried man, born in Skib-
bereen, South of Ireland, and was about 62 years of age. He
was a pensioner of the Imperial Navy, and had served his country
for twenty-three years, attaining the rank of gunner’s mate on
LI.M.S. “Excellent.” He also served on H.M.S. “Wolverine”


for five years, in the Queensland Defence Force for six years, and
on the “ Merrie England ” for three years. He was of a. peculiar
retiring disposition, very temperate and conservative, and seemed
to confide in no one. At one time he was known to possess con-
siderable means, and at the time of his death had saved a fair
sum of money. There appears to be no one to- claim it, for the
only relative he had was a brother, formerly resident in Tun-
bridge Wells, Kent, England, but whose present address is not
known.
Sympathy with the Bereaved.
When the dire news was known, universal sorrow and
sympathy were expressed, cablegrams, telegrams, and letters
being received from all parts of Australasia, and even from
America and England, indicative thereof.
The following appeared in the “Courier ’’ of 18th March :
“ The Premier has communicated to us the following tele-
gram which he received yesterday from his Excellency the
Cover nor, who is now in Tasmania : —■' Please convey my deep
sorrow at learning of the disaster in North Queensland, and my
sympathy with the sufferers. I have only now heard the news,
having been cut off from the telegraph. (Signed) Lamington.’
“ Mr. Dickson requests us at the same time to state that the
members of the Government have been profoundly shocked by
the appalling calamity to which Lord Lamington so feelingly
alludes, and desire to express through our columns their deep
sympathy with the sorrowing relatives of those who have been so
suddenly cut off in the fulness of health and vigour.”
The Honourable Robert Philp, the Treasurer, who was at
Townsville at the time of the disaster, and who was very active in
ordering search and relief parties to be organised, wired his con-
dolences.
Captain Almond also, who carried out the Treasurer’s wishes
most readily and kindly, giving all the information at his disposal
to the sorrowing relatives of the deceased, expressed both orally
and by letter his sympathy.


Sympathetic references were made and prayers offered up in
most of the Queensland churches, and special memorial services
were held at Nundah and at Thursday Island.
Special prayers were offered up for the sufferers at West-
minster Abbey, and many other churches in the Old Land.
The following is an extract from the “ Torres Straits
Pilot ” : —-
“ Memorial services were held in the Quetta Church on Sun-
day last, morning and evening, the Rev. C. F. Seymour officiat-
ing, the church being filled on each occasion. The interior was
neatly and suitably draped and set out with white flowers. In the
Roman Catholic Church also special services were held in
sympathy with those who had lost their relatives and friends.
There was a meeting last Tuesday evening held in the late
Japanese Club House, by the Japanese Brethren's Society, to
mourn for those who had been lost in the recent tei'rible storm.
The purport for holding the meeting was explained by Mr. R.
Nakagawa, representing the Japanese Brethren s Society, and
prayers were read by the Rev. C. F. Seymour after a portion of
scripture had been read by Mr. I. Nakashiba. There were several
letters of condolence read by Messrs. R. Nakagawa, I. Abe, T.
Sasaki, K. Sakamoto, and I. Nakashiba. In concluding the




meeting a brief address, sympathetic and affecting, was delivered
by the Rev. C. F. Seymour. It is reported that a monument in
memory of those who had been lost in the recent terrible storm
will be erected shortly.’’
All of the Colonial newspapers had articles bearing on the
subject.
The following is reprinted from the Brisbane “ Telegraph,"
of 11th March, 1899 :
“ANOTHER GREAT SORROW.’
“When we read one of Mr. Wragge's literary gymnastic
efforts last week in describing the storms in the iNorth, we little
supposed that the tropical disturbance was piling up sorrow upon
sorrow for Brisbane families and Brisbane owners, besides
sending to silence of the deep four hundred coloured men, repre-
senting Asiatic and Polynesian races. Those who clamour against
the so-called ‘ alien ’ may do well to pause here and consider how
vast they would have regarded the disaster if this had
swept away four hundred white men. Not only all Queensland,
but all Australia, and even all the nation, would have joined in
a prolonged wail of sorrow at the awful disaster. The loss of a
dozen or so young men, known to us all, and loved by families
in. our midst, is bad enough. The loss of 400 such would have-
been well nigh unbearable. To the Outridge and Atthow
families—widely diffused as they are in cur immediate midst—
words of sympathy in their hour of grief will be tendered from
all sides, and such consolation as can be, will be offered freely.
It is not known if the families of some of the others who were
drowned—the sailors on the schooners and the lightkeepers who
form the faithful watch on the sea—are in need of help, but
immediately such wants are made known the big heart of public
sympathy will loosen purses, and aid will flow in. Then, too, our
sympathy may be extended to those who are yet in doubt as to
the fate of sons and brothers whose names are not yet recorded
among the drowned. Hope for the best buoys them up to catch
at the belief that they may yet be alive. Such anxiety wears the
mind more than actual hopelessness.
“Apart from the sorrow and sadness attendant upon such
an extensive loss of life, there is the commercial aspect of the
disaster. Schooners, luggers, and diving boats have been tossed


about like cockle shells by the tempest, crushed to pieces as in
the hand of a giant, and cast useless upon the reefs and islands.
The loss of these means loss of money, but the paralysis of the
pearling trade for many months means even greater loss. Men,
who ten days ago were in comfortable, not to say affluent, cir-
cumstances, are to-day back at the initial stages, and the toil of
years has to be repeated. To them also is our sympathy due.
They come, however, of an undaunted race, and true to tradition
they will not be dismayed by disaster. The pluck and energy, the
intelligence and acumen which have guided them in the past,
will stand by them in the future to build up the comforts recently
so ruddy snatched from their hands. ’’
The following is reprinted from the Brisbane “Courier"
of 10th and 11th March, 1899 :
"THE HURRICANE IN THE NORTH."
“ Expressions of sorrow in connection with the terrible
disaster that has overtaken the pearling industry of this colony
are multiplying; and the Governor as well as members of the
Ministry have hastened to convey their profound sympathy with
relatives of the lost pearlers and with the survivors of the hurri-
cane. Sufferers may rest assured that the community has been
deeply stirred by the news which has come through so tardilv ;
while those who are anxious for further information may be
certain that no stone will be left unturned to succour the dis-
tressed and otherwise to gauge the full extent of the mischief
done."
" Last Sunday's hurricane would appear to have inflicted a
severe blow on the pearling industry in the North, and our news
this morning tends to confirm the sad story of loss and ruin.
Comparative immunity from disaster, which had been the lot of
pearlers in Torres Straits, had bred a sense of security now proved
to be false, and the very success of past years helped to make
their fleets a prey for the winds and waves.’’
The following is an extract taken from the “ London Letter
of the Brisbane “Telegraph," dated 22nd April. 1899;
“ It may afford some little consolation to those of your people
who are suffering from the effects of the terrible hurricane on the
coast to know that all England sincerely sympathises with them.
When the news of the calamity reached us we felt as if a member
of the family had been stricken down. At every colonial meeting


in London, of course, reference has been made to the untoward
event, but at meetings on purely English matters the most hearty
sympathy has been expressed for Queensland. The calamity was
mentioned by the preacher at Westminster Abbey on Sunday last,
and the prayers of the congregation were asked for the sufferers.
The blow is a heavy one for a small and young colony, but
Queensland has, I hope, the mettle to meet it. Troubles and
difficulties have often proved the grit of the British colonist. So
may it be with you. In the meantime be assured that you have
the warm sympathy of ‘the old folks at home.”’
THE MONUMENT.
It was considered desirable that some lasting monument
should be erected near the place where our relatives and so many
of our friends were resting. With this object in view, and also to
obtain, if possible, from the natives and survivors some more
definite information, as to the identity of the bodies buried, Mr.
P. P. Outridge visited the scene of the disaster three months
after the occurrence. The stone procured is of marble with leaded
letters to make them more lasting. On 6th June photographs of
the original grave of Alfred Outridge were taken by an old friend.
A grave had been prepared by the officers and crew of the “Olive’’
about three-quarters of a mile north-east from where the natives
nad buried the body, and here the remains were re-interred in a
coffin made of timber from the “Sagitta’’ (his old ship), “Silvery
Wave, ” Lightship, and “ Zoe.” The coffin was not embellished
in any way, but there was a melancholy appropriateness in its
construction. The ships and the man had been connected in life,
and were now in death as well. No word was spoken at the re-
interment, the duty was performed in silence, the hearts of all
present were too full for utterance, but although strong men
stood around the grave the tense features and quivering lips gave
evidence of the efforts to repress the strong emotions that affected
Ml there.
Next morning the monument was erected and made as stable
as possible, a space of about eight feet square being cleared and
cemented so that grass could not overrun the sacred spot and
possibly injure the stone when burnt.


ALFRED OUTRIDGE’S GRAVE.
ALFRED OUTRIDGE’S GRAVE.
Cross shows where remains were re-interred, and monument erected.


Monument erected under the hills at Cape Melville in memory of pearlers lost in the hurricane




Views of the monument are given, and it will be noticed
that the names of all the white men who were lost appear, except
that of Captain Powell. This was an unintentional omission,,
which is much regretted by those responsible. Our loss was
great, but so was that of the relatives of the others lost, and the
community of sorrow was intended to be expressed on the monu-
ment.
From the view containing the stone a correct idea can be
obtained of the locality. The stone is facing north-west, and the
hills in the distance are to the south-east. About thirty yards to
the left, high bare hills covered with granite boulders rise
abruptly to the heig'ht of nearly a thousand feet, forming a monu-
ment impossible of imitation by human hands.
The grave stone is about half a mile from the beach, and
can be easily found, being as before stated, just under the hills,
from which a gentle slope extends away to the south. A few
yards from the beach a belt of scrub existed before the hurricane.
It was quite demolished, but will, no doubt, grow again, in fact
the stumps were sprouting again at the time of the visit.
The best track to the grave will be found leading from the
watering place (a spring under the hills about a mile and a half
south-west along the beach from Cape Melville), then through the
belt of scrub southerly, then about south-east. A native track
passes within a few feet of the grave. The country on the slope
from the hills to the flat is covered with long rank grass with an
occasional stunted tree, but on the flat, trees of a larger growth
exist, as may be seen from the illustration.
Particular directions are thus given of the locality so that
any who see this account, and who may be in the neighbourhood
may readily find the monument and give it any care and atten-
tion that may be needed, in the way of removing encroaching
grass or gathered debris, that if burnt would damage the stone.
We earnestly solicit the kind offices of all friends of sorrow-
ing humanity who may be in the neighbourhood to give the
stone such care. A report of any such visit sent to the Outridge
Printing Co., Queen Street, Brisbane, will be thankfully received,
and if any important repairs are necessary we hope that such will
be reported without delay.


Close view of Memorial Stone at Cape Melville.


CONCLUSION.
If the foregoing pages bring comfort to the hearts of the
bereaved, or prove instructive and interesting to the general
reader our object will have been attained. In the hope that this
may be so, we conclude, leaving our effort to the kindly considera-
tion of the reader.
FINIS.






