

The
Martyrdom of
Nurse Cavell
By EDITH DAHLKE




THE MARTYRDOM
OF NURSE CAVELL
ALSO
THE REVERIE
By EDITH DAHLKE


NURSE CAVELL


THE MARTYRDOM OF NURSE
CAVELL


THE MARTYRDOM OF
NURSE CAVELL
''That you may be loved, show yourself
deserving of love.”
"Duty makes one work well, but love
makes one work beautifully”
CROSS the sea, ir; the land of shadows,
a frail woman, with a heart over-
flowing with love, and pity for the large
family of suffering humanity, laboured
amongst the dark clouds of indescribable
misery caused by the horrors of War.
With courageous spirit-—worked, un-
daunted by hardships, her silent influ-
ence, courage, and serenity, helping
many from breaking down utterly into
absolute despair under the strain of a
nightmare of remembrance of awful


scenes enacted in that fair land, by the
callous brutality of a barbarous foe.
one aim "The Ideal.”
"A woman's soul, most soft, yet
strong .”
Through the long night, pain-racked
forms, burning with fever, tossing rest-
lessly, found comfort, relieved by the
cool soft touch, soothing presence, gentle
voice, and absolute fearlessness, of the
ideal nurse. At times, to some, sounds
of music could be faintly imagined in
the soft Stillness, "and the night became
the touches of soft harmony.”
duty with its Still cold face, and
beckoning fingers called—leading
slowly into other paths of labour. Love
smiling gladly murmured—" For all time!
through deep sorrows, through dark


tragedy, loneliness and tears, Love that
priceless treasure will remain. Even
though the way lead upward to the
awful gate of martyrdom.”
"To love with perfect unselfishness is the
perfeftion of love"
a wonderful garden, haunted by old
time memories of peace, perfedt
redtfulness, and golden dreams of a
glorious future, before the shadow fell.
With wild roses climbing over the grey
old buildings, and a tiny trickling stream,
half hidden by bushes, softly flowing
over the Clones, and trees made glorious
with Autumn’s dainty touch. Behind
the distant hill-tops the sun slowly rises,
flooding the grounds with golden splen-
dour. Bird calls echo from the branches
of trees, in joyous morning greeting,


peace and brightness seem to reign
supreme.
without warning. The
mi&s fall, the golden sunlight is
over-shadowed with its icy breath. A
bird flies slowly acrosslthe leaden sky to
covert in some sheltering woodland.
Night seems to spread her brooding
wings, and one’s spellbound gaze strays
from receding trees upward into the
depth of such terrifying blackness, earth
and air are hushed heavy with a breath-
less prophetic silence.
Affrighted songsters hush their notes
of melody. Not a sound is heard until
the tramp of men’s heavy footsteps re-
sound from the distance, and a £tern
sharp note of command rings shrilly
forth from out the silence. And the
mi&s roll slowly away.


A shudder of apprehension, a dread
of one knows not what approaching
horror goes forth into the £ill air.
Then realization flashes forth to the
hidden silent inmates.
It is Death’s hour! The death angel
hovers near. Another tragedy to be
enacted. A helpless woman for its
vidtim, whose only crime—Her love for
others!
With face;white, but in absolute silence
and dignity she walks beside her guards,
her eyes ever toward the towering moun-
tain on the distant horizon.
"I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills
from whence cometh my help”
/jftNE ladt glance around, upon the
beautiful trees, the sky, the sun, the
fair earth, profaned by the feet of
tyrants. And thoughts come rushing to


her mind with forceful recolle&ions of
the far away English home, the loved
ones, she would see no more.
’'Abide with me fa£ falls the Even-
tide,” surely they are singing it for her
in the dear home Chapel!
How the golden shaded sunlight lights
up the grandeur of the dim old church,
as the rays of light steal softly across
the rosy tinted glass, reflecting again
and again a thousand mi&y lights, and
great tears gather and roll from the
weary eyes at thoughts of Mother!
Ah! to die so far away, and thus—
Wandering alone in the land of night
amid such dense blackness!
sleep is very tranquil to the
tired frame. You are not lonely
when you sleep, neither does your heart
ache, nor do you feel the weariness, or


the burden of the day. She had laboured
well, that work was finished for her the
night—the blackness. "Oh death, cruel
death, mystery of pain, only the in
the Infinitely Loving can glimpse your
meaning.”
For those she had helped—the dawn
of day. She had not lived in vain. A
smile of ineffable resignation and peace
steals over the calm face. Then, turn-
ing, faced her guards.
-fpROM afar sound the cry of affrighted
birds.
{JTHEN perfedt stillness reigns once more
within the silent depths of the gar-
den, and from the heavy haze of black-
ness the sun comes slowly forth from
behind great clouds, shining weakly


through the morning air, the
gentle murmuring breezes pausing for
an instant carry onward in their flight a
message to the sons of men.
"Greater Love hath no man than this F


A REVERIE


A REVERIE
Grant me to see my duty face to face,
And to perform it faithfully ”
sun was setting round and red,
beyond the lonely fields and grey
distant woods, the bright rays of
light falling across a field of golden corn
ripe for harvest. Dotted in and out of
the golden splendour were vivid splashes
of color, revealing poppies everywhere—
red, white, pink and blue, but the red
predominating. Corn-flowers and other
sweet-scented blooms grew luxuriantly.
mingled fragrance of the flowers
seemed to cling around and enclose
one with an invisible ring of perfume, so


Strong and sweet it was. A bird call
rang out in the Still evening air, and from
the branches of distant trees, hidden
securely by the dense masses of foliage,
hundreds of bird-notes shrilly ascended,
diminishing finally to a gentle twittering
of the feathered songSters trilling out
their Te Deum in a low, sweet key, and
with the happy chirpy note of a cricket,
hidden cosily away amongSt the grass,
were the only sounds to be heard.
Then silence.
fit tiny baby form, with rosy, dimpled
cheeks, and lovely golden clustering
curls, comes toddling down the narrow
village road, her baby fingers lovingly
clasping a minature Belgian flag, oc-
casionally holding it forth inviting the
frolics of the gentle breeze and laugh-
ing gaily as the wind lightly Stirs its
silken folds.


Clasped within the shelter of the little
maiden’s arms is a gaily dressed doll.
A bend in the road reveals the corn-field,
glorious with the declining rays of the
sun.
(2JT sight of the bright-hued poppies, the
child holds out her arms in admira-
tion of so much beauty, "Oh pretty,
pretty flowers!” The treasured flag and
toy fall down unnoticed on the edge of
the path, and the little maid breathlessly
climbing the &ile, falls panting and
laughing into the enchanted field, only
to rise hurriedly to fill hands and arms
with the gorgeous red and pink treasures.
rtjWAY in the distance a dull rumbling
shakes the horizon, as of an earth-
quake. Then the crash of musketry
from the wooded ridge to the left; and


the thunder of galloping hoofs; above
the rattle of guns rises the shouts of
men, the deep barking of dogs, the
screams of women and children, con-
tinued quick-firing —which slackens
gradually—then a burSt of cheering, and
down the village Street a mass of men,
whose uniforms proclaimed them to be
the dreaded Uhlans, hurriedly charged.
They had been repulsed—but not until a
fearful vengeance had been meted out
upon the peaceful village homes—and
their occupants.
officer, blood-stained and furious,
shouting orders sharply to the men
under his control, catching sight of the
flag lying on the edge of the field, with a
savage gesture and oath, spurns the
emblem with his heel, afterwards savage-
ly tearing it into shreds.


A cry of anguish rends the £ill even-
ing air, and a sweet baby face, with big,
innocent blue-grey eyes, and golden curls
massed closely round her head, stands
confronting the furious German.
"Oh my pretty, pretty flag," and tears
roll down the soft baby face, as lovingly
gathering the torn fragments with patient
earnestness and care, she attempts to
smooth out and join the spoiled folds.
For the moment the doll was forgotten;
then, remembering, the child catches
sight of the broken and shattered pieces
of the treasured toy. That, also, the
savage feet has not spared. Her grief
becomes uncontrolled, and sob after sob
shakes the tiny form.
the moon rises its silvery rays
shine out over the desolate corn-
fields; the one-time gay poppies hang


limp and dead, broken down with the
tread of heavy feet of a hurrying ho£t of
men. The shadowy branches of the
trees throw weird shadows and shapes
upon the paths. Somewhere in the dis-
tance a dog howls piteously.
6JT the edge of the field, close to the
narrow lane, a little girl, whose
golden hair is all earth-stained and
tumbled, lies motionless—an ominous
&ain upon the white frock.
Clasped within the tiny arms are
remnants of a tom Belgian flag, and
around her a mass of fading poppies and
com flowers. The rays of the silver
moon shine gently and caressingly upon
the white upturned face of the little one.
flrnE sign of dawn—in the ea& the
sun slowly rises—shining out from


amongst great banks of clouds, as though
reludtant to look down upon so much
desolation, sadness and despair. Near
the trampled corn-fields forms of men
are slowly moving. A woman, from
whose eyes the light of reason has for
ever fled, crouches upon the ground,
slowly rocking the &ill form of the
golden-haired baby, meanwhile croon-
ing lullabies and cradle songs, heedless
alike of everything else around, of the
sobbing of the little band of women and
strong men’s pity and horror of this
awful tragedy.
pon a hill-top, spent and weary with
fatigue and sleeplessness, shortage
of food, and the appalling horrors of the
war against tyranny, a small band of
men patiently wait.
In spite of the havoc this awful war


has wrought, a smile lingers on their
lips, and courage in their eyes, as they
continue to look away into the distance.
Listening, waiting, hoping, for the help
that and will come from the far-
away homeland, confident in the know-
ledge that when their comrades finally
realise the awful calamities threatening
their nearest and dearest, as well as
humanity generally, they will hasten to
do their part, and quickly, to save their
country and that country's homes! To
crush for ever the iron heel of tryanny.
This thought goes out over the sea.
"Come—but come quickly."
"Fear not to share the burdens your
brothers are bearing ”


