

THE TESTIMONY WHICH ASTRONOMY
FURNISHES TO THE
ATTRIBUTES OF THE CREATOR:
[?]
LECTURE BY
JOHN TEBBUTT, ESQ., F.R.A.S
Of the Windsor Observatory.
1878




THE TESTIMONY WHICH ASTRONOMY
FURNISHES TO THE
ATTRIBUTES OF THE CREATOR.
A LECTURE BY JOHN TEBBUTT, ESQ., F.R.A.S.
Prayer having been offered, and a portion of the Holy Scriptures
read, the assembly sang the well-known hymn, —
“ Father, how wide Thy glory shines,” &c.
The lecturer then delivered the following Address:—
My Dear Christian Friends,
Among the many hymns which are now used, every one of you,
doubtless, has someone or more which he particularly cherishes.
It may, perhaps, be unnecessary to inform you that the beautiful
hymn which we have just sung is one of those which I especially
esteem. It is, indeed, calculated in some degree to awaken in your
minds feelings which it is intended that my lecture should call forth
to-night.
The Great Father of the Universe has revealed himself to his
creature man by a grand and noble book. That book consists of two
volumes. The first or oldest of'these volumes is probably one which
few of my hearers have deeply consulted, while the second is that
the study of which is the object of the Association in connection with
which I have the honor to address you. The first volume of God’s
great book of revelation is the volume of Nature, and the second
that commonly known as the Bible. There are good Christians in
these days who uphold the majesty and inspiration of the second
volume while they despise, or at least lower indefinitely, the majesty
and importance of the first. In the views of such estimable men I
need scarcely inform you Ido not concur. God has indeed himself


given us a very good testimony of the value of tlie first volume in the
pages of tlie second. I will just give you two quotations to illustrate
tliis testimony. If you turn to the 19th. Psalm you will find these
words :—“ The heavens declare the glory of G-od and the firmament
showeth his handiwork. Day unto day uttereth speech, and night
unto night showeth knowledge. There is no speech nor language,
where their voice is not heard. Their line is gone out through all the
earth, and their words to the ends of the world. In them hath he set
a tabernacle for the sun, which is as a bridegroom coming out of his
chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race. His going
forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of
it, and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.” And if you read
the latter part of the same psalm you will find that the words I have
thus quoted typify the law of the Lord as contained in the second
great volume of revelation. Again turn to the first chapter of St.
Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, and at the 19th verse it will be found
that the apostle reasons thus with them who sin against the light of
nature : —“ Because that which may be known of G-od is manifest to
them, for God hath shewed it unto them. For the invisible things of
bim from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so
that they are without excuse, because, that when they knew God, they
glorified bim not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.” And here
I would also maintain, by the way, that the majesty and glory of the
first volume of God’s revelation is in no small degree attested by the
fact that the texts of many of the beautiful discourses of Jesus were
taken from it. As I have already said there are some estimable
Christians who greatly undervalue the teaching of the first volume of
God’s Book, because, as they think, the study of it resulted in past
ages in gross idolatry, and in the present age in bold infidelity.
But St. Paul, in the passage I have just quoted, so far from
condemning the study of the volume of nature, only says that an
acquaintance with it leaves men without excuse. An acquaintance
with either volume must indeed, to use another phrase of the inspired
apostle, be either the savour of life unto life or the savour of death
unto death. The fault I assert is not in the volume of nature, but in
the evil tendency of man’s corrupt will. As well might we under-
value the study of the Bible because by far the great majority of
those whose religion is professed to be founded on it entertain the
most preposterous notions of its teaching, notions certainly quite as
absurd as any that ever possessed the minds of those who gathered
their knowledge from the volume of nature. lam truly sorry that it


is fast becoming a fashion in some quarters, where we should least of
all expect it, to attempt to build up the truth of the Christian religion
by detracting from the nobility of that system of God’s truth which
lies in nature, and this because some scientific men have not scrupled
to conceal their contempt for religion as it is revealed in the Bible.
Such teachers dishonour science because of the faults of some of its
professors, but I must gently remind them that we should not have to
go very far to find theological infidels and theological idolaters too.
Indeed there are some so-called Christian theologians who would
deprive us of the right to study the second volume of God’s great
Book, as well as the right to study the first. Having briefly shown
you from the Bible itself that the Volume of Nature is one of great
dignity and importance, and testifies of its Author, we will now open
it for a brief space, and read a few lessons from its pages.
One of the most beautiful traits in a child’s character is faith —
faith in its parent. This implies trust in the attributes of the parent;
confidence in his power ; confidence in his wisdom; confidence in his
love. And the more the parent manifests his power, his wisdom and
his love, the more the child’s faith increases and abounds. But a more
beautiful characteristic still is the faith maintained by the child of God
in the attributes of his Heavenly Father. And this Heavenly Father
has written His character in the sky above and in the earth beneath,
so that we are left without excuse if we do not have faith in Him.
Job, a primitive student of nature and an eminent example of a faith-
ful child of God, read the language of the sky and of the earth with
good effect. “ Have faith in God,” is the great precept inculcated by
the Saviour Himself. Now in order to this faith, we must enter-
tain worthy conceptions of Him, and these conceptions we can get in
no small degree from the Book of Nature, whose words go into the
ends of the world. I shall this evening confine my attention to one
part of this great book, namely, that which is the daily study of the
astronomer. We shall consider briefly then the testimony which
Astronomy furnishes to the attributes of the Almighty, and the
consequent claims which He has upon our faith and love.
The first attribute we shall consider, is the surpassing grandeur
of the conceptions of the Divine Mind. As an illustration of this
attribute let us first take the Solar System, properly so called, that is,
the Sun with its attendant planets and comets. In the centre of this
great system is located the Sun, a magnificent globe 850,000 miles in
diameter, enveloped in a perpetual wreath of flame. About the
greatest conception which an ordinary man has of a conflagration is
that of the burning of London, but what is this compared with the
fiery ocean which surrounds the sun ? We regard the earth on which


we dwell as an enormous body, and so it really is, but yet it becomes
insignificant when compared with tbe central luminary. The diameter
of the latter exceeds that of the former one hundred times, and its
volume is so great that it could contain 1,240,000 globes as large as
our planet. It has been calculated that a globe as large as the earth,
if surrounded with a fiery envelope similar in nature to that of the
sun, would at the sun’s distance afford only the 11,600 th part of the
light and heat we receive from the great luminary; and further, that
the heat emitted by the sun in every second of time is equal to that which
would be given out in the burning of 11,600 millions ot millions of tons
of coal! When we regard the stupendousness of the solar globe and its
ever restless ocean of fire, our minds are impressed with an idea which
does not come into the ordinary range of men’s conceptions. We can-
not wonder that such a grand object is not merely the subject of the
observation of astronomers generally, but also of some of the most
eminent of the brotherhood in particular, who pay little attention to
any other department of the science than that which relates to solar
physics. I have hinted at the restlessness which characterises the
ocean of flame surroundin g the sun, so before we quit our contempla-
tion of this grand luminary, I will advert to one or two great
disturbances which have been observed by astronomers. The first
observation I would direct your attention to is that of Hodgson and
Carrington on the Ist September, 1859, a year remarkable, it will be
remembered, for disturbances in the solar photosphere and for the
exhibition of auroras. These two astronomers were engaged in the
telescopic examination of a group of those dark spots which were at
that time so abundant on the sun, when they perceived two patches of
intensely bright white light suddenly make their appearance in front of
the spots. These remained visible for the space of about five minutes,
and from the meaurements taken it was found that during that brief
period they had changed their position on the solar surface to the
extent of about 83,700 miles. The rate of their movement could not
therefore be less than 100 miles per second. Just conceive for one
moment the amount of physical energy required for the production of
such a phenomenon as this ! It was a remarkable fact that at the
same time a marked disturbance took place in the self-recording
magnetic instruments at the ELew Observatory, and both phenomena
were preceded and followed during many hours by a universal
magnetic storm. For some hours indeed, both before and after this
great outbreak in the solar photosphere, the magnetic instruments all
over our planet were greatly disturbed and auroras were seen in
abundance. It will, perhaps, be remembered by some'of you that at
that time the colonial telegraph wires, to use the language of the


newspapers, were seized with an unaccountable fit of restiveness and
almost absolutely refused to transmit messages. I will ask your
patience for' a brief interval while I quote from an able writer an
account of another remarkable manifestation of the energy of the sun’s
eruptive forces. “Professor Young, of Dartmouth College, Hanover,
in the United States, was observing the edge of the sun in October
1871, having his telescope armed with a powerful spectroscope and
directed upon a long low-lying band of solar clouds. I say low-lying,
but in point of fact the upper side of the cloud layer was fully 50,000
miles above the sun’s surface, the lower side being not less than 20,000
miles above that surface. The cloud layer was about 400,000 miles in
length. Professor Young was called away from his telescopic work
for half an hour at a somewhat interesting epoch, for he had noticed
that a bright rounded cloud was rapidly forming beneath the larger
and quieter cloud layer. In less than half an hour he returned,
however, and then, to his amazement, he found that the great cloud
had been literally scattered into fragments by an explosion from
beneath. The small rounded cloud had changed in shape, as if the
explosion had taken place through it, and all that remained of the
large cloud was a stream of ascending fragments, averaging about
3,000 miles in length and alout 300 in breadth. Professor Young
watched the ascent of these fragments (each of which, be it noted,
had a surface largely exceeding that of the British Isles), and he
found that before vanishing (as by cooling) they reached a height of
about 210,000 miles. Moreover, he timed their ascent, and from his
time measurements I have been able to demonstrate the surprising
fact that the outrushing matter by which the great cloud had been
rent to shreds, must have crossed the sun’s surface at a rate of at least
500 miles per second.”
An intelligent and devout person unacquainted with practical
astronomy can scarcely read such words as these without feeling his
mind expanding in the contemplation of the facts; but then he
receives such astronomical information only on the testimony of
others. He has not yet mastered the alphabet, he has not yet
possessed himself of the key by which he can read for himself such
awe inspiring lessons from the volume of nature. When I was in the
position which most of you occupy to-night with reference to
astronomy, I was accustomed to hear with interest the stupendous
facts which astronomers had learned from the heavens, but I did not
comprehend, I did not realize the truth of those grand lessons. Now,
however, I have learned the alphabet, and so am able to read much of
the divine handiwork in the heavens, and am therefore in a position
to pledge you my word that the statements which astronomers make


about tbe magnitudes and distances of the heavenly bodies are no
exaggerations. Well, I have briefly presented to your minds the
stupendous nature of that body which we call the sun ; and who that
devoutly regards it can refuse to acknowledge that it declares the
grandeur of those conceptions which dwell in the Divine Mind ? The
sun alone as a single object of contemplation declares the glory of
God, and shows his handiwork. But we cannot rest here in our
contemplations. The conceptions of the great Architect are greater
than this. We will now essay a rapid but mighty journey over the
system of which the sun, magnificent as it is, is but the centre.
Passing outwards from the great orb we come to Mercury, the nearest
known planet to the sun. It is a globe 2,962 miles in diameter, or
somewhat larger than our own moon. It revolves round the sun in
about 88 of our days at an average or mean distance from him of 35
millions of miles. On reaching a distance of 66 millions of miles, we
arrive at the orbit of Venus, the planet which is sometimes seen so
beautifully bright in the east before sunrise, and at other times in the
west after sunset. In the former aspect it rises before the sun, and
is called the morning star, and in the latter it sets after the sun and is
called the evening star. The planet itself is a globe of 7,510 miles in
diameter, being nearly as large as our own earth. It revolves round
the sun in about 225 days. We next come to our own planet, which
is a globe of 7,912 miles in diameter, revolving round the sun in our
year of 365 days at a distance of 91| millions of miles. On stretching
out 139 millions of miles from the sun we reach Mars, 5,000 miles in
diameter. This is the planet which, at its opposition last year, came
unusually near to the earth, and was consequently the subject of much
study with the telescope. The markings on its surface, and the
beautiful polar snows, were remarkably well seen. Leaving Mars
we come to a region which is of no small interest to astronomers.
Until the beginning of the present century this region was not known
to be occupied by any planet, but during the first seven years of the
century four small planets were discovered by means of the telescope
revolving in orbits differing but little from one another. Most
schoolboys knew these four small bodies as Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and
Vesta; their diameters varying from 112 to 218 miles. Since the year
1844 no fewer than 187 asteroids, as they are called, varying from 100
to only a few miles in diameter, have been detected revolving round
the sun within the region referred to. You will, doubtless, remember
the hypothesis of Olbers respecting the small planets Ceres and Pallas.
They moved so nearly in the same path round the sun that he
conjectured they were fragments of a large planet which had in
remote antiquity been shivered to pieces by some great catastrophe.


The probability of this hypothesis is strengthened by the additions
that have been made by discovery to the number of small bodies in
this region. Leaving the swarm of asteroids in our outward journey
from the sun we arrive at Jupiter, the largest planet of the system. It
revolves round the sun in nearly twelve of our years at a mean distance
of 476 millions of miles, and is attended by four satellites or moons,
whose never ceasing phenomena of transits, occupations, and eclipses
are among the most interesting sights to the amateur. The diameter of
this vast globe is 88,400 miles. Before we can come to another planet,
we have to pass over a space from Jupiter nearly equal to that which
separates this planet itself from the sun. At the enormous distance
of 872 millions of miles from the sun we have the magnificent
system of Saturn. The planet is not quite so large as Jupiter, but it
is surrounded by a series of concentric luminous rings, and is attended
by no fewer than eight satellites or moons. The equatorial diameter
of the ball of Saturn is 74,400 miles, the distance of the inner edge of
the inner ring from the surface of the ball is 19,000 miles, and that
of the outer edge of the outer ring 48,000 miles. There are good
reasons for supposing that these rings are not one solid or fluid mass,
but that they are concentric streams of small bodies revolving round
the planet’s globe,—a belt, indeed, of satellites. My object is not to
enter into particulars relating to the several planets but to state their
sizes and distances from the sun in order to give you some conception
of the magnitude of the scale on which the great Architect has
constructed the solar system. Once more then we resume our flight
outwards from the sun and at a distance of 1754 millions of miles we
reach the planet IJranus, a globe of 88,000 miles in diameter revolving
round the sun in rather more than 84 of our years. Another flight
and we come to Neptune, the furthest known planet from the sun.
Here it is time for us to rest and ponder over the mighty journey we
have taken, a journey of no less than 2,746 millions of miles. In the
immensity of. space this globe of 36,600 miles in diameter pursues its
noiseless journey obedient to the simple but grand law of gravitation.
Light from the central sun moving at the rate of 190,000 miles per
second is propagated over the vast abyss reaching the planet in rather
more than four hours from its transmission, and is flung back to us
by reflection in an equal space of time. Talk of the mighty achieve-
ments of man —of the powerful steamer ploughing its way through the
ocean—or of the mighty locomotive dragging its heavy train along
material rails at the rate of a mile a minute. AVliy these contrivances
dwindle into utter insignificance when we come to measure their
dimensions or their speed by the rule of the Divine Architect. In the
planet Neptune we have a locomotive which rolls round the sun on


immaterial rails at tlie rate of 3-| miles per second, not performing one
mighty journey round the central luminary till 165 of the years of
mortal man have expired. When we look hack over the abyss we
have traversed and try to grasp with the mind at once the magnitude
of the solar system and the sizerof the bodies composing it, we cannot
hut be struck with the grandeur Of the divine conceptions. And yet
such a contemplation is calculated to give us only a small idea of those
conceptions. You will marvel, perhaps, when I tell you that the solar
system, grand as it is, is only as a drop in the ocean when we compare
it with the real magnitude of the universe of God. God, in his
providence, has not only permitted the astronomer to mete out the
solar system and to weigh its individual parts in the balance, but he
has graciously designed that he should go one step further and stretch
out his measuring rod to the region of the fixed stars, and it has been
shown by methods which admit of mathematical demonstration that if
our system, compassed as it is by the orbit of Neptune, were viewed
from the nearest of the fixed stars, it would shrink into a mere speck
on the heavens. In other words a globe which could be just encircled
by the orbit of Neptune, or, which amounts to the same thing, had a
diameter of 5,492 millions of miles would at the distance of the nearest
fixed star appear not so large as the planet Jupiter does at present to
the naked eye. After this statement I will leave you to form your
own conceptions as to the distance of the brighter fixed stars. But
vast as this distance is the abyss of space is still more profound, for
on the confines of the visible universe we have congeries of stars which
even with the fight grasping powers of the mightiest telescopes appear
but as faint misty stains on the deep blue of the heavens. The solar
system itself is, indeed, but a small island in the ocean of space. It
matters not how far we plunge into this ocean we can never come to
its confines, for it is infinite. It is, indeed, an ocean without a shore,
and none but the High and Lofty One who inhabiteth eternity can
comprehend it. How magnificent then—how unutterably grand are
the conceptions of the Almighty. And yet this great Being clothes
the lily with beauty and cares for the meanest insect that crawls on
our planet. If this knowledge of the comprehensiveness of the Divine
Mind is capable of generating faith in the corrupt heart of man he
ought, indeed, to have it in abundance.
But now let us .pass on to consider another attribute of the Creator,
namely, his wisdom. God has not left himself without witness in the
heavens as regards his wisdom. As one exemplification of it we have
the beautiful, grand, and withal simple principle of gravitation, which
governs the movements of the solar system. This fundamental
principle of celestial mechanics it pleased The Divine Architect to


reveal to onr countryman Newton. It is enunciated as follows :
Every particle of matter in tlie universe attracts every other particle
of matter with a force or power directly proportioned to the quantity
of matter in each and decreasing as the squares of the distances which
separate the particles increase. This is the beautiful though simple
principle which binds the whole system together and regulates the
movements of all the individual bodies which compose it. It practically
results in the three laws discovered by Kepler previously to the advent
of Newton. They are usually styled laws but they are rather
necessary consequences of the great principle of universal attraction
combined with the initial projections of the different bodies in space.
The laws of Kepler may be stated thus :
1. The planets move in elliptic orbits, having the sun in one of
the foci.
• 2. In each case the line joining the sun and planet moves over
equal areas of the orbit in equal times.
3. The squares of the periodic times of revolution of the planets
about the sun are proportional to the cubes of their mean distances.
The principle of universal attraction as expressed by Newton
being granted, the laws of Kepler, with the addition that bodies may.
also move round the sun in a circle, a parabola or a hyperbola can be
mathematically demonstrated as a necessary consequence, and this
necessary consequence itself is daily proved to the astronomer by
ocular demonstration. Observation has confirmed in ten thousands of
instances, indeed is daily confirming, the truth of universal
gravitation and the laws of Kepler. To the minds of the initiated
these beautiful facts are patent enough. It is on the principle just
enunciated that every figure in the Nautical Almanac, or any other
astronomical ephemeris is computed. It is on this principle that
every eclipse is predicted and every return of a comet is announced.
It was in accordance with these laws that the great total eclipse of
the sun experienced here on the 26th March, 1857, and that the
interesting transit of Venus in December, 1874, were foretold.
Obedient to these grand laws the comet of Encke is now traversing
the ocean of space, and will shortly come within range of our
telescopes for the 28th time since its discovery. There are some
among you, my friends, who, although they have made this country
the land of their adoption, still claim the dear old country as the land
which gave them births You have long since left the scenes of your
childhood, traversed the great deep, and made your homes in this
]and. Now, when we come to think of it, it is a great undertaking to
launch away on the wide waste of waters which compass our globe,
and to be out of sight of land for months together with nothing to


look up upon but tbe mighty abyss of space above, and to look down
upon but the profundity of the great deep below. I daresay a
feeling of something like awe crept over you at the commencement of
your voyage. It was something of this feeling, doubtless, which is
immortalized in the third Ode of Horace when he says that “ oak
surely and threefold brass surrounded his heart who first trusted a
frail vessel to the merciless ocean.” What was it, my friends, that
guided the little bark, for little it was indeed compared with the great
ocean, to which you trusted your life and your fortunes ? Was it not
the professional skill of the navigator, guided by the Nautical
Almanac, that wonderful handbook with which the student of the
volume of nature has provided him ? And after all, that handbook
is only a reflection, and a very partial one too, of the wisdom which is
written above in the language of light. After all we must come to
this, that your vessel was guided—instrumentally indeed by man —-
but really and truly by that wisdom which God has been pleased to
vouchsafe in the stars of heaven. And it is this same wisdom which
is the perpetual guide and safeguard of the commerce of the world.
Another exemplification of the wisdom of the Deity is the continual
of day and night, and the grateful vicissitudes of the
seasons. The wonderful alternation of day and night is secured by
the rotation in twenty-four hours of the earth about an imaginary line
passing through it and called its axis. How necessary is this arrange-
ment to the economy of man, “ Man goeth forth to his work and to
his labour until the evening. How manifold are thy works, O Lord,”
may we exclaim with the sweet singer of Israel, “ in wisdom has thou
made them all, the earth is full of thy riches.” Consider the wants
that are met by this beautiful and wise provision of daily rotation.
The interests of men, the wants of the beasts of the
field, of the fishes of the sea, of the fowls of the air, and
even of the flowers of the field, are all satisfied by this wise
arrangement. The mind is struck with the marvellous adaptation
of the great to the small, and the small to the great, in the
comprehensive scheme of creation. Let us consider again the
perpetual succession of the seasons. The course of the seasons
depends on another simple but withal wise design, namely, that of the
annual revolution of the earth round the sun, the axis of rotation of
the former being inclined to the plane of the orbit and maintaining
its parallelism to a fixed line in space during an entire revolution. If
the axis of rotation were perpendicular or nearly so to the plane of
the annual orbit the polar regions would not only be locked in
perpetual ice and the tropical regions subjected to torrid heat, but there
would, indeed, be no change of seasons at all. On the other hand, if the


axis coincided or nearly so with the plane of the orbit, both the polar
and the equatorial regions would be subjected at one part of thb year
to icy coldness, and at the other part to torrid heat. It does not
require any great effort of the mind to conceive the consequences of
such extreme alternations of temperature. The great Architect has,
however, shown his wisdom by giving to the axis of rotation such an
inclination to the plane of the orbit as conduces to the welfare of the
host of creatures which inhabit our planet. We might read other
lessons of the wisdom of God from the mechanism of the solar
system. We might, for instance, consider the mutual attractions
of the bodies in the system, how the disturbances due to these
attractions will not go on accumulating till they bring about the
destruction of the system, but that they will in cycles, some of very
long and some of very short duration, bring about a compensation,
and thus secure its stability. Time, however, will not allow of
our doing this. Many of you, doubtless, have examined with
some curiosity the mechanism of a clock. Well, when we come to in-
spect a clock, more especially that masterpiece of mechanism, the astro-
nomical clock, we are struck with the wisdom and skill manifested in
its theory and construction. W e perceive that its motive power and its
controlling power are simply the God-given principle of gravitation,
and we marvel at the abilities of the man who so adapted this principle
to the measurement of time. I may tell you that in the great temples
of astronomical science there are clocks whose rate of going may be
depended on within a small fraction of a second for days together. If
we consult the magnificent volumes which issue annually from such
observatories as Greenwich, Paris and Washington, we shall find such
to be the case. And yet what is the wisdom which constructed such
mechanism as this, divinely communicated after all remember, com-
pared with that comprehensive wisdom which set such a stupendous
clock in space as the solar system, whose movements are controlled
by gravitation, whose arbor is the sun, the extremity of whose index
is at the orbit of Neptune, and whose movements notwithstanding its
gigantic proportions, are performed in silent majesty and with a
delicacy and accuracy which themselves supply a test for the time
keeping mechanism of man. The only other evidence which I shall
adduce to-night of the wisdom of God is the provision of the lesser
light which rules over the night. Many of you who have studied
political economy, and more particularly, perhaps, those who have
conducted our municipal affairs and contemplated the lighting of a
whole city with gas, might well turn their thoughts to the moon, and
marvel at the wisdom of God which has provided such a magnificent
lamp, 2,100 miles in diameter, for the successive illumination not only


of cities, but of tbe whole earth. Our satellite, too,, in accordance
with the principle of gravitation, produces the daily tides, and by the
ebbing and flowing of our rivers the water is purified for the service
of man. How many there are who see these illustrations of the
wisdom and goodness of God, and yet never appreciate them. So
much then for a lesson from the volume of nature concerning the
wisdom of nature’s God ; we will now turn over a leaf of the book,
and learn something about the beauty of the divine conceptions.
In the beginning of the second volume of God’s great book of
Revelation it is recorded that the earth was without form and
void, and darkness reigned over the great abyss. But by and by
came the mighty words “Let there be Light,” and light came
forth in all its beauty and simplicity. The solar light which surrounds
us on every hand is a very beautiful thing, but far more beautiful
is it when we come to analyze its composition. Our ordinary white
light is composed, roughly speaking, of seven constituents or rays of
the most exquisitely beautiful colours; and when it is transmitted
through a prism and received on a white screen, we have an exhibition
of its constituent parts in the spectrum. The colours beginning at
one end of the spectrum are red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo,
and violet. With the purity and vividness of these heavenly colours,
no artificial ones can compare. In the light from our own sun these
colours exist in a blended form, but they are often separated and
presented to the eye of man without any prism or other contrivance
of his. Look, for example, at the analysis of the solar rays as
presented by that magnificent arch which, during a shower of rain,
sometimes spans the firmament. I allude to the rainbow—that
beautiful symbol of God’s condescension and love to man. What can
be more magnificent and at the same time more beautiful in colours
than this specimen of Divine handiwork P If we are not struck with
admiration at the sight of it, it is because we are so familiar with it.
Look again at the exquisitely beautiful tints with which the summer
sun frequently paints the western clouds. The botanist can tell you
how God has painted the lily, the entomologist how he has clothed
gorgeously the tiny insect; so too can the meteorologist speak of
summer sunsets of red and gold; and the astronomer can dive into the
constitution of light, and view the spectrum in its exceeding beauty.
But the Divine Mind has conceived of other suns than white ones like
our own. In the great volume of nature He has stored up for man’s
contemplation suns presenting the individual colours of the spectrum
The fixed stars, you must bear in mind, are suns like ours shining by
their own and not by reflected light. Well, in some parts of the
heavens there are isolated stars of deep red, deep orange, blue, or


green. In many places double stars or suns are found revolving
round their common centre of gravity, and presenting the comple-
mentary colours. Far away in the profundity of space and near that
hazy belt of light familiarly known as the Milky Way, is a beautiful
cluster of stars called Kappa Crucis. It appears but a misty object to
the naked eye, but in the telescope it expands into a group of
brilliant gems. Such a sight as this is, to the untutored vision of the
ordinary observer, an extremely pretty one, but to the astronomer
there is something in it more than mere prettiness. In the sparkling
gems which fill up the field of his telescope he recognizes clusters of
magnificent suns. These stars present various colours, and each of
them, owing to the vast distance which separates us from them, must
be many thousands of miles in diameter to be seen at all. Sir John
Herschel, who observed and mapped the components of this cluster,
when at the Cape of Good Hope, from 1834 to 1838, describes it as
an extremely brilliant and beautiful object when viewed through an
instrument of sufficient aperture to show distinctly the very different
colours of its constituent stars, which give it the effect of a superb
piepe of fancy jewellery. How different is the jewellery with wdiich
God has adorned the nocturnal heavens from that with which an
earthly monarch adorns his palace. Man’s jewellery consists of small
pieces of coloured stone —God’s consists of systems of coloured suns.
My friend, the present Colonial Government Astronomer, has made
very elaborate observations of this cluster, and tabulated the positions
of one hundred and thirty of its individual stars, or twenty more than
are contained in the Catalogue of Mr. John Herschel. And this
magnificent group of suns is embraced within a spot of the sky not
greater than one tenth of the apparent disc of our own sun. With a
far less powerful telescope than those employed by the astronomers
just mentioned, I have contemplated this beautiful object. Coming
near again to the earth on which we dwell, we are charmed by beauty
of form, by the varying phases of our satellite the moon, whose
praises have been the theme of the most tender of our poets. With a
telescope we can observe all these changes of illuminated disc in the
interior planets Mercury and Yenus ;we can, too, study the beautiful
characteristics of the systems of Jupiter and Saturn. And if we
could only have been privileged to spend an evening with the late
Lord Fosse, we might have beheld, through his gigantic tube, the
various conformations of the nebulous masses which stud the confines
of the known creation. Who can view his exquisite delineations of the
dumb-bell nebula;, the ring nebulae, and the spiral or whirlpool
nebulae, without feeling that God has, indeed, stamped His conceptions
of symmetry and beauty of form, as well as of colour, on the page of


heaven. Are these beautiful nebulae undergoing a process of
development, and will they ultimately become hosts of finished suns ?
In taking our leave of this part of our subject we therefore put on
record that G-od has not left Himself without witness in heaven as
regards His conceptions of beauty of colour and form.
We will now turn for a brief moment to a consideration of the
power of the Divine Architect. Just think of the energy which is
required to carry our earth round the sun with undeviating accuracy
at the mean rate of 18 miles per second, and then consider that the
same ponderous globe, if at rest, could not be moved one inch from its
place by the combined efforts of the millions of men who have lived
upon it with Archimedes at their head. Then pass on from a
consideration of the power which revolves our globe round the sun,
and think of that which rolls others more stupendous in their orbits,
and you will have but a small idea of the might which dwells in Deity.
-Would you know something of the prescience and omniscience
of God—just think that before the location of our own sun and its
system of planets and comets in the firmament of heaven, and the
provision of a law for the controlling of their mighty movements,
these must have been present to the Divine Mind a foreknowledge of
all the consequences of that law. In consequence of the provision of
the law of gravitation for instance, simple as it is in itself, there are
mutual disturbances of the different bodies throughout the system,
and these disturbances are themselves continually changing with the
daily variations in the distances between the bodies. So, although
every planet was originally weighed and started in its orbit that
orbit would not remain the same but would undergo variations.
The excentricity of the earth’s orbit, for example, is continually
diminishing, and this diminution again acts by reflex influence on the
orbit of the moon, so as to bring her nearer to the earth, and to make
her revolve round it in a shorter period than she did in the remote
ages of Chaldean and Egyptian astronomy. Thus every orbit in the
system is undergoing gradual change. Such, however, is the nature
of these changes that it can be shown by mathematical demonstra-
tion that the size and form of the orbits oscillate about a mean
value. For instance, after the earth’s orbit has arrived at a certain
excentricity, it will again go gradually back to its former state. All
these disturbances or perturbations, as they are technically called,
for ages past and to come, must have been present to the Divine Mind
when the grand celestial machine was first launched into space. The
calculations of perturbations are among the most abstruse intricate
andt rouble some of astronomical investigations. Before the place of
the moon or a planet in the sky or the return of a comet can be


predicted a long array of figures has to be gone through. Take, for
example, the first predicted return of Halley’s comet for the close of
1758. From observations of this body in 1682 the orbit was calcu-
lated and found by Halley to be very similar to those pursued by
comets which had been recorded in 1581 and 1607. He, therefore,
concluded that all three apparitions were of one and the same body,
and that the comet would again return within the limits of visibility
at the end of 1758 or beginning of 1759. This conclusion was care-
fully recorded in the archives of the science, but Halley himself did
not live to see the fulfilment of his prediction. He had roughly
estimated the amount of disturbance which the comet would sustain
in its path between 1682 and 1759, for the methods of astronomical
research in his day were not sufficiently advanced to enable him to
give more than a rough guess. His prediction was something like that
of the man who, knowing on what day the mail steamer sets out from
England, estimates roughly when she will arrive in Sydney. This
estimate would, of course, be founded on a knowledge of the average
duration of the voyage from many previous trips. But it becomes
another question to allow for all the minor disturbances which the
steamer has to encounter on her passage over the ocean, from winds
and currents, and other known causes. The accumulation of these
disturbances may either increase or diminish the length of the
average trip, and therefore either accelerate or retard the arrival of
the vessel in port. And so it is with the comet. Its average period of
revolution round the sun in its long elliptic or oval orbit is lengthened
or shortened by the sum of the varying attractions of the different
planets. Starting with the principle of universal attraction two
eminent French astronomers, Clairaut and Lalande, assisted by a
French lady of extraordinary ability, attacked the grand problem of
computing the time of the comet’s next arrival at the nearest end of
its orbit to the sun. Clairaut supplied the mathematical formulae,
while Lalande and Madame Lepaute worked them out arithmetically.
These two computers worked from morning to night, sometimes at
meals, for the space of six months, and at last arrived at an approxi-
mate date for the comet’s arrival in perihelion. This comet sweeps
into space to the distance of 3,870,000,000 miles from the sun, or
considerably beyond the orbit of Neptune, and being only a body of
exceeding tenuity is then far beyond the reach of the most powerful
telescope. When at perihelion it is only fifty-six millions of miles
from the sun, and so becomes visible in our telescopes. The
computers found that the average arrival of the comet in perihelion
would be retarded one hundred days by the influence of Saturn, and
five hundred and eighteen days by that of Jupiter, and that it would '


actually reach the perihelion on the 13th of April, 1759, with a
possible error of a month either way. And now let us see the verifi-
cation of this important investigation. Observations showed that the
comet, after a voyage of seventy-six years through space, came to the
point thirty-two days earlier than the predictions indicated. I shall
not, of course, dwell upon the enthusiasm with which astronomers
awaited the arrival of this interesting body within the range of vision,
it is an enthusiasm known only to the student of the skies, and of a
far deeper character than any which could ever be directed towards
the arrival of the mail steamer aforesaid. I have never been so
fortunate as to witness the predicted return of a comet of such long
period. Three times, however, have I, from my little watch-tower
in the Peninsula, observed the return of Encke’s comet, whose
period is only three years and four months. I can assure you
there is something very solemnizing in the position of the
sentinel, who, while darkness reigns over nature, and the hum
and bustle of the world are hushed, keeps his lonely vigil at the
telescope and watches for the arrival of one of these strange visitants
from the depths of space. And yet in one sense he is not alone, for he
realizes the overwhelming majesty of the Great Architect, and feels a
kind of spiritual communion with the great brotherhood of astro-
nomers who, he knows, will appreciate his labours when they are made
known. But to return to Halley’s comet. Previously to its return in
the year 1835, the methods of investigation had been greatly improved,
and the perihelion passage was predicted with an error of only three
days instead of thirty-two. Since 1835 the methods of investigation
have been still further improved, and our knowledge of the masses
of the disturbing planets has been greatly extended, so it is not
improbable that we may hail the great celestial ship on the very
day fixed beforehand by calculation. Its next perihelion passage
will occur in the year 1910. But greatly improved as are the
methods of calculation, the problem of pertubations for so long
a period as seventy-six years is one of great labour and difficulty
to the astronomer. If now we come to multiply this labour
and difficulty by the millions of instances in which pertubations
like these are are going on, not for a period of seventy-six years
only, but for ages both past and to come, what an overwhelming
problem is presented to the human mind. And yet the Divine mind
has grasped, I will not say calculated, not only the average revolutions,
but all the pertubations of the numerous hosts of heaven for ages
both past and future. Behold here a lesson from the volume of
nature of the omniscience and prescience of God. In such contempla-
tions as these I have often felt the force and the truth of the 139th
Psalm, which treats so clearly and so vividly of the omniscience and


omnipresence of God. In the labour of computing cometary pertu-
bations the astronomer has often felt the intellectual weariness which
necessarily belongs to a finite mind, and he is reminded thereby of the
language of Isaiah, the grand old Hebrew philosopher, prophet and poet.
Speaking as the ambassador of the Almighty, and in sublime contempt
for the conduct of those who would represent the Creator in works of art,
he says : —“ To whom then will ye liken me, or shall Ibe equal P saith
the Holy One. Lift up your eyes on high and behold who hath
created these things, that bringeth out their host “by number; He
calleth them all by names by the greatness of his might, for that he
is strong in power ; not one faileth. Hast thou not known P Hast
thou not heard', that the Everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the
ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary ? There is no searching
of his understanding.”
Astronomy too is not without its testimony to the Unity of the
Divine Mind, this testimony is to be found in the universality of the
principle of gravitation. Kepler’s laws not only obtain in the solar
system, but they reign in the region of the fixed stars. We find'
scattered over the heavens numerous stars which, although single to
the naked eye, appear double in the telescope. Many pairs of these
stars have been carefully observed and found to revolve round each
other in ellipses in accordance with the principle of gravitation. We
have a very notable instance in our bright southern star, Alpha
Centauri. The components of this double star have been found to
revolve round their common centre of gravity in a period of 76 years.
Thirty-eight years ago they could be separated by a telescope of very
moderate dimensions, and have ever since been gradually approaching
each other. They are now at their nearest approximation and will
soon begin to recede from each other. This is the nearest known star
to the solar system, and it appears from the elaborate discussion of its
parallax by Sir Thomas Maclear at the Cape of Good Hope, that its
distance from us is not less than 224,000 times the distance of the sun
from the earth. We see therefore that at this remote distance the
law of gravitation still obtains, and we have therein a testimony of
the Unity and Universality of the Divine Government. And this
testimony is wonderfully augmented by the fact that out of six
thousand stars which are optically double no fewer than six hundred
pairs have been proved to revolve in accordance with the laws of
gravitation.
Would you get some conception of the eternity of God’s
existence, consider the thousands of years which have elapsed since
the light by which we now see the filmy nebulse in the larger telescopes
was first emitted, or again try to grasp the infinitude of space or the
eternal duration of time. It fairly staggers the intellect of man to try


to grasp either the eternity past or the eternity future of duration,
and yet we know that duration could never have had a beginning and
that it can never have an end. There is, my friends, One alone who
can compass this awful truth, and it is He who inhabiteth eternity
and is from everlasting to everlasting.
Finally would you know something of the glory of this inscrutable
Being, sum up all we have said this evening and you cannot
fail to perceive to some extent that the heavens declare the glory
of God and the firmament shows his handiwork. The lonely
watchmen on the plains of Chaldea, on the desert wastes of Arabia, or
even in the Court of the Emperor of China had, like the builders of
the ruins of Mount Zion, to hold the weapon of defence in the one
hand while with the other they grasped the tool of the builder. The
ancient watchers of the heavens while they wielded the weapon which
kept away those enemies, sloth and want of enthusiasm, also grasped
firmly the symbol which expressed their determination to work for the
solution of the great problem of the heavens. These men laid the
foundation of the great astronomical temple both deep and broad
while their successors appreciated their labours and maintained their
post still higher and higher on the - scaffold, laying indeed masonry of
more beautiful and exquisite design, but not more important to the
general edifice. Of the dizzy height to which future generations of
astronomers shall rear the scientific scaffold we have no conception,
but this we do know that when the great temple shall be completed it
will have inscribed over its mighty portals the beautiful words of the
Shepherd King and Astronomer, “ The heavens declare the glory of
God and the firmament sheweth His handiwork.” So vivid and
conspicuous indeed will this inscription be that he that runs may read
it—so impressive will it be that there will be no escape for the
Yoltaire or the Tom Paine of atheism or for any of those who not only
say with the heart but also with the mouth “ there is no God.” lam
fully aware, young men, that there are persons in this city who, by
their tongues, their pens, and their acts, would fain draw you over to
the ranks of those fools who say there is no God, but if my coming to
Sydney to-night be for no other purpose than to enter a simple protest
against such conduct, and to encourage you in the path of wisdom, I
think I shall do a great deal indeed.
For one evening we have now said enough about the lessons to
be derived.from that part of the Volume of Nature which is displayed
in the starry heavens. The great use of that volume, as I have said
before, is to enable us to get by means of the seeing eye and the
understanding mind exalted conceptions of the Divine Being ; we are
thus the better enabled to enter into the study of the other volume of


His great Book, namely, the Bible. And now, while your minds are
somewhat expanded and your conceptions exalted by the contemplation
of God’s material creation, I will, with your permission, open for a
brief interval this volume, which is emphatically the Book of His
Love. Unless I did this I hardly think I should satisfactorily fill the
responsible position which I occupy to-night. From the knowledge
that man has acquired respecting the wonderful mechanism of the
heavens, we cannot fail to perceive that within him dwells a spirit far
surpassing in excellency that which exists in the lower orders of created
beings. “ The spirit of man,” says the Preacher, “ goeth upward, but
the spirit of the beast goeth downward to the earth.” The heathen
poet Ovid, too, in his description of the creation of man, says that while
the other animals were destined to look downwards upon the earth the
Creator gave to man a sublime countenance, and commanded him to
behold the sky, and raise his face erect to the stars. It is indeed a
universal feeling that within the human mind and soul dwells a
capacity for the enjoyment of the mysteries, the deep things of God.
And the Bible repeats this truth, but, alas! it says something
more. There is, indeed, a sad and gloomy picture at the beginning of
that blessed book. We are told in few and simple words how this
intellectual being, this being of wonderful capacities, was created in
purity and holiness and consequently in the enjoyment of happiness,
but that he soon fell away into disobedience and sinfulness. By this
sad fall the moral nature of our first parents became changed. Where
purity and holiness originally reigned sin entered and took possession,
and the taint of corruption engendered thereby clings by nature to every
son and daughter of Adam, and by it the whole human race became
children of wrath and outcasts from Divine favour. Ho sooner,
however, had man fallen than the promise came of a Mighty Deliverer
from sin and death. That deliverer, my friends, was not a saint taken
from among men, for all mankind have sinned and come short of the
glory of God. He was not taken from among the shining hosts of
beings that surround the everlasting throne, for even the angels veil
their faces in the presence of the Infinite One. There is not one
among the ranks of the Created Beings that can present merit for the
atonement of man’s sins. All the merit they possess is second hand;
it is but imparted to them. Ho, my friends, neither Virgin, nor saint,
nor angel can act as a ransom and an advocate for the sinner. The
Mighty Deliverer from sin and death is He whose works we have
endeavoured to contemplate this evening. He is the Lord Jesus
Chbist, the Son of God, Begotten from all Eternity; God of God,
Light of Light, Very God of Very God, the great I Am, and the
Second Person of that Glorious Trinity, who in the beginning created


the heavens and the earth, and still upholds all things by His powerful
word. So far beyond comprehension indeed is His love to fallen
man that He stooped from the throne of infinite greatness to the
manger of Bethlehem, to the agony of Gethsemane, to the mocking,
the scourge, the buffeting, the spitting, the crown of thorns, and at
last to the cross of Calvary. The great Being who hath spread abroad
the heavens as a curtain, hath measured the water in the hollow of
His hand, meted out heaven with the span, comprehended the dust of
the earth in a measure, weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills
in a balance, is the same who, in human form, trod our sin stained
earth and tasted its sorrows and its woes that we might be redeemed
from sin and sorrow to the holiness and happiness of heaven. It is He
who with His powerful word hushed the storm tossed waves of Galilee
to rest; and what is more important still, has spoken and is still
speaking peace to many a sin tossed soul of man. It is He who now
stands at the right hand of the Majesty on High as the sinner’s priest,
the sinner’s advocate, and the sinner’s friend. He is the great Spiritual
Sun, the Sun of [Righteousness, who blots out as a thick cloud our
transgressions, and as a cloud our sins. His throne is established as the
sun, His church as the moon, and His promises to her as the rainbow,
that faithful witness in heaven. What a powerful friend is here ?Is
not His condescension indeed ? Is there a mind in this hall so dull
that it will not be struck with wonder, or a heart so cold that it
will not warm at the contemplation of love so amazing, so Divine ?
Every characteristic about Jesus is great. His power to create and
govern revolving worlds is great, and His compassion and condescen-
sion are not less great. The self-denying love of an earthly friend
moves our heart’s affections ; it begets love in return. And, O ! let
it not be said that the love of the Infinite One, the love of the self-
sacrificing Jesus, does not stir our affections and our gratitude to the
depths.
Let me therefore, my dear friends, in conclusion, conjure you by
all the lessons we have learned to-night from the Volume of Nature of
the mighty power, wisdom, and goodness of God, and by all the
lessons too which you have learned from your childhood from the book
of His love, to prostrate your souls before Him in worship, and
gratitude and love. As the wise men from the east were guided to
the adoration of the Infant Saviour by the leading of a star, so let the
starry heavens which we have contemplated this evening lead us to
crown Jesus as the Saviour and the Lobd of All.
Printed by Foster and Fairfax , 13 Bridge Street, Sydney.


OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
OFFICE - BEARERS FOR 1878.
PRESIDENT:
M. H. STEPHEN, Esq. (Barrister-at-Law.)
VICE-PRESIDENTS:
The LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY
Rev. ROBERT STEEL, Ph.D. D.D.
„ JAMES JEFFERIS, LL.B.
„ W. J. K. PIDDINGTON
„ FREDERICK HIBBERD
Hon. JOHN FRAZER, M.L.C.
Hon. S. D. GORDON, M.L.C.
~ W. J. FOSTER (Attorney
General.)
„ Sir G. W. ALLEN (Speaker
of Legislative Assembly)
JAMES R. FAIRFAX, Esq.
HON. TREASURERS:
EBENEZER VICKERY, Esq. | J. H. GOODLET, Esq.
HON. SECRETARIES:
Mr. H. A. STEEL | Mr. T. J. HITCHMAN
LIBRARIAN:
Mr. H. C. EVANS.
BOARD OF MANAGEMENT:
Rev. J. D. LANGLEY
„ W. M. WHITE, LL.D.
„ T. B. TRESS
Mr. G. WILKINSON
„ J. G. CATLEY
„ A. C. DOUTTY
„ EDWARD DOWLING
Mr. JOHN KENT
„ ROBERT MACLEAN
„ C. R. WALSH
„ J. GRAHAM NIXON
„ THOMAS PEPPER
„ G. C. TUTING
„ JOHN WALKER.
DAVID WALKER, General Secretary.
New Rooms— Corner oj Pitt and Park Streets, Sydney.


