

W.E.A. PAMPHLET No. 1.
"The Root of the Matter”
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC ASPECTS
OF
THE SEX PROBLEM
BY
Mrs. FRANCIS ANDERSON
PRICE THREEPENCE
SYDNEY:
BURROWS & CO., PRINTERS, ENMORE ROAD, NEWTOWN.
PUBLISHED BY THE
Workers’ Educational Association
of New South Wales
EDUCATION BUILDING, BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.


Workers’ Educational Association of A.S.W.
WHAT IT IS.
The Workers’ Educational Association is a Federation of Work-
ing Class, Social and Educational organisations, united for the
purpose of promoting the Higher Education of the People. It is
entirely non-sectarian and non-partisan in policy. Its membership
includes individuals of widely different temperament and outlook,
but who can unite for the one purpose for which the Association
exists.
WHAT IT DOES.
The Association endeavours to. promote the Education of the
people in any and every way possible, whether of the child, the
adolescent, or the adult. It seeks to impress upon our Educational
systems the point of view' and the Educational interests of the wage-
earners, both men and women. Our principal work, however, is,
and must always be, to promote adult education, particularly on
those subjects of broad human interest, such as “Industrial History,”
“Economics,” “Sociology,” “Political Science,” “Psychology,”
“Biology,” or “Literature.” Our work in this direction is not
designed to have a technical value, but aims at giving to students
a mental training and a knowledge of the subject they are studying,
which will enable them to become worthier and better citizens by
equipping them for more efficient social service. It is the desire to
serve the community which, in the eyes of the Association, consti-
tutes the real hall-mark of true citizenship.
HOW IT WORKS.
The Association believes that the only way by which it can
provide such a training is to encourage absolute freedom of thought
and freedom of discussion on all phases of whatever subject any
particular group of students may be interested in, at the same time
giving each student free access to all the latest books and sources
of knowledge that are available, and also the assistance of a skilled
tutor, who has specialised in that particular subject, to assist him
in his search for knowledge, and to discuss the subject with him.
WHY NOT JOIN?
If this movement appears to you to be good, then why not join?
And why not try to influence any organisation to which you may
belong to affiliate?
SUBSCRIPTION.
There are three minimum rates of subscription for individual
members. They are: 2/6 for membership only; 5/- for membership
and twelve copies of the “Highway” (monthly magazine of the
Association), sent post free to any address; and 7/6 to include
membership, “Highway,” and free admission to all Public Lectures
organised by the Association.
JOIN NOW.
If you are not personally acquainted with a Card Steward send
your subscription direct to the General Secretary,
D. STEWART,
Education Building,
Bridge Street, Sydney.


W.E.A. Pamphlet No. 1.
"The Root of the Matter”
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC ASPECTS
OF
THE SEX PROBLEM
BY
Mrs. FRANCIS ANDERSON
PRICE THREEPENCE
SYDNEY:
BURROWS a CO., PRINTERS, ENMORE ROAD, NEWTOWN-
PUBLISHED BY THE
Workers’ Educational Hssociation
ot mew South Wales
EDUCATION BUILDING, BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.


FOREWORD.
'■p he Workers’ Educational Association
undertakes the publication of any kind of
literature which may assist the attainment of
its great objective, and enlightened democracy. The
W.E.A. addresses itself fearlessly and impartially to
the discussion of all human problems. It is hoped
that this series of pamphlets will serve to educate
the public mind on matters of gravest importance,
careful study of which is the duty of every citizen.
The Association, however, does not commit
itself to agreement or disagreement with the
opinions expressed in any of its publications.
Its function is limited to finding the best writer on a
good subject, and placing his or her views before the
public with the object of stimulating the average
citizen to further study and to devotion to the service
of the community. Whatever the reader’s views may
be, we hope he will receive from our publications the
real benefit that we desire to bestow.
MEREDITH ATKINSON,
President oe the W.E.A. of N.S. W.


THE ROOT OF THE MATTER
BY MRS. FRANCIS ANDERSON
The spread of venereal disease is discussed in every English
newspaper, and in each of the Australian capitals it is arousing
anxiety. The more important hospitals have now so large an
attendance of out-patients for this particular complaint, that
they each have a special ward, and find a separate building
necessary. Many are taking steps to provide one.
When we consider that each of the patients, now numbered
in hundreds, has already been, or may in the future be, the
parent of a child, and know that such a child must almost in-
evitably begin life bearing the burden of ill-health, the outlook
is serious. But this is.only a small part of the matter. The
men and women who attend at the hospitals are only a few of
those who threaten the nation with disease and early decay.
There are those who pay for private advice, those who endure
without advice, and those who are cured only to fall again; and
all these have passed on, and may continue to pass on to their
descendants the fatal result.
Dr. Mary Scharlieb, a member of the Royal Commission on
Venereal Disease, now sitting in London, speaking at a woman’s
meeting last November, said that out of 800,000 children born
every year, 100,000 died during the first year after birth, and
20,000 during the first week. Ignorance, overcrowding, bad
housing, bad milk, etc., she went on to say, might be held to
account for many of those who died in the first year, but for
that 20,000 who died almost as soon as they were born, these
causes could not be held accountable, for they had not had time
to come into operation. The main cause was syphilis, one of the


three great racial poisons at work in the community. Nor was
the effect of syphilis less disastrous for the children who sur-
vived the first week. More than half the total number of blind
persons in the kingdom owed their loss of sight to one or other
form of the same disease. One-third of all cases of deafness were
due to the same cause; as well as nearly all cases of locomotor
ataxy, general paralysis of the insane, and aneurism of the aorta.
When we consider these facts, which are borne out by the
figures supplied by our own doctors, who tell us of young Aus-
tralians born to be nursed in hospitals till they die, and of
women condemned to a life of ill-health, while they pass on the
taint to the third and fourth generation, the. outlook becomes
appalling. Why prate about a White Australia, and erect fine
buildings for posterity? We are a diseased and dying people!
Can nothing be done? We have fought with smallpox and
plague; typhoid and diphtheria have lost much of their terror,
and we know how to prevent or cure many minor diseases. Can
nothing be done to kill this secret enemy, who maims and de-
stroys more than all the others added together? If nothing
can be done, it is hardly worth while to defend our island con-
tinent, and it is mockery to talk about free and prosperous
Australia. Only a healthy nation can be vigorous and happy,
and unless we do something, and do it soon, we shall be neither
in a few generations.
Meetings are occasionally being held to consider the matter.
Of course. It is always easy to find speakers, and listeners.
Compulsory notification has been suggested, and much has been
said of humane provision for cure. Some people maintain that
the difficulty must be met by the stern prohibition of marriage
of diseased persons, and pin their faith to registration before
marriage. Nearly all agree that moral influence and education
are necessary, but they cannot decide where to begin; and amid
the babel of voices nothing but the opening of a special depart-
ment in hospitals has been actually done.
In this short and imperfect consideration of the question,
an attempt is made to reach some of the causes of the evil. To
deal with effect is useless. Let us try to discover the root of the
matter. And before seeking for it, it may be well to consider
the methods of prevention at present proposed—for those who
demand education sometimes assert that they are trying to re-
move the cause.
Education! When does it begin, and how ?It begins with
the birth of the child. It must therefore begin in the home, or in
the substitute for a home which the State or philanthropy pro


vides. There, at present, education on matters relating to sex
generally begins with a lie —a first step in the wrong direction.
A fairy tale has its own value in the education of the little child,
but a lie in answer to a direct question is not a fairy tale. The
first question inevitably asked by an intelligent child should
receive for answer the simple truth. The enquirer is hardly
likely to ask for details, for he will know instinctively that he
has been told the truth; a mother’s love will be understood, and
he will be for a time satisfied.
A lie seldom really deceives an enquiring child, and it
generally marks the beginning of distrust. On sex matters it
has an especially fatal consequence, for it creates an atmosphere
of unwholesome mystery about a subject which could be more
easily treated merely with the delicate reserve which most people
bestow on any other bodily function. Upon a lie, and particu-
larly a lie to a child, no good building can be done. He knows —
often much better than his informant supposes—that there is a
desire to mislead him, and when he discovers the truth, he will
naturally conclude that the business about which it was thought
necessary to lie must be worth knowing. He will not again ask
his previous informant for enlightenment. He will get his
knqwledge where and bow he can, generally from a tainted
source, and he will hear much more than he asks for. The
subject will cease to be wholesome, natural, deeply interesting
as part of life, and health, and love, and will become a filthy,
amusing secret, a subject for sly jokes. To many persons it
remains so as long as they live.
How can pure and wholesome instruction be given to grow-
ing boys and girls on such a foundation? It seems evident that
we must begin nearer to the beginning than the school and the
school teacher if we decide to give instruction on matters re-
lating to sex.
But if it should be decided that the work must be done in
school (and certainly extraordinary things are often expected
of the school teacher), a few questions may be considered.
Would the right sort of teacher, man or woman, be willing to
undertake the subject? What other subject in an already
crowded curriculum would give way to it, How could classes be
arranged to allow of the necessary disposition as to sex and age ?
And finally, though not the last question that could be asked—•
Is the subject a fit one for class teaching ? In a class composed
of girls, or of boys, of differing temperaments, possessed of dif-
fering degrees of knowledge acquired in different atmospheres,
teaching on sex matters could not fail to be suggestive to some,
and probably as much harm as good would result.


How, then, should instruction be given, if it is decided that
it must be formally given? If we take as an axiom that know-
ledge, and especially such knowledge, can only be useful and
effectual when it is desired or needed, it follows that it can be
given to only one child at a time, and then by a parent or friend
able to judge of the effect, of the amount of knowledge necessary,
and also able to convey it with purity and delicacy as concerning
a serious part of the child’s own life. The father and mother
are the right and responsible teachers; but since parents are
sometimes ignorant, or unwilling, the work might be undertaken
by nurses and others who can speak with authority, and it might
be done either in connection with a school, without interfering
with the ordinary routine; or perhaps, better still, by churches.
Another consideration! Is education done only by talking
and learning lessons? Does not the teacher, whether he or she
will or not, give not only words, not only facts, but his thoughts,
his character, his soul, his very self ? An unseen and almost un-
recognised influence touches the child closely and continually,
a lesson involuntary and inescapable. An old teacher and a
young woman met one day, and the young woman told her old
friend of a time of trial and trouble, which had demanded much
of her, and then recounted her words and deeds.
‘ ‘ That was good, ’ ’ said the elder woman. ‘ ‘ It was more than
good, it was noble. How glad lam that you acted in that way. ’ ’
‘ ‘ Ah, well, ’ ’ said the younger one, ‘ ‘ I tried to do as you had
always taught me.”
“As I taught you!” said the old woman. “Why lam sure
that I never once spoke to you on the subject.”
“True, indeed,” said her companion; “very true. But you
must remember that I lived with you for many years, and
your life was a continual lesson.”
This is not a mere sentimental story. It conveys a scientific
truth, a fact known to psychologists. The person who says little
may have a stronger influence than the one who says much.
Life is more than words. We all teach silently, and to live with-
out teaching is impossible.
With this in mind, let us consider what a girl learns about
sex and motherhood in wordless teaching, and the effect on the
girl of that unspoken education. Being a woman, I confine the
discussion to girls.
Nature, the first teacher, began by preparing the female
child to be a mother. Deep and strong within her she planted
a longing for motherhood. From early childhood every healthy
girl displays it by nursing and caressing anything in the shape


of a child; and even the foolish fancy of giving her a gollywog
or a teddy bear, as if to disgust her, does not destroy her* desire
for a baby. As she grows to womanhood it may be overlain, or
set aside by prudence, or vanity, or idleness, but it cannot be
destroyed. When Nature determined to perpetuate humanity
by means of woman, she laid her foundations deep and strong,
and only an unnatural woman can say with truth that she does
not love children, or desire to be a mother.
The girl, then, as she grows up, ought to find, by words and
deeds, from her companions old and young, that a child is wel-
come in a world where death is inevitable, and she ought to find
friends and advisers who would counsel her to preserve her
health and virtue in order that she may fulfil the chief business
of women, and bear healthy children. Does she find such con-
ditions ? On the contrary, she often discovers, perhaps first of
all from her own mother, that a baby is a dreaded trouble, an
encumbrance, and that many women do all they dare do to rid
themselves of the possibility of such a burden. She occasionally
hears some sentimental talk about the love of a mother, and she
sees that on a certain day a few persons wear a white rose in
honor of their mothers. But one of her companions is about to
bear a child, and she is turned out of her father’s house in dis-
grace. No white rose for her! She was not married! So the
girl learns, without words, that she must ignore the teachings
of nature, and turn her attention to the getting of a husband,
and there is no one to make the beauty of pure love, and the
reason for marriage, clear to her.
She knows a good deal about love. Nature and her com-
panions have taken care of that part of her education; but she
sees for the most part its grosser side, and she finds that in a
world of men and women the order of nature is reversed, and
the female must attract the male. She ponders a little on this,
as she watches the peacock at the Zoo, and the little blue wren
among the bushes, and looks on at the courting of their plain
brown wives, but she knows nothing of the growth of social con-
ditions which have made woman the inferior; she does not con-
sider the laws relating to marriage which make a man afraid of
the burden of a wife. She does not understand the reason for
the poverty which dogs the steps of the man with a large family,
and we offer her no opportunity to study these, or any other
social subjects. So she devotes all her time and money to the
adornment of her person, in order that she may quickly attract a
man who will keep her without asking for too much hard work,
and will at the same time allow her to gratify her natural in-
stincts with respectability. Lace and face powder, and pretty


stockings are costly, and she soon discovers that without these
things she cannot attract, for many men do not admire sim-
plicity and good health alone. While she waits she finds out —
and there are many teachers—that there is a way of getting all
she wants quite easily; the desire for motherhood, though so per-
verted that she does not recognise it, still leads her on; loss of
health, if she hears of it, is a far-off threat; and unless a kind,
strong hand arrests her, she gradually, and perhaps uncon-
sciously, loses the modest ideals of her childhood, and starts on
that path which is downhill all the way, until it reaches the
abyss which waits for her, and for thousands of her companions
who might have been happy mothers.
God, who painted the butterfly’s wing so that it might at-
tract a mate, who fashioned the seed pod of the tiniest plant,
and bid it spread its increase far and wide; who taught the
bird to build its nest —God, the Life Force, decreed that woman
should pass on the torch of life, and therefore He designed her
for motherhood. Uncounted aeons of evolution faded into
eternity, and the girl child was given to civilisation. Then
Luxury overfed and pampered her, or Poverty and Ignorance
starved her; Vanity loaded her with finery; Instruction bade
her sit still in the shade when she might have been playing in
the sunshine; Education taught her much of many unimportant
subjects and little of that which concerned her most; and when
childhood had passed, and she was well-nigh unfitted for the task
God meant her to fulfil, Commerce seized her, Competition made
her a willing slave, and uncontrolled Desire debased ber and
made the promise of life into a threat of death.
We think of Nemesis as of a worn-out myth. We sel-
dom listen to the voice which said '‘Vengeance is mine, I will
repay,” and when we are repaid, in disaster, we suppose that
the God we have imagined to suit ourselves is capable of deeds
as inconsequent as our own. But there are no omissions or
mistakes in the ledger of the great Accountant. Nature
neither forgets nor forgives. What we pay in endurance of
loathsome disease, we have been earning for years, by neglect
of social problems, and we shall be punished until we solve
them.
Education
How can education alone save a girl from the encompass-
ing crush of existing conditions? This is a question for
women. Whether boys need education is a question on which
no woman should venture an opinion. Let their fathers de-
cide. But it is certain that if any useful and lasting stand
is to be made against venereal disease, the whole subject, and


not the mere surface, must be considered by women, and they
must realize that education, moral, as well as hygienic, may
deal mainly with effect, and leave the root of the matter un-
touched.
Teach the girl child early, and let her clearly understand
that on her must devolve a great and noble task—the con-
tinuance and preservation of the race. Lead her, and help
her, to prepare herself for her work—her body for health,
her heart for love, her mind for the intelligent care of the
.coming generation. Exalt her office, honour her as all honour
the preserver of life, and give her conditions which will en-
able her to live honourably. Will not the girl respond? She
will respond at once. Being honoured, she will become hon-
ourable. Realising the need, and the beauty of purity, she
will keep herself pure, and men will not need to be educated,
for she will guard herself, and doing so, will wake in them the
nobility now too often stifled by desire.
Early Marriage
One of the most effectual agents for the prevention of
venereal disease would be early marriage. On both sides
the prospect of marriage would act as a safeguard. At pre-
sent, even the prospect is denied to most young people. Why ?
In part, no doubt, because girls are apt to expect more than a
man can afford to offer them in a home and money. But
mainly because of the dread of illness and the cost of a large
family. In every station in life, the girl now expects a better
position than the man who would marry her can offer. It
is the result of conditions which make a sudden rise in for-
tune possible to any striver, and we cannot expect the girl
who works in a pickle factory to have less ambition than a
rich man’s daughter. She will probably have more. The
ambition might be lessened, and contentment be more general,
if men and women would learn that there is as much satis-
faction, and probably more happiness in simplicity than in
display. This lesson must come from above. When our rich
people live more simply, wear fewer fine garments, waste less
on jewels, employ fewer men and women to serve them, and
show themselves content, the girls who now copy their clothes
and their manners will be satisfied with plainer homes.
Fashion always filters downwards, and some reform might be
effected in this way. But the greatest incentive to marriage
would be found State help to the family.
The bachelor and the married man may do equal work,
and if so should receive equal pay, but it is absurdly unjust


to expect the married man to keep a wife and bring up a
family on the amount which suffices a bachelor. It is equally
absurd to tempt a bachelor to remain single while he wastes
health and money. If the child is an asset of the State, as
he certainly is, and if he becomes year by year more valuable,
it would be mere justice, as well as good policy and economi-
cal, to assist parents to produce and rear large families, and
thus indirectly to reduce the temptation to live a dissolute
life. In spite of the sometimes-expressed dislike to a large
family, which is mainly confined to one class, hundreds of
women would be proud and happy to have many sons and
daughters, if they could be sure of the means to feed and
clothe them. The baby bonus is a small step in the right
direction, but it is not enough. Continued help should be
given, until the youngest child is able to earn money.
This subject has received attention in many countries, and
especially in France, not on account of prostitution, but be-
cause of the decreasing birthrate. Writing on “La Famille
Francaise,” in a late number of “ L’lllustration, ” a French
weekly, M. Henri Lavedan says much in favor of such a
scheme for France, and he quotes the opinion of a well-known
French lawyer, thus: “To the class not in easy circumstances,
I would assure the mother of an income for life of one hun-
dred francs a year, for every child over the number of three. ”
M. Lavedan adds that the desire to have a certain income
would be a very great encouragement to mothers.
Such a law would cost much, but there are other measures
which could be adopted, and he goes on to recommend: That
all advantages and favours in the hands of the Administration
should be reserved for members of large families; that “office’ ’
should be closed to bachelors; that in all Government situa-
tions, the preference, capacity being equal, should be given to
th£ married father of a family.
Proposals such as these have never been seriously made
in Australia, but the time may be coming when we may think
it wise to follow the lead of our brave ally. M. Lavedan’s
last proposal has been occasionally mentioned in Sydney. He
suggests that every father of a family should have the right
to a supplementary vote according to the number of his chil-
dren, an extra vote for every child, and he declares that such
a provision would be in accord with logic, justice, and reason.
Whether France will use these and other measures to increase
her population is to us a matter of interest. If we have a
true account of her statistics, she will have to do something


to repair the waste of war, and to save herself from annihila-
tion. We have not as yet thought of taking action to in-
crease our numbers, because we have hitherto relied on immi-
gration, which has seemed to give us all we needed, and these
proposals are not introduced here for the purpose of advo-
cating increase. They are advocated because early marriage,
which they would encourage, would automatically and easily
decrease prostitution, and so to some extent prevent venereal
disease. Increase of the population would be a useful and
profitable by-product.
Such measures would be costly, and the State would need to
practice wise economy, but the investment would be secure, and
the return in wealth and happiness incalculable. Can we allow
waste and paltry luxury to outweigh the life and health of the
race ? We are not a poor people !
The Unmarried Mother
An effective agent for the prevention of venereal disease
would be found in more kind and reasonable treatment of the
unmarried mother. The girl who dreads that laxity of con-
duct may cause her to become a mother, drops easily into
prostitution. If she were sure that motherhood would not
disgrace and handicap her for life, she would protect herself,
and bear her burden willingly. It is a sufficient burden,
without the unkind sneer which she too often suffers. The
instincts of the man and the woman differ. The man desires
a mate, the woman desires a child, though neither the one or
the other takes the trouble to analyse instinct. Why should
the fact that the girl has allowed her instinct to overcome
her judgment be remembered against her as long as she lives,
and be passed on as a disgrace to her children, while the man
goes scot free? Instinct often reigns supreme in the lives and
actions of men and women, and nearly always brings own
reward, or punishment. Only in the case of the unmarried
mother is it so heavily recompensed by her fellows. Some
alteration is taking place. The military authorities in Eng-
land decided, soon after the beginning of the present war, that
a soldier’s children by an unmarried mother should receive
the same allowance as those of a soldier’s wife. The narrow-
minded and bigoted protested against this act of simple jus-
tice to the child, but their protest was unheeded, and the de-
cision has had its value.
The unthinking often conclude in haste that to mention
this subject is to strike a blow at the institution of marriage.


There could be no greater mistake! Marriage, when hus-
band and wife are friends, as well as lovers, offers the nearest
approach to happiness that earth affords, and the ideal home
must always be tire liome which is shared with a true comrade.
We ail, men and women, know this. But, there are others!
in every country unmarried mothers may be counted in hun-
dreds. The State helps them, if necessary cares for their
children, and sometimes gives them a start in life. Australia
does so. And in no country does the institution of marriage
suffer. So long as property lasts, and the laws of inherit-
ance, men will marry, if only to beget heirs and to perpetuate
their names. And so long as nature holds sway, and she
will endure, and perhaps outlive property, unmarried women
will bear children. The ideal family will always be the one
brought up in a home where father and mother rule, but
there is no reason at all why the child of a single woman
should not be as well cared for and as well trained as the
child of a deserted wife, and it is probable that the child of a
single woman in a single home will enjoy more happiness and
plenty than it would do if it was obliged to share the home
of a gambler or a drunkard. When men and women learn
to modify their unkind prejudices and their unreasonable
judgment of the unmarried mother, and when they cease to
look upon her child as if it were hopelessly stained and dis-
graced, we shall have less venereal disease, as well as an in-
creased birthrate, and no child murder. We shall also have
a larger number of healthy single women.
Wages
No consideration of venereal disease would be complete
without some notice of the question of women’s wages and
the part which poverty plays in prostitution. One instance
may be given. It is a true one! Not long ago, a woman
who had walked in to one of the refuges of the city, was
asked why she had adopted the life for which she seemed
so strangely unsuited. She replied that she hated the life,
but her husband was ill, she had two small children, and she
did not know how else to pay the rent of her one miserable
room. As we all know, she might have found help somehow,
somewhere, but she did not know how to get it, and she took
the only way which seemed open.
There can be little doubt among women (I do not think
that men are able to form a fair opinion in this case) that
desire for money (not always because of poverty), and the


things that money will buy, increases prostitution, and its re-
sult. The girl who receives as wages a bare pittance, and
at the same time sees everywhere that finery adds to attrac-
tion, experiences temptation often beyond her power of re-
sistance. Boys and men are willing to be ugly and dirty and
untidy. They often seem to.enjoy such conditions. Not so
the girl and woman. Bad taste is often an effort to be beau-
tiful. The female creature, even when old and broken down
instinctively desires to please the eye, and only an unwomanly
woman is satisfied when she knows herself to be ugly. This
desire has much to do with prostitution, instinct makes use
of poverty. There is abundant proof of this, in the fact that
only a very few girls from well provided families become
prostitutes. Not only are they better taught, and better
cared for, they have not the great temptation of desire for
prettier clothes. Give every girl a sufficient income, and
perhaps more important, teach her how to live, and how to
spend her money, and the number of girls who will sell them-
selves will be immensely reduced.
Our Australian women workers are more highly paid
for their labour than those of many other countries, but they
are at the same time more wasteful, and they often spend on
smart and useless dress, money that should be given for good
food. Very few try to save. To increase their wages
would be of doubtful value, unless at the same time, hostels
were provided so that working girls might enjoy comfort-
able lodgings, and club houses and playgrounds were opened,
so that they might be instructed and entertained in the even-
ing, at a moderate cost. At present, with a poor home, often
only one small room for sleeping and living, and with no plar*e
for recreation but the street, the girl is open to any tempta-
tion which promises to relieve her of poverty and monotony.
She often succumbs, and no reasonable person could expect
her to do otherwise. Not hers the blame!
Women’s wages are low, in part, because of competition.
But though from the girl’s point of view she is insufficiently
paid, from that of the employer she is amply recompensed,
sometimes too highly paid. It is probable that only a few
of the girls, mere children, who are employed in shops and
factories to-day, are at first worth even the low wage which
the law compels the employer to pay them, and one must con-
clude that he is willing to be inconvenienced and to lose at
first, in order to ensure a large supply of labour later, so
that competition may keep down the rate of pay.


In an ideal State, no young woman under eighteen or
nineteen would be employed in any shop, office, or factory.
The business world does not need the labour of half-grown
girls. The physical wellbeing of a child must suffer from
continual standing at attention in ;a vitiated atmosphere,
and her moral and mental health must suffer from associa-
tion with the crowd. She apes the manner of twice her age.
and learns to be a woman too soon. The first and most im-
portant business of the woman is motherhood, and the mak-
ing of a home. To that the girl should be apprenticed, and
not to the counter or the desk. After she has left school, the
years that follow should be given to learning by practice, all
that she ought to learn at school by theory, about home work
At present, girls who know nothing either theoretically or
practically about the business of their lives, marry and bear
children, and learn that business, only by bitter experience,
for which a drunken husband and a sickly family are the
price. When and where can a girl learn to make a comfort-
able home, how can she learn to rear healthy children, if we
allow her to go straight from school to shop or factory?
Every girl whose mother does not need her practical help
at home, should be sent as a matter of course, to a home
where help is needed, and should there be taught, as well as
paid for her services. Her welfare, her instruction, her
health, and her wages should be carefully guarded by law,
and the employer not able to teach her should be obliged
to see that she attended classes for instruction, if such were
needed. This regulation should apply to girls of every class,
and none should claim exemption without ample proof that
they were being carefully educated in certain household
matters.
This proposal is not offered as a way of solving what is
sometimes called the domestic problem. That problem is
solving itself, for the household slave has gone, never to re-
turn, and domestic labour is now more highly paid than any
other unskilled work. It is offered as the only way to pre
vent the young girl from being hurried into an unsuitable
position. But it would solve other problems. Every com-
petent housekeeper would be sure of help, and those incom-
petent or unsuited to be teachers or housekeepers would have
to reform or suffer. The birth rate would be increased, for
the many mothers of the lower and middle class who now find
the care of two or three children as much as they can man-
age, would gladly have larger families if they could be sure


of help. Domestic work would become attractive, for as
home apprentices would be drawn from all classes, and pro
tected by law, they would bear no resemblance to the or-
dinary “servant.” The girl herself, cared for and respected,
would be saved from the temptations of the little shop girl,
her body exercised in a variety of ways, would develop
naturally, while her habits would not suffer from confinement,
her mind, interested in many different subjects, would cease
to dwell only on personal attraction and futile amusement,
and she would thus be prepared for marriage and mother-
hood, and for a happy and useful life. *
Young women so trained would seldom, if ever, become
the means of passing on disease. The class from which they
would, no doubt, be mainly drawn, is possibly the class which
supplies the largest number of those who should be called,
not fallen, but ruined women, a class whose welfare should
therefore before all others be carefully considered by women
of larger means, because also it offers a greater problem and
a wider promise.
Science may do much for the cure of venereal disease, but
its cause and its prevention rest not so much with the doctor,
as with the psychologist, and the sociologist. No cure can be of
great value while the causes remain. Cure may, indeed, be worse
than valueless if it merely allows a relapse, and so becomes
a lifelong process. The wmrk of removing causes will be long
and tedious, much harder than the establishing of a hospital,
or the giving of instruction to listeners, and it will have to
be done mainly by women, and by men who can see from the
woman’s standpoint. It will be a truly patriotic work, not so
pleasant as working for the soldiers who command our admir-
ing love, not so easy, nor so sure of praise. For it will provoke
controversy, and it is sure to be misunderstood, as all work
for a great reform must needs be. But for all those who work,
there will be a reward far transcending the praise of those who
see only the surface, the quiet reward of a heart conscious of
having done less than it would, but as much as it could, for its
country and its fellow women.
Will the women of Australia work for that reward? ’fhey
have shown, by their energy in politics, that they can organise,
and though they have mainly only accentuated party differ-
ences, when probably more useful work might have been done
by unity, they have still upheld the woman’s cause. They have
shown by their zeal for war work that they are able, with en-
thusiastic energy and self-denial, to lay aside amusement, and


forget class and social distinctions, in their anxiety to help
the State and the Empire. Will they, when peace comes to a
weary world, turn again to the life they led before, or will
they continue to ignore party spirit, and class difference, and
unite as women for woman, to make a tremendous effort to
save the nation’s daughters from prostitution, and their coun-
try from vile disease and ruin?
There will be work to do socially, for every idle prejudice
will make a dull stand for inertia, and cry, “What has been
always must remain.” There will be work to do politically,
for legislation will be needed, and politicians will make every
little reform a party question. The battle will be, not against
Germans or Turks, of whom we know little, but against the
foes of our own household, against our own habits, our own
customs, our own silence on the subjects we would rather
ignore, and our own blindness to the evil we prefer not to see.
And the fight will be long, so long, that those who fire the first
shots, will have to pass on while victory is still in the far dis-
tance. But for all that, and perhaps because of that, it ought
to be begun, and that soon. For time presses.
Can we live on happily now, and forget the prostitute, and
her misery? Can we help to build Maternity Hospitals, and
Children’s Hospitals, and Creches, and continue to shut our
eyes to the ravages of a disease which makes marriage a dan-
gerous venture, and childbearing a ghastly menace?
The deaf and dumb call to us silently from their prison
of sense, the blind stretch out imploring hands to the light
they may never see, and hundreds of good men who watch and
wait and sorrow for suffering humanity, look longingly for
the time when woman, who alone can initiate the great reform,
shall awake to her responsibilty.
Shall we go on and live indifferent, or shall we begin,
sure that right, though long delayed, must rule at last, and
that truth is great and must prevail.
MAYBANKE ANDERSON.
Bayview, N.S.W.
BURROWS & CO,, PRINTERS, NEWTOWN,


..W.E.A. PUBLICATIONS..
“Trade Unionism in Australia.”
Report of a Conference held in iQJg, containing Papers on —
‘‘Relation of Trade Unionism to Co-operation, Co-partnership and Profit-sharing. ” By
Meredith Atkinson, M.A.
“Trade Unionism and Efficiency.” By Professor R. F. Irvine.
“Trade Union Administration and Industrial and Craft Unionism.” By the Hon. W. G.
Spence.
“The Historical Development of Trade Unionism in Australia.” By GERAED LiGHTFOOT,
M.A., and J. T. SuTCEIFFE.
“The Effect of Industrial Legislation in Australia upon the Ideals and Aspirations of the
Workers.” By F. W. EGGEESTON.
“Industrial Legislation in Relation to Socialism.” By. F. A. A. RUSSEEE, M.A.
Price 1/6, post free.
66 Teaching of Sex Hygiene.”
A Book no Parent, Teacher, or Social Worker can afford to be without.
Report of a Conference held in 1916, containing Papers on —
“The Massacre of the Innocents.” By Professor D. A. WEESH.
“Prostitution.” By Mrs. James Booth.
“The Child and the ex Problem from the Psychological Point of View.” By H. LOVELL,
Ph.D.
“Sex Irregularities of Childhood and Youth.” By W. A. T. LIND, M. 8., B.S.
“How much should be Taught to Children and Young Adolescents.” By Sir Thomas
Anderson Stuart.
“How the Church could Co-operate in the Teaching of Sex Hygiene.” By Right Rev.
G. M. Long.
“Teaching Sex Hygiene to Children and Teachers.” By Dr. G. SAVIEE WIEEIS, Prin-
cipal Medical Officer, Department of Education, N.S.W.
“Teaching Control of the Sex Instinct.” By Dr. Richard Arthur, M.L.A.
“Preventive Training for Young Children in Relation to Sexual Control.” By Miss ZoE
Benjamin, Lecturer in Psychology, iSydney Kindergarten Training College.
“The Case for Sex Education of the Adolescent Girl.” By Mrs. James Booth, M.A.,
D.Phil.
“Sex Education for Boys.” By J. Smith, Principal Teacher, Training College, Mel"
bourne.
“The Double Standard of Morality.” By J. Smith, M.A., D.Phil.
Price 1/9, post free.


