

10/tteu
THE AFTERMATH
Making Good War’s Wastage.
THE
Hon. DAVID J. GORDON, mix.
(Author of “The Handbook of South Australia,”
“ Nile of Australia,” “ Conquering the Desert,”
etc., etc.)
heprinted from “Ihe Advertiser
Adelaide
J. L. Bonython & Co., Printers, “The Advertiser ” Office, King William Street
1916


THE AFTERMATH ;
IMAKIISQ GOOD WAR’S WASTAGE.
ECONOMIC FACTORS.
Civilians who cannot light should cheer-
fully accept the obligations of '"keeping
the home tires burning” and getting ready
for peace. Peace may have her victories
“no less renowned than war,” but the out-
standing lesson of the world-conflict is that
victories belong to those who can command
them. “In peace prepare for war” is a
military maxim which would find univer-
sal acceptance in countries that were no-
toriously negligent of national eventuali-
ties. The converse is equally true —in times
of war, when wastage, human and material,
is at its height, plan for peace. The af-
termath of hostilities will supply problems
as complex as any of those now confront-
ing combatants on the far-flung battle-
lines of Europe and Asia. If they are not
faced with boldness and solved, then the
conditions that peace will bring may only
be a little less awful than the frightfulness
of war.
Most authorities agree that the economic
pressure will increase in a corresponding
ratio to the duration of the war, and
therefore the reaction will be in proportion
to the exhaustion caused by the diversion
of human energies and capital from wealth-
creation to wealth-destruction The na-
tional loss involved at present is mainly on
the negative side, since it is the wealth
that is not being created, rather than that
which is being dissipated on such a colos-
sal scale, which will affect the restoration
period when great readjustments must be
made.
The extent of industrial dislocation and
wastage will vary according to the prox-
imity of each country to the zone of hos-
tilities. In France, Belgium, Germany,
and, to a less degree, Russia and Eng-
land, wealth destruction and trade disturb-
ance have already reached huge dimen-
sions and will increase the longer the way
continues. The net shortage in British
shipping tonnage since 1914 is already put
down at 2,000,000 tons. Varying periods
will pass in each country before the finan-
cial balance can be restored by the work
of wealth-creation being stimulated until
the economic pressure is relieved and ulti-
mately removed. In Europe millions of
men and women have had their energies
and brain power diverted from avenues of
production to the service of destruction,
which is economic waste. As a counter-
acting influence, it should 'be borne in mind
that in most of the belligerent countries
production per unit in factory and field has
appreciably increased under the joint spur
of patriotism and profit. Here in Aus-
tralia, far removed from the battle arena,
conditions are not so deplorable, and yet
it cannot be doubted that the path of duty
is leading the Commonwealth into a'unique
position for so small a community in pos-
session of a vast and undeveloped country.
The situation is one of such startling
importaace as to represent a clarion call
to public men and citizens of the Com-
monwealth to take serious thought for the
morrow and prepare for the inevitable
■‘aftermath.”
History provides no parallel on whicii lo
base accurate forecasts of after-war expe=
rienees. Prosperity followed close on the
heels of peace in some wars, but they were
“minor affairs of outposts” compared with
toe present Armageddon. Most coun-
tries, however, have displayed rare powers
of responding to the unexpected demands
of war, and if the same strenuous efforts
and all-conquering spirit are displayed in
making industrial conquests the speedy
restoration of national prosperity would be
assured. it is a cheering and significant
fact that the statistical position disclosed
in recent commercial reports from Eng-
land, France, and Russia, while showing
the heavy drain on workers engaged in pri-
mary productions, shows that the abnormal
conditions caused by the war have stimu-
lated rural enterprises and caused a re-
markable speeding-up in factories. Com-
batants have discovered many latent ener-
gies, and, even at the height of each
nation’s travail, private and national effort
is being made to develop resources
and encourage enterprise and expan-
sion. There is no available evidence, how-
ever, that any similar improvement
in organisation and efficiency is taking
place in Australia. In that respect, and
in the matter of industrial contentment
and harmony, the Commonwealth offers
an unfavorable comparison even with
countries in the very throes of a death
struggle.
Just as it is impossible to look into the
future and fix a date for the cessation of
hostilities so it is futile to prophesy in
detail concerning world-wide economic con-
ditions which will assert themselves alter
peace is declared. That _ there will
be Wastage to make good, wreckage
to clear away, and grave issues to face,
cannot be doubted, and the obvious duty
of the men who stay at home is to get
ready to restore the balance of things with
the least possible delay and disturbance.
Professor Scott, in concluding his ad-
dress on “The Economics of Peace in Time
of War” at the British Association meet-
ing at Manchester in '1915, said: —“The
great national emergency has caused a
closing of the nation’s ranks, and it rests
with us to keep them firm and steadfast
when peace returns. There are plain
signs that it may not always be easy,
since so many industrial and other difficul-
ties have been carried forward as a sus-
pense account, which is to be dealt with
when the war is over. National unity is
enabling us to progress towards victory,
and the same unity will be required to
enable us to reap the full fruits of that


victory at home. It would be a mad waste
not to employ the qualities of heart and
mind which have been aroused in this
great struggle in the service of peace and
social progress. The future may be dif-
ficult for some years to come, but difficul-
ties are the opportunities of the strong
and courageous. It has fallen to us to
live in an heroic age; and, if we remain
true to ourselves and to our high destiny,
we shall have the strength and the fixity
of purpose to achieve greatly in peace as
well as in war.”
It would be a great achievement if the
national conscience could be awakened to
a recognition of the economic factors at
the basis of a nation’s material prosperity.
Notwithstanding the recent suggestion of
a Federal Minister, that all the text-books
on political economy should be burnt and a
new set of rules for national conduct drawn
up, the war has not affected economic prin-
ciples. It has emphasised them. Natural
laws cannot be put into watertight com-
partments even by a world-wide conflict
of unparalleled ferocity, any mere than
they can he modified or improved by Acts
of Parliament in the piping days of peace.
It is still true that production is the domi-
nating factor of progress—providing that
wealth from which profits and wages are
draw r n, and by avhich the cost of living
and the standard of social comfort is
measured.
A development of the natural resources
of a country like Australia to an extent
which will speedily restore the trade bal-
ance lost during the war can only be made
possible by increased production, a greater
and an unharassed flow of trade, and im-
proved relations between wage-payers and
wage-earners. The demand for a legisla-
tive distribution of wealth and the cry for
artificial adjustments of wages and prices
have hidden from view the far greater
reforms of increased production and better
means of transportation, which would auto-
matically solve lesser problems.
Rising prices; the movement of ex-
changes against Australia; the growing
obligations of public and private indebted-
ness, with accompanying interest pay-
ments; the losses of producers due to bad
seasons and higher freights; all call for
constructive statesmanship. There would
be no need for despondency in Australia
concerning the aftermath of war if national
energy and efficiency were thrown into the
ecale > against the wastage involved in the
conflict and the stagnation which usually
succeeds unnatural inflation.
Economists agree that capital, like public
credit, is as sensitive as a seismograph,
and_ that the mobility of some forms of
capital makes its transference to lees ob-
jectionable climes a comparatively easy and
rapid transaction. The crusade against
capital and threats about “conscription of
wealth” are not calculated to restore pub-
lic confidence and credit, or help the State
and the individual through the critical
times ahead.
It ie not a political panacea, but a prin-
ciple governing a progressive policy of in-
dustrial expansion that is necessary to
make for a national preparedness, that
will largely discount the disturbing in-
fluences of the demobilisation of large
bodies of men, the stoppage of munition
factories, and the decrease of war expendi-
ture. The Federal Treasurer has stated
that £3,000,0,00 is being spent in Australia
every month in equipping soldiers, and he
forecasted unemployment and suffering
when this payment stops.
Now, if ever, is ithe time for patriotic
citizens to identify themselves with an up-
lift and constructive movement —a cour-
ageous but sound policy, which will re-
store public confidence in governments,
and make for industrial expansion and na-
tional growth. It is the clear duty of
everyone to throw themselves into a move-
ment for the better organisation of the na-
tion, in order that peace shall not find ua
unprepared for its problems.
The promotion of rural industries, and
the development of other natural re-
sources is a vital economic factor in any
scheme for national preparedness for
peace.
PRODUCTION AND TRANS-
PORTATION.
“War having taught us the value of pro-
duction, let us cling to the conception when
peace comes again. Let us have a new valu-
ation of society, in which the man who
makes Something is seen to be the man
who really helps. Let us make it possible
for productive work to be esteemed Die
gentlemanly thing that it is.” So writes
Sir Leo. Chiozza Money, who adds; —“I
look for a great stimulation of British pro-
duction as the result of this wav What
we want in peace and war alike is a new
valuation of work. We have got to see
very clearly that wealth must be produced,
and that whether in peace or in war the
man who is not producing is not making
a proper contribution to society.”
If the war brings a new era of pro-
duction, and causes a revival of the old
spirit of the dignity of service, then the
material and ethical gain will be a tremen-
dous factor in modifying after-war in-
fluences. Production must be multiplied
in Australia if the Commonwealth is to
take its rightful place as a dynamic _ force
within as well as outside Imperial circles,
until it eventually establishes its undis-
puted claim as the dominant Power in the
Pacific. The real problem confronting the
Commonwealth is how is this increase to
he brought about?
Australia is essentially a producing
country, depending upon the world’s mar-
kets for the sale of surplus products. It
is not only the capacity to win wealth from
field, factory, or mine, that will govern
industrial expansion, but the cost price of
the article which must meet world-wide
competition. There is a close community
of interest between the capital and labor
that must be brought together before
wealth is created; between the grower and
the carrier who transports the raw or the
finished article; as well as the trader who
provides the connecting link between sel-
ler and buyer. These interests are mutual
and not antagonistic. The gospel of sec-
tional distrust and hatred is the gospel of
anarchy, which not only helps to disturb
society, but if unchecked would ultimately
destroy it. Ancient civilisations declined
and fell when class fought class; when the
people neglected the fields and glorified the
city: when Governments penalised the pro-
ducer, destroyed initiative and enterprise,
and substituted despotism for democracy.
The Prime Minister of the Commonwealth
made the declaration in England that “the


trade problem is the keystone of our
national life”—a most welcome recognition
of the vital importance of production and
untrammelled commerce.
Tn Australia, according to the Federal
Statistician, “a feature of the distribution
of population is the tendency to accumulate
in the capital cities. To such an extent
is this metropolitan aggregation carried
that in every State the population of the
capital ranges between 20 to 46 per cent,
of the entire population of the State.” The
percentage of population in the capitals—
varying up to 45.68 per cent, in South Aus-
tralia, 46.10 per cent, in Victoria, and 38.80
per cent, for the Commonwealth—ie higher
in Australia than in any other country.
The war has emphasised the evils of cen-
tralisation, and some of the causes of it,
and upon Australia’s prompt recognition
of the folly of neglecting or penalising
rural industries will depend its power to
counteract the effects of the diversion of
human energies and capital due to the
noble part it is taking in the Empire’s
cause.
It cannot be successfully contended that
the great natural industries of the Com-
monwealth are buoyant and expanding.
Measured by the growth of population
production has not maintained its ratio
even when the comparison is carried over
a period sufficiently long to eliminate the
element of aridity. Statistics relating to
live stock —the chief item in the national
ledger—are positively alarming. The pas-
toral situation in every State is unsatis-
factory. The flocks in South Australia
have declined to the point which they
Avere in 1862, Avhile the decrease for the
Commomvealth last year was over fourteen
million sheep! The cloAvnward movement
for the CommonAvealth, though mainly due
to seasonal influences, is none the less dis-
astrous. There is a want of vitality in
rural industries Avhich cannot be wholly
accounted for by unfavorable seasons, and
the causes should be investigated. Rightly
or AArongly the impression has gone abroad,
until it has become deep rooted, that rural
interests are being subordinated because
of the stronger political pull of metropoli-
tan centres. Nothing could be more fatal
to all interests than the decline of primary
production, and yet the most superficial
knowledge of the statistical position and
the lack of enthusiasm which characterises
the man on the land compels the convic-
tion that the general movement Avhere it
is not stationary is backAvards.
Governments Avhich commandeer the pro-
duet of the farm, station, and dairy; check
free interchange; fix prices against the
producer, and impose preferential railway
charges against the country, are striking
a blow at the very vitals of the nation,
and the first reform that demands advo-
cacy is the cessation of the political ven-
detta against the primary producing
classes. Anything that causes the human
stream floAving toivards the cities to grow
in depth and Avidth will in due course
affect all sections of the community by
reducing production and trade and add-
ing to the cost of living. A recent over-
seas visitor expressed the opinion that too
little attention was being paid in Aus-
tralia to agriculture, and whether or not
that is correct it cannot be doubted that,
the call of the land is falling on deaf
ears at the present time.
If production is to be stimulated rural
pursuits must be made attractive, and
this can only be done by making them
profitable. To cause occupied areas to
become more productive means the ex-
penditure of capital and the employment
of labor. The growing of rodder
crops where water is available would
enable more stock to be carried, but the
enterprise is surrounded by difficulties
probably too great for small farmers to
overcome. Experiments conducted on
the Adelaide plains have proved that, in
addition to growing crops, it pays to
erect shelter sheds for stock, but while
the returns fully justify the outlay only a
small proportion of landholders are in a
position to finance and conduct a business
calling for expert management. It
cannot be questioned that the carrying
capacity of large areas in the Common-
wealth is capable of being greatly in-
creased, and the livestock of Australia
thereby multiplied. This is a branch of
technical education in which, if agricul-
tural departments show'ed more en-
thusiasm and enterprise, would speedily
produce good results.
While the settled parts of Australia—
situated for the moit part Avithin a fair
rainfall zone —may he made to respond to
the demands of still closer settlement, it
is in the valleys of locked waterways and
in the waste and idle areas of Central and
Northern Australia that the great vic-
tories of peace must ultimately be won.
The conquest of aridity offers Avide scone
for statesmanship. Every sane person
knoAVS that it can never be Avrong to
conserve water in dry regions Avhere, oc-
casionally, supplies cau be impounded,
while the reclamation of SAA r amps and
lakes would mean the making of good
homes for soldiers.
Professor Gregory (Geologist of Yale
University, America), after a recent visit
to this State, said; —’“The middle section
of South Australia, which is commonly
described as a desert, is quite as good
as the 'desert’ across Utah, Nevada, and
Arizona. I Avould just like to have a
million dollars to put into scientific in-
vestigation of the water supply and soils
of Australia, and I think I could promise
to pull her right through. Such an in-
vestigation Avould be a great thing for
Australia,” This statement is similar
to one made by Sir Arthur Cotton, of
India, after an investigation: —“l am
fully assured that the cost of storing
water will be found, in Australia, per-
fectly insignificant in comparison with
the results which would be secured.” In
a publication just issued by Mr. Griffith
Taylor, of the Central Meteorological
Bureau, it is clearly shown the influence
of climate on production in Australia, and
hoAv imperative it is to improve natural
conditions before crops or stock can be
multiplied.
All this represents a wide field for the
activities of States and CommonAvealth,
and the Governments could not do better
than carry out a systematic investiga-
tion of natural resources along similar
lines to the Roosevelt Conservation Com-
mission. Meanwhile larger votes to Sta.,>
Agricultural Departments would enable
experiments to be made in more or less
inhospitable and greater enter-
prise to be shown' by experts in giving
settlers within a rainfall zone a lead in


116 W industries. A Federal Research
Bureau on the agricultural side is a press-
ing necessity.
In no other direction can the aftermath
of the war be prepared for with lees
excuse for delay. Federal and State
Governments have committed themselves
to a repatriation policy, and land settle-
ment schemes for soldiers are under con-
sideration. There is no time to spare if
justice is to be done to soldiers unfit for
further service, and for those who will
eventually return in larger numbers.
The industrial growth of _ a country
and its capacity for high civilisation de-
pend upon the steady expansion of pri-
mary industries. The prosperity of the
men on the land will regulate industrial
expansion and national life, and help
more than anything else to make good
the wastage of war.
Australian experience has proved that
there is a natural evolution from pas-
toral occupation to agriculture; from farm-
mg on big lines, to closer settlement-
dairying or mixed farming—and all these
industries, with the addition of raining,
rest upon transportation. Not mileage—
and Australia is a land of great distances
—but the cost of transport, is the modern
commercial measure of what is practicable
and profitable. Producers and traders
who can reach markets cheaply will pros-
per and multiply. Railways, roads, and
rivers are factors of the first magnitude
in the industrial and social life of a conn-
try, for unless transportation is available
production in excess of the most elemen-
tary personal needs becomes unprofitable.
The theory of efficiency in means of tran-
sit is how to reduce the unit in the cost
of production.
Increased production stimulates con-
sumption, multiplies avenues of employ-
ment, and adds to that wealth from
which a community draws its daily sus-
tenance. To adequately prepare for
peace, therefore, it is imperative that
every effort shall be put forth without
delay to revive and promote primary in-
dustries, this being one practicable way
of increasing production, paying the debts
of war, and laying the foundations of a
lasting peace.
NATIONAL ORGANISATION.
It required a great war to lay bare the
defects of national organisation in most
countries. Prompt action will be neces-
sary to prevent peace making equally un-
pleasant exposures. Some authorities con-
tend that a democracy is not the best form
of government in a great crisis, when war
conditions have to be faced, and when vic-
tories depend upon industrial organisation
.as much as a strong arm. It will be a
sad reflection on the result of the political
evolution of centuries if popular Govern-
ments are not able to rise to a great occa-
sion, appeal to the higher intelligence of
the_ people rather than to passions and pre-
judices, put principles before panaceas, and
so place the State in a position to prepare
for peace and take full advantage of
normal times. Plato’s advice to the indi-
vidual, “Know thyself,” applies with equal
force to the State. If there is to be a
sincere attempt in Australia to apply ac-
cepted systems of efficienlcy in peace times
Governments must acquire a greater know-
ledge of the country they control, its cli-
matic and other problems, before they at-
tempt to meet varied conditions and cor-
rect and supplement natural deficiencies.
There has been a singular ignorance in
high places in the past concerning natural
resources, largely due to the absence of
data, and the common neglect to collect,
classify, and circulate information, and give
a vigorous and continuous industrial lead
to the public. A commendable effort is
being made by the Commonwealth Bureau
of Statistics to correct a notable weakness
in Australian administration; but there is
scope in all the States for supplementary
work and increased vigor and wider vision
in agricultural and other departments to
which the public have a right to look for
industrial beacon lights. In this connec-
tion the proposals of the Acting Prime
Minister and the Minister for Home Affairs
at the Premiers’ Conference for a Science
of Industry Department and a Federal
Publicity Bureau are of the utmost
importance, and are along sound
lines. Federal activities in the matter of
investigation and special education can sup-
plement, but need not supersede, State
efforts. Co-ordination as well as co-opera-
tion for the common good is quite consis-
tent with the Federal ideal.
Sir William Ramsay, in his presidential
address to the British Association a few
years ago, said: —“i plead for recognition
of the fact that progress in science does
not only consist in accumulating informa-
tion which may be put to practical use,
but in developing a spirit of prevision, in
taking thought for the morrow, in at-
tempting to forecast the future, not by
vague surmises, out by orderly marshalling
of facts, and by deducing from them their
logical outcome, and chiefly in endeavoring
to control conditions which may be utilised
for the lasting good of our people.” ■
It is as necessary for a nation as it is
for individuals to take stock periodically,
to ascertain the extent and capacity of na-
tural resources, and provide facilities by
which they can be utilised for the common
good. The patriotic citizen of the Com-
monwealth should not be satisfied with a
larger production, a growing trade, increas-
ing wealth, swollen revenues, and a growth
in expenditure as one national obligation
after another is faced. To him the re-
sponsibility of the trusteeship of a fertile
but empty continent imposes obligations,
not the least important of which is a better
knowledge of how _ wealth is created, to
what uses it is being put, and how re-
sources can be husbanded lor future use.
That is the ideal of organisation, which
is only another name for a national effi-
ciency, which 'will be required before any
scheme for land settlement for soldiers or
a vigorous immigration policy can be safely
launched. Such proposals, as well as the
repatriation scheme, depend upon their
final success on organisation, based upon
knowledge of natural conditions and a full
appreciation of the difficulties to he over-
come and the deficiencies to be made good.
This data is not at present available. Mr.
Griffith Taylor, B.Se., 8.E., (physiographer
to the Commonwealth Meteorological Bu-
reau), in his publication, “The Climatic
Control >of Australian Production,” makes
“an attempt to gauge the potential wealth
of the Commonwealth,” and that is one of
ctie first steps to be taken in organising
national forces. The following summary
of his deductions will indicate the scope of


Mr. Taylor’s effort in the first-aid work of
organisation, “gauging,” as he puts it, “the
potential wealth” of the country:—
New South Wales. —Whole of the
State forms mart of the uniform rain
region. Rainfall varies in same way as
temperature. Ranks second to Queens-
land in cattle, and heads the Common-
wealth list for sheep. Capable of in-
creasing cattle, but not likely to carry
more sheep unless methods of raising
change. Leading State in wheat produc-
tion. Parts of the State suitable for
dairying. As regards future grain pro-
duction, close agreement of wheat
boundary with the winter Isohyet is very
significant. Future development of rural
industries in this State closely bound up
with increase of transport facilities.
Victoria.—Although State comprises
small area, yet climatically four distinct
regions within its bounds. Third State
in Commonwealth for cattle and sheep,
second in ,'wheat production. 'Strong m
dairying. Apart from dairying, no reason
to expect great increase in cattle. Ap-
pear to he great possibilities for further
increasing wheat yield.
Queensland— Major portion of State in
tropics. South-east winds and elevation
of eastern littoral makes Queensland
more productive than other tropical parts
of Australia. Whole State lies within
summer rain region. Eastern coast re-
ceives good winter rainfall. State easily
first as a producer of cattle. Some un-
occupied districts, suitable for extending
dairying industry. Second State in sheep.
No climatic reason why number of sheep
should not be doubled. Small producer
of wheat. Unused areas suitable for
growing wheat. Many countries which
climatically resemble Queensland are
large wheat-producers. This affords scope
for investigation by agricultural experts.
South Australia. —This State wholly in
temperate zone. Greater portion in win-
ter rain region. One of the smallest pro-
ducers of cattle, being superior only to
Tasmania. Unlikely any great increase
in number of cattle. Some unoccupied
regions, more suitable for wheat and
sheep than cattle. Ranks fourth amongst
Sheep more widely spread over State
than cattle. Largest producer of wheat
per head of population, but ranking
third in total production. Yield per
acre lowest of all States. Extreme boun-
dary of wheat-growing area appears to
be the 6-in. winter Isohyet, which runs
approximately parallel to the 10-in. line
and about 25 miles outside it. This is
beyond Goyder’s well-known line based
on native flora within 10-in. rainfall line.
'Western Australia. —This_ State com-
prises three regions of rainfall. Arid
region includes most of the _ State south
of the tropic. Fourth on list in cattle.
Cattle increasing in numbers more
rapidly than in any other State. An-
other 800,000 cattle may be expected to
be carried within the next 20 years. Bet-
ter transportation would increase carry-
ing capacity, but unlikely that State can
rival Queensland in cattle. Fifth State
in sheep, but showing greatest increase,
the State having trebled its number _ of
sheep in 24 years. Sheep not carried
so far north or so far inland as cattle.
Most promising regions for further in-
crease along south coast from Perth-
Albany railway eastward. Here large
areas with more than 10-in. rainfall prac-
tically unoccupied. Fourth State as
wheat producer; quadruples its produc-
tion since 1905. Greatest progress to-
wards south-east, owing to new railways
opening up wheat belts. Large areas
suitable for cultivation untouched. May
expect annual yield of 30,000,000 bushels
within next 10 or 13 years.
_ Tasmania. —Though small State, con-
siderable variation in climate. Almost
all the State in winter rain region.
Ranks last as a cattle producer, and only
slight increases. Tasmania by no means
fully developed, and production of cattle,
sheep, and wheat cling to the railways.
Has remained stationary as a 'dheep-
raiser for 50 years. Unlikely to increase
numbers under existing conditions.
Ranks lowest in sheep and wheat. No
progress in agriculture for many years.
Northern portion
within the tropics, fifth of importance
in cattle. Numbers have not been
increased owing to difficulties of com-
. munication. Until transportation im-
provement no possibility of country ar-
the States in sheep. Downward move-
ment in recent years, and little increase
to be expected under present conditions,
riving at its proper cattle production.
Suitable regions for livestock unoccu-
pied. Probably under present condi-
tions of difficult communication sheep
will not be spread much, and the Nor-
thern Territory will owe its future
prosperity to cattle.
Australia. —Considering the continent
as a whole, chief advance in production
promises to be in portions of Western
Australia and Northern Territory. Ac-
cessibility to markets chief influence.
Comparing Australian wheat areas, nor-
thern states of America correspond to
Victoria, southern states to New South
Wales, Algeria and Texas to Queens-
land. No crop harvest in early spring
in Australia corresponds with the large
crops of Northern India. in blew
South Wales and Western Australia
, there are still virgin regions, but it is
in Queensland that future wheat in-
creases may be expected. Similarity of
east-central Queensland, with large pro-
ducing regions in India, warrant careful
study of wheat culture.
Mr. Taylor has made the first practical
as well as scientific attempt to estimate
some of the resources of the continent, and
so arrive at a determination how they can
be utilised on a larger scale. That is
a form of national stocktaking which has
been singularly neglected in Australia,
and yet anything approaching industrial
organisation for the expansion of indus-
tries is impossible without accurate data.
First-hand knowledge gained by explora-
tory work and experiments is the basis
of the good work of the United States
(Federal) Department of Agriculture, one
of the best organised and most progres-
sive Government departments in any part
of the world. Referring to its objects
and aims, one of its officials recently sum-
marised its activities as follows: —
(1) We are finding out the secrets of
the soil, and, by adaptation of crops to
soil better tillage, wiser rotation, and
more economical fertilisation, the earth
is yielding profits which the farmer of
a century ago would noit have thought
possible. 2. In seed selection and in


the breeding of plants and animals we
are just at the dawn of a new era, and
scientists believe that within 50 years the
yield of o r principal crops could be in-
creased 50 per cent, by seed selection
alone. 3. We have in our vast expanse of
territory soils and climates adapted to
the growth of almost every kind of plant,
yet we still import vegetable products
annually. The department has done some
notable work in reproducing new crops,
especially adapted to certain sections.
Already the orange industry in California,
the rice industry in Louisiana and Texas,
macaroni wheat in the far west, and
■ Cuban tobacco in the south are monu-
ments to its enterprise. 4. Insect pests
and diseases of plants and animals, which
had brought famine and desolution to far-
mers of another age, we conquer by the
most wonderful scientific remedies. Mil-
lions are saved to American agriculture
each year through the work of the Bureau
of Animal Industry and the Bureau .of
Entomology.
Such industrial conquests, as are here out-
lined, should be the aspiration of Aus-
tralians. Nothing of the kind is being at-
tempted in the Commonwealth. “I believe
it easily possible,” the cerealiat of the Ag-
ricultural Department of the United States
has declared. “by_ careful selection to in-
crease the yield of grain more than 50 per
cent, in 50 years. There is no Government
expenditure which more directly affects
the wealth-producing power of the country
than that on plant and seed selection and
acclimatisation. It means that the Ameri-
can farmer is no longer tied to the few
crops that his forefathers knew. It gives
him the material with which to experiment.
He ceases to be a plodder along old lines,
and becomes an intelligent investigator.
He is emancipated from the one-crop idea,
and the whole world is coining to his aid.”
It is along similar lines that Australians
must work if the spinifex of the desert and
the useless bushes that fringe river swamps
are to give place to profitable plants. In
one year the United States Congress voted
£2,000,000 to pay the salaries cf
4,000 working teachers, who spread
themselves over the agricultural districts
of the Republic to live on the farms, work
with the farmers, and experiment under
local conditions with seed, manure, soil,
crop rotation, and stock feeding. The cen-
tral idea of this movement was organised
educational effort in taking the agricultural
college to the farmer instead of asking the
farmer or his sons to do what is often im-
possible, go to the college. The average
agricultural department in Australia fixes
a site for its teaching school and experi-
ments, and if a farmer cares to go there
good and well; if not, he can potter on in
ignorance, unassisted by any governmental
organisation. Private-owned railways in
America run what are known as “corn
gospel trains.” carrying agricultural
teachers with sample products. Schedule
time is kept, and demonstrations and lec-
tures at wayside stations are largely at-
tended. A suggestion made years ago that
the same thing should be done in South
Australia met with a frigidly unsympa-
thetic reception by both the agricultural
authorities and the State Railway Depart-
ment. In America the railways carry stud
stock, to be used for breeding purposes, at
reduced rates, and on some lines free. Aus-
tralian Government-owned railways charge
higher rates —in some cases ten times ordi-
nary rates—on stud animals. In the
former country railway managers consider
they are deeply and directly concerned in
promoting increased production of stdok
and products. In the Commonwealth rail-
way managers confine themselves to exact-
ing the uttermost farthing from the pro-
ducer and rural interests generally. There
is not the sympathetic understanding or
affinity between Government transport ser-
vices and their rural customers that there
should be, and there has been no attempt
to break down the barriers and enforce the
recognition of common interests. Until
something of the sort is done and fresh life
infused into agricultural departments, there
is small prospect of the productivity of the
soil being increased, the stock-carrying ca-
pacity improved, or the climatic disabilities
outlined by the Commonwealth physio-
grapher faced and overcome.
With national organisation developed
along sane, safe lines, there would be scope
for investigation and vast improvement in,
say, the following branches of enquiry, all
of which have a close relation to national
betterment and progress:
Avoidable loS,s of life, infantile and
adult.
Inefficiency in men and machinery.
Reduction in output owinv to industrial
disputes, and the “slawing-down” system.
Out-of-date machinery that should be
scrapped.
Losses through bad agricultural me-
thods and want of method in the fac-
Waste of raw materials, such as tim-
ber, &c., and food supplies.
Failure to utilise by-products.
Wasteful methods of distribution lead-
ing to unnecessary duplication, thus ad-
ding to the cost of living.
Neglect of geographical outlets and
cheap water-carriage.
Bad roads and general absence of mo-
dern means of quick communication.
The Eight Hon. James Bryce, at the
close of his visit to Australia, said that
“he had been favorably impressed with the
immensity of Australian resources. How
immense they were was not generally
known. The common impression was that
tne fertile acres were restricted to a fringe
round the coast, but such he found was
not the ease. There were immense tracts
of fertile lands which could be put to pro-
fitable use. Australia had every favorable
prospect of huge development, and must
eventually become a large and wealthy na-
tion.”
Mr. Bryce was right about the greatness
of Australia’s resources and the want of
knowledge concerning them. There is room
in every State tor a National Conservation
Association, which might have as one of
its objects the awakening of the national
conscience to a sense of its moral as well
as material obligation towards this vital
question of tne conservation of natural re-
sources. Australians should aim at know-
ing their country better than they do. They
want to cultivate a healthy optimism, and
educate one another in the direction of a
higher appreciation of things Australian.
That would indeed he an easy yet effective
way of preparing for war’s aftermath hv
stimulating local trade.


It is only by national organisation—Go-
vernmental activity in investigating, experi-
menting, and education so that the in-
dividual will be well equipped when coming
into daily grips with Nature in , field and
factory—that the urgent call for efficiency
and economy can possibly find an adequate
response. Economy in production, saner
methods of distribution, and only such
legislative restriction as will give due pro-
tection to capital and labor; guaranteeing
a “square deal” to the public by not grant-
ing preference to one section of the com-
munity or giving privileges to another sec-
tion. That is the corner-stone of a true
and safe democracy. Australians before
they can hope to people their empty con-
tinent must first be taught—even if the
lesson is enforced in the hard school
of experience—the fundamental economic
truth that it is productive industries which
really add to wealth, pay wages, and main-
tain a high standard of comfort. The neg-
lect of resources is economic waste, and
economic waste means public lose and
national decadence.
There is in the Commonwealth a clear
call for nation-builders. Men who will
utilise its resources and organise the forces
which make for progress, Australia at
present is a vast, empty, wealthy, conti-
nent, with its resources little understood,
and its affairs mostly conducted on hap-
hazard wasteful methods After-war prob-
lems urgently call for organisation on
broader national lines, and more business-
like control of public works and expendi-
ture.
INDUSTRIAL EFFICIENCY.
Will the national spirit created by the
War make for greater industrial efficiency
after the war? Writing on the subject
of war as a “moral force,” the London
“Spectator” recently took the view that
there will be created a “new spirit” be-
tween masters and men, and that this will
affect “the whole future organisation ot
society.” The “Spectator” adds; —“What
we have to hope is that this new con-
ception will teach the employer that his
interest and duty lie in improving the
position of his workpeople to the ut-
most possible extent, and that the same
conception will teach the wage-earner
that his interest and duty lie in making
the best use of his strength of body and
mind.” If that ideal is realised, then
threatening “Aftermath” problems will
pass like mist before the morning sun.
Possibly the “Spectator” is unduly opti-
mistic, but all the same the hope of
humanity is that the world-wide conflict
Will have far-reaching moral and spiritual
influences. There will be much readjust-
ment required, social and industrial, call-
ing for a generous compromise, wastage
to be made good, wealth to be created
to meet national obligations and prevent
unemployment, and the key to the whole
position is industrial efficiency, and its co-
rollary, industrial harmony. Educational
effort and toleration will be necessary to
produce good results. Economic truths
may be admitted, the value of production
and transportation recognised, and na-
tional organisation attempted, but in-
dividual aptitude and grit are the real
determining factors of national stability
and progress. Personal equation, like
personal responsibility, can never be
eliminated. The great problem of peace
is the problem of personal capacity
and willingness. There can be neither
State nor private organisation without
the active co-operation of effective labor,
and since labor works mainly for labor,
the best results for the greatest number
can only be obtained as a result of the
highest individual effort. The problem
calling for attention is how to bridge
the gulf between widely separated
“mutual interests.” The “bridging"
ought not to be left to chance.
As one writer on “Economic Problems
After the War” says;—“The whole world
will not come right of itself out of mere
revulsion from the horrors of war, unless
we are at pains to do our best to set it
right. If we neither evade the difficulties
nor attempt to minimise them, but face
them fairly, we need not give way to pes-
simistic apprehensions about the future.”
The development of technical education
and a sympathetic revision of the sys-
tem governing apprentices to skilled
trades, would appreciably help towards
increasing efficiency and in giving work-
men a broader outlook and a greater in-
terest in life. It must not be supposed
that the benefits of technical education
nave been overlooked in Australia. Com-
mendable efforts have been made, more
or less spasmodically perhaps, in most
States, to follow on the lines of older
countries in this branch of learning.
Authorities who have studied technical
systems in various lands seem to agree
in affirming that Australia is behind other
countries in providing opportunities for
acquiring skilled training. Technical edu-
cation is the handmaiden of industrial
efficiency, and cannot be neglected by na-
tions compelled to make good the wastage
caused by this war. It is generally ad-
mitted tnat the system of apprenticeship
in Australia is urgently in need of altera-
tion, and that one of the first reforms is
to make technical education compulsory in
every trade.
Closely associated with increased ef-
ficiency per unit is the problem of collec-
tive output, which in some departments
of industry is said to be a diminishing
quantity, owing to the popular fallacy
that less work per unit means the em-
ployment of a greater number of persona.
Even at the hour of the nation’s trial,
when* every ounce of effort by .State and
citizen is needed to save the Empire and
prevent democracy being crushed under
the iron heel of despotism, such declara-
tions as the following are receiving a wide
circulation in the Commonwealth:—“Slow
down on the job. The slogan of the
I.W.W. Dungarees and long-handled
shovels for parasites. Work for capi-
talists, parsons, politicians, landlords, and
other undesirables. Join to-day. If you
are unemployed, it is because some bone-
head is doing two men’s work. Unem-
ployment means more competition for jobs,
less wages, slum life, and gaols. Only
fools and horses work hard.’’ This is
not only false economics, it is high treason,
and deserves to be treated as such. Even
ignorance is no excuse for a traitor. An
enemy within the gate is more to be
feared than a valiant foe outside. Not the
least significant feature about this organ-
ised attempt to '“slow down” in order
to produce less per unit is that it is not
confined to striking the private employer
at what the Socialist-cum-Syndicalist be


lieves to be his most vulnerable point—
“capital’s profits”—but it*, is a growing
factor in increasing the cost of railway-
construction and other public works
built under departmental control, and in
fencing nationalised industries to show
a loss when compared with privately-
controlled businesses. Indeed, in the
matter of output or . immunity troin
strikes, nationalisation offers no attrac-
tions or advantages to the community, so.
that in those two important features
practical ‘Socialism is proving a moral
fraud on society and a failure on the ma-
terial side, since it neither improves the
status of the individual nor makes lor
national advancement. The greatest
economic object-lesson of the war has
been that there is no common fund out of
which wages can be drawn, but that
Wages are “created cvealth.” Limit pro-
duction and you curtail employment; in-
crease cost of living and you decrease
the purchasing power of the sove-
reign. Professor Karkaldy, in ad-
dressing the Economic Section on
“The Promotion of Industrial Har-
mony” at the British Association
meetings in Manchester last year, empha-
sised the point in these words:—". . . .
Whatever tends to decrease production
must decrease the real amounts received
as salary or wages. . . Really wages are
limited by the amount of wealth produced,
i.e., the more that is produced the greater
may be the wages fund; thus wuth de-
creased production, in the long run, there
must be a decrease in real wages.” Until
that fact is accepted there can be but
little industrial efficiency, and no possi-
bility of industrial emancipation, with
its accompanying human betterment and
national awakening. A writer in the
“Round Table” utters this note of warn-
ing:—“lf Labor decides to restrict out-
put, not only will capital suffer a Joss
of interest, but wages cannot possibly b,-.
maintained. Capital and credit are so
mobile and delicate that an attempt to
force them to accept a rate of interest
below the market rate simply means their
disappearance. The policy of restriction
thus hurts everybody.”
Xo feature of the industrial situation
in Australia has been more disappointing
in recent years than the failure of legis-
lative attempts to prevent strikes. In
1914 there were 337 disputes, involving
71,049 persons, a loss of wages of £500,475
and of 993,153 working days. The Presi-
dent of tiie Associated Chambers of Com-
merce recently declared that arbitration
had been a “failure,” and the Labor At-
torney-General of _Xew South Wales ex-
pressed the following view:—“Those of us
who have watched the trend of arbitra-
tion for the past fifteen years have no-
ticed that it is taking us round in a
circle. It moves ns onward, but not
upward.” Others who claim to speak
in representative capacities have admitted
the increase in industrial disputes,
notwithstanding the multiplication of
boards and courts to adjust differences be-
tween employers and employes. In no
other country in the world have more
genuine efforts been made to remove the
supposed causes of discontent than in
Australia. Every successive demand for
machinery to prevent strikes has been met
until the Statute-books of State and Com-
monwealth are crowded with newly-made
laws and amendments thereto. Wages
boards, voluntary courts, compulsory
courts have followed in quick succession
in order that the ideal of a “land without
strikes” might be attained. The next
stage in the evolution was nationalisation
of industries in the hope that the cutting
out of private enterprise and the em-
ployers’ profit would lead to harmony, and
a larger output and generally higher ser-
vices to the community. Expectations of
contentment in Government employ have
been doomed to disappointment, however,
and strikes, or mutiny, against the Go-
vernment are as frequent even in war time
as against private employers. It is not
too much to say in the light of disputes
in navy yards, and military clothing fac-
tories and against vessels employed in
transporting trooips, that Governments and
people in a supposed democracy, have
been humiliated, the law flouted, and
judges and courts ignored and sometimes
abused and spurned. That the Govern-
ment service does not prevent strife by
making possible an industrial elysium is
being proved every day, and thus the
whole movement —wages boards, courts,
and nationalisation —has produced disap-
pointing results, and a threatened dead-
lock with a return to the old and costly
system of strikes. Thev Labor mission to
France on its return to England reported:
—“No strikes have taken place in France
since the Beginning of the war, and there
have been no applications for advances in
wages. It appears to the mission that the
increase in production in France is due to
one cause, and or/e only, and that is the
patriotic enthusiasm which exists there.”
Sir C. W. Macara, representing English
cotton industries, at a meeting called
for the purpose of considering the best
means of promoting industrial harmony,
said he had been forced to the conclusion
“that the enforcement of compulsory
arbitration where large bodies of men are
concerned is an impossibility, and that an
enquiry into the merits of a dispute by
experienced men representing capital and
labor, and the publicity given to its find-
ings, would, together with public opinion
generally supply the only effective -com-
pulsion.” The voluntary “round table”
conference, with full publicity of proceed-
ings, in order to let public_ opinion exert
an influence, is, with modifications, the
Canadian system, which is preferred in
some circles to the slow and costly Aus-
tralian tribunals. Sir 0. W. Macara at-
tributes the comparative freedom from
general stoppages in the cotton industries
during the past twenty years—an immense
change from tne conditions that obtained
in the previous twenty years—to the
operations of the famous Charter which
terminated the twenty weeks’ struggle in
1892-3. This declares, in its preamble that
“the representatives of the employers and
the representatives of the employed hereby
admit that disputes and differences be-
tween them are inimical to the interests
of both parties, and that it is expedient
and desirable that some means should be
adopted for the future whereby such dis-'
putes and differences may be expeditiously
and amicably settled and strikes and lock-
outs avoided.” The system of co-operation
or profit-sharing by the automatic increase
of wages along with profits was adopted,
with good results, in the cotton and seve-
ral other industries in England. A similar
method was adopted some years ago by
the Wallaroo and Moonta Mining Com-
pany, and it has given complete satisfac-
tion. This company has just made a refund


amounting to about £115,000 to employes
to compensate for a reduction made when
copper was low in price. An American
journal devoted to the copper industry re-
cently drew attention to the sliding scale
system of the Wallaroo and Moonta Com-
pany.
Whether or not the extended application
of some such system to Australian con-
ditions would reduce the number of dis-
putes which lead to the dislocation of busi-
ness and loss of wages, it is obvious that
a better understanding between employers
and employed is imperative before there
can he an appreciable advance in industrial
efficiency and national prestige. A mutual
recognition—as in the cotton trade—of
what economists term the “identity of in-
terest” would go a long way towards bridg-
ing the chasm which at present yawns be-
tween wage-payers—even when the State
is the employer—and the wage-receivers.
Professor Kirkaldy, in his “Economics
and Syndicalism,” written before the war,
said:—“What is needed at the present mo-
ment is that all ranks in the industrial
army should he equally well versed in the
economic laws which regulate, not only the
production of wealth, but also its distribu-
tion and its consumption. Until this comes
about society will continue to grope in the
dark, and there will be not only unrest,
but the possibility of worse things. . . . . .
Good organisation, not revolutionary chat-
ter; harmony, not friction; a freedom to
rise to the position to which a man’s abili-
ties entitle him. not the seizing of the in-
struments of production, are the essentials
for the material well-being of every Eng-
lishman and the continuance of our Em-
pire.”
Failing industrial peace, there can be
nothing approaching efficiency, and, fail-
ing either, or both, Australia can-
not hope to counteract the far-
reaching financial and industrial in-
fluence inseparably associated with this war
which is straining the resources of so many
countries. In such deplorable circumstances
problems of the aftermath will indeed he
something to he feared. Mr. W. H. Mal-
lock, writing in the “Fortnightly,” utters
a warning to the Empire:—“Just as the
belligerent nation which has at its service
the best industrial brains will, other things
being equal, win, so will the nation which
has the best industrial brains at its service
become, when the war is over, a wealthier
nation than its rivals.”
CREDIT, TAXATION, AND
EXPENDITURE.
“Our national credit is on an unshakeable
foundation.” These were the challenging
words which the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer sent ringing through space to Eng-
land’s foes as he went on to disclose in his
historic Budget how the Empire’s financial
position demonstrates the latent power re-
quired to carry on the war “with unabated
vigor.” The credit of a country is a pre-
cious and sensitive thing at all times.
National credit is governed by the ability
of a country to pay interest, and, in due
course, principal; or, in other words, it
rests on the future productive power of
the people. That the Chancellor of the
Exchequer was making no idle boast when
he spoke about an “unshakable founda-
tion” is proved by two other statements
which should not pass unnoticed in Aus-
tralia. He declared —'“We never borrow a
pound without*providing for interest and
sinking fund/' And—'“With nrudence and
statesmanship we can maintain our credit
throughout the war however long it may
last.” There is no comment to make con-
cerning the demands of the Commonwealth
Government for war purposes, hut an offi-
cial assurance that “prudence and states-
manship” are being displayed by all the
States in the disbursement of borrowed
money would go a long way towards creat-
ing public confidence and preventing
trouble when the “tumult and the shout-
ing” die.
The heavy drafts on internal financial
resources, have been so magnificently met
that successive loans were over-sub Scribed.
No apprehension is felt concerning the near
future requirements of the Government or
the growing paper currency, which no
doubt the authorities are administering
with due caution. The guarantee that the
public has_ a right to expect from those
charged with the guardianship of public
credit is that a sharp line of demarcation
will be drawn between war demands which
are; imperative and expenditure which is
not urgent. A pronouncement on the
point would have sa steadying influence.
Among the advantages claimed for inter-
nal loans are that interest payments are
locally distributed, and that the credit of
the country _is in the hands of its own
people; but it must always he remembered
that the money put into loans for State
purposes was not previously reposing in an
heirloom teapot or a long stocking! The
greater portion oi it must have been with-
drawn from other interest-earning chan-
nels, and this represents more or less dis-
turbance in industrial quarters, possibly a
diversion from productive avenues, the
effect of which will be realised later in
bank rates, reduced production, and, possi-
bly, commercial stagnation. In addition
to pledging public credit for war purposes,
the practice is growing in some States of
paying for works in Treasury bonds when
public borrowing is inconvenient or impos-
sible. This seems a Micawber-like system
of paying debts by giving a promissory
n °te! Possibly the proud and defiant chal-
lenge could be repeated of Australia that
its “national 'credit” is on an “unshake-
able foundation,” but those entrusted with
the control of that credit should not be
unmindful of the ever-present fact that
some day peace will be declared, and that
the public credit will have to be pledged
to make good the wastage of war, and
provide large sums to set the wheels of
industry moving again. One important
aid to production, and trade is cheap
money, and when the State becomes a
local borrower on a large scale the effect
of the competition leads to dearer money
and a contraction of private credit, and
consequently individual enterprise.
In view, therefore, of the certainty that
the “aftermath” will provide complex
financial problems it will only be prudent
statesmanship to jealousy guard the credit
of the country and not unnecessarily
strain it. The manner in which the hanks
came to the aid of the Government in re-
spect to the note issue and the wheat
scheme and the response of the people to
the war loans have all combined to place
Australian credit to-day where the credit
of Great Britain is—“On an unshakeable
foundation.” Every effort must be made
to keep it there.


-t was to be expected that taxation, al-
ready comparatively high in Australia, on
a per capita basis, would soar upwards
as a result of the war. The Australian
citizen is surrounded by importunate tax-
gatherers on behalf of several authorities —
municipal. State, and Federal. Per unit,
he is almost the heaviest taxed person in
the world, and certainly the most worried
by the complex machinery devised for the
purpose of extracting the highest dues in
the tax scale. There are State and Federal
progressive land and income taxes, with
sliding scales running into many decimals,
and curves of the “second degree,” and
so burdensome do higher grades become
that one citizen has been able to show that
his city-owned property returns him “less
than 1 per cent!” The rivalry between
State-and Common vvealtn to squeeze the
same person may eventually nroduce re-
sults which are not desired, for it, cannot
be questioned that some schemes for rais-
ing revenue by taxes are more suggestive
of sectional impositions than that equit-
able incidence which would cause all citi-
zens to share the burdens of Government
according t 6 their means. Many of those
who clamor for increasing gradations of
taxes appear to derive satisfaction from
the contemplation that is always the
“other fellow” who will pay, unmindful of
the fact that most forms of taxation, like
water, ultimately find a common level. A
countrv is not richer by multiplying taxes,
but poorer, and the general community
mainly carries the burden through rising
prices, decreased employment, or ultima-
tely by reduction in wages. In no other
direction does false democracy and eco-
nomic fallacies disclose their animus and
ignorance than in the demand for more
and more taxation, and ior the Brewster-
like methods of distribution of revenue
derived from this and other sources. The
steady increase in expenditure, other than
for war purposes, and the growing cost of
administration of public affairs in Austra-
lia constitute financial factors that cannot
be overlooked in any scheme of national
preparedness for dealing with both war
and peace problems,
While Australian Governments patrioti-
cally pledged the “last man, and the last
shilling,” neither the Federal nor any
State Ministry has attempted, up to the
present, to lead the way in, practising
economy. Indeed there is no lack of
evidence of extravagance in con-
nection with the building of rail-
ways and other public works, and
in maintaining the ordinary services
of government The East-West railway
is a notable example of wastefulness. in
the_ opinion of some authorities this line,
which it was estimated would be com-
pleted in three years at a cost of about
£4,500,000, will not be finished in five
years, and at less than £10,000,000! What-
ever prospects the railway had of paying
interest on capital cost are destroyed
by the failure of responsible officers to
carry out their promise to finish the work
as quickly and as cheaply as any contrac-
tor, and the neglect of successive Go-
vernments to protect public interests by
carrying out so large a work on business
principles. Although it is common know-
ledge that the whole undertaking has
become a benevolent institution of colos-
sal magnitude, the authorities take no
steps to stop the scandal of wastefulness,
even during a war which taxes the energy
and resources of the people. With this
and other examples of extravagance in
administration before them it is not sur-
prising that official appeals for private
economy are falling upon deaf ears. There
is no apparent attempt in any direction
to economise, nor can there be until Go-
vernments show the way and give a de-
finite lead. There is nothing approach-
ing organisation of resources or national
economy, and the result is that the far-
reaching effects of the war will be in-
tensified, and the “Aftermath” problems
will be made more complex by the ab-
sence of forethought and efficient control.
Appeals like the following made in Eng-
land are regarded in Australia to-day as
so much political “hot air.” “In order
to collect and concentrate the whole
energy of which the Empire is possessed
national economy has become one of the
most pressing necessities of the hour.
The rule for the. nation and for the in-
dividual till hostilities close is. Buy only
goods of home manufacture; deny your-
self everything for which money will
have to be sent out of the country.”
“Excellent advice,” replies the individual,
“but what are our Governments doing
in their conduct of public affairs?” The
only way to prepare for peace times and
minimise the inevitable reaction is to con-
serve resources, jealously guard the coun-
try’s credit, and create a financial re-
serve for use should there be a period
of industrial and commercial stagnation.
One English authority states the case
very frankly;—“lf we are to put our-
selves in a position to go on indefinitely,
we are bound to do all in our power to
make our national income meet our na-
tional expenditure, military and civilian.
It may be considered as certain that we
cannot cut down to any extent our mili-
tary expenditure. Therefore, we must
either increase our national income, or re-
duce our civilian expenditure. There
is no other way we can increase our na-
tional income only by greater production;
we can reduce our civilian expenditure
only by greater saving.”
By preventing avoidable waste, check-
ing extravagance in administration, and
by the carrying out of only urgent public
works there is no reason why Australian
Governments and people should not be in
a position to command all the elements
necessary in the creation of wealth which
will help to solve after-war problems. An
error that requires to be avoided at the
outset is to suppose that the vast and
complicated machinery necessary to tap
the resources of so large a continent and
lift it to its proper position alongside
competing nations can be controlled solely
by the State. Private capital and indi-
vidual initiative cannot safely be ignored
or supplanted, and the value of personal
equation and initiative cannot be elimi-
nated in any system of national organisa-
tion or economy.
Apart from, and above, the economic
principles which cannot be safely ignored
on the material side, the war has awakened
many more or less dormant moral and spiri-
tual attributes which may correct and even
destroy some of the inequalities and in-
justices of modern life. “The nations of
the world are engaged together in the bitter
but salutary process of discovering their
souls” is the view one philosophical autho-
rity holds concerning the world-conflict. It
is too early yet to even attempt to lift the


veil and obtain a clear vision of the titanic
struggle, with all its horrors and wastage;
but perhaps behind all the smoke and
tumult, beyond the din of the shells, the
sufferings of the wounded, the tears of the
mourners, the spirit of renunciation and
sacrifice everywhere, there may prove to
be influences at work that will make for a
great human uplift and emancipation from
present follies and sufferings. It is not too
soon to attempt to anticipate and get ready
to solve some of the problems of the “after-
matn,” so that Australia at least shall make
it possible for a true democracy to provide
unsurpassed opportunities for human de-
velopment and true national progress. This
war is challenging our thoughts day and
night. It should be a constant challenge
to our manhood, citizenship, and human
sympathies in order that all the sacrifice
shall not be in vain. If this war is a con-
flict between cold intellectualism based
upon a godless science; a soulless material-
ism governed by force; the doctrine that
the Might of the State shall always domi-
nate the Right of the individual; and ideals
founded on the instincts of a justice that
seeks to protect the weak against the
strong; ideals that depend upon human
sympathy for their inspiration—then the
stake is worth all the suffering and the
sacrifice.
Dr. Cunningham, Archdeacon of Ely, in
a contribution he made to the British As-
sociation (Manchester, 1915) on “Heonomic
Problems after the War,” concluded his
paper as follows:—“There is much that the
State may do for the promotion of the
welfare of the public in the long run, but
we can see that there is also a great need
for cultivating a higher sense of duty in the
individual. Economic experts have been
ready to assure us that the mere considera-
tion of interests will prove a sufficient sub-
stitute for the sense of duty, and that in
the new era the work of the world may go
on without conscious reference to duty to
either God or man. But it is not true. In
the march of progress there are duties of
humanity towards those who are compelled
to fall out; we are all bound by human ties
to see that the material prosperity of the
public shall be so pursued as to involve the
minimum of incidental loss to individuals;
and Christians believe that it is by awaken-
ing a sense of duty to God that they can
best foster a deeper sense of duty to man.”
Ethical considerations must _ not be sepa-
rated from economic activities.
J. L- Bonython & Co., Printers, “The Advertiser” Office, King William Street, Adelaide-
