

[From the Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries, May 8, 1873.]
R. H. Major, Esq. F.S.A. communicated the following
account of the Mappamondp, of which a photograph had re-
cently been presented to the Society by Baron Heath, F.S.A.
See ante , p. 9.
u Our Secretary, Mr. Knight Watson, has asked me to say a
few words to you this evening upon Baron Heath’s recent
munificent present to the Society of a full-sized photograph of
the Mappa Mundi of Fra Mauro, and I do so with great pleasure
because I appreciate very highly, this noble gift from our
venerable and distinguished Fellow. I shall naturally be
obliged to confine my remarks almost entirely to the general
merits of the map and of this copy of it, because it is clear that
to treat of the state of geographical knowledge as laid down in a
well-filled map of the middle of the fifteenth century, would be
to write a book instead of laying before you a mere passing
notice of the map itself. Indeed a monograph on the subject,
occupying 163 pages folio, was published by Cardinal Zurla in
Venice in 1806.
It was at the instance of Prince Henry the Navigator that
this superb monument of medieval geography was constructed.
At Sagres, that dreary promontory at the extreme south-western
angle of Europe, where he spent his life in the prosecution of
his Atlantic researches, the Prince had established a school of
navigation and astronomy, and had brought together thither the
most able Arab and Jewish mathematicians that he could obtain
from Morocco or the Peninsula. In the cultivation of the
science of cartography he was warmly seconded in the first
instance by his brother Dom Pedro, and afterwards by his
nephew King Affonso V.
In 1416, the year after that memorable conquest of Ceuta in
one day by Prince Henry, which from that time to this has
never been recovered by the Moors, his elder brother Dom
Pedro was seized with the desire to gain enlightenment by travel
through the principal countries of Europe and Western Asia.


His first destination was to Palestine, whence, after visiting the
Holy Places, he proceeded to the Court of the Grand Turk, and
to that of the Grand Sultan of Babylonia, where he met with a
magnificent reception. He thence passed to the Court of Rome,
where Pope Martin Y. welcomed him with the highest dis-
tinction. He also visited the Courts of the Kings of Hungary
and Denmark, and after peace was established between the
Emperor Sigismund and the Venetians he went to Venice.
There he received from the Senate of the Republic, in compli-
ment to him as a traveller and a learned Royal Prince, the
priceless gift of a copy of the travels of Marco Polo, which had
been preserved by the Venetians in their treasury as a work of
great value, together with a map which had been supposed to
have been either an original or the copy of one by the hand of
the same illustrious explorer. Before returning home the Prince
visited England, the country of his Royal Mother Philippa, who
was a daughter of John of Gaunt.
Ho one knows what has become of the map which was given
to Dom Pedro by the senate of the Venetian Republic, but I
have very little doubt of its identity with one which formerly
existed in the Cartorio or study of the 'Royal Monastery of
Alcobaga, and of which the celebrated Antonio Galvam, the
apostle of the Moluccas, says in his Discoveries of the World
down to the year 1555, published in 1601, that “he had been
told by his friend Francisco de Sonsa Tavares, that in the year
1528 Dom Fernando, the son and heir of King Manoel, showed
him a map that had been found in the said Cartorio at Alcobaga,
which had been made more than a hundred and twenty years
before, and on which was laid down all the navigation of India,
with the Cape of Good Hope as it was now known.” And
Cordeyro, in his Historia Insulara, Book 4, p. 97, speaking of
this map, says, “ our discoverer Prince Henry must have availed
himself of such a map, together with the information received
from the Venetians for giving instructions for the discovery of
these new islands,” by which he meant the islands in the
Atlantic re-discovered and colonised by Prince Henry’s sailors.
Unfortunately, although the result of Prince Henry’s ex-
plorations was the discovery, within one century, of half the
globe, including Australia, no examples have survived, as far as
I am aware, of the cartographical skill of the map-makers of
Sagres. Indeed it is not difficult to conceive that their success
in Atlantic exploration should be greater than their skill in
cartography. Their geographical situation along the Atlantic
made them, beyond comparison, fitter for the former class of
achievements than the old masters of what are merely inland
waters compared with the mighty oceanic seas, while the long


experience of the latter would give them great facility in laying
down their hydrographical knowledge upon paper. And this
we find to have been the case. Our best maps of the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries are from the Mediterranean, and especially
from Venice. And this will account for the circumstance that
when a work of notable beauty had to be done, the Portuguese
Prince Henry and his uncle King Affonso should have recourse
to Venice for its execution. By a curious coincidence Venice
was destined to be connected with this most beautiful of all the
maps of the Middle Ages, even in the primary exploration which
suggested to the minds of the Portuguese Princes the idea of
having it constructed. By a Bull of Pope Nicholas V. dated
January Bth, 1454, a grant had been made to the Crown of
Portugal of all Guinea beyond Capes Non and Boyador, as far
as a certain large river reputed to be the western branch of the
Nile, but really the Senegal, which Prince Henry’s sailors had
then reached. * In 1456, however, a Venetian gentleman named
Aloise Cadamosto, who had entered the service of Prince Henry,
doubled Cape Verde, and when it was found that beyond that
point the coast trended eastward, the hop&s of King Affonso and
his illustrious uncle received a new impulse, for they assumed
therefrom that it would soon lead to India. So much were
they at fault in those days in the matter of longitude, that the
King even thought it possible that in that direction the meridian
of Tunis, and perhaps even that of Alexandria, had been already
passed. He gave names to rivers, gulfs, capes, and harbours
in the new discovery, and sent to Venice draughts of maps on
which these were laid down, with a commission for the con-
struction of a mappe-monde on which they should be pour-
traved. It was to the Venetian Fra Mauro, of the Camalclolese
Convent of San Miguel de Murano, that this commission was
entrusted. King Affonso V. spared no expense, and Fra Mauro
paid the draughtsmen from twelve to fifteen sous a day, while
from 1457 to 1459 he himself gave all possible pains to per-
fecting his task.
One of those employed on the labour was Andrea Bianco,
who in 1436 had produced an Atlas in ten sheets of great
celebrity. One of the special points of interest in this atlas was
that it was the earliest, containing the full delineation of the
island of Antiilia, supposed by Formaleoni and others to indicate
America fifty-six years before the date of Columbus’ first great
voyage across the Atlantic. The defects of Fra Mauro’s map
are in perfect harmony with the ignorance of the age. Although,
as I have said, I cannot pause to dilate upon its general merits
and defects, yet there is one geographical fact represented in it
which is so interesting that I cannot omit to mention it hero.


It constitutes, in truth, the principal curiosity of the work. The
date of the map, as you know, is 1459, and yet it has Africa
represented with a southern termination. Now you will recol-
lect that it was not till thirty-seven years after this, viz. in
November, 1497, that Da Gama in the first sea-passage to India
had rounded the Cape of Good Hope. He first sighted the high
land of India on Thursday the 17th of May, 1498, and on
Sunday the 20th he anchored before Calicut. I may mention
that the first salutation which the new comers received after
attaining the object of so many anxieties, and of so many years
of persevering effort, was not of so complimentary a kind as
might perhaps have been expected. On the day after their
arrival some boats came out to them, and Da Gama sent one of
the “ degradados,” or condemned criminals, on shore with them,
and they took the man to two Moors of Tunis, who spoke both
Spanish and Genoese, and the first salutation they gave him
was as follows: “The devil take you for coming here. What
brought you here from such a distance?” He replied, “we
come in search of Christians and spies.” After some conversa-
tion on the reasons wli/ other European Powers, such as Spain,
and France, and the Republic of Venice sent no one out thither,
the two Moors welcomed the man and gave him wheaten bread
with honey, and one of them afterwards went with him to the
ships, and on coming on board said, “ Happy venture! happy
venture! abundance of rubies, abundance of emeralds! You
ought to give many thanks to God for bringing you to a country
in which there is such wealth! ” The Portuguese were utterly
astounded at hearing a man at that distance from Portugal speak
their own language. The Moor himself, whose name I judge to
have been Bon-said, proved very useful to Da Gama, and re-
turned with him to Portugal, where he died a Christian. But
although Da Gama had the good fortune to accomplish the feat
which drew forth this ecstatic but truthful congratulation on the
wealth of the country which he had succeeded in reaching, it
must never be forgotten that in the crucial portion of that feat,
namely, the rounding of the Cape of Good Hope, he had been
preceded eleven years before by Bartholomew Diaz, to whose lot
fell all the suffering, and scarcely any of the glory. It was
fitting that a Diaz should be the first to accomplish the great
task which it had been the ruling desire of the life of Prince
Henry to see effected. It was a family of daring navigators.
Joao Diaz had been one of the first who had doubled Cape
Bojador, which for ages had been the “ne plus ultra” of Atlantic
exploration. LourcnQo Diaz was the first to reach the Bay of
Arguin, where the Prince subsequently built a fort, and whence
lie obtained information and found means of facilitating his


intercourse with the Negro States on the Senegal and Gambia.
Bartholomew Diaz started about the end of August, 1486. His
predecessor, Diogo Cam, had erected a pillar at his furthest
point, now known as Cape Cross, from that very pillar in
21°49'S. Passing this, Diaz reached a point known to this
day as Diaz Point or Pedestal Point, in 27° S. lat. from a cross
which he then erected, which was broken some seventy-five
years ago. Proceeding yet southward, they came to Orange
"River, and from this point were driven before the wind for
thirteen days, due south, with half-reefed sails, entirely losing
sight of land, till at length they were surprised to find a striking
change in the temperature, the cold increasing greatly as they
advanced. When the wind abated, Diaz, not doubting that the
coast still ran north and south, as'it had done hitherto, steered
in an easterly direction with the view of striking it, but, finding
that no land made its appearance, he altered his course for the
north, and came upon a bay where were a number of cow-
herds tending their kine, who were greatly alarmed at
the sight of the Portuguese, and drove their cattle inland.
Diaz gave the bay the name of Angra dos Yaqueiros, or the
Bay of Cowherds. It is the present Flesh Bay, near Gauritz
River. Proceeding eastward, Diaz reached a small island in
Algoa Bay, on which he set up another pillar with its cross, and
the name of Santa Cruz, which he gave to the rock, still survives.
This was the first land beyond the Cape which was trodden by
European feet. The crews were now worn out with fatigue,
and alarmed at the heavy seas through which they were passing.
With one voice they protested against proceeding further. Diaz,
however, was most anxious to prosecute the voyage. By way
of compromise he proposed that they should sail on in the same
direction for two or three days, and, if they then found no reason
for proceeding further, he promised they should return. This
was acceded to. At the end of that time they reached a river
some twenty-five leagues beyond the island of Santa Cruz, and
as Joao Infante, the captain of the second ship, was the first to
land, they called the river the Rio do Infante. It is now known
as the Great Fish River. In the map collection in the British
Museum there is a very beautiful Italian MS. Isolario, by Henricus
Martellus Germanus (probably Allemanni), which was made
between the period of Diaz’s voyage and that of Da Gama, as
is shown by the following interesting legend opposite the furthest
point which Diaz reached : “ Hue usque ad ilhe de fonti * per-
venit ultima navigatio Portugalensium.”
The remonstrances and complaints of the crews now compelled
* A misreading by the author for “ do Infante.”


Diaz to turn back. When he reached the little island of Santa
Cruz, and bade farewell to the cross which he had there erected,
it was, to use his own words, with grief as intense as if he were
leaving his child in the wilderness with no hope of ever seeing
him again. The recollection of all the dangers that he and his
men had gone through in that long voyage, and the reflection
that they were to terminate thus fruitlessly, caused him the
keenest sorrow. He was, in fact, unconscious of what he had
accomplished. But his eyes were soon to be opened. As he
sailed onwards to the west of Santa Cruz, he at length came in
sight of that remarkable Cape which had been hidden from the
eyes of man for so many centuries. In remembrance of the
perils they encountered in passing that tempestuous point, he
gave to it the name of Cabo Tormentoso, or Stormy Cape, but
when he reached Portugal and made his report to the King,
Joao 2nd, foreseeing the realization of the long-coveted passage
to India, gave it the enduring name of Cape of Good Hope.
The one grand discovery which had been the object of Prince
Henry’s unceasing desire was now effected. When subsequently,
in 1496, Vasco da Gama was sent out by Don Manoel to com-
plete the work which Diaz had so painfully but successfully
inaugurated, it had been intended that the latter should accom-
pany the expedition, but he was afterwards ordered to sail for
San Jorge cl Mina, perhaps from motives of policy, on a more
profitable but less glorious mission. After the return of Da
Gama, however, Diaz was sent out in an expedition of a more
remarkable character. It was magnificently appointed and
placed in charge of Pedro Alvarez Cabral, a scion of a noble
house, its object being to establish commercial intercourse with
the Rajah of Calicut. It consisted of 13 ships, and the boldest
and most famous seamen of the period were placed under the
orders of Cabral. Great as the importance of the object was, it
was the fate of this expedition to make a discovery, before which
the results that had been contemplated in equipping it shrunk
into insignificance. The expedition sailed on the 9th March,
1500. When off the Cape Verde Islands, one of the vessels
which was commanded by Pedro Dias, lost convoy, and after a
short delay the fleet proceeded without her and steered a course
to the west. Whether this was to avoid the calms off the coast
of Guinea, as Barros thinks, or under the pressure of a storm,
or as is not unlikely, done on purpose, under the influence of
that intense curiosity which had been excited by the recent dis-
coveries in the New World, will perhaps never be known, but
the result was such as to satisfy both hope and curiosity. On
Wednesday the 22nd April, Cabral perceived the rounded top
of a mountain, to which, as it was then Easter-tide, he gave


the name of Monte Pascoal. It forms part of the chain of the
Ay mores in Brazil. He called the country Vera Cruz, a name
afterwards changed to Santa Cruz, which was retained until the
importation from it into Europe of the valuable dyewood of the
ibirapisanga caused it to be called Brazil, from the name which
for centuries had been given to similar dyewoods imported from
India. Cabral despatched a messenger to the King with the
important news, and, on the 22nd May, himself set sail eastward
with the purpose of carrying out his original mission. But the
joy which had been awakened by success was soon to be turned
into mourning. The appearance of an immense comet produced
an alarm which was only too unhappily realised. A fearful
typhoon sunk four vessels, and the brave Bartholomew Diaz,
whose great achievement had converted his Stormy Cape into a
Cape of Good Hope, perished off that very Cape, which for
him was still to be a Cape of Storms. In this.brief sketch of
events which I have here laid before you in relation to the
discovery of the Cape of Good Hope, you will have seen how
the true pioneer in this deed of “ during do ” was the one whose
fate it was to undergo all the suffering, but to receive none of
the glory ; and yet to him it most unquestionably belonged.
But it is not for this purpose only that I have placed this picture
before you. My desire has been to put the dangers and the
difficulties of the practical discovery of this formidable Cape in
contrast with the mere theoretical placement of it on the face of
a map. Things being then as I have described them, how, we
may ask, does it come about that on the map of Fra Mauro,
which was drawn thirty years before even Diaz’s great achieve-
ment, we find Africa laid down with a southern extremity,
under the name of “ Cavo di Diab.” Wo see delineated a tri-
angular island on which north-east of Cavo di Diab are inscribed
the names of “Soffala” and “ Xengibar.” This southern
extremity is separated from the continent by a narrow strait.
An inscription on Cape Diab states that in 1420 an Indian junk
from the East doubled the Cape in search of the islands of men
and women (separately inhabited by each), and after a sail of
two thousand miles in forty days, during which they saw nothing
but sea and sky, they turned back, and in seventy day’s sailing
reached Cavo di Diab, where the sailors found on the shore an
egg as big as a barrel, which they recognised as that of the bird
Crocho, doubtless the roc or ruk'h of Marco Polo, a native bird
of Madagascar. This fact leads me strongly to doubt the con-
clusion which might very easily be adopted that Cavo di Diab
corresponds with the Cape of Good Hope. I should rather infer
that the south point of the island of Madagascar and not the
south point of Africa had been rounded by the Indian junk, but


as the existence of Madagascar was unknown to Fra Mauro, he
would more readily apply the story to the extremity of the great
Continent, the rounding of which was the great object of ambi-
tion to the Princes who had engaged his services. It is very
remarkable that the Camaldolese geographer makes no mention
of the sources from which he derived his information. He does
not even mention the names of the most renowned voyagers,
not even that of his own countryman, Cadamosto, whose recent
discoveries he was made acquainted with by direct communi-
cation. The unfortunate Doge, Francesco Foscari, states in a
letter, that, “ when he considered the success of Cadamosto’s
voyage, and witnessed the plan and commencement of Fra
Mauro’s work, he trusted that Prince Henry would therein find
new inducements to continue his explorations.” Indeed there
can be little doubt that the evidence of the map was calculated
for the furtherance of Prince Henry’s designs. There are two
legends on the map which tend to show that it was composed
with a view to encourage the Portuguese in the prosecution of
their voyages to the south—the one which I have already read
to you respecting the Indian junk and Cape Diab, and another
which is inserted on the West Coast of Africa, and contains the
following particulars:—
“ Many have thought, and many have written, that the sea
does not encompass our habitable and temperate zone on the
south; but there is much evidence to support a contrary opinion,
and particularly that of the Portuguese, whom the King of
Portugal has sent on board his caravels to verify the fact by
ocular inspection. These navigators report that they have been
round the continent more than 2,000 miles to the south-west
beyond the Straits of Gibraltar .... that everywhere they
found the coast not dangerous, with the soundings good, and
convenient for navigation, and with little danger from storms.
Of these regions they have framed new charts, and given new
names to the rivers, bays', capes, and ports. I have many of
these drafts in my possession, but if any one should question the
evidence of those who have actually visited these coasts, much
less would he credit those who are not navigators, but writers
only on the subject, and receive their information from others.
“ I have likewise talked with a person worthy of credit, who
affirmed that he had been carried in an Indian ship by stress of
weather, in a course out of the Indian Ocean, for forty days,
beyond the Cape of Sofala and the Green Islands, towards the
west and south-west, and that in the opinion of the astronomer
on board (such as all the Indian ships carry), they had been
hurried away for 2,000 miles. And this report is at least more
credible than the assertion of others, who mention a progress of


4,000 miles (in the same direction) ... In short, without all
doubt, we may affirm that the sea encompassing this southern
and south-eastern part of the world is navigable ; and that the
Indian sea is ocean, and not a lake (like the Caspian); for this
is constantly asserted by all those who navigate this sea, or
inhabit these islands.”
From these legends I gather two important facts : the first,
that Cape Diab was. not the Cape of Good Hope, or, in other
words, did not represent the south point of Africa, as a fact
ascertained by actual explorations; but, in the second place, the
legends exhibit a desire to prove by argument that Africa was in
very deed circumnavigable on the south. Maps anterior to Fra
Mauro’s had shown similar representations ; for example, that of
Marino Sanuto, of about the date of 1320, published by Bongars
in the u Gesta Dei per Francos.” A beautiful anonymous map
of the date of 1351, in the Laurentian Library at Florence, also
exhibits the same phenomenon, but in my Life of Prince Henry
I have written lengthily to show that this was simply a theoreti-
cal exponent of old ideas confirmed by more recent observations.
During many centuries the Arabs were exclusive masters of the
commerce of the eastern coast of Africa, and had establishments
in all the ports and principal islands as far as Sofala. Further
south than Cape Corrientes, however, they did not venture,
because, as Barros tells us (Dec. 1, liv. 8, cap. 4), their vessels,
being sewn with cocoa fibre, and not fastened with nails, u could
not stand the shock of the rough seas off the Cape of Good
Hope,” and u several losses of vessels had occurred in the direc-
tion of the Western Ocean.” Now, the westward trending of the
coast south of Cape Corrientes, suddenly first, and continuously
afterwards, would naturally lead to the conclusion that the
termination of the African continent there commenced. There
is no difficulty in understanding how these notions of the Arabs
were communicated to Europeans, for as the former were the
purveyors of the commerce of India and the east coast of Africa
by the Red Sea to Alexandria, they would not fail to be ques-
tioned by the merchants of the Mediterranean respecting the
countries whence they came. Moreover, Marco Polo, who
returned from his eastern journey in 1295, speaks distinctly
(Book 3, chap. 36) of the prodigious velocity of that southward
current which led to this belief, and which was so strong off' the
Cape alluded to as to cause it to be afterwards named by the
Portuguese u El Cabo dos Corrientes,” or Cape of Currents.
In addition to these facts, the very singularity of the Lauren-
tian map affords presumptive proof that it was not the result of
a distinct exploration of so eminently notable a character. But
let us return to Fra Mauro. The appreciation in which this


grand production of his was held by the Venetian Republic was
such that a medal was struck in honour of him on which was his
portrait, encircled with the following legend: “ Frater Maurus
Sancti Michaelis Moranensis de Yenetiis Ordinis Camaldulensis
Chosmographus Incomparabilis.” It is interesting to read what
the illustrious Ramusio says of this map nearly a century after the
date of its construction. He says : “ tip to the present day it has
been constantly held in such great veneration and esteem through-
out this city, and especially by those who take an interest in
cosmography, that not a day passes without its being inspected
with great pleasure, and it is looked upon as one of the wonders
of this divine city by the strangers who come to see the glass
works at Murano.” In 1811, when the convent of Murano was
suppressed, the map was removed to the library of St, Mark,
but has since been transferred to the Doge’s palace.
The planisphere is a circle of 6 feet 4 inches in diameter ; the
corners of the table are filled up with four small circles, each
inches in diameter, representing:
1. .The Ptolemaic system and the spheres.
2. The lunar influence over the tides.
3. The circles described on the terrestrial globe.
4. A miniature painting representing the- expulsion of our
first parents from Paradise, with the four rivers of that garden.
A copy on vellum, coloured, to represent the original, and with
the legends written in a modern hand, and at full length, was
executed in the year 1804 by Mr. William Frazer, for the sum
of £2OO, contributed for that purpose by the East India Com-
pany, the Earl Spencer, Lord Hobart (then Secretary of State
for the Foreign Department, and afterwards Earl of Bucking-
hamshire), the Bishop of Durham (Dr. Shute Barrington),
Andrew Stratum, Esq. King’s Printer, and Dr. William Vincent,
Dean of Westminster, at whose instance the copy was made,
and by whose directions it was deposited in the British Museum.
The map has been several times engraved, and it is particu-
larly described in the following works, and is besides mentioned
in many works on geography.
Annales Camaldulenses Orb. S. Benedicti, auctoribus J. B.
Mittarelli et Angelo Costadoni. Venet. 1762, tom vii. p. 252.
II Mappamonde di Fra Mauro Camaldolese, descritto ed illus-
trate da D. Placido Zurla. Venezia, 1806.
The Voyage of Nearchus and the Periplns of the Erythrean
Sea, by William Vincent, 1809. Part 11. dissertation IV.
It was also reproduced by the late Vicomte de Santarem, in
the atlas to his Essai sur I’histoire de la Geographic du Moyen-
age. Paris, 1842.
But all these copies were very defective for practical consul-


tation, and one could never be sure of the accuracy of the
transcription of the words, which in the original are very often
abbreviated. At length, in the year 1869, a photograph fac-
simile was published by Herr Munster of Venice, but on so
reduced a scale, viz. of 2 ft. 3 ine. diameter, instead of 6 ft.
4 inc. of the original, that the legends can only be read by the
aid of a powerful glass. The noble copy which we now possess
through the munificence of Baron Heath is, as you will per-
ceive, of the full size of the original, a fact which not only
enhances the beauty and greatness of the gift, but constitutes
the map itself the only one in England which is of real practical
service to the student of the geography of the period.”


Bi&uo
cr/ $ & 04-*~
