

fVp n
%lo
6
The Late Mr. John King Lethbridge.
Reprinted from The Nepean Times of
May 12, 1900.
There passed away from among us on Friday
night last one of the best-known and best men in
the district, in the person of Mr J K Lethbridge.
J.P.. district coroner, returning officer, and, we
think, the oldest magistrate in the district For
some oonsiderab’e time Mr Lethbridge had suffered
severely, and his death was not altogether a sur-
prise He bore up with the greatest amount of
Christian fortitude, and was carefully tended by
Dr Barber and the various members of his family
Mr Lethbridge was a model husband and father,
and his loss will be severely felt News of his
death travelled quickly and there was deep-spread
sympathy 'expressed on all sides towards the
bereaved family There was some little confusion
with reference to the time the funeral was to
take place Although i was announced that it was
to take place on Sunday morning at 11, a rumor
got round Penrith on Saturday night that it was
not to come off till 2pm, and several persons did
not attend at the proper time in consequence The
funeral was the largest ever seen at St Marys
however One of the features in the procession
was the att ndance of Sergeant ( halmers and
Trooper Brown in full dress, who preceded he
hearse, and the number of deceased s brother
magistrates who attended The number of
veh cles were about 70 and there were about 50
horsemen. On arriving at the railway station
there were a large number of persons on foot who
followed up, and at the church there could not
have been less than 300 people waiting to pay their
last respects to the deceased A peculiar affair
happened in connection with the church. A few
hours before Mr Lethbridge’s death he expressed a
wish that Mr Percy Herford be asked to come to
the church on the Sunday and play “ The Dead
March ’ in connection with the death of Trooper E
H Ransley, the news of whose death reached him a
couple of day before. Mr Percy Herford was pre-
sent and did play the 1 Dead March ’ at Mr Leth-
bridge’s funeral. There was a large attendance at
the church, every seat being occupied, numbers
being unable to gain admission. Rev Dixon Hud-
son conducted the service, and two special hymns—
‘ Rock of Ages ’ and ‘ Abide with Me ’ —were sung
by the choir. The scene round the open grave was
a most impressive one, and one not likely to be for-
gotten for a very long while. A large number of
beautiful wreaths, including one from the Penrith
Bench of Magistrates and one from the Nepean A.
H. and I. Society, were sent in. Among those pre-
sent at the funeral we noticed John King Leth-
bridge, Robert Copland Lethbridge, William Baron
Lethbridge, and Philip Northmore Lethbridge (sons),
Duncan McDonald (son-in-law), Mr Geo H Leth-
bridge (brother), Messrs Harold, Harry, Herbert,
and Percy Lethbridge, Charles, W R, Cecil S, and
F R Cowper, Cecil J, J W Vero, jun, Charles Read,
and H H Dare (nephews), Messrs W V Read,
F L King, Frank King, E H G King, Lieut
H B Goldfinch, R.N., Messrs Roger Goldfinch, A 0
Buchanan, W Wilkinson, A Wilkinson, S E Lees,
M.P., Grafton Lees, Dr Barber, J.P., Messrs J D
Single, F D Woodriff, E K Waldron, A J C Single,
George, Chas W and John W Perry, F H Woodriff,
—■ Wamsey, A Richardson, T E Dryhurst, T 0
Stenmark, W H McKenzie, Chas Lloyd, A Judges,
T R Smith, W Fane de Salis, B Brown, J Angus, A
Thompson, E Robbins, W J B Neale, H J F Neale,
W Garner (Mayor of St. Marys), G Turner, G J
Turner, J Sainsbury sen. and jun., E and H
Braithwaite, G T and J Bennett, Henry, Albert,
Edward, Robert and James Beacroft, James, A and
J Luxford, James Jones, James Payne, J Stevens, R.
Hamilton, J Allen, J Silk, E E Poulton, TOW
Croft, A B Baker, W Player (Mayor of Penrith).
The late Mr Lethbridge, who is a descendant of a
very old Cornish family dating back several cen-
turies, was the son of Robert Copland Lethbridge,
his mother being the youngest daughter of Captain
Philip Gidley King, second Governor of New South
Wales, and was grandson of Christopher Lethbridge,
of Launceston, England. Mr Lethbridge’s father
came to the colony in the early part of the century,
and engaged in squatting pursuits and practiced his
profession as a solicitor in the Penrith district. He
built Werrington House, where he resided for many
years,taking great interest in matters relating to the
welfare of the distriet, was chairman of the Penrith
Bench of Magistrates, and largely contributed to-
wards the building of the Church of England at St.


Mary’s. He was largely instrumental in initiating
the old Penrith Hospital.
Mr J K Lethbridge’s mother presented the silver
bugle to the old No 1 Company of Penrith Volun-
teers nearly 40 years ago. He was for some years
Captain of this Company, resigning the position in
1873. This bugle is now held by K Penrith
Company.
Mr Lethbridge was born in Parramatta on 27th
May, 1832, and married Frances Emma Tindale,
daughter of the late Wm Tindale, of Hornsey wood,
Penrith. He leaves a widow, four sons and four
daughters, as follows : —Misses Mary Isabel, Amy
Frances Copland, Maud Ruth (now Mrs McDonald),
Messrs John King, Robert Copl ind, William Baron,
Philip Northmore, and Miss Laura Hannah.
Mr Lethbridge was for many years connected
with church matters, and was an active worker.
His name appears first on the records of St Mary
Magdalene Church, St Mary’s. He was church war-
den and lay reader at St Stephen’s, Penrith. For
about 40 years he was church warden at St Mary
Magdalene, as well as being a Synod representative,
and was one of the trustees of the church until the
property was vested in the corporate body of trus-
tees for the diocese of Sydney. He has been Re-
turning Officer and District Coroner for over 30
years. He was a member of the School Board,
surviving trustee of the Young Bequest Fund, member
of the Pasture and Stock Board, also licensed to give
consent to the marriage of minor, was president of
the Nepean District Agricultural, Horticultural and
Industrial Society, vice-president of the committee
of the Nepean Cottage Hospital.
SYMPATHY FROM ST MARY’S.
At the Easter meeting connected with St Mary
Magdalene Church, St Mary’s, a motion of sympathy
with Mrs Lethbridge and family was passed.
SYMPATHY FROM THE BENCH
On Monday last, before the ordinary court busi-
ness commenced, the matter of M" Lethbridge’s
death was referred to The Bench consisted of
Messrs F R Wilshire, P M , J D Single T R Smith,
F 1) Woodkiff, and A Colless, J’s.P. Mr D
McDonald son-in-law of deceased, was the only
membr of the legal profession present, and Sergt
Chalmers represented the police Mr F R Wil-
shire, police magistrate, in opening the proceedings
said he wished at that stage to refer to Hie serious
loss the Bench had sustained by the death of Mr.
J. K Lethbridge, the oldest magistrate of the dis-
trict, and district coroner On behalf of the Bench
and himself he had to sympathise deeply with
the loss sustained to the Bench, to the family, and
to the district He had known Mr Lethbridge but
a short time in the district but had known of him
for very many years, and he had always heard him
spoken of with the very greatest of respect He
held many responsible positions in the district, and
had taken an active part in all public matters
Mr J D Single followed in a similar strain, and
agreed with all Mr Wilshire had said. He had sat
with Mr Lethbridge for many years and spoke of
his sterling qualities as a magistrate and a gentle-
man Mr Lethbridge commanded the highest
respect wherever he was known and he felt the
death of such a friend very keenly.
Mr T R Smith joined with the previous speakers
in his expressions of sympathy towards deceased s
family, and fully endorsed all that had been said
of his many estimable qualities. He had known
Mr Lethbridge for about 50 years, and was a near
neighbor for some time The district had lost a
good man—one who had always identified himself
with anything beneficial to the district or his
fellowmen
Mr F D Woodriff spoke similarly, and said he
was pleased to have an opportunity of saying a
few words with reference to so good a man He
looked on Mr Lethbridge as the best man in the
district, and his loss would be severely felt As
Returning Officer, Coroner, and President of the
Agricultural Society, he had done good work
Mr A Colless also spoke at some length, referring
to the friendly relations that had always existed
between Mr Lethbridge and himself He had much
to do with Mr Lethbridge as Coroner, Returning
Officer, President of the Agricultural Society, and
member of the Hosp tal Eoard, and had ever found
him thoroughly genuine. He expressed bis deepest
sympathy with the members of the late Mr Leth-
bridge’s family.
Mr D McDonald said as the only member of the
legal profession present, it would not be out of
place for him to say a few words Although he had
not appeared before Mr Lethbridge, from what he
knew, however, he could say that the deceased had
always administered justice in a fair and imparlial
manner. He might say on behalf of the m mbers of
the f mily that they felt deeply grateful to the Bench
of magistrates for the sympathetic telegram, and for
the handsome wreath sent by them yesterday. The
family, too, were pleased at the police force appear-
ing at the funeral yesterday ; especially did they
feel grateful to Sergt. Chalmers, who had so recently
arrived in the district.
Mr S J Hamblin, C'erkof Petty Sessions, said he
wished to express his sympathy with Mrs Lethbridge
and family in their trouble Pie had always received
the greatest courtesy from the late Mr Lethbridge.
Mr F R Wilshire, P. M , explained why he was
not present at the funeral. He intended going in
the morning, but on Sunday night Mrs Wilshire
was informed bv a lady friend of the family that the
funeral was not to take place till 2 o’clock in the
afternoon. He left home at 1 o’clock for the pur
pose of attending, but on his arrival in Penrith he
found people had returned
It was agreed to write a letter of sympathy from
the Bench to the members of the family.
The ordinary business of the Court was then pro-
ceeded with.
SYMPATHY FROM THE HOSPITAL
COMMITTEE
\t the monthly meeting of the committee of the
Nepean Cottage Hospital, on Tuesday afternoon
last, the President (Mr S E Lees) said it was his
very painful duty to have to report the death of one
of the most esteemed members of the Board, Mr J
K Lethbridge From the initiation of the institu-
tion that gentleman had been a hard w rker, always
taking a never-flagging interest in everything which
had for its object the benefit of the hospital. He
w s an amiable, loveable, and honorable man in
every respect, and his death was a loss, not only to
the hospital, but to the whole district. He thought
this very painful event should be recorded in the his-
tory of the hospital. At the (ime of his death Mr
Lethbridge held the position of vice-president on
the Board, and he was also one of the trustees
It would be the duty of the committee to appoint
another vice president to the position rendered vacant
by his dea'h, but he would have to look into the
rnatt-r of apponting another trustee, and that was a
position which was confirmed by Act of Parliament.
He would like to see a motion of condolence moved
at that meeting, expressing sympathy with the be-
reaved relatives of the deceased gentleman.
Mr J D Single said it was with feelings of very


great sorrow and regret that he felt called upon to
say a few woids. Mr Lethbridge had been a very
old and esteemed friend of his for years, and he felt
his loss very keenly. Asa member of their Board,
he had always endeavored to do his duty to the hos-
pital conscientiously in every respect. He moved
that a letter of sympathy be sent from the Board to
the wife and family of the deceased gentleman.
Mr F H Woodriff seconded the motion and
expressed his deep regret at the loss they had
sustained. Although he was related by marriage
to the late Mr Lethbridge, he preferred to look
upon him as a sincere friend. The deceased gentle-
man was generous, kind, and manly, and his life
could be taken as an example by them. With re-
gard to his connection with the hospital, he had
always taken a great interest in its w Ifare, and
his loss would be a great and, perhaps, irreparable
one.
Mr A Judges supported the motion and also ex-
pressed regret at their loss. The suffering poor of
the district had lost a good friend. He would like
to go further than the motion proposed, have a
tablet, or something similar, erected at the host it a 1
to the memory of the deceased.
Messrs H J F Neale, G Besley, and Rev E King
also spoke in support of the motion, and referred in
sympathetic terms to the loss the institution had
sustained, after which the motion was put and
carried unanimously.
Mr A Judges moved that a tablet be erected in
the vestibule of the hospital to the memory of the
late J K Lethbridge.
Mr F D Woodriff, in seconding the motion, said
he endorsed all that had been spoken that after-
noon concerning the good works of the late Mr
Lethbridge.
The motion was carried unanimously, the matter
to be left in the hands of the executive.
Reprinted from The Nepean Times of
May 19, 1900.
On Sunday morning last a large congregation
attended St. Mary Magdalene, St. Marys, to take
part in a memorial service of the late John King
Lethbridge, All the sons and daughters of the
deceased gentleman were present. The service was
conducted by the rector (Rev Dixon Hudson). Mr
Percy Herford presided at the organ. The service
commenced with hymn 384, “ How Bright These
Glorious Spirits Shine.” The other hymns sung
were “ Rock of Ages,” ;i The King of Love,” and
“ Just as I Am Without One Plea ” —all favorite
hymns of the deceased’s. The Rev Dixon Hudson
preached the following sermon taking as his text :
“Well done, good and faithful servant, thou hast
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things ; enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord.”—Matt. 25, 23.
The parable of the talents from which our text is
taken, and especially the pronouncement of Jesus
regarding the faithful servants, is particularly
applicable, I think, to the person upon whom our
thoughts are centred this morning The late Mr
John King Lethbridge was a man endowed by God
with many talents. All the gifts at his command
were freely and faithfully given to the service of
God and man. And be it said to the honor of this
community, the ability and rectitude of Mr
Lethbridge were recognised and honored in some
measure. This church for over 40 years has been
impressed with the integrity and ability of the man,
find consequently has honored him with the highest
honors possible for laymen, by appointing him
trustee of this church, which office he held until
church property was vested in the hands of a
corporate body of trustees appointed by Synod.
For some time Mr Lethbridge was lay-reader in
this district—long before St. Marys became a
separate parish. Up to the time of his death he
was Synod representative and churchwarden. The
latter office he held, I think, ever since his father’s
death. By the death of Mr Lethbridge the Church
of England throughout the district has lost a prince
among laymen. And what shall I say of the loss
sustained by this community ? The influence of
Mr Lethbridge was not confined to St. Marys ; his
ability was recognised throughout the Nepean
district. This is evident from the fact that he was
vice-president of the Nepean Hospital Committee
and one of its trustees, president of the District
Show, district coroner for over 30 years, and
returning officer for this electorate. Besides holding
these responsible positions, he was chairman of the
Local School Board and trustee of the Young
bequest. A man who has filled—and filled up to
the day of his death—these offices with marked
ability, with satisfaction, with honor to himself and
to the community, could be no ordinary man. The
loss to this town, to this district, to this church in
particular, is great indeed —it is felt keenly. His
death cast a shadow over the whole district of the
Nepean. There is no person whose death could
touch more hearts than that of Mr J K
Lethbridge. He was loved for his worth—
for what he was, an honest upright,
straight-forward, genuine man of God. He
was a man not without faults, but with far less
faults than most men. He lived to glorify God and
to serve his fellow men. He stood as a giant among
men for honesty of purpose, and for having courage
to declare his convictions and to carry them out.
There is no name so greatly respected, no face so
greatly missed, no life has left such a mark for good
on the moral life of the community like that of Mr
J K Lethbridge. And why ? Because he exercised
faithfully those talents of time, of energy, of ability,
of spirituality for the service of God and man. We
believe he will listen to those comforting and cheer-
ing words of our text on the Great Day of Judg-
ment—when the secrets of all hearts shall be dis-
closed before God, when they that have done good,
and they that have done evil will receive—every
man according as he hath done in the body, whether
it be good or evil. We believe, I say—nay, we are
sure that he will listen to those comforting and
cheering words uttered by His Lord and Master—
“ Well done, good and faithful servant, thou hast
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things ; enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord.” And because we believe this the bitter-
ness of death is taken away. “For if we believe
that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also
which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him.
For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord,
that we which are alive and remain unto the com-
ing of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
asleep. For the Lord Himself shall descend from
Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Arch-
angel, and with the trump of God : and the dead in
Christ shall rise first : Then we which are alive and
remain shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. and so shall we
ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one
another with these words.” It is the word of com-
fort and of consolation I offer you to-day. The
Church’s loss is great. The community’s loss is
great. But the loss to the family is greater still.
The loss to the family is greatest of all. It was in
his home where he was most valued and most loved.
It was there, and naturally so, that the severance of
h’s tenderest ties was most keenly felt. And if pos


sible, he was bound more closely to the members of
his own household during the time of his suffering.
It was during this time of suffering that he was
drawn more closely to the heart of his Saviour in the
fellowship of His sufferings, being made “ comform-
able to His death.” Suffering has one or two effects.
It either brings a man to hold communion with God
and think more of the heavenly things than the
earthly ; or, it makes a person desperate. To the
man of faith, suffering softens, purifies, transforms
the life to the likeness of Jesus. To the man with-
out faith, suffering frequently has the opposite effect ;
although suffering sometimes appears to be the
means of quickening faith. It is a hard thing to
watch your loved ones suffer, especially when you
know that the life lived has been a good one. It is
just at this time when faith is most essential, be-
cause we are in danger of murmuring, of judging
God. When sight and human reason fails to
give a satisfactory answer for suffering, it is just
then that our faith in God should be strongest. Our
faith in God is being tested. It is as though God
said, “ I will not allow one unnecessary pang !” Ah,
yes ! if we could but see the end of things we should
not murmur nor complain beneath His chastening
rod, but in the hour of grief and pain should lean
upon our God. We should believe that “ All things
work together for good to those who love God.” If
we could but hear the voices of those who have
gone before, their testimony would be—“ He had
done all things well.” But we, in our finite wisdom,
sometimes venture to pass judgment upon the actions
of God, because His actions appear to our minds to
be unworthy of His character. But why all this
suffering 1 What is the meaning of it ? Listen !
until I tell you. You have sung,—
“ How bright these glorious spirits shine !
Whence all their bright array /
How came they to the blissful seats
Of everlasting day ?
Lo ! These are they from suffering great,
Who came to realms of light ;
And in the blood of Christ have washed,
their robes, which shine so bright.
God’s Word says,—'“My son, despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord, nor faith when thou art re-
buked of Him, for whom the Lord loveth he chas-
teneth, and scourgeth every son. whom he receiveth.
If ye endure chastening God dealeth with you as
with sons ; for what son is he whom the father
chasteneth not ? But if ye be without chastisement
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and
not sons. Now, no chastening for the present
seemeth to be joyous, but grievous ; nevertheless,
afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of
righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby.
After ye have suffered awhile, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you. If we suffer we
shall also reign with Him. Yea, and all that will
live godly shall suffer persecution.” But to return
to our subject of loss. However satisfied we are
now that all is well—and we have the perfect
assurance of the Word of God that our dear one is
with Jesus, which is very far better than this life—■
we cannot help sorrowing ; it would be unnatural
to do otherwise, although our sorrow is not the
sorrow of those without hope. It is such as the
Lord permits and commends within certain limits,
provided it tends to godliness. If sorrow breaks the
heart it gives wonderful power to comfort those
who are in like sorrow. St. Paul experienced this
when he said : “ That we may be able to comfort
them which are in any trouble by the comfort
wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God.”
God has already comforted you in a marvellous
way. May we never be found wanting to give
comfort to those who need it. Shall we not again
look into the life and character of the one who has
lived amongst you nigh on 70 years, and ask our-
selves the question, “What lesson is there in
that life that I should learn ?” To the members of
the family I would say : If ever you should find
yourselves falling into habits of carelessness and
indifference in regard to yom’ religious duties, re-
member the noble example of yom dear father : he
was always faithful in the discharge of his religious
duties. You have inherited a priceless legacy—an
unsullied and irreproachable character. While your
legacy is great your responsibilities are equally
great. May the spotless and honored name of John
King Lethbridge remain the same while time shall
last. Lou will need daily prayer and daily conse-
cration to God to discharge your duties. I pray
God may grant the grace you need. Jo the
members of this church I would say, and especially
to the office-bearers: You, too, have had aii
example set to you as to how you ought to attend
your church—as to how you ought to show your
practical interest in all that concerns the welfare of
the Church of England. Lives are meant for
lessons. Let not the lesson of the life of Mr J K
Lethbridge be lost on the members of this church.
To the community at large I would say : Look at
the life and character of the man who has filled so
many important public positions in your midst.
He has left a legacy for you—-the legacy of an
upright and honorable life. It is your duty to see
that his successors are men of character and ability.
His memory will ever stand as a reproof of crooked-
ness, injustice, and to men of doubtful character
who may aspire to fill public positions. Yes ; we
may Well say the community is the poorer for his
death, the church is the poorer, the family is the
poorer, the world is the poorer for his death. More
men like Mr Lethbridge in this world would make
it a little more like heaven. Our loss is great, but
our consolation is that he has been counted worthy
of promotion—he has been called up higher. Our
call will come some day ; it may be sooner than we
expect it. May we be as prepared as he was, then
in death there will be no sting, but a happy release
in being freed from sorrow and suffering and sin.
The early Christians were accustomed to say “ Good-
night ” to their departing friends, so sure were they
that they would meet again on the Resurrection
Morn. Our dear departed friend said “ Good-
night” to his dear ones and kissed them, and then
fell asleep in Jesus. And so we would say :
“ Sleep on, beloved, sleep and take thy rest;
Lay down thy head upon thy Saviour’s breast.
We love thee well, but Jesus loves thee best—
Good-night! Good-night ! Good-night!
Calm is thy slumber as an infant’s sleep ;
But thou shalt wake no more to toil and weep.
Thine is a perfect rest, secure and deep—
Good-night ! Good-night !
Until the Easter glory lights the skies ;
Until the dead in Jesus shall arise,
And He shall come, but not in lowly guise—
Good-night !
Only 1 good-night,’ beloved —not ‘ farewell.’
A little while, and all His saints shall dwell
In hallowed union, indivisible—
Good-night !
Until we meet again before His Throne,
Clothed in the spotless robe He gives His own ;
Until we know even as we are known—
Good-night ! Good-night! Good-night!”
Printed at the Nepean Times Office, Penrith.
