

THE ABOMINATIONS
OF THE
WROEITES
(OR CHRISTIAN ISRAELITES)
FULLY AND COMPLETELY
EXPOSED:
BY ALLAN STEWART,
FOR SIX YEARS A MEMBER OF THEIR SOCIETY.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




THE WROEITES.
It is high time that the abominations practised by this sect should
be brought to light. That such horrible rites should be practised in
the 19th century is almost incredible; but equally incredible is it that
any person should dare to come forward and make disclosures such as
these unless he were prepared to substantiate them.
I declare that I speak the truth, and am ready to repeat my state-
ments on oath before any magistrate, and should the public require
further information on this important subject, I have ample materials
for a large volume.
In this pamphlet it is my design to disclose the circumstances which
led to my joining this sect, and the manner in which I was treated
among them, together with such an account of their abominable rites
and ceremonies as will fill the public mind with horror and surprise.
My father was for sixteen years door-keeper of the Presbyterian
Church, of Hobart Town, and in my more youthful days I cannot re-
member that I once absented myself from Divine Service on the
Sabbath.
Being apprenticed to a carpenter, and thrown into the company of
wild young men, I grew more careless, and the good impressions which
I had received wore away, but still I was a sober, steady youth, though
neglectful of religious observances.
Bambling about on Sundays I now met some of Wroe’s preachers,
listened to their sermons and read their tracts, which gradually worked
upon my mind, till I really thought T had met with the best and purest
people on earth, who could most assuredly show me the way to heaven.
I joined their society, was circumcised, and devoted myself to their
cause.
Never was there a more enthusiastic convert than I; for I thought
no labor too arduous, no sacrifice too great, if I could thereby promote
the interests of that church which I now considered so pure and holy.
Nothing could induce me to think evil of the leaders of the body-
no argument could shake my confidence in them, and I became their
willing slave.
My parents entreated and threatened, my friends laughed at me, but
all in vain; for I was fully persuaded that I had found the truth, and
was prepared to suffer any persecution which the avowal of my prin-
ciples might bring upon me.
Nor were my eyes opened by the habits and conversation of the
Wroeites : for their filthy talk, and indecent allusions were represented
to me, as the privilege of those who had separated themselves from the
world, and become too wise, too pure, too good to be harmed by con-
tact with any evil. In fact, I fully believed that the old proverb, “No
man can touch pitch and not be defiled/’ did not hold good with regard
to my new associates, and remembering how completely I was “ given
over to believe a lie,” I can feel for those who still labor under the same
delusion.


I found that this body was founded on the ruins of Joanna
Southcottism, for when that sect was thrown into disorder by the death
of the pretended prophetess and mother of Shiloh, John Wroe intro-
duced himself to them as an inspired seer who had received commands
from God to console them in their sorrow, and to guide their steps in
the right way. He was a wool-comber, and not being able to get on in
that employment, set up business as a prophet, having received a rev-
elation that the followers of the miserable woman'aforesaid should sup-
ply him with a tenth of their weekly gains.
This speculation proving abundantly profitable, and throwing wool-
combing altogether into the shade, he persevered in it, receiving con-
venient revelations from time to time till he secured the blind reverence
of his infatuated followers.
The old days of struggle and hardship were now forgotten. Tender
remonstrances, or impassioned appeals opened the purses of his people,
and the exchequer was in a flourishing condition.
Mark the delicate manner in which a liberal spirit is inculcated in
the following passage.
He does not ask for money —but sweetly insinuates the blessedness
of those who gave freely in by-gone days.
The passage begins in the usual blasphemous style— u The words of
the Lord came unto me, &c.”
"As for my former prophetess, Joanna Southcott, while she was
among the house of Israel, I wrought upon the rich, I overshadowed
them with my spirit, and they sent secret letters unto her, some £5,
some £lO, some £2O, and some £5O; and those that murmured not
after their money, they are in the heavens ready to be revealed with
me, &c., &c.”
Vol. 2, p. 910. Private Communications.
The following also is a brilliant stroke of genius, and shows that
Wroe, if he were a knave, was certainly not altogether a fool. " Some
" will be ruled by their wives, what they give to the Lord, some by
" their husbands; but happy is he who lets not his mortal wife know
" what he gives, though she be in the covenant; happy is she who lets
“ not her mortal husband know.” P. 905.
We can easily imagine the consternation of Mr. Briggs, when Mrs.
B. (who has been induced to become a Wroeite), informs him that all
the housekeeping money is expended, and applies to him for more.
Alas ! poor Briggs! Now thou hast the secret!
Mrs. Whitely is a woman after the prophet’s own heart. He men-
tions her in his Private Communications, vol. 2., page 967.
"I speak for the sake of a right hand man.—(Wm. Whitely being
" then sitting on his right hand ) he has given one shilling for the
" fourth quarter, last year. Before he put his money in the shop, he
" kept it locked-up safe. His wife seeing this, when she got it again,
", thought she would beware for the future and provide.”
Hear also his promise that those who pay their tithes shall never
die.— lbid,page 995.


" Every one that petitions me that I should take away sin from him,
u and keep him from it, and KEEPETH NOT BACK HIS TITHE,
“ I will even do it for that soul, and his body shall not die. ,>
Henceforth let Holloway despair, and let even our own cherished
L. L. Smith hide his diminished head !!! such wonders are beyond the
power of even their pills !
Before I proceed with my narrative I cannot refrain from giving one
more instance of the prophet's cupidity :
It was revealed to him that a large aud substantial house should be
built for him. He therefore made the revelation known, and the saints
emptied their pockets at his feet. Many of them, believing that they
were called upon to sell everything they had, did so, and gave him the
proceeds, with which he built a splendid house.
In order to stimulate them to liberality he gave out that he had been
directed by the Almighty to call the house after the name of that pro-
vince which subscribed most, and with a glow of generous pride we
Yictorians claim the honour of being the largest contributors, the
building being called “ Melbourne House.”
The building fund amounted to upwards of £15,000, but even this
was not enough, and the prophet, in his zeal to accomplish his high
and holy mission, trusted his sacred body to the mercy of the treache-
rous deep, and paid us a visit here in Melbourne.
He visited the societies in the various towns of this and the neigh-
bouring colonies, to ascertain whether " they were all of one spirit,”
which, being interpreted, signifies “ whether they were willing to al-
low him a portion of the tithes to complete his house.” They were
unanimous in their consent, and the prophet went home rejoicing with
a light heart and a heavy purse.
During his stay in Melbourne I was appointed to preach a trial ser-
mon before him, that he might be able to judge whether I had gifts for
the work. After hearing me, he sent me forth to preach his doctrines,
and I started for Ballarat without a penny in roy pocket, but greatly
comforted by his prophecy that “ I should have thousands of Jews and
Gentiles to contend against—but the Lord would prosper me.”
I preached in Ballarat for a few days without success, and then went
to Geelong.
I then sold all I had and went to Adelaide, where I remained for
about three months, and on my return to Melbourne found that there
was a complete "glut of preachers in the M arket.” Consequently 1 was
now more at leisure, and devoted myself to the study of Chemistry.
My brother (who had been a member of the society), now paid me a
visit, and entreated me to leave them.
Not being now in such a constant whirl of excitement, increased by
the hardship and privations with which I met while engaged in the
work of preaching, my mind grew gradually calmer, and I began to be
influenced by the arguments of my brother ; while my chemical stud-
ies engaged my interest, and diverted my attention from my usual con-
stant study of, and meditation on Wroe’s works.


I now examined his great prophecy which fortells the restoration of
the children of Israel within 40 years from A.D. 1822, which proved
a terrible shock to my former unreasoning belief; and finding that this
prophecy had most indisputably failed, my eyes were opened to my
folly, and I made the wise resolution of quitting the society.
I will now give an account of the rites and ceremonies in which I
took part while I was a member.
As the first step, I had to write out my confession of all my sins
against their laws, which I enclosed in an envelope, addressed to the
Female Trustee.
Then I underwent the unpleasant rite of circumcision, in which I
was told I should be divinely supported; but I found it to be a terri-
ble operation, which cost me three weeks of agony before I recovered
from it.
Then I had to provide the requisite clothing, which cost me about
£lO, viz. a mitre, surplice, coat, waistcoat, trousers, shoes and shirt,
all linen, even to the buttons, and a pair of silk stockings.
This light and airy costume is worn on Whit-Sunday, and the nine
following Sundays, all the members coming to the meeting house in
their ordinary clothing, which they solemnly take off, and then put on
the sacred garments. This process of dressing and undressing is car-
ried on in the meeting, both sexes being together, and may be illustra-
ted by supposing half-a-dozen married couples changing their dresses
in the same room.
I had then to go before the minister and take the oath, which is as
follows: —
“ I now swear in the name of the man Christ Jesus that I will not
divulge the secret now bestowed upon me to another that knows not of
it, or who is not joined in the covenant, or who cannot show the Seal
of the Covenant.”
This seal is a piece of green silk on which some Hebrew characters
(which I believe to mean Holiness to the Lord) are printed in gold
letters.
A private prayer was then given to me, which I was commanded to
keep secret, even from my wife.
I was now received as a full member, and admitted to the “ secret of
cleansing,” of which, more hereafter.
I omitted to mention, that before I took the covenant, I had to be
“ overshadowed,” i.e. dipped into a running stream. One of the bre-
thren went down with me to the stream, and stood on the bank while
I went in.
Not being accustomed to bathing, and it being necessary that I
should dip myself completely under water, it was some time before I
could accomplish the three dips, which are requisite for an “ oversha-
dowing.”
I poked my head down, and feeling the water rushing into my ears,
I was alarmed, and immediately rose.
“That won’t do, brother,” said my guide, “You must dip yourself
entirely.”


I tried again, but still did not satisfy him, and made at least a dozen
dives before I fully performed the rite, repeating, while my teeth chat-
tered with cold, the following words : , ,
“In the dame of the man Christ Jesus, have I been overshadowed
“ to wash away my sins.”
This is as far as a half-member of the society can go—he knows
nothing of the abominable “ cleansing process/’ or Law of Christ, as it
is blasphemously termed, to which I advanced after having been a rail
member for about six months. . ,
A half-member is not admitted to this secret, neither is he permitted
to pay tithes, the payment of which secures endless life for the bodies
as well as for the souls of the full members.
This explains the letters which have appeared m various
newspapers, from persons who profess to be Wroeites, and who declare
that they have never witnessed any of these abominations, Ihe tact is
they are not allowed to witness them —nor are they aware of their ex-
istence, excepting from my testimony. „ w ,„ .
In addition to this I may state that only a portion of the Word _is
read in their presence, certain parts being reserved for the edification
of the full members only. „ ~
There is also a “ Female Word,” which no man, not even a rati
member, with the exception of John Wroe, is permitted to hear; but
. the women separate themselves from the men, on the first Sunday m
every month, to listen to it. . „
I had been a full member for about six months m Hobart I own,
when a female came to me and said “If you consider yourself under
transgression come to me.” ,
My earnest desire at that time was to fulfil the law, and my con-
science accusing me of breaking it, I felt that I was indeed under
transgression. „
I must beg my readers to believe that I was perfectly sincere m my
misguided zeal, and that I was an earnest seeker after good. Ihe
history of the various religious impostures proves beyond a doubt that
there is no absurdity too great, no ceremony too filthy, no lie too tre-
mendous, for the faith of one who is thoroughly under the influence ol
religious delusion. , i
I cannot claim a mind stronger than those of many thousands who
have believed lies as wickedly foolish as those which I believed. 1 can
only say that I was a fool—a madman on that subject to which above
all others, a man should bring “ a sound mind,” and I thank Hod that
the scales have at length fallen from my eyes—nor do I shrink from
publishing to the world the depth of my degradation, hoping that my
disclosures may influence some who are wavering, that they may open the
eyes of some who are already within the toils, and rouse the public to a
thorough investigation of these abominations. ,
Remember that your children, your sons and your daughters, may be
deluded by these people, that the atrocities which I have witnessed
may be practised upon them—then happy will they be if at length, like


ine, they are rescued from their delusion even with a shattered constitu-
tion, a shaken mind, and a life-long remorse.
But to proceed with my narrative—l went with this woman to her
house, next the Sanctuary, that I might undergo the cleansing pro-
cess. ° r ■ »
She took me into a bed-room, shut and locked the door.
Have you any idea, said she, “what you are about to undergoP ”
I answered, “No I” 6
She opened the Wroeite Song Book, which they use in their worship
and pointing to 2nd verse of the 95th song on the 85th page, said
“ Bead this :
I read as follows:
An holy sight it is to see
Brother, sister uniting be—
And for each other to set free,
To inherit immortality.
"Do you see anything in that ? ” she asked “ No, ” said I
“ Then ” said she “ I suppose you’ll submit ? ”
I answered “ Yes! ”
then told me to strip myself—l did so,taking off everything but
my shirt. She then placed in my hand a piece of paper and a pin,
telling me to stick the pin in the paper every time she paused, until she
had made the requisite number of pauses.
She then dipped her hand in a basin of water, which action she
repeated twice during the process. In her left hand she held my pri-
vate parts, while with her right she manipulated my posteriors, pausing
at intervals, at each of which I thrust the pin into the paper, and
repeated the following words after her:—
“In the name of the man Christ Jesus have [ received this cleansing
as a purgation from my sins.” I do not remember the number of
pauses she made; but, when she had completed the operation, she
directed me to confess my transgressions, which I accordingly did. I
then dressed myself and came away.
In submitting even to this filthy absurdity my motive was pure, viz.
to be cleansed from my sin and therefore I declare that I did not attempt
to take any liberties with the woman, though I have heard from one of
the members that the woman is not always the only operator.
This would have been proved at the meeting at Bt. George’s Hall on
"Wednesday, June 10th, but the man, who would have come forward to
testify to it, was unable to attend, having been proceeded against for
debt by one of the most influential members of the society, who took
a warrant out against him and thereby prevented him from giving his
evidence.
I again underwent this process, and this time, in the Sanctuary,
Titzroy Street, Collingwood. It differed in nothing from the first, ex-
cepting that the place where it was performed, was a pit, or cellar,
lined with green baize, below the Sanctuary—and that instead of the
pin and paper, brass buttons were used, one of which I was directed to
drop every time the female cleanser made one of her pauses.


This rite appears so utterly absurd, and so unspeakably filthy, that
1 should almost hesitate to publish it, standing alone, as I stand,
against the whole society.
The following declaration, however, of Dr. «J. L. Milton will cor-
roborate my statement, in every particular—On this subject I have
only to declare, in the sight of God, that I speak the truth.
To All whom it may Conceen.
■ “I do solemnly aver that about seven years ago Alexander Payne
voluntarily came to me and defined the ceremony known among the
Wroeites as the “ cleansing process,” and I do affirm that his descrip-
tion of the process, manipulations, &c., was in exact accordance with
the statements that have been repeatedly made by Mr. Allan Stewart.
“ Mr. Payne stated that the female cleanser and he were alone to-
gether in a private place belonging to their Sanctuary, and after putting
to him some questions, he was requested to denude the lower part of
his body, and bow down his head upon a table, whilst she threw his
shirt over his back, laying bare his posteriors, and then began to ma-
nipulate liis private parts till he was afraid he would not be able to con-
tain his * * *
He shortly afterwards left them in disgust and sold me the two vo-
lumes of their books which he had previously procured. These books
were entitled ee Private Communications/'’ by their Prophet, John
Wroe . ‘ JOHN L. MILTON, M.D.
Melbourne, June 11, 1863. _
I will now proceed to give a few extracts from their Bible—-the <f Pri-
vate Communications” of John Wroe, in order to shew their blasphe-
mous absurdity. . .
Many passages are far too filthy to print, in confirmation of which
assertion, 1 have only to refer the public to the following pages of vol.
2 of this work —1181, 952, 1243, 891, 973, 947, 1329, and many
others.
In his so-called inspired account of the Deluge, Wroe represents the
Almighty as speaking thus : —“ Tell them to take two cups that they
drink tea out of, and fasten them mouth to mouth, and tell them to
drill a hole in each of the ends of the cups, and let them call one of the
holes the north pole, the other the south pole; and tell them, so is your
planet that you dwell on: and when the time came, the sides of the
cup settled, pressed out the water that came into lakes —the clouds rose
and gave their rain, the water gushed out of the cup —out of the north
pole and out of the south pole, till the waters prevailed over the ball,
50 cubits in depth.
Page 1072. —“ There are people in the house of Israel at this day
who appear as saints, but thus saith the Lord. Their bodies will die,,
and will be carried about in men’s pockets in pill-boxes, and be taken
cis medicine
rwhat! Is it possible ? No it cannot be ! A fearful suspicion is upon ns ? Perhaps L. L. Smith
is a Wroeite, and we have been swallowing portions of the ungodly when we hare taken his justly
celebrated pills!—Ed.] . . . , ~ ,1 , i
See on page 1061 Wroe’s impartial spirit, where we are told that he
reproved Alexander Bennie “ for giving kisses to young women, and


warned him to cease from it, unless he would do the same to the old
ones also, with snufftakers and tobacco smokers, and be no respecter of
persons.” But it appears that Alexander was not only fond of kissing
young women, but also of drinking old whiskey, the prophet therefore
solemnly warns him and another minister against this amiable weak-
ness, charging them first with the offence, and then telling them «if
they have not done these things to take care lest they should do them.”
Page 1372 he declares that “this religion will be brought into Par-
liament with great honour.”
. If one of my children has an unbelieving, temporal father, and he
binds them to have a doctor, let them give the medicine to the dogs,
or to the swine: that it may be proved that lam with the house of
Israel.
Now I command all my children to enter in at the door of that fold:
for I am the shepherd.
I will divide the fish, though they have fins and scales, as I shall
divide the beast that divideth the hoof, and cheweth the cud: and the
bird, as I divide the former Hebrews, who say they are Israel, and are
not, but do He.
He that hath my spirit will not rest till my name be written in his
forehead, and on his heart and on his thigh—though Satan will, come
forth with this mark, yet can he not do the work—the work shall prove
whether they be mine or Satan's.
Private Communications , vol. 2., p. 815.
Every year the house of Israel are bound to go up to the marriage,
every one to their churches; if a man have an unbelieving wife or un-
clean, say not your prayers with them, worship not with the unclean.
As I sowed my seed in the woman and brought forth a man, so will I
put my spirit within man and bring forth the works of a woman, the
last Eve, to be a helpmate unto me the God-man.
Page 713.—“ As they have mocked my word, my word shall mock
them, but be thou aware of those that refuse to ride the chariots, they
are they that shall seek thy Hfe, when thou enters into this land, Eng-
land, the people shall tremble at thee coming, and the whole news-
papers shall be alarmed.”
This, prophecy can hardly be said to be fulfilled yet—and John
Wroe is dead !!! How can this be reconciled with his claims to
immortality ? P. 813 “It cannot be that thy body see corruption.”
Want ot space, not of materials, compels me to stop here. The dis-
gustingly filthy language of many of the revelations is too horrible to
be placed on these pages; but should the public require further dis-
closures, I am fully prepared to make them, though I do so at consider-
able personal risk, having been threatened with assassination in conse-
quence of my revelations ; but I persist from a sense of duty, and will
never cease from exposing their atrocities while my tongue can speak,
or my hand guide the pen.
ALLAN STEWART.
Abbott & Co., Printers, Melbourne,


