

THE WAYBACKS
IN TOWN &
AT HOME.








THE WAYBACKS:
IN TOWN
AND
AT HOME.
By HENRY FLETCHER,
Author of “ The North Shore Mystery,” "The
Gentleman Lorri Kin," (D»c«, (H»c.
SYDNEY:
,
“THE SUNDAY TIMES” NEWSPAPER CO., Ltd.
1902.


molfe’s
It's a drink. You take it because you like
't ; f or the same reason that you take
whisky, or any otter liquor.
After taking it for a little while seven
men out of ten like it better than any
other liquor, and they find it likes them
better.
A Drink.
WOLFE’S SCHNAPPS is good to the
taste ; it is a quick stimulant, and it does
a vast amount of good.
It is so good for all diseases of the Stomach,
Bowels, Kidneys, and Bladder, that many
people who drink no liquors keep it on
hand as a medicine, and nothing can be
better, either as a drink or a medicine.
A Medicine.
It is “good stuff.” A little of it in the
•
morning is a bracer and a tonic that acts
well on the system through the day ; it
dees you lasting good.
i.
It is the tonic of all tonics for tired-out
■women. The best of all remedies for the
peculiar troubles that women alone have
to bear.
A Tonic.
It is a beverage and stimulant, that has
stood the test of time. No new thing be-
ing advertised into short-lived popularity.
It has been for 70 years doing all the good
things claimed for it.
Ask for
WOLFE'S
SCHNAPPS
Call it by its Full
Name and Take
Nothing Else*
Shun Substitutes*
# # #
Schweppes
. v . .:
Dry
Ging'er Ale
Malvern Spa
(From celebrated Malvern
Springs, England)
Sell
A ■' 1*
weppes
£ aw -fm.
i
See that you get
SCHWEPPES
As Supplied to
Royalty for over 63 Years
v t , , 5 t v , • • • / /<• j;
t • ' < it
* * **


To THOS. R. ROYDHOUSE,
MY FIRST APPBECIATOR, AND WHO SUGGESTED
THESE PAPERS, THIS BOOK IS RESPECTFULLY
DEDICATED BY
The Writer.


“ W aybacks
AS WELL AS DWELLERS IN TOWN, HAVE
LONG AGO RECOGNISED THE WISDOM OF
4
Buying Everything
AT
ANTHONY HORDERN'S
BECAUSE the ASSORTMENT ot GOODS is LARGER, and the PRICES
LOWER, than ar-v other bouse can offer, and because, to put it in a NU TSHELL,
ANTHONY HORDERN’S
FAMOUS LOW PRICES
ARE
THE LOWEST IN THE LAND.
WE, 1.e..
ANTHONY HORDERN’S
supply everything wanted to carry on the BUSINESS OF LIFE, whether that
BUSINESS is run IN SINGLE or DOUBLE HARNESS. To Family People
our Store and the vast stock it contains are BLESSINGS of the MOST PRAC-
TICAL KIND, while to all the OTHER FOLK, both rich and poor, our sys-
tem of trade presents ATTRACTIONS NOT TO BE FOUND ELSEWHERE.
PATTERNS, PRICE LISTS, AND INFORMATION SENT POST FREE
ANYWHERE.
«
ANTHONY HORDERN and SONS,
A
Only Universal Providers ,
HA VMARKET (only), SYDNEY.


THE WAYBACRS
IN TOWN.
CHAPTER I.
How Dads Waited a Few Minutes.
€VERYONE at Dingo Flat, and far be-
yond, to the Wallaby Ranges, knows
the Wayback family—old settlers,
corned-beef and pumpkin eaters ; tall,
Umked, ringbarked folk ; hair sun-bleached,
and features contracted to a pucker in the
brow in the contest with flies and vivid sun-
light ; true children of sun, sorrow, and scrub.
Old Ted had been going down to Sydney
any time this last score years, but had never
gone. When he had the money, he lacked
time, and when time hung on his hands the
pockets were empty.
Ever since they could remember the chil-
dren had heard of that wonderful journey
ahead : “When we all go to Sydney !”—and
had come to regard it as a visionary mirage,
an instalment of paradise only to be realised
in dreams.
So that, when Old Ted, having sold his
mob of fats at a fat price, suddenly said
that the time had come for them all to go
to town and see the Commonwealth Celebra-
tions, and join in the festivities, no one
could credit it.
“Oh, Dads !” said Mums, “how can we go
now ? That’s just like you. Why didn’t
you say so last week before I sot the three
broody hens ? Who’ll look after the
chicks V”
“ Oh, hang the broody hens ! Haven’t yous
been botherin’ ter go this last twenty year ?
Said you wos buried alive, an’ tlier children
ought ter see life, an’ I don’t know what
else ? An’ now yous talk o’ broody hens !
How wos 1 ter know last week that Price
would come along an’ give ten pounds a
head ?”
“ But we’ve got nothin’ ter wear, Dads,”
said Mums, looking fearfully at the nine
children, who had paused in their eating as
though petrified at the news. Jabez held a
potato on a fork half way to his mouth, Tilly
had her teeth fast in a chunk of damper,
Sarah Jane held a cup of tea aloft as though
she were an iron drinking fountain,
Euphemia had her mouth wide open, Rube
held his spoonful of sugar half over the
table, Delia’s lips were stuffed with pump-
kin, Little Sid’s eyes had opened so wide
that his forehead had vanished, Cris held
his bread in mid-air like a newspaper ; while
Bubs, alone unaffected by the general para-
lysis, grasped the moment with both paws,
and collected all the tit-bits from the plates
of his brothers and sisters that were within
reach or grab.
“ Nothin’ ter wear ! ” said Dads ; “ why
yous not naked ! ”
“That’s just like you replied Mums ;
“you never take a bit o’ notice as long as
there is some sort o’ rag over our backs.
What would people say of us in Sydney even
in our Sunday things ? Why Tilly wants


new everything ; Sarah has outgrown all the
tucks I let down out of her skirt; Euphemia’s
boots have no toes in ’em ; and, as fer Delia,
I'm fair ashamed ter see ther child.
Then there’s the boys’ pants ; I’m just sick
o’ mendin’ ’em. I believe Rube thinks his
mother’s a sewing machine. I’ve patched
his nickers five times this month if I ”
“ Oh, all right ! ” said Dads ; “ if wes can't
go, wes can’t, an’ there’s an end o’ it ; but 1
thought yous wanted ter go.”
“Now there you are, flying off and jumping
down a body’s throat before they have
opened their mouth ! I never saw such an
unreasonable man. Who said wes couldn’t
I
go ? The Celebrations are weeks ahead yet,
and ”
“ 1 see by ther papers, Jane, that all the
hotels are chock a block, an’ folks that wait
will have ter camp in ther streets an’ eat
their meals on ther kerbstones. None o’ that
fer me, Jane ! If we goes, we goes now,
before ther rush. The last beast in ther pad-
dick gets ther worst grass. Not me, Jane ;
not me !”
“Oh ! are we really, truly going, Mums ?”
eight voices asked with a single shout.
I •
“By cripes !” said Jabez, and he went to
the verandah and shot a stone at the cat.
“I must have a new dress now, Mums !”
cried Tilly. “An’ me ! An’ me ! An’ me !”
cried the others as they caught hands and
waltzed round the room.
As for Rube, the room could not hold his
delight ; he had to rush to the yard, and
heave rocks at the dog. Bubs had crawled
over the table, his movements covered by
the general riot, and now sat in the gravy
while he pulled over the cruet.
Crash !
Howl ! !
Spank ! ! !
“Oh, you wicked child ! Why didn’t you
mind him, one of you ? Now, look at that 1
I hope you’ll wash it up, I shan’t! I
declare it’s enough to vex a saint!”
• #.••• • •
Bright and early the following morning
the male Waybacks and Mums drove into
Barjo, the father and the boys to fit on new
suits and get their hair cut, the mother to
buy much dress material. Dads took sevens
in ready-mades across the shoulders, and
four about the waist, so that the new coat
hung at the back in two gracefully-draped
box-pleats from the shoulder blades. The
storekeeper said it fitted like a glove ; and
as Dads had never worn a glove, he could
not contradict him ; besides he was mighty
anxious to get the job over.
“That’s all right, boss ; fits me tip-top”—
and the suit was packed up.
Mums had all the boys’ suits on the shelves
pulled down, while her lads stood in a row
like railway signals, flopping their arms up
and down as they tried on the coats. After
all, Mums took those she had seen first.
Then she sat down in the drapery depart-
ment as though she owned it, and meant to
camp there a week. Seeing this, Dads went
ever to the Dodrop Inn to have a nip and
pass the time o’ day with Sullivan. He came
back in an hour.
“Are you ready, Mums ?”
“In a few minutes, Dads.”
Dads went over and had another nip. He
met Regan, from Duckhole, and, of course,
they both shouted. Regan warned Dads
about the “confidence” men down in Sydney,
and how a bloke he knew got took down
for fifty quid. Dads, looking at the clock,
saw another hour had gone by, and went
over to the store.
“Are you ready, Mums ?”
“Only just another minute, Dads.”
Dads went over for another nip, and met
Allsop from Longswamp, Allcorn of Seven-
acres, and Fegan from Cowshorn, and they
all had to relate to Dads of what they had
“heard tell” of the pitfalls of city life. Dads
felt he was being posted up to worldly wis-
dom of latest date, and armored against all
the wiles of the wicked, and took more nips
to sink the advice into his memory. He did
not go over to the store again. Later on,
when Mums had really finished and the boys
harnessed up, they helped Dads into the
cart, where he sat on the bale of drapery
and sang songs all the way home.


“It’s extraordinary,” said Mums, “how a
man can’t wait a few minutes without
making a fool of himself !
• • • • . • • •
It was the night before the journey. For
a week the house had been in the possession
of the dressmaker, the sewing-machine, and
the fashion plates from “The Young Ladies’
Journal.” Snips of “lining” fluttered in the
wind and covered the floor ; the girls were
always taking on and taking off the raiment,
and Dads had to get his meals anyhow in
the slab kitchen. But now at last the ordeal
was over, and Tilly, in her new dress, had
gone down to the slip-rails to meet Tom
Rawson. Tom was waiting.
“My word, Till, I wouldn’t have known
yer !”
“Is that all you’ve got to say ?” said Tilly,
tossing her head.
“Now, don’t eat a bloke ! Yer looks rip-
ping, slap up ter ther nines, like one o’ them
pictures in the papers. My Colonial ! Now,
don’t yer let none o’ them Sydney toffs run
off with yer. They tells me they can yabber
like a dozen life assurance agents ; just mag
to a girl till she’s fair dotty. An’ don’t yers
be taking up with any of those English
soldiers. I know they’ll want yer ; but don’t
yer go ter forget Dingo Flat an’ ther boy
what’s waiting for yer.”
Tilly said she would not—no, not if Lord
Hopetoun’s handsomest aide-de-camp went
down on his bended knees to her. And the
balance of her asseverations is mostly
written thus—xxxxxxxxxxxx.
.
The train starts from Barjo at 6 a.m.
Dingo Flat is two hours’ drive, so naturally
the Waybaclts started at 2 a.m. to leave a
safe margin of time. Mums had a new hat
with three ostrich feathers that the milliner
at Barjo had said was “the very latest from
Paris.” Mums said she did not care a pin
what she wore, only for the sake of the
family she did not want the Sydney folks to
laugh at her ; thus, from a strict sense of
duty, she bought the hat.
Now, a two hours’ drive in the bush when
the dew falls is ruination to the curl of
feathers ; so when the Wayback family got
into the two spring carts Mums had her tine
new hat in a paper bag, to be carefully pre-
served till they got to the station ; in the
meantime she wore her old milking bonnet.
Bubs howled all the way to Barjo, where
Mums nursed him to sleep in the waiting-
room.
All Barjo and Dingo Flat seemed to have
congregated at the railway to see the Way-
backs off. Till now they had no idea how
many dear friends they had for it is when
they are going to get rid of you, if only for
a time, that true fellowship declares itself.
When at last the train did come in, Dads
and Mums rushed to hold it as though they
'feared it might change its mind. In they
jumped— father, mother, boys and girls, bags
and parcels, packets and wraps, and then
everybody that could find a place leant out
of the windows and grinned at the neighbors
on the platform.
Cousin Jonas was there to take the carts
home, and he kept saying : “Now, mind you
take care of yourselves.”
Then there was a whistle, a banging of
doors, and the train moved out of the
station.
“Hi ! Hi ! Stop !”
It was Jonas, rushing along the platform
waving a parcel in his hand.
“Good gracious !” cried Mums, “I’ve for-
gotten my hat. Tell them to stop, Dads !
Oh, tell them to stop !”
Dads shouted out of the window, the chil-
dren shouted in the carriage. Bubs howled
from sympathy. But the train, regardless
of the most frantic appeal, carried off Mums
in her old milking bonnet to see the Com-
monwealth celebrations.


The Wayback Family leaving Sydney for a “Real” Picnic.


CHAPTER II
The Emu Coffee Palace.
“By cripes, .Dads, this must be Sydney !
We’re going inter a lashing big station, my
Avord ! Lays over Barjo, an’ no mistake.”
It was Jabez who spoke, his body half out
of the carriage Avindow.
“Noav, get all yer things ready, children !”
Everyone stood up, and grabbed a parcel or
a bag with a desperate resolve to be first
out of the carriage. Other passengers acted
on the same impulse, so that when the train
pulled up, the platform was, of a sudden, a
dense mass of hurrying humanity.
“Come on, kids ! Let’s get out o’ this !”
cried Dads, as with the Bubs under one arm
'he dragged Mums with the other. As for
Mums, she held three parcels and towed
little Sid, who held Cris, Avho held Delia,
who hung on to Rube, who had grabbed
Euphemia, who clung to Sarah Jane, who
was fastened to Tilly, who helped Jabez
carry a portmeanteau.
“ Now, don’t yous let go, anyone! ”
shouted back Mums, as the long line of Way-
backs swayed to and fro in the crowd, “ or
you’ll be bushed ! ”
They rounded up under the clock before
the station.
“Now, just bide a bit here,” said Dads,
“till the crowd’s gone.”
They waited and waited, standing like an
island in the moving sea of rushing people.
Dads’ eyes opened wider and wider.
“What’s up, Mums? Der yer think it’s
,er bush fire ? Hi, mister !”—and he clutched
hold of a porter pushing a luggage trolly—
•“what’s up ?”
“Damper’s rose a penny a pound,” said the
porter, hurrying on.
“You’re mighty smart,” said Dads. “I
suppose yer think I come from ther
country ?”
“Let’s get on ther ’bus, Dads,” said Mums,
pointing to the electric tram.
“I’m just Avaitin’ fer them to hitch ther
team on. Yer don’t cod me them there
carriages is pulled far with that bit o’ fencin’
wire ! Take my tip, there’ll be a bloomin’
accident pretty soon ! ”
But as time passed, and no damage Avas
reported, the Wayback family gained con-
fidence, and finally boarded the car, and were
whirled up George-street.
.
“Is this here ther Emu Coffee Palace ?”
It was Dads who spoke.
“That’s it,” said the clerk, as he stuck two
dinner tickets on the file and handed key
24 to a boarder.
“I’d like ter know,” said Dads, “ if yer
sells tea as w T ell as coffee. Yer see, we’s not
strong on coffee up Barjo way.”
“Buckets o’ tea, any time you like,” said
the clerk, now collecting dinner tickets with
both hands.
“That’s right,” said Dads, a great anxiety
lifted from his mind. “Can you let us have
a bit o’ a shake-down fer ther lot o’ us ?”
“Here you are—72, 73, 74,” said the clerk,
handing over three keys to the lift boy after
he had entered Mr. Wayback’s name in a
big book, and tucked away a five pound note
as though it was a pipe-lighter. The boy


pulled a door open and showed a room five
by five.
“No yer don’t, sonny,” said Dads.
“Eleven of us can’t sleep in that ; no, not
if we all stood up !”
After a time the lift boy persuaded them to
crowd in.
“Oh, crikey, Dads !” cried Jabez, and all
the children howled a chorus ; “ther blanky
house is falling inter ther cellar !”
“Well. I’ll be hanged !” said Dads, when
the party, white and trembling, stepped on
the landing, “if that don’t beat everything !
Take my tip, that catapult will go up through
the roof to glory one o’ these here days when
ther breaks off. It’s er bit too sudden, that’s
what it is !”
Before the boy left them, Dads was back
again.
“Say, sonny, is there a water-hole handy ?
We wants a bit of a wash.”
“There’s a bathroom, mister, at the end of
the passage.”
When Dads and Jabez had opened the
bathroom door they had grave doubts about
entering. It reminded them too much of
the lift, and they sounded the floor carefully
with a foot each to make sure it would not
fall down or jump up with them.
• • • • • • •
Crash ! Crash ! Crash !
It was the boarders dinner gong that
resounded up the stairs.
“Hi ! hi ! Where are they ?”. It was
Dads, with nothing but his pants on, who
rushed out on the corridor, caught up a tray
some waitress had left, and started banging
like a demon as he ran. Jabez followed,
hammering a tin lid ; and all the little Way-
backs swarmed into the passage armed with
hair brushes, water bottles, boots, or any-
thing handy that would make a noise. It
was a fearful row. All doors flew open, and
anxious boarders rushed out, certain that at
the very least the house was on fire.
“Throw dust on ’em, Mister ! Throw
dust ! ” shouted Dads, to a bald-headed,
frightened man who was rushing for the
stairs.
“ Throw dust on what ? ” enquired an.
alarmed chambermaid.
“On ther bees, o’ course ! Isn’t there a
swarm ? An’ didn’t you start to ring ’em.
down ? ”
Then everybody laughed.
Dads grabbed the fat man, and in spite
of his protests began to explain how to catch,
bees.
“ You’ve got to be quick an’ lively after
bees. No time ter ask questions. Dust is
real good ; but water’s better if it’s handy.
Rub some honey in ther box if yer want ter-
make ’em stop. Now at Barjo ”
But the fat man had reached his room, and
banged the door, so that Dads was obliged
to finish his discourse on bees to the lift boy.
• • • • • • •
When the Waybacks descended to the
dining-room, a fair young man, sunburnt and
angular, came forward and warmly grasped
Dads and Tilly by the hand.
“ Glad to see you, Mr. Wayback. Down
in Sydney, like myself, I suppose, to see the-
sights and the great celebrations ? Remem-
ber me at Barjo at the show, don’t you ? ”
“ No you don’t,” says Dads, stepping back
as though he had seen a snake ; “ you don’t
have me ! ”
“ What do you mean ? ” said the stranger,
turning very red.
“ Ain’t yer got an uncle in Fiji ?
demanded Dads, with scorn. “ Ain’t yer got
two hundred quid to give to the honest man
who will trust you to the same amount ? I
know yer ! Go away, or I’ll call ther
police ! ”
“ Oh, Dads ! ” cried Tilly ; “ why, it’s
Charley Lyons, of Prickly Flat. I’ve met
him lots o’ times at dances. You know his
dad—you know you do ! ”
“ Well, if that don’t beat all ! ” said Dads,
as he opened his mouth to a long think.
“ You’re old Bob Lyons’ boy —just think o’
that ! Now you sit down an’ have a bit o’
tucker with us—o’ course yer can’t expect
to get vittles here like my old woman turns
out at home. By ther way yer talked I
made certain sure you was a ‘ confidence ’
man. I tell you I’m just watching fer ’em,


an’ I’ll give ’em Fiji, I promise you, if they
start to tackle me ! Now, mind you be
keerful, young feller, an’ don’t yer be took
down by none o’ those blokes as want yer
ter show ’em money. Why, they tells me
Charley Lyons had to listen to a lot of
historic frauds worked at the expense of
; . ; ?
confiding travellers from Barjo, and could
not get a word in edgeways with Tilly, who
sat next to him.
“ Where’s ther dog ? ” enquired Jabez of
the waiter.
“ What dog, sir ? I’ve not seen one.” ■
“ Ter throw ther bone to ! What’ll I do
with ther bone if ther ain’t no dog ? ”
“ Now, Cris ! ” cried Mums ; “ don’t you
put your knife so far in yer mouth. Knives
is meant to scoop up gravy, not ter cut yer
throats with. Keep your legs still, Sid, an’
•don’t put all yer fingers in yer plate at once.
Remember you’re in Sydney, an’ be a little
gentleman. Gentlemen only take taters with
•one hand at a time. Euphemia, if you want
to drink up yer soup, ask Sarah Jane ter
hold up the dish fer yer, or you’ll spill it
all down yer new frock. Now Delia, don’t
catch flies at meal times, it’s not manners ;
shoo them off and eat up all those bits on yer
plate. There’s many a poor child has come
to want through leaving bits. Wipe the
gravy off yer mouth, Jabez ; and I wish,
Tilly, you would look after Bubs, and stop
him making post-holes in all the loaves of
bread. Perhaps ther folks here won’t like
it. Have a little sense, do ! ”
When dinner was over, the Wayback
family, with their friend, Charley Lyons,
drifted down to George-street to see the
sights. At the latter’s suggestion, the party
abandoned the hand-in-hand formation, and
made parties of twos and threes, that
walked one behind the other. If by this
means Charlie expected to have Tilly all to
himself, he was disappointed, and counted
without Dads’ burning desire to impart in-
formation to a new auditor.
“ Now, Charlie, what I’d like to know is,
why all these here people is allowed ter
walk up and down, up and down, doin’
nothin’ ? Look at ’em, hundreds of ’em
thousands of ’em ; not like us, come just
ter see ther sights fer once in our lives, but
just loafin’ along, lookin’ at nothin’, doin’
nothin’. Surely ter goodness they could
find a bit o’ clearing or stumping ter do.
I’d give all them gals hoes and set ’em
chippin’. Take my tip, they wouldn’t want
ter put all that paint on ’em. Now at
Bar jo ”
“Dads, I want to speak ter yer.” It was
Mums that caught hold of Dads and dragged
him back to the rear rank.
“ What is it, Mums ? ”
“Let Tilly have a chance, you stoopid.
Those two don’t want you with ’em. Can’t
yer sees they are struck on one another ? ”
“By gum, Mums, yer don’t say ? Who’d
er thout er that ? ’’
The progress of the party was slow.
Every shop window had to be surrounded
in turn, and calls and counter calls drew
them to and fro.
“ I say, Cris ! “ Look here, Sarah
Jane ! “ Oh, ain’t that spiffin’ ! “ Euphe-
mia, how’d you like to wear that ? ’’ —“ Delia,
come and see, come and see ! “By cripes,
look at that now ! “ Did you ever see ther
“ Talk about clocks and watches,
look at that, Mums !—Look, Tilly !
But no Tilly answered. Look and call as
they would, they could see no sign of her,
nor of Charlie Lyons.
“ Where’s Tilly ? Where’s our Tilly ? ”
The cry was taken up by the whole family.
“ Tilly ! Tilly ! Tilly ! ” The shouts rang
down George-street, and echoed up the
vaulted arcade. With true bush instinct
Dads did not lose a moment in commencing
a vigorous search. He divided the party in
three squads. Jabez leading down York-
street, Sarah Jane down Pitt-street, and him-
self and Mums each taking a side of George-
street. As they went along everyone who
would pause a moment was interrogated.
“ Have you seen our Tilly ? Have you
seen our Tilly ? She’s got a straw hat,
white blouse, and black skirt. Have you
seen her ?”


Dads, for his part, looked carefully in the
roadway.
“ What are you looking for ?” a policeman
demanded of him.
“ Our Tilly's bushed, and I’m trying ter
pick up her tracks.”
Jabez was the first to reach Market-
street, and standing by the portal of the
“ Sunday Times ” he took a deep breath, gave
a coo-ee ! coo-ee ! coo-ee ! that resounded
like the shriek of a steam tram. Dads and
Mums took up the cry from George-street,
and Sarah Jane, Rube, and Delia followed
suit from Pitt-street. And, as all the chil-
dren helped, such a pandemonium of bush
cries burst forth as Sydney had not heard
I • * 9 *' ' '
since Captain Cook.
i
Crowds of people gathered about the
Waybacks, marvelling at their wondrous
vocal powers. But Dads and Mums were
every moment more and more alarmed.
“ Where is Tilly ? Have you seen our
Tilly ? ”
Noav where was Tilly, and what had
happened to her ?
CHAPTER III.
The Benevolent Stranger.
We left the Wayback family in four
divisions—Jabez in York-street, Mums and
Dads on two sides of George-street, and
Sarah Jane in Pitt-street; they had all
arrived by parallel routes to Market-street,
and were making the welkin ring by calls
of “ coo-ee ! ” to discover the vanished Tilly.
As the latter still gave no responsive
answering shout, the Family pushed on and
forward, regardless of the jibes and com-
ments of the curious. If they had only been
on the Wallaby Ranges, in dense scrub or
heavy timber, there is no doubt that their
method of exploration would have kept them
together, and within touch and call ; but in
the wilds of George-street South, the
precipes of Brickfield Hill, the weird gorges
of Pitt-street, and the under-scrub of Sussex-
street—into which latter Jabez had diverged
—bush-craft altogether failed.
At Druitt-street Sarah Jane gave no
answering shout from Pitt-street, while at
Bathurst-street, so quickly did Dads press
forward, he found his shouts quite without
reply. Undaunted by failure, Dads rushed
on, but though moving quickly, progressed
slowly, for he had to zig-zag in the crowd.
and it happened that when he dodged, the
man in front would dodge also, and they
would bring off the spot stroke with great
success at the first try.
Still no signs of Tilly, not in the Hay-
market, nor in George-street West.
Dads began to falter, to fear he had over-
run the tracks ; besides, he was getting tired,
he had already cannoned against one
hundred and fifty-seven persons, and while
a few bumps more or less don’t count, yet
when you get over seven score in less than
thirty minutes, a certain soreness is left on
even the toughest. Again, Dads had been
called a blanky fool more times in the last
half-hour than in all his life before, and,
though he had taken the remarks in a
friendly spirit, they began at last to pall, and
he to have a vague doubt that a verdict so
unanimous must have some justification in
fact. No doubt some others of the family
had found Tilly ere this ; in fact, it was
pretty certain they must have done so. He
would turn back.
“ Say, Mate ! Can you tell me the way to
the Railway Station ? ”
The man who spoke was evidently a


countryman ; stiff-jointed, round-shouldered,
face bronzed, and blotched with tan.
“ I’m a stranger myself hereabouts,” said
Dads, “ but I just passed the station, and am
going back.”
“ Now that’s lucky ! ” said the countryman,
“ for I’m no hand at all at this street work.
If it was the Myall Ranges, now, it would
be a hard job to bush me, and I guarantee
to cross country with any man. But the
fact is, I have only just come up by the train,
and I started on my way to find the Emu
Coffee Palace ; but I’ve got bogged somehow,
so 1 reckon to make back to the Railway,
and take a fresh start.”
“ Going to ther Emu, are yer ? ” said
Dads. “ Now that there is a most extra-
ordinary thing as I ever heard tell of:
Why I’m stopping there myself ! ”
“ By cripes ! You don’t say so ? Do you
think it’s a safe place for a cove to camp—
one who has a few beans, you know. 1
don’t want to get took down, and they tell
me a bloke can’t be too careful ; Sydney’s
full of spielers, and you’ve got to sleep with
both eyes open, or get your eye teeth drawn.”
“ You’ve just about sized things up,
* mate,” said Dads, “ but seeing as I only
arrove this morning, I can’t give yer many
pints about ther Emu. Keep yer door
locked, carry yer beans in yer hip pocket,
and strap yer belt tight. Don’t tak ter
strangers, an’ if a bloke mentions ‘ Fiji’ call
a policeman. But if yer stops at ther Emu.
take my tip, don’t get in that there gun that
fires yes up ther house, with two charges o’
powder in her. I’ll allow it’s quick, but give
me ther stairs fer safety. I’ll tell yer how
it is with me. Yer see, we all comes out ter
see ther sights a while back, and I loses
track o’ my eldest gal, Tilly—her an’ Charley
Lyons—a fine-looking, handsom’ gal—like
me, folks say—maybe you’ve seen her ? ”
“ Can’t say I have, Mister, but I’ll tell you
what I’ll do. I’ll help you look for her while
you put me on the track for the Emu. Any-
way. come an’ have a drink ; that looks a
decent sort o’ pub.”
Dads bad a drink, then he shouted, and
Wie stranger would shout again ; and to be
more at their ease they sat down in a room
off the bar, and here Dads, taking pity on
the stranger, began to post him up in all the
villainies by wliibli Sydney sharpers took
down country mugs, the wiles of “con-
fidence ’’ men, and the fatal lures of spielers.
“ By cripes, Mate ! if what you say is true,
and I could not doubt your words fer a
moment—l can always tell an honest man
when I see him—l think I had best take the
next train home again ! ”
“ Don’t be afraid, now,” said Dads. “ I’ll
stand by yer, we’ll be mates up there at ther
Emu ; you’ll be all right if yer keeps in my
tracks. Hold yer money tight, an’ beware
of ‘ Fiji,’ an’ yer as safe as the Wallaby
Ranges.”
While they were talking two strangers
entered the room. The taller, who was
most elegantly dressed, offered to shout for
the crowd, and he was such a nice, genial
man, Dads could not refuse.
The man who shouted said he had just
come in for a lot of money, up till now he
had been a poor selector, working on the
land. He knew what hard graft and harder
fare was, to his sorrow, and till the longest
day he lived should always feel sorry for
the poor “ cockie.” So much so that he
had decided to help one poor man every day,
till he had got through four thousand
pounds. He had helped one yesterday, and
one the day before, and if he did not help
one to-day he would not sleep that night.
Here the stranger pulled out a big bundle
of notes, and turned to explain his ideas to
Dads.
“ I want to help those who help them-
selves ; it’s not a bit o’ good—l’ve tried it—
giving a cheque to a man without a bean.
He may be a good sort o’ fellow, but the
chances are a thousand to one the cash will
do him harm, and all go in the cursed drink.
No, let me see that a man is a careful, saving
chap, and has got a little stuff, and I’ll
double it for him ; then he will take care of
it, and it will do him good !”
Dads thought the stranger talked most
rationally ; it was a kind of cbaiuty he under-
stood. and his eyes were fascinated by the


huge bundle of notes, but his friend, the
countryman, seemed more sceptical, and
when the two strangers had turned away, he
whispered to Dads : “ We’d best be careful
now. I’ve got my doubts of those two ; but
I tell you how we can be on the safe side.
I don’t mind showing them twenty-five quid,
if you show twenty-five, and you hold the lot.
No letting it out of your hands, mind. If
they give us another fifty you can hold that
w r hile I make an excuse, and slip out and
fetch a policeman. If they are spielers they
will clear when they see him ; if they are on
the square, it won’t matter. Anyhow, we
stand to make a sure fifty, -which won’t be
"m
too bad for two bushies their first day in
town.”
With this the countryman produced a
pocket-book, with twenty-five notes, and
handed it to Dads, who felt pleased all over
himself, and quickly produced his own share
of notes.
“ Hi. mate,” said the countryman. “we
are two poor men, the sort you want, and
can show you fifty quid.”
“ You can ? ” said the amiable stranger.
“ I’m dashed glad to hear it. Two of you,
too !—that will save me looking for a man
to-morrow ! Show me, and I’m as good as
my w r ord.”
The countryman took the pocket-book, and
carefully counted over the fifty notes, and
Dads was pleased to see how careful he was
not to let go of them. The stranger, quite
satisfied, handed over another fifty in five
tens, and was so pleased, he called for more
drinks for all hands. The countryman put
all the notes in the pocket-book, handed it to
Dads, thanked the stranger for his kindness,
and saying he had a friend outside he must
call in to tell his good luck to, turned to go,
and giving a knowing wink to Dads, he was
gone.
Dads, sitting firmly in his seat, grabbed
the pocket-book securely in both hands, and
sat clmckling to himself with glee.
“ Now, if that’s not the smartest thing I
ever heard tell of. We’ve got ther stuff all
right, whichever way it works out. We’re
not all fools at Bar jo, take my tip ! ”
“ Your friend’s a long time away,” said
the genial stranger, after a long pause ; “ I
want him to join in another drink. I’ll go
and call him in,” and off he went. Later,
the thii’d man said he must look for the
second. “ He could not think what was up.”
Still Dads smiled. Happen what would,
he held the pocket-book, and was safe from
all wiles, real or pretended.
Minutes passed, half an hour, an hour.
Dads still sat solid and satisfied.
The barman came in and asked what he
was waiting for.
“ That friend o’ mine I came in with,”
said Dads. “ I ’spect he’s lost his way
again ; yer see he don’t know Sydney.”
“ Well he ought to,” said the barman.
“ I’ve seen him knocking about here for the
last five years.”
Dads began to feel uneasy. Was it pos-
sible that after all he had been done ? ”
With shaking hands he opened the pocket-
book. only to find there a fat bundle of blank
papers.
“ Well, I’m damned ! ” said Dads. “ But
how was I to know ? Never a word did
they say about ‘ Fiji ’ or the ‘ rich uncle ’
there ?”
“ Lord love me !” said the barman, reading
all the story in Dad’s amazed face ; “ the
likes o’ you ought to be led about with a
string !”
• • • • • •
It was natural that Mums had lagged be-
hind Dads, for with one hand she was held
back by Cris, while with the other she towed
little Sid and Bubs, and every shop caused
a pause. Not only the children, but Mums
herself was fairly paralysed by the strings
of bargains that hung suspended from
tradesmen’s windows. Ladies’ undercloth-
ing, even to the most secret garments, ap-
peared to fresc-oe one side of Brickfield Hill.
An avalanche of articles that lace with
strings, and are alleged to support the female
figure, were marked one and eleven pence
three farthings. The shilling very plain,
and the eleven pence three farthings so
faint that Mums could not see it. This
wonderful bargain fairly took Mum’s breath


How the Confidence Trick was worked —“Still Dads smiled!”


away. She paused, in a kind of hypnotic
trance, and the doorman, marking her as his
own, stepped briskly forward :
“ Come inside, lady. We have an immense
variety within, all marked in plain figures,
and no one is pressed to buy. Our goods
are a bankrupt stock, all at less than half
wholesale cost. We have to sell ; must
sell ; the shop has to be cleared to-day, or
the goods given away.”
Mums went in. Dads must surely have
found Tilly by this time. And really the
goods were so absurdly cheap, that she had
to buy ; it was a positive sin to throw such
a chance away, a chance that could never
by any accident occur again.
The nice young man behind the counter
said this, and Mums quite agreed with him.
Minute by minute her pile of purchases
grew bigger on the counter. The “ nice”
young man rubbed his hands secretly at the
many “ spiffs” he was scoring for himself
by working off all the old goods in stock.
Mums, usually so cautious, had let herself
go, had in some way contracted the buying
fever, a mad desire to acquire all and every-
thing that was offered. She remembered
that she had nine children to clothe, and
there was not a garment or a piece of stuff
that would not come in useful. By the way.
her children—that brought them to her mind.
Why were they so quiet ? Why was Bubs
not dragging at her skirts ? She looked
around her with growing horror. She could
not realise it ; not in all the length and
breadth of the store was there a sign of Oris,
Little Sid, or Bubs !
“ Where are my children ?” cried Mums,
as she jumped up frantically, and seizing
the “ nice” young man by both shoulders,
shook the breath out of him. “ Where are
my children ?”
She ranged up and down the shop, looking
into every nook and corner, shouting, “ Cris !
Oris ! Bubs ! Bubs !” And getting no reply,
rushed to the door and tore up George-street
like one possessed ; and all this before the
“nice” young man could fairly grasp the
situation and realise what a weary, weary
hour of re-packing—with no “ spiffs laj"
before him.
• •
Soon after Mums’ entrance to the shop,-
the three children, wearied of drapery, had,
all unseen, edged sideways to the pavement
again, and wandered slowly on till they cam*,
to the most wonderful shop ever heard of out
of dreamland. Cakes and lollies, lollies and
cakes, were piled in stacks and cartloads.
Of all colors, all sizes, all shapes : phantasies-
in blue, red, green, yellow and white.
Animals, vegetables, geometrical cubes ancf
curves, all representing an endless variety
of sweets.
The simple contemplation of these wonders
struck the children motionless for a
time. Then they commenced a general sur-
vey from varied points of view, finding new
beauties and delights every time ; at last,
with growing boldness, they dared to suck
the glass window, and thus gain a kind of
reflected taste that excited more than satis-
fied. Bubs, with all the enterprise of four
years, decided on a bold strategic move, and,
noting a lady entering the shop, followed in
her wake. Cris and Little Sid could do no
less than go after.
The lady sat down at a marble table ; so
did Bubs and Sid and Cris. The attendant
served the lady and the children. The
lady, quickly finishing, remained seated out
of curiosity to watch the amazing perform-
ance of the children on the pastry. She
counted nine custard tarts to Bubs’ share
before she lost count. Little Sid had cleared
the establishment of meringues, while Cris
was working into Napoleons with the energy
of a gohanna into a white ants’ nest.
The lady, laughing to herself, rose to go,
“ Ten and ninepence,” said the attendant.
“ Good gracious ! Why, I have only had
a scone, a tart, and a glass of milk.”
“ That’s quite correct ; that is the nine-
pence ; the other is for your children.”
“My children ! Good heavens ! I would
not own such little gluttons for a fortune !
%
They are, I am glad to say, perfect strangers
to me ! ” And the lady sailed off with
her nose in the air.


“ Where’s your mother ? ” enquired the
flabbergasted attendant of Cris.
“ In er store,” replied Cris, still steadily
eating.
“ What store ? ”
Cris pointed vaguely to the street, for his
mouth was too full for words.
“ Where’s your money to pay for what
you’ve had ? ”
“ What money ? ” said Cris, between bites.
The attendant called another, w r ho called
the Boss ; but while he was hurrying from
the rear of the shop, a wild-eyed woman
rushed tearing past the doorway, shouting :
“Cris ! Cris ! Sid ! Bubs ! Where are
you ? ”
With a single yell the children cried :
“ There’s Mums,” and in a flash they were
off their seats, out of the shop, and tearing
down George-street in full cry.
The attendant hesitated for one moment
—and was lost. For when the Boss arrived
the surging crowd of George-street footpath
had shrouded the Wayback Family in a
cover that defied pursuit.
Now, what that pastrycook said, when he
saw his empty dishes, and the vast cutting
and underground work made in his vast piles
of comestibles, is not fitted for publication,
and betrayed a latent wealth of invective
previously undreamt of even by himself.
But where is Tilly all this time ? What
has become of Sarah Jane, and Euphemia.
and Delia ? How fares it with Jabez ana
Rube ?
CHAPTER IV.
The Hunt for Tilly.
Early in the hunt for Tilly, Rube had
deserted his sister in Pitt-street to find Jabez
in York-street. He was a youth of a scien-
tific. enquiring mind, eager for information
and speculative truth ; but omnivorous as his
desires were, they yet stopped short of
ladies’ garments and the mysteries of the
feminine toilette, Yet his interrogative in-
tellect had posed one question before his
sudden departure.
“ What’s that thing in the window, Sarah
Jane ? ”
“ A ladies ‘ walking costume.’ ”
“ ’Sposing you were wearing that in ther
street, and all ther buttons came off, and
’sposin’ the buttons and strings and things
came off your other things, and ’sposin’ you
couldn’t hold ’em on, what would you do-
take a cab, or call a policeman ? ”
“You stoopid kid. Whatever put such silly
ideas into you ? ”
Rube, finding he was not appreciated, left,
and overtook Jabez at the Town Hall.
“ What place is that ? ” asked Rube.
“ Ther Town Hall.”
“ What’s that ? ”
“ Ther place where ther blokes camp what
minds Sydney.”
“ Well, ’sposin’ there was no Town Hall to
mind Sydney, an’ no blokes ter mind ther
Town Hall, would Sydney clear out ? ”
“ How should I know ? ’”
“ But, ’sposin’ Sydney did clear out, an’
there was no houses, no land, no water, no
nothing, what-cher think it ’ud be like
then ? ”
“ Oh, shut up ! ”
Rube kept quiet, till at last, by by-ways
and narrow turnings, they came to the Fruit
Markets. The rows of open cases full of
fruit greatly interested him.
“ Jabez, if we was ter buy a case o’ fruit
and eat it all up, would it hurt us ? ”
“ I dunno.”
“ ’Sposin’ we was ter eat two cases ? ”
“ We’d bust.”
“ Could a doctor mend us if we busted ? ”
“ He might.”


“ Do you think he could mend us if we ate
three cases ? ”
“ Dry up ! ”
“ ’Sposin’ we ate three cases, an’ ’sposin’
we busted, should we go off like a gun ? ”
But Rube’s last question met no response.
A youth with bleary eyes, very short hair,
and a cigarette in his lips, had stopped Jabez
to ask him for a match. Jabez gladly prof-
fered a box ; and seized the opportunity of
talking to someone who belonged to the
city.
“ How’s things ? ” he enquired of the
stranger.
•“Not too putrid,” was the genial reply;
“ Wines is now one-and-a-sprat, gins is bad
business, but beers is O.K. Could yer put
er bloke on ter er few dozen ? ”
“ Dozen what ? ” enquired Jabez.
“ Bottles, in course ! Whatcher think I
was er givin’ yers ? ”
Jabez expressed his regret that being a new
arrival in Sydney he was not familiar with
the bottle supply ; at the same time, if his
friend was dry he was desirious of shouting
at the pub over the way.
Rabbits—for that was the name their new
friend told them he was generally known by
—willingly accepted the proffered refresh-
ment, which took the form of long shandies ;
also, he shouted in his turn, and by that time
Rabbits and Jabez became very friendly in-
deed.
“ I tell you what it is, mate. You’s and
the kiddie best come fer er ride. I’ve got
ther moke outside. Yer see, I come ter ther
market fer a load er specks an’ windfalls,
but, blime ! ther ain’t none ; so I’se off ter
ther Hills, 1 am. I marked er good lay o’
Sunday when I was out with the donah, only
ther cove keeps er dorg ; but, you bet, weT
fix him proper.”
Speaking thus, Rabbits led the way down
the street, to where a smart pony stood,
harnessed to a small spring van, the whole
turn-out gorgeous with fresh paint, varnish,
and shining harness.
“ All erboard, an’ pull up ther gangway.
This way for Flat Rock an’ Middle ’Arbor ! ”
They all jumped in the van, and at a touch
of the reins the pony started at a four-
minute gait down Sussex-street, over Pyr-
mont Bridge, Glebe Island, through Balmain,
Iron Cove. Drummoyne, and so on to Glades-
ville and Ryde, without pause or slackening.
“ By cripes ! he’s a clinker ! ” said Jabez,
his bushman’s instinct warming to admira-
tion at the pony’s gameness.
“You bet he has ter travel, or where would
1 be when ther cops is on me tracks ? Yer
should er been with me last week ; ’twas
as good as ther Tivoli. I was just er gettin’
over ther fence, with a bag o’ lemmins, when
a cop what was planted in ther orchard er
waitin’, jumps up : ‘ Whatcher got there ? ’
sez he. ‘ Orts and crosses,’ sez I, an’ hops
in ther cart quick an’ lively.
“ ‘ Stop in ther Queen’s name,’ sez he.
‘ Don’t know the lydie,’ sez I, with the mare
full speed ahead. He was er fat cop, but
just there ther was er bend in ther road, an’
he reckoned to cut me off, an’ ter see him
sprintin’ over ther ploughed ground was er
treat fer sore eyes. But, in course, the mare
done him, an’ done him bad. Ther last I
see er that cop he’d took his boots off, an’
was er pouring out ther sweat on ther road.”
“ Here we are,” said Rabbits, as they drew
up in a lane, sheltered by a peach tree
hedge. “ Yer see that house there up ther
hill, the bloke what lives there thinks he’s
mighty smart ; barbed wire all round the
fences ; an’ er dog wot runs all over ther
place every ten minutes. Now, yous go up
to ther house an’ ther dorg he’ll go fer yer,
then ther Boss he’ll come ter keep back the
dorg, fer he won’t leave yer while yer there.
Then yous do er pitch, an’ say yers lookin’
for graft, an’ ask him if he can put yers on
ter a job—yous bein’ er bush bloke, he’ll
think yer mean it. An’ if he wants ter
leave off talkin’, just ask him if anyone has
been er sneakin’ his fruit. Then he’ll yabber
fer a month ; it makes him fair dotty, s’help
me ! Come when yer hears er whistle.”
Rabbits evidently knew what he was talk
ing about, for events shaped just as he had
stated.
When he opened the orchard gate, a savage


dog rushed at Jabez, then the master came
from down the orchard to call off the dog,
and said in answer to the enquiry for work
as ploughman or orchard hand :
“ Yes ; Barnett, up the road, wants a hand ;
you look a likely chap ; not one of those
swaggies or townies who only ask for work
so that they can keep clear of it. Tell Bar-
nett I sent you,” and the speaker was turn-
ing to his work again.
“Is there much fruit-stealing round here ?”
enquired Jabez.
“ Is there much fruit-stealing ! ” said the
orchardist, his eyes blazing with sudden
interest. Why, you can work here all day,
and watch all night, and yet the scoundrels
will take the fruit from under your nose,
poison your dog, or start a bush fire to take
you away. I tell you what they did once.
A chap came here one day—just the same
as vou have come —an’ he asked me for a
job, or could I put him on to one, and he
talked away here like George Reid on Free-
trade, an’ me a-listening and a-listening. I
thought he’d never go. Then he wanted a
drink of water, and could I give him a
match, and, would you believe it, I found out
afterwards it was all a put-up job, for while
he was talking to me his mate was down
there at the bottom of the orchard, stripping
my trees like a hailstorm ! I tell you, it
was a smart trick, and they are the min-
ningest lot o’ devils out of hell ; but they
don’t have me that way again. They may
draw my eye-teeth while I’m asleep, but
I’m dashed if they shall take my fruit.
Another time they —
The orchardist gave a whole catalogue of
petty larcenies that greatly instructed and
interested Jabez, the man of fruit marking
each point in his narrative by banging his
hoe on the ground. The sound of a shrill
whistle gave the cue to Jabez.
“ Which did you say -was the way to Bar-
nett’s place ? ”
“ The third house up the road.”
“ Good-day ! ”
“ Good-day ! ”
“ What oh ! she bumps ! Sold again ! ”
Rabbits and Rube were waiting in the cart
for Jabez. “Three bags o’ lemmins, worth
three quid if they’re worth a sprat, an’ won't
ther old cove perforin when he sees tlier
loan we’ve took of him ! Now set to wind-
ward, an’ we makes Sydney in one tack.”
• • • • • • •
To expect that Sarah .Tane, Euphemia, and
Delia would hurry along Pitt-street, even
after a lost sister, was to ignore a funda-
mental trait in feminine character. What
was a lost sister to a pound hat, to a multi-
tude of hats, and all the varied regalia of
«
ladies’ apparel that the mammoth stores of
Pitt-street so lavishly displayed ?
“ Oh, my ! “ Did you ever ! “ Ain’t it
just lovely ! “ Oh, fancy ! ” —“ Oh, do look
at this. Ain’t it just too lovely for any-
thing ? “ I wish Mums would buy us
that.”—“ Did you ever see the like ?”
“ How cheap ! “If we only had the money
now ! That would just suit me. I wonder
df it would fit ? “ I should just love to try
it on. I think I’ll buy one with my half-
crown.”—” What ! three and elevenpence
halfpenny ; what a shame ! “ Shall us go
whacks in one ? ”—“ No, indeed, I’m going to
buy a blouse with my half-crown,” said
Euphemia, “and I’ll buy a blue sash,” said
Delia.
“ Well, I never seen such a pair of selfish
things ! ” continued Sarah Jane. “ Never
mind, I’ll buy a pair of gloves.’”
But the future destiny of the three half-
crowns possessed by the three girls was
changed at every shop they passed; each new
possible investment was better than the last,
giving a deeper thrill, a wider sense of power
and possession, a sacred happiness that
abided for just five minutes.
“ But where is Tilly V We are quite for-
getting Tilly,” said Euphemia, recalled to
duty by the blank prose of thirty feet of
men’s clothing.
“My belief,” said Sarah Jane, “is that
Tilly is not lost at all ; she’s just sneaked off
to some quiet spot with Charley Lyons.
She’s afraid I might get him. That’s just
like her. Wait till I have on my new frock
and blouse, and she’ll see—the mean thing ! ”
“ What’s this ? ” said Delia. “ What a
funny shop.”


The window before them was small and
narrow, displaying charts and plans and
plaster charts all of the human hand. In
the midst, the framed portrait of a lady with
the legend beneath :
MADAME CASCARA,
SCIENTIFIC PALMIST AND EGYPTIAN
FUTURIST. ADVICE ON LOVE, ‘BUSINESS, AND
MARRIAGE.
P.S. —Madame Cascara was the only
palmist to foretell the fate of Jimmy
Governor, and the falls of Lord Brassey.
Madame C. is acknowledged to be the most
marvellous prophetess of the age. Fee and
full reading from 1/-.
“ Well, I never ! ” said Euphemia, “ this
must be one of those people we’ve heard
about, that tell fortunes, an’ all that.”
“ A pack o’ rubbish ! ” said Sarah Jane,
who, nevertheless, peered curiously into the
window', reading the different tickets, whose
meaning for the most part she could not
understand, and was therefore correspond-
ingly impressed.
“ I wouldn’t mind a shilling’s worth, just
for the fun of the thing—just to see what
she said,” said Sarah Jane.
Euphemia agreed with alacrity. Delia was
not consulted, but her eyes beamed expecta-
tion no less than her sister’s.
They had been quite ten minutes outside
the shop mustering up this resolution ; they
had seen no one go in or go out, and were
quite surprised to find a lady in the waiting-
room, who assured them she waited her turn
to see Madame, “ who was always so very
busy, being so much consulted by the elite
and aristocracy of Sydney. Why, I know
Ministers of the Crown,” continued the lady,
“ who w'ould not dream of taking any serious
action without first consulting Madame Cas-
cara. As for me, I have found her infallible.
She told me the husband I should marry,
that my first child would be a boy, that
trouble would come to me from over the
water—that was my husband’s mother from
England, and it all came true, every word !
Oh, it’s simply wonderful the power that
Madame has ”
So the kind lady went on telling all her
personal history in the most unembarrassed
way, and, naturally, Sarah Jane and Euphe-
mia gave their history ; how they w'ere two
of nine children, who had alw r ays lived in
the bush ; had so far never had sweethearts ;
their parents were with them in Sydney :
and they had all just arrived to see the cele-
brations, and so on, and so on.
Presently a little bell rang, and the kind
lady said it was her turn, and left them.
Later she came out smiling, saying that
Madame’s revelations were something mar-
vellous, and that the girls coud go in now.
A small room, dimly lighted ; a woman
dressed in a long robe, and an Egyptian
head-dress, a low table before her. The
walls of the room hung with heiroglyphics,
a stuffed alligator, and a mummified cat ; a
scent in the air of burnt sandalwood. The
girls were abashed and tongue-tied at the
strange sight, and stood awkwardly, one
behind the other, gaping at the revealed
mysteries.
“ Come in, Miss Sarah Jane Wayback, and
Eupliemia and Delia. Come in, lam very
glad to see you. Close the door, and take
seats ; you have nothing more to fear here
than at Barjo.”
“Oh my ! However did you know our
names ? ” cried Sarah Jane, with an
astonishment that overcame her shyness.
“ Tut, tut ! That is nothing. You have
each of you a new half-crown in your dress
pockets ; you must cross my palm with them,
and then I shall see clearly all you want to
know.”
So commanded, so done. In the twinkling
of an eye seven and sixpence was added to
Madame Cascara’s banking account, and
that lady taking Sarah Jane’s masculine
hand in her own, began her momentous
revelations of the Past, the Present, and the
Future.
“You have a sweet nature, Sarah Jane ;
a loving and affectionate heart. You have
three sisters and five brothers, and you have
all been reared amidst the beauties of
Nature, in the wild, beautiful bush. Much
money is coming to you from over the sea,
but there will be delay before you get it.


The first Thursday in the month is your un-
lucky day, and you must never accept an
offer of marriage on that day, or go a
journey, or christen a baby. I can see three
gentlemen striving for your hand. One is
tall, dark, and strikingly handsome, but
poor—he has only a thousand a year ; one is
fair and thin, but very rich. He loves you
madly. The third has curly hair, and is
short and stout, and very good-tempered. I
see you hesitate between these three lovers.
You think you love the dark man, while,
perhaps, you really love the short one, and
there is no doubt that the fair one, for whom
you do not care, loves you better than either
of the others, and he has hundreds of thou-
sands of pounds, and a fine house at Potts’
Point. Whoever you marry you will have
five children—two will be lovely twins ; the
first will be a darling boy. Great trouble
will come in your path, which you can only
avoid by consulting me in time. It is very
important that you should know which of
your three lovers you should choose, but I
cannot see more for you to-day. To-morrow
the darkness will lift, and to you, as a new
client, my fee will be only five shillings.”
Euphemia’s fortune had a strange resem-
blance to that of Sarah Jane ; only, in her
case, two dark men were striving with one
fair man for her heart and hand. One of
the dark men was very wealthy—an English
lord in disguise. The fair man had a lovely
drooping moustache, but as to which lover
Euphemia ought to choose Madame was
again in doubts, that could only be settled by
a payment of two half-crowns on the
following day.
Perhaps, because Delia was only a child,
her fortune rested less on love and matri-
mony than on events. She was to grow up
exceedingly beautiful, to become an actress,
and have her picture in all the shops and all
the papers. Kings would beg for her smile,
and squatters offer to run away with her :
and much more flapdoodle of the same vague,
kind for, as Madame explained, “being a
child, and her future yet distant, the events
were not to be seen so clearly as with a
grown-up person.”
Sarah Jane and Euphemia, on hearing
their fate, had been struck speechless with
awe. Not so Delia ; she was indignant.
“Is that all ? You call that a fortune ? ”
“ Yes, my dear ; all I can say to-day.”
“ Well, I want back my new half-crown.
Keep your old fortune.”
“ Certainly not, the money is my fee.”
“ Give me back two shillings, then ; that
fortune ain’t worth more than sixpence, is
it, Sarah Jane ? ”
But Sarah Jane, very much shocked, pro-
ceeded to drag the protesting Delia off the
premises.
“Let me go ! Give -me back my new half-
crown or I’ll tell ! I’ll tell Mums you’ve
had yer fortune’s told, so there now ! Give
me back me new half-crown or I’ll tell. Give
me back ”
Madame Cascara smiled complacently, as
the contending voices melted away.
“ The little fools.”
2


CHAPTER V.
The Landing of the Governor-General.
As Tilly Wayback and Charlie Lyons were
more interested in each other than in the
shop windows, it happened, naturally, that
they advanced more rapidly than the rest
of the family, who found new delights to
gloat over in every plate-glass front. But
there are bounds to feminine interest, even
when they are centred in a new young man,
and the sight of a photographer’s vestibule,
with the hundreds of pictures of ladies and
gentlemen, each with a different grin, aroused
Tilly’s enthusiasm to the exclamation point.
It may be well to state that Tilly had
literary and artistic talent of no mean order,
for, as was well known to all the residents of
Barjo, she had contributed poems on
“ Spring,” and “The Wattle Flower” to “ The
Barjo Banner also her lead-pencil sketch
of a three-legged cow eating a haystack had
•
taken the champion prize of five shillings in
the art section of the Barjo Agricultural
Show. These successes put Tilly on a
pedestal of refinement and culture that she
strove her very best, when she remembered
it, to live up to.
“ Oh, what lovely pictures, Mr. Lyons !
How beautifully they are shaded ! I wonder
now if there is anyone I know ? ”
It was here that Charlie Lyons had an
inspiration.
“ What say if us go in an’ have our
likenesses drawn?”
“ No ; I could not dream of it; no really ;
what would Mums say ? Besides, we should
lose all the others, and I have not got my
best hat on.”
“ That’s all right ; you look spiffin’. It
won’t take ten minutes, an’ we can eaten
them up in no time. Come along ! ”
But they had a good half-hour of waiting
before their turn came to face the camera’s
glassy stare.
“ Oh, I feel so nervous ! Are you sure that
thing isn’t loaded and won’t go off ? ” said
Tilly, indicating the barrel of the lens, that
pointed towards them with maxime direct-
ness. “Is my hair quite straight ? I feel
sure it tumbling all down behind. How
hot it is here ! I’m just melting ! What is
he doing under that black cover ? Is he
drawing us now ? What a shame ! And my
blouse all rumpled ! What has he gone into
that little dark room for ? ”
“To stir up the paint, I expect,” said
Charlie Lyons.
The photographer dived from out of his
cave and approached the camera.
“The ladv will sit down, please ; her elbow
resting on the table, so. The gentleman will
stand in an easy position—keep the weight
of his body on the right foot, and put the
left easily forward—your hand resting on
the lady’s shoulder. Kindly look this way,
and remember something pleasant—the lady
can think of the gentleman, and the
gentleman of the lady. That’s right. A most
delightful smile ! Now, steady ! Thank
you. Good-day ! Proofs will be ready the
day after to-morrow.”
“Is that all ? Is it over ? ” exclaimed
Tilly, with astonishment, as, drawing a long
breath, she secretly felt about her person to
make sure that no part had been amputated.
“ It’s not so very bad, is it ? But I’m sure
I looked a fright. Now, don’t you think I
looked a fright ? ”
Charlie Lyons at once assured her that she
looked bewitching, or words to that effect.
• ••••*
“ Now, wherever is Dads and Mums, and
all the rest of them ? ”


They were once again on the George-streer
footpath. Charlie suggested that the Way-
back Family were probably still shop-gazing
some distance ahead, and that by taking the
electric tram they would soon catch them
up.
The idea appeared excellent. Tilly could
watch one side of George-street while Charlie
watched the other, what time they sat close
together and clasped hands secretly, as
though the said hands were strangers to
them, and embraced without knowledge of
the owners. But, as may be surmised, when
their tram passed Mums she was buried in a
draper’s, buying “ special lines,” the children
were fighting Waterloo again with tarts in a
tuck-shop, and Dads, in a pub. parlor, was
calculating how he would spend a suddenly
arrived twenty-five pounds that he thought
lie held in his hands. Nevertheless, in spitp
of the bootless quest, Tilly was in ecstacy as
the tramcar rushed down the heights of
Brickfield Hill.
“ isn’t it glorious ? It’s like flying without
wings ! I think Heaven must be like this—
riding for ever on a car without a ticket,
Tilly whispered to Charlie. “ You feel all
over alike, only different, gliding along like
a bird thinking of nothing but floating and
gloating, and how splendid it is just to IB e
and do nothing at all ! ”
Charlie said those were his sentiments “ to
a T.,” and that riding on the tram was “ tip-
top.” And he further proposed at the railway
terminus that they remain on the car, and
go to and fro till their search was rewarded.
So it was decided, and Tilly and Charlie, in
a glorious beatitude, took endless penny trips
up and down George-street all that after-
noon.
At the third, or the fourth, or was it the
fifth round ?—Tilly could never be quite sure
of the number—their search was rewarded
in full measure.
Dads, walking dismally, like a dog with his
tail between his legs, was sighted, and taken
up at Redfern ; Mums and the babies
appeared in the Haymarket ; Jabez and
Rube, quite unconcerned, were waiting at
Goulburn-street ; and the three girls, Delia
si ill protesting, and her mouth held closed by
Sarah Jane, were found waiting at the Royal
Arcade.
There was great rejoicing at the union ;
but strangely enough all were singularly reti-
cent as to their adventures, and as to the
method in which they had passed their first
few hours in the great metropolis.
Bubs and Cris and Little Sid, white as
ghosts, and puffed out in the body like
goliannas that have swallowed a hare, were
unnaturally silent, and when they arrived at
the tea table of the Emu Coffee Palace
displayed a modesty of appetite disgraceful
to their Barjo up-bringing.
“I’m sure Sydney don’t agree with the
poor dears,” said Mums, as she vainly strove,
by spreading jam on Bubs’ bread and buttei.
to tempt his vanished appetite.
On the Friday night, Dads had met Billy
Watkins, an old Barjo identity, and as Billy
said it was the birthday of his wife’s
mother’s sister, it was only common polite-
ness to drink that lady’s health. Now, a
birthday over-night always left Dads a
pessimist and caustic critic of things in
general the following morning.
“ I don’t hold with all this flummery an’
tomfoolery,” he said to Charlie Lyons at
breakfast. “ Are we a lot o’ kids having a
school treat ; or is we men an’ women with
duties in life ? I’m er Republican, like Billy
Watkins, I am ; one man's just as good as
another, if not better. Australia fer ther
Australians, an’ down with ther Chows—
that’s my motto. And as fer this here Lord
Hopetoun—have yer seen his picter i— he s
only a rat o’er bloke, say what cher like. If
ther likes o’ him came round Dingo Flat with
his swag, an’ asked fer a job, I reckon I’d be
doing ther handsom’ if I give him ten bob a
week an’ his tucker ; an’ then I’d be losing
by him till I’d liisted a few hundred a’ hard
feed inter him. Corned beef an’ pumpkin is
what he wants—l reckon he’s been fed on
soft stuff, like they give at this yer Coffee
Palace, till there’s no more sap in him than
er dead cornstalk. Now, my idea of a
Governor-General, if we must have one, is a


strong, upstandin’, eighteen-stoner, who’d fill
out his uniform till it busted, who ”
“ Come along, Dads,” said Mums, as she
hurried the children over their breakfasts :
“ if we want to see the landing we must
start now.”
Experience had taught the Waybacks that
if they desired to keep together in a Sydney
crowd, it was best to march in single file,
open order, Dads in the van, Mums in the
rear. And it was in this formation that they
deployed on the kopje known as Lady
Macquarie’s Chair.
They had a grand position. Mums had an
elegant rear view of Dad’s back, Tilly could
see a square yard of harbor between five
hats, Sarah Jane could note the colors of a
ship’s flag over a fat man’s shoulder,
Euphemia had an unbroken prospect of the
blue sky overhead ; while Rube and his little
brothers studied with absorbing interest the
rear aspect of pants in all stages of pre-
servation. Dads and Jabez and Charlie
Lyons could have seen almost everything if
the people in front had only held their heads
down.
“ It’s er wonderful sight,” said Dads. “ I
wouldn’t er missed it fer bags o’ money—
an’ we’ve got such a fine position.”
“ Yes,” said Mums, “ you'll soon want a
new one : the collar’s getting quite shabby.”
“ Ther go the guns,” cried Dads ; “ Seven-
teen of ’em. He’s coming ! ”
“ Are they shootin’ him ? ” enquired Rube.
“No, you stoopid ; it’s only powder.”
“ But s’posin’ they did shoot him ; s’posin’
someone put bullets in the gun, an’ ther
Governor was blown ter little bits, would
they feed some one else on tarts, an’ lollies,
an’ things, an’ make a new Governor ? ”
Rube, it may be explained, had heard quite
lately of the habits of bees in regard to their
Queens. “ S'posin’ they shotted the Governor
an’ wanted er new one, should we all have
er chance ? ”
But the increasing din of steam whistles
and distinct cheering made all further
coherent talk impossible. Dads grew
moment by moment more and more excited
as he saw—or fancied he saw—the advancing
flotilla of ships, the debarkation of the
Governor-General from the Royal Arthur to
the steam launch, his landing at the glorified
drinking fountain without the drink—the
historic incident, when a thousand throats
gave tongue to the moment’s joy.
What a crushing of people came from
behind ! A pushing, squeezing mob of
struggling shouters that squashed Mums flat
on to Dad’s spine, and made Tilly give such
a squeak that Charlie Lyons had to bold her
in his arms for minutes afterwards.
Aided by a hatpin stolen from Eupliemia.
Rube was testing how much of the fat man
in front of him was solid. Very soon Rube’s
scientific researches had the result of giving
much room to himself and little brothers—
to Mum’s delight “ How kind of the
people ! I thought the poor children would
have been killed ! ”
Dads was going frantic. “ Hip ! hip :
hooray ! Hip ! hip hooray ! Shout Jabez '
shout Charlie ! shout everyone ! The
Governor’s landed ! He’s shaking hands—
just like you or me ! He’s getting in his
carriage. Look ! look ! Hip ! hip ! hooray !
m
The finest man in the world, bar none ! Now,
that’s something like a gentleman. You can
see it in ther cut o’ him ! Hip ! hip !
hooray ! Long live Lord Hopetoun !
Hopetoun for ever ! For he’s a jolly good
fellow, an’ so say all of us ! Hip ! hip !
hooray ! ”
Long after the Governor-General’s carriage
was driven by, Bads was dancing and
shouting— *• Did yer see him ? I saw him !
By cripes ! Don’t he take ther bun ? Er
real aristocrat ter ther toe-nails ; thorough-
bred ; no brumbie about him, my oath !
Come on, Mums, come on, kids ; let’s follow
on. We might see him again.”
“ 1 thought you were a Republican, Mr.
Wayback,” said Charlie Lyons.
“So I am,” said Dads. “ I’m er Re-
publican ter ther marrer er me bones, in
theory ; but when I sees er man what is er
man like that ere, I’d make him the Emperor
o’ Australia, I would, an’ King o’ Barjo—by
cripes ! ”


“ Wasn’t it lovely ? ” said Tilly, who had
seen nothing, to Sarah Jane, who had seen
less.
“ Just too sweet for anything,” said Sarah
Jane, who had picked up this phrase at the
Coffee Palace dinner-table, and fired it off
with great unction at ten minute intervals.
“ I wish you meant it,” said Euphemia,
who had also sipped at the fount of Sydney
culture.
“ S’posin’,” said Rube, “ while all ther
people is out in ther streets, ther rats an’
cats, and dogs and mice were to eat up all
ther tucker in all ther safes, what should
we’s have for tea ? ”
“ I’m certain sure it was all nice an’
beautiful,” said Mums, “ an’ I hope all you
children enjoyed yerselves ; but I’m sure I’d
no idea as it was so shabby, or I’d have
made him change it. The way men knock,
out their things is just surprisin’.”
“ Ain’t ther nothin’ ter eat, Mums ?’’
cried Bubs. “It ain’t no treat if there ain’t
no lollies.”
Here Dads stopped a hawker with a tray
and banner, and purchased commemoration
medals for each of the party, not forgetting
a small Union Jack to stick in his own hat.
“ Now, kids,” said Dads, “ yer must never
forget—no, not so long as yer lives—this here
most important day. Ter day we commences
ter be somebody. Yesterday we was nobody
in partickler ; just odds an’ ends o’ people
scattered round Australia. Ter day we’re e:
Nation. We’ve rose up an’ sharpened our
claws on an ironbark stump, an’ we’re jus:
lying low ter fight somebody. Nations
always fights ; that’s what they’re for.
“ Noo South Wales would never have
shaped up ter nobody ; she was too small er
dorg ter do more than bark behind er fence.
But yer bet Australia’s rorty an’ full o’ sap,
standin’ up on her hind legs with her coat
off, an’ means ter have er cut in at ther first
scrap handy !
“ That’s ther mark o’ civilisation Bill
Watkins talks about, an’ shows ther progress
we’s made from ther days o’ ther poor naked
savages.
“ When Captain Cook come here in hi*
paddle-boat a hundred year ago, we was all
tame enough ter feed out o’ ther hand ; there-
was no ‘ confidence ’ men, no railway
accidents, no coffee palaces —all was ther
wild, wild bush.
“But now we’s heddicated. We gets er
paper—them as buys ’em—every day, that
tells us who’s been cured last by Mixem’s-
Pills. an’ cables from England how our Tom
Jones, o’ Barjo, was presented ter ther
Queen; an’ how Lord Brassey had another
fall off somethin’.
“ All these here things should make us
proud an’ haughty, an’, as Bill Watkins sez,
we is easily ther first nation in ther world—
fer why ? ’Cause we is ther newest an’,
therefore, up ter date. We’s built on ther
1901 model with all ther latest improvements
—Old Nations fer sale at er big discount ter
clear.
“ We’s got ter take our place at ther
Council Chamber o’ Nations, an’ yer bet we’s
goin’ ter be in ther front seat, an’ we s
goin’ ter pick an eleven o’ all Australia with
jaws as’ll talk all ther other nations o’ ther
earth stone deaf ! Now, kiddies, Hip, hip,,
hooray ! Hip, hip, hooray ! ”
“ Ain’t it just too sweet for anything ? ”
said Sarah Jane.
“ I wish you meant it! ” murmured-
Euphemia.
“ Now. s’posin’ ” said Rube, but he got
no further ; the heavy hand of Jabez grasped
his windpipe. Jabez took no pleasure in-
flights of imagination.
“ Well, I’m very glad ther landing is over,”
said Delia. “It was just beastly. I’d much
rather see shops. It wasn’t nice at all, I
don’t care what yer say ! An’ if that’*
watcher call er Governor, I don’t want ter
see him no more —so there, now !
“ What are we goin’ ter have fer dinner ? ”
suddenly demanded Cris, whose thought*
always rested on the gastronomic future.
“ Roast pork ! ” promptly replied Bubs,,
with general approval.
“ I wish you meant it ! ” said Euphemia.


CHAPTER VI
Life at the Coffee Palace.
“ I’ve been takin’ er speer round, Bill, at
ther fixing up o’ these here celebrations,”
•said Dads, on New Year’s Eve, “ an’ I give
ther bloke what was bossing ther job er few
hints ter improve things. There’s er span
where it’s writ up : ‘ Welcome ter ther Land
o’ ther Golden Fleece.’ That’s fust-rate, I
sez, if yer only hangs up er few o’ ther
golden fleecers.”
“ Wot’s them ? ” he says.
“ Spielers an’ confidence men, I sez. We
grows em ter beat ther world ! I knows
three top-notchers as ’ud make yer span real
pretty—my word ! But you’ve mistook ther
spellin’ on that there next one, I sez ; you’ve
got— ‘ Cerise welcome the Commonwealth '
put wrong. You should er got my Tilly ter
help yer afore yer wrote it out. She’s er
dab ter spell, she is ; an’ what’s cerise
got ter do with Australia, anyhow ? Now,
if yer’d said, ‘ quinces,’ you’d er bin fair in
it. Quinces is our stan’by ; makes ther pies,
makes ther jam, an’ fattens ther pig when
ther melons is done. Them an’ pumpkins is
ther only fruit as amounts ter much at
Barjo.”
“ I see you’re from the country ! ” he sez.
“ Right oh ! sonny, I sez. I’m ther man
off ther sile right enough—ther real genuine
article, ther vegetable marrer o’ ther land,
an’ if yers take my tip an’ want ter fix up
er real Australian span, you’ll do somethin’
different ter anything I’ve sot eyes on yet.”
“ How’s that ? ” he sez.
“So far as I can see, I sez, that here
framework yer’ve put up is made o’ Yankee
pine, ther canvas kiver is German, ther
paint outside is French, an’ ther flags is
Dago ; now where do Australia come in 1
want’s ter know ? ”
“ Well, how’d you do it, Mister Gum-
leaves ? ” he sez.
“ When it comes ter buildin’, I sez, our
main holt is slabs an’ stringy bark, with
greenhide as er stan’by. But if yer wants
something tip-top, right up ter ther nines,
just yer get my Jabez ter run up er lean-to
o’ saplings with er bark ridge, an’ dolled up
with pumpkins, an’ possum-skins, an’ dingo
scalps, an’ yer’ll have somethin’ like—some-
thin’ as ther rain won’t wash ther paint off,
an’ show ther innards of like as ther one
yer puttin’ up. Is this here Commonwealth,
I sez—for I see I had him fair bailed up--
only going ter be lathe an’ baggin’ painted
ter look like stone ; or is it ter stand on iron-
bark girders an’ be floored with taller wood
an’ turpentine ?”
“Go an’ have er drink, old man,” he sez ;
“yer must be getting dry.”
“Yer was too many fer him, Wayback,”
said Bill Watkins, “an’l can give yer another
pint er two I’ve picked up in me travels :
Australian drinks, like tea, an’ beer, an’
whisky, ain’t good enough fer ther toffey
blokes as runs this here show, so they sent
home for two thousand cases o’ champagne
made in Germany. Ten thousand blanky
quid fer one shout in German gooseberry
juice—how do that strike yer ? I tell yer
ther like o’ you an’ me will have ter buck up
an’ graft when ther Bill comes along.”
“By cripes ! yer don’t say so, Bill ! Is that
er fact V But yous er bloke as knows ther
inside runnin’ o’ things ; tell me, straight,
what’s this Federation guiver all amount
ter ? Seems ter me wes got Government
enough ter keep out ther rain as ’tis. More
nor half Barjo’s in billets; there’s ther lands
office an’ land board, ther police office an’


magistrates, the post office an’ hospital, rail-
way station, an’ gaol, stock inspector, rabbit
inspector, road inspector, forest ranger,
medical officer, returning officer, Government
architect, registrar o’ births, deaths, an’
marriages, schoolmasters, an’ schoolmissus,
an’ lots more I can’t call ter mind —without
countin’ ther Town Council an’ all ther
officers. So when this here new Government
comes along, it looks like billets fer ther
lot o’ us ! How is it done, Billy ? How is
they goin’ ter do it ?”
“Let me tell yer somethin’ in yer ear,
Wayback, on ther strick Q.T., as I was told
not ter give away, not at no price—lT’S
BORRERED MONEY ! Ther colonies has
borried all they could on their own, an’ now
they’s* jined tergether ter sign each other’s
bills an’ get some more. That’s fer why we
keeps ser sweet with ther old country, der
yer tumble ? An’ what they calls er great,
politician is er bloke as can get in debt till
he’s up ter ther eyes ; an’ if so he can borrey
an’ borrey off yer till he’s got ther last sprat
in yer kick, they calls him a financier, an’
puts him in Parliament an’ ther Government
so’s he can use his talents ter ther best
advantage.”
“ But whose goin’ ter pay fer it all in ther
end ?” said Dads, aghast.
“Our Colonial troubles !” said Bill Watkins.
“Paying’s out er date ; borrerin’s ther biz,
an’ don’t yer forget it ! I was speakin’ to
our Member this mornin’, an’ he sez as soon
as ther new Federal loan comes along we
has a new bridge over Barjo Creek, frontin'
my place, an’ er formed road ter Dingo Flat
is as good as made.”
“By cripes ! I’m solid fer Federation, an’
no mistake !” said Dads.
• • • • • *
Arrived, the fateful first of January, when
all Australia was to shake hands with itself,
clap itself on the back, and say how grand,
and noble, heroic, and patriotic, it found
itself, ’when it spoke the honest truth.
The Emu Coffee Palace had people camped
in the passages, on the tables and chairs, on
the sofas, under the sofas, in the loft under
the roof, in the cellar under the basement, in
the ticket-office, the dining-room, the scullery,
the kitchen—and a guinea was paid for a
shake-down in the wood-shed.
The new boarders had just closed their
eyes in the first sleep when the chambermaids
roused them to wash down the passages, and
do a general clear-up betimes, as they wanted
to see the procession.
“Why, I only went to sleep at 3 o’clock, and
now it’s not more than 4,” said one indignant
slumberer.
“Can’t help it, sir ; everyone has got to
‘awake and arise !’ to-day, and put away the
bed-clothes early.”
But the Waybacks wanted no rousing ;
true to their breeding, they were up with the
laughing jack, and before the first streak of
dawn Bubs was riding a visionary buck-
jumper on Mums’ chest, what time Dads,
going out instinctively to give the horses a
feed, fell flop over three recumbent forms in
the dim gallery.
“By cripes !” said Dads, recovering himself,
“I’m surprised ter see fine, up-standin' coves
likes yous camped out on ther wallerby.
Whys don’t yer go harvestin’ or foller er
thrasher ?”
“Now, kids, hurry up an’ put on yer best
clothes,” said Mums. “You, Delia, mend
those stockings at once ; folks don’t want
ter see er little gal ruunin’ about with two
new taters stickin’ out o’ her knees. Cris,
give me those knickers o’ yourn ; there’s
another hole in the back where I darned
them yesterday. I do believe you children
sit on knives an’ forks just ter aggrevate
me ! Tilly ! where’s my needle au’ thread ?”
“ Tilly’s got all ther back gathers of her
skirt torn out, Mums,” said Euphemia.
“Well, tell her ter take ther safety pin out
o’ Bubs’ bib an’ hook it up.”
“ What am I ter do, Mums ? ” said Sarah
Jane. “My shoe’s busted.”
“Yer can’t buy another; ther shops is
closed ter-day. You’ll just have ter put on
Jabez’s lace-ups.”
Splash ! Crash ! Howl !
“Snakes alive ! There’s Bubs tumbled in
ther foot bath, just after he’s dressed in
ther only clean things lie’s got! Take ’em


off ; take ’em off ter once an’ send ’em down
ter the cook ter dry at ther stove ! Oh, you
blessed kids ! What’s ther matter with you.
Eupliemia ? Three buttons off yer dress
behind ? AVell, cut one off Dads’ pants an’
sew it on ; that'll have ter do.”
“Mums ! Where’s my boots ? Mums,
where’s my boots ?”
It was Rube calling from the next room.
“Bless ther boy ! Does he think I carry
bis boots about in me pocket ? Look for
’em ; ain’t yer got er pair o’ eyes ?”
“Mums, I can’t find ’em ; someone’s took
me boots. Where’s me boots ?” Rube yelled
with the voice of despair.
“Well, I’ll be sugared !” said Mums, going
to the doorway, “if ther child ain’t got ’em
on !”
“So I have !” said Rube, standing suddenly
still in his hunt as though mesmerised. “I
s’pose I must er gone ter bed without takin’
’em off!”
“Have yer mended those stockings yet,
Delia, yer little limb ? ”
“Yes, Mums,” said Delia, as she walked
forward triumphantly from a dark corner,
where, with the aid of an ink bottle, she had
made her knees match her black stockings.
“ Now, little Sid, come here, an’ let’s wash
yer, an’ do yer hair—it’s no good yer kickin’
an’ howlin’—how can I keep ther soap out o’
yer eyes ef yer won’t keep still ? Where’s
ther laces in yer boots ? Sarah Jane, take er
bit o’ string off that parcel an’ tie ’em up
fer him. Lord save us ! I never see such
-er helpless lot o’ cripples in all me days ! It’s
‘Mums this !’ ‘Mums that!’ as though I had
a gineral store in me pocket an’ er hand on
every toe ! An’ now, here’s Dads singing
•out. What’s the matter ?”
“There’s a button gone off me pants.
Mums ; looks as some one’s cut it off.”
“Sarah Jane, pull that nail out o’ ther wall
an’ give it yer Dads with er bit o’ that string.
That’ll hold his brace fer him. Yer all alike ;
I never see such a lot!—no care, no thought
about nothin’ ! Now, I’ll get meself cleaned,
an’ we’ll have breakfast an’ go.”
• • . • • • • •
The terrible crush that was bound to take
place in Sydney streets on Celebration Day
had been so impressed on Dads’ mind that
lie thought it wise to procure seats for the
family. With this end in view he went to
the owner of a stand just erected.
“How much fer er seat in that here ?” said
Dads, pointing to the planking.
“Three guineas.”
“I s’pose yer gives er trial in light
harness V”
“What ?”
“Or er vet.’s guarantee?”
“What do you mean ?”
“Ain’t it er lioss yer sellin’ ?”
“Go to !”
The man turned on his heel. Dads laughed
to himself. “ Three guineas ; by cripes ! Ther
country’s not particler green out Barjo way.
as I remember ! Three guineas ! An’ they
thinks us country blokes don’t know nothin’ .'
Three guineas ter sit fer an hour on er bit o’
plank ! Jerusalem ! Not ef it was ther Day
o’ Judgment an’ all ther devils in hell an’
ther angels in Heaven were going to waltz
by on bicycles ! Three guineas !”
Foiled in this direction, Dads cast about for
other means to give his family an effective
view of the procession. Carefully surveying
the line of route, he chose a point of vantage
in Hyde Park, under the branches of a More-
ton Bay figtree, and having, at a cost of
sixpence, purchased two kerosene cases,
announced his preparations complete.
At breakfast Dads told the day’s
programme. “We starts fer our camp early
Jabez an’ me goes fust with ther boxes an’
wedges through ther crush ; yous foller an’
holds tight. Remember, ther shows ter be
ther biggest sight Australia ever see ; thev
circus ain’t nothin’ to it, nor yet the
Salvation Ai-my. Yer’ll have ter keep yer
eyes half shut ter keep out ther dazzle.
When it’s all gone by, wes foller quick an’
lively ter see ther swearin’-in, an’ be in front
o’ ther crush. They do say as how ther
Chief Justice had the swearin’-in job, but I
’specs I’ve put his pipe out, fer I sez only
yesterday ter ther bloke what’s ter run ther
show, ‘ When swearin’s wanted yer should
get Nick Dwyer, ther bullocky from ther


Wallaby Ranges—he’s in town,’ I sez, ‘an’
he’s er real artist. Why, it’s like music in
er church ter hear him swear,’ I sez. ‘No
Chief Justice in the world could hold er
candle ter him ; an’ if Lord Hopetoun don’t
fair rise out o’ his boots, say I’m er liar.’
“ ‘l’ll bear it in mind,’ ther bloke sez, so I
reckon Nick’s good fer ther job. An’ my
word ! ther swearin’-in’s goin’ ter be ther
sight ter cure ther sandy blight ! Lord
Hopetoun he stan’s up as bold an’ straight
as er blackfeller, an’ he sez : ‘I takes
possession o’ this here run an’ homestead, an’
all ther live stock, fences an’ tanks. All
hands on ther station after date takes orders
from me an’ ther Queen. Strange swaggies
is warned off, an’ I shouts er fig o’ terbacca
with all yer rations.’ Then all ther people’ll
shout like blazes, an’ it’ll be ther finest go
yer ever seed —and we’s got ter be there, if
we fights every inch o’ ther way. And so as'
we can tell, ther longest day we lives, how
we see Young Australia furst jump out o’
her bunk and shake off ther flies.”
.*•••••
With anxious yet resolute hearts the
Waybacks left the Emu Coffee Palace for
the toilsome struggle to Hyde Park.
“ By cripes ! ” said Dads, as they walked
along quite at their ease, “there ain’t no
crowd ter speak of ; ter hear folks talk yer’d
er thought we er been flattened ter tlier
railin’s.”
In the park the crowd was as quiet and as
orderly as a church service. Dads put the
children up in the figtree, while Mums and
the three girls sat on the cases till the time
came to stand on them. Dads moved about
uneasily, his face growing moment by
moment more serious.
Where was the crowd, the crush, the
shouts, the wild, untamed joy ot a new
nation bursting the bonds of provincialism
for national freedom and unity ? Where the
seething mass of panting, gasping humanity,
frothing hosannas to the new-born nation,
the accouchement of a continent, the natal-
day of a race ? People read the papers
smoked, or spoke in whispers.
“ It’s a nice day, mister,” a man said to
Dads just as though the day was like any
other. Dads could have punched him.
A murmur in the crowd, a little pushing
forward, a weak-lunged shout down the
street : “ Here they come ! Here they
come A string of workmen, marching,
carrying tools ; two triumphant cars ; a line
of carriages with people no one knew ; seve-
rals bands playing ; assorted soldiers looking
very hot and uncomfortable ; more soldiers,
some black, some tan ; Lord Hopetoun in a
carriage. The children in the trees cheered
the uniforms ; the crowd cheered a fat man
Tvitli an eyeglass, and another fat man with-
out an eyeglass ; a few cheered the
Governor, then, of a sudden, it was all over
and passed.
Dads could not understand it, nor realise
that the great event had actually taken place.
He was wanting to let himself go, to whoop
and jump and howl with the joy he felt he
ought to feel, and yet, all the time, he found
the fizz leaking out of him like bubbles out
of stale beer.
“ Whatcher all think o’ it ? ” said Dads, in
a dazed way.
“ Not too bad,” said Jabez.
“ The soldiers were just lovely ! ” said
Tilly.
“ Too sweet for anything ! ” said Sarah
Jane.
“ Better nor Barjo Show ! ” said Rube.
“ But not as good as the pantomime,” said
Delia, as she climbed down the figtree ; “ not
half as pretty.”
“ Hadn’t us better go on quick ter ther
swearin’-in, ter save ther crush, Dads ? ”
enquired Mums, anxiously.
“ There ain’t no crush ; no one’s er rushin’
as I can- see, except ter ther dinners,”
answered Dads, despondingly.
“ Dinner ! ” Bubs caught the word, and
it was echoed by all the children. “ I wants
my dinner—l wants my dinner ! ” And
without protest or a glance back, Rube led
the entire family on a bee-line to the Coffee
Palace.
The flags waved, the banners blew,
garlands and arches decked the streets, the


moment was historic, epoch-making—and the
•crowd wanted its dinner.
“ I’m glad we ain’t going to the swearin’-
in.” said Mums, “ it ’ud be an awful drag
with the children.”
“ Er dry hash,” said Jabez.
“ Not good enough,” said Charlie Lyons.
“ We’ve seen all there is to see,” said Tilly.
“ An’ it’s not half as good as ther
pantomime,” said Delia again.
Dads quite lacked words to express what
he felt, so he filled his mouth with pork, and
drowned reflection in six cups of tea.
• • . • • • • •
At night time Dads’ hopes rose, the city
'm
was festooned from roofs to basements in
glowing incandescent lights. Every house
was a study, a fresh device in illumination,
and as the Waybacks entered the streets
they found them filled with a compact mass
of people, a mass so close that the Waybacks
were promptly wedged tight as though
trussed by a poultryman, and, without power
to move or struggle, carried in the slowly-
moving throng down and around the town.
But there was no pushing or shoving, no
rowdyism, no outcry.
The sight and pressure of the crowd had
Avarmed Dads’ heart. He felt that now, at
last ; the great moment of emotional upheaval
had come, and the pent passion of the crowd
would explode in wild outburst. But no, it
might have been a funeral function in a
cemetery, so quiet, so ordered, so peaceful
was the crowd. And this for hour after hour.
Dads wondered if they were all asleep, and
in final despair cried out :
“ I’d give er crown ter see er drunken
man ! Two crowns ter see two drunken
men, an’ er solid quid ter see a fight! Fer
Gawd’s sake can’t some o’us smash somethin’
or break somethin’, ter show as we’s alive l
Holler, Jabez ! Pull some one’s hair, Delia,
or us ’ull soon be dead ter all ther world ! ”
CHAPTER VII.
A Christmas Picnic in the Bush.
Christmas Eve in Sydney was not a
cheerful day for the Waybacks ; the gloss of
freshness had worn off the city sights, and
the view of thousands of persons making
seasonable purchases of Christmas goods
and Christmas cheer recalled to their bush
souls memories of regret. And the Emu
Coffee Palace, though satisfactory as a
lodging, was not a home, or the semblance
of a home. Mums felt that a meal she had
not helped to prepare was not, in the words
of Cris., “a truly dinner.” And, if all must
be told, Dads and the children were some-
what cloyed in appetite by the succession of
four-course meals and unlimited toothpicks.
Thus it came about that the prospect of
spending Christmas Day at the Emu, even
with the “ poultry dinner ” promised by the
management, awoke no enthusiasm.
Dads and Munis and all the children went
up the lift and down the lift, then up, then
down again, as though looking for something
they had not lost and did not expect to find.
There was no comfort in the bedrooms, the
reading-room or the sitting-room, and Dads
failed to find in the vestibule a solitary
listener for his reminiscences of Barjo. In
her heart of hearts Mums was longing to go
in the kitchen and help the cooks pluck the
geese, but she did not dare to volunteer.
Dads had cast wistful eyes at the wood pile
in the back yard, but the timber was sawn
in such short lengths as to damp his ardor,
and, besides, the axe had a blade disgraceful
to behold, notched, blunted, and unground,
a blackfellow’s flint was as good a tool.
It was Euphemia’s inspired suggestion
that awoke new life in the Waybacks.


“ Why don’t we have a picnic ? Everyone
has one ; why don’t we ? ”
“By gum ! you’ve said it ! ” exclaimed
Dads, “ that’s just what we wants ; ter get
in ther bush agen an’ smell ther old trees,
an’ get er appetite fer er real square feed o’
ther old standby ! Whatcher say, Mums ? ”
“ Well, I don't care if us do,” said Mums ;
“ we could cook our own bit o’ tucker, an’
be real homely for once, but can yers find
any bush handy, an’ how shall us get
there ? ”
On enquiry Dads learnt that north of
Sydney stretched miles and miles of
unsettled country within easy drive of the
city ; thereupon he promptly made arrange-
ments for an expedition.
Mums sallied out shopping, armed with
empty sugar-bags, and accompanied by
Jabez to carry the provisions. First to be
purchased, a pound of real good old tea —the ,
black and tan mixture that wants a good
boil to get the strength out ; none of your
Ceylon mixtures like they had at the Coffee
Palace. Then some “ yaller ” sugar, the
sugar that is “ real sweet an’ no mistake.”
Next a piece of corned beef to be of tin-
well-known brand. This last was hard to
procure ; butcher after butcher was visited,
but the corned beef on sale was always rich,
juicy, and fat—meat that would boil tender
and greasy, and give no work for the jaws.
At last, in a mean shop in a side street.
Mums found a piece of cow-beef sandwiched
with gristle and hard as a wood block. This
took her fancy, so that when a bag of flour
was purchased, together with some plums
and salt, the bill of fare was provided.
At an hour on Christmas morning when
Sydney had not finished its first sleep, Dads
drove up to the Emu with the carrier’s van
he had hired for the day. In this the whole
family were packed, including Charlie
Lyons ; also a kerosene tin, billy, new axes,
buckets, pannikins, knives, forks, and tin
plates. The faces of the family fairly
beamed. Dads and the boys had abandoned
their holiday clothes and white shirts for
plain singlets and moleskin pants, and their
boots and socks were exchanged for open
bluchers, their braces for leather belts.
What Mums and the girls abandoned it
would be hardly modest to mention ; but
once in the van Sarah Jane, Euphemia, and
Delia took off their shoes and stockings, and
said they had not felt so comfortable for a
month. Tilly looked enviously at her sisters’
bare feet, then at Charlie Lyons ; looked
wistfully, hesitated, then set her teeth to
discomfort.
“ Gee up ! ” Dads shook the reins joy-
fully. It seemed like old times, and when
the van began to rumble and jolt and shake
them all together, like pigs in a bag, it
reminded them all so strongly of the old-
spring cart at Dingo Flat that tears nearly
came into their eyes.
It was a good twelve miles drive, but that
was nothing to the Waybacks, and during
the last mile or so the increasing bush
aroused interest like the meeting of old-
friends.
“ There’s er free splitter, Jabez. I bet cher
there’s er hundred rails in that tree.
“ Look at ther mahogany, Dads ; how’s
that fer er shingler ? ”
“ By cripes ! I sees one ! ” cried Rube,
nearly out of the van with excitement.
“ Sees what ? ” asked Dads.
“ Er bees’ nest.”
“ Where ? Where ? ”
It was in the fork of a red-gum, where
only Rube’s keen eyes would have noticed
it. On the instant the van was driven in the
bush, the family climbed down, Jabez and
Dads advanced with axes, while the girls
came behind with buckets and the kerosene-
tin.
How those axes flew, keeping time and
measure. It sounded like sweet music and
the refrain of a dear old song to the listeners.
Dad’s eyes glowed again, and Jabez seemed
to wake up as from a long sleep.
The crash of the falling tree must have
been heard for miles about, and though the
nest fell handy to the smoking fire of green
bushes the children had made, a host of bees


flew directly to the stump as though they
had pressing business to discuss with Dads
-and Jabez.
But what signified a few stings ? In a
cloud of smoke the nest was chopped out,
and the tin and buckets filled with yellow
comb.
“ I say, Dads ! ”
“ What is it, Rube ? ”
“ There’s an old cove cornin’ through the
bush quick and lively, with er big dog, an’
.he’s er cornin’ this way.”
“By cripes ! So there is ! In the cart,
Mums —in the cart, all of yers. Gee up, old
gal ! Gee up ! Encourage her with ther
stick, Jabez ; encourage her with ther
stick ! ”
“ Hi, there ! you, sir. Stop ! What do you
mean by chopping down my trees ? Hi,
there ! Stop ! ” A frantic man rushed in
their rear, and a big dog yelped around the
van.
“ What der yer say ? ” screamed Dads, as
he flicked the mare under the flank.
“ I’ll have the law of you, you Sydney
thieves ! ” The voice came to them faintly
now through the bush, as they turned an
angle in the road, and gradually the shouts
grew less and less as the mare, keeping her
stride, drew further ahead.
“ How’s that fer honey ? ” said Dads, as he
chewed a piece of comb.
No one answered ; their mouths were too
full. But the flavor of that honey they will
never forget; for it was stolen honey, and.
as all may know, stolen honey is a con-
fection of the gods.
They made their camp in a scrub by a
water-hole, Jabez lighting the fire while
Mums mixed the damper. Dads stripped
bark for a gunyah, the children hunted for
five-corners. The girls found a cow in the
bush, and bailed her up between two
saplings, where they milked her.
Tilly and Charlie went hunting for
mushrooms, Rube for more bees’ nests, and
everyone sang out and shouted at the top of
their voices as though they were all deaf, or
-each was separated by a mile of country.
It was glorious !
Delia found a pony in the scrub that
allowed her to catch it and halter it up with
a strip torn off her petticoat, then she
mounted like a boy. Perhaps the beast,
though quiet enough, was not used to be
ridden, for it bolted like a startled hare,
right through the camp and up the hill, Delia
holding on to the mane and shouting with
delight.
“ She’ll be killed for sure,” cried Mums,
dropping the damper and rushing off in
pursuit.
“ Never yer fear,” said Dads ; “ that gal
could set a wallaby.”
Dads’ estimate was not unfounded. He
had seen Delia riding the sucking calves and
young heifers, and the child who can sit a
frisky young heifer has not much to learn.
The hill steadied the pony, and Delia rode
him back as proud as Lady Hopetoun. Then
followed a ride for everybody, except Mums
and Dads ; and that pony’s Christmas was
not the day of ease and rest he may have
counted on.
When Mums rattled the tin plates for
dinner, it sounded for all the world like
Dingo Mat, and as they sat round to the
meal home incidents crowded on them—blue
meat-ants ran up their legs, small black ants
got in the tea and sugar, mosquitos kept
their hands busy slapping their faces, and a
nest of red bull-dogs, on which Dads in-
cautiously sat, made him talk fast and
furiously in dear old Barjo adjectives.
“ This is what I call tip-top ! ” said Jabez.
as he swallowed a bit of damper and worried
his teeth at a chunk of corned cow. “ This
is er proper blanky feed fer er bloke. My
oath ! ”
“Ah ! ” said Mums, quite delighted,
“ there’s nothin’ like home vittles, say
whatcher like !” and she poured out the good
black post and rail tea into the pannikins.
“ Now, here’s something a cove can chew, ’
said Dads ; “ none o’ yer soft slippery tack as
goes down yer throat before yer’ve opened
yer mouth. Ef we’s only had er pumpkin
we’d be perfect.”


So, with damper plain, plum damper,
corned beef and honeycomb, the whole
washed down with billyfuls of tea, the Way-
backs’ memorable Christmas dinner drew to
a glorious close. There was no taking of a
plateful and clearing it in five minutes, as
at the Emu Coffee Palace ; here the damper
was of Indiarubber texture, and the corned
cow of a greenhide nature, and both
required a good hour’s delightful mastication
to do proper justice.
• • • • • •
After dinner Mums made more damper,
Rube found another bees’ nest, Bubs got lost
in the bush, and after half-an-hour’s search
was found fast asleep under a currant bush,
not a hundred yards from camp ; Cris and
Little Sid emptied the buckets of honey-
comb, and though Tilly and Charlie Lyons
found no mushrooms they seemed quite
pleased with their quest. Dads and Jabez,'
who had brought lines with them, went
down to the creek to fish, taking Delia to
hunt for bait. They found a stranger by the
water-side, with an elaborate rod of brass
and cane. He looked superciliously at the
fishing poles just cut in the bush by the
Waybacks, nevertheless, his own catch only
totalled two small sprats. Dads showed him
how to fish, and they had a good time.
“ Now, come along, young feller,” said
Dads to the stranger when the bucket was
full ; “ come an’ taste ’em cooked proper.”
The stranger assented, and was soou
seated with the others, eating fresh fish
grilled in hot ashes, and drinking long drinks
of blue black tea.
Then they all played kiss-in-the-ring, Tilly
dropping the handkerchief to the stranger,
and taking him quite a run, as she giggled
and shouted ; yet, when later Charlie picked
Euphemia, Tilly pretended she did not mind
a bit, and laughed very loudly with the
stranger.
Next they played jolly miller, Dads and
Mums, and all, and everyone screamed and
howled as though they wanted to awaken
the dead and gone blackfellows. And the
more they howled the more they enjoyed
themselves.
• • • • • •
It was getting dusk when they harnessed
up, and took their seats in the van.
Charlie Lyons sat between Sarah Jane and
Euphemia, an arm round each to hold them
to their seats. Tilly, between Dads and
Jabez, made believe to be in the best of
spirits, talking louder and faster than anyone
else. But Sarah Jane and Euphemia kept
nudging each other, and they giggled so that
Charlie had to hold them tighter to keep
them from falling.
As they passed through North Shore, they
sang, or rather bellowed, “ Sons of the Sea ”
and “ The Holy City ” alternately. It was
lovely !
“ S’posin’,” said Rube, as the van crossed
the harbor in the horse punt, “ s’posin’ er
big whale was ter come along an’ swaller
ther boat, ther carts, ther horses, an’ all o’
us ; and s’posin’ some one was ter ketch that
ther whale, Avould he be good ter eat, Dad.
Would yer like ter eat him ? ”
The new moon made a white gleaming
track across the water, the headlands and
islands patterned shadows like a dark em-
broidery on a blue ground ; the million stars
above twinkled their mysterious greeting.
“ Ain’t it just too sweet for anything ? ”
said Sarah Jane.
At that moment Charlie Lyons squeezed
Euphemia very tightly.
“ I wish you meant it! ” she whispered.
“ I’m just tired of the whole thing,” said
Tilly, suddenly.
“ I’m not,” replied Delia, emphatically;
“ picnics is splendid. Shall we go again
ter-morrer, Mums ? IVe ain t eat all thci
beef ! ”
Arrived at the Emu, Charlie and Jabez took
the van back; Tilly said Sarah Jane and
Euphemia were sly cats, while they called
Tilly a greedy pig who wanted to grab
everybody, and then they pinched her. Rube
was pulling Delia’s hair, and Cris and Little
Sid trying to steal the last piece of honey-
comb from the howling Bubs.
“We’ve had a grand day, Mums, said


Dads, speaking with emotion, as he grasped
her affectionately round the waist ; “ there’s
nothin’ like ther old ways and ther old tucker
after all.”
“ No,” said Mums, a choke in her voice, as
she pressed Dad’s fingers, “ it’s been just
beautiful ! beautiful ! ” And she brushed her
eyes with the back of her hand. “It seems
just like home agen with all ther children
ser cheerful an’ happy ! ”
CHAPTER VIII.
Relatives in the Zoo.
“ I’ve been havin’ er pitch with Bill
Watkins,” said Dads, “ an’ he sez as how we
aught ter go ter ther Zoo an’ see ther
monkeys.
“ He sez we’s all bred from monkeys in
ther first place, an’ wore off our tails sittin’
on chairs an’ stumps, an’ our hair from
wearin’ o’ clothes. He’s very positive, Bill
is ; sez all ther clever blokes wot knows
everything swears to it, so I think we’ll go
an’ look these monkeys up, seein’ as they is
kind o’ relations o’ ours.”
“ Not on my side o’ ther family,” Mums
eagerly protested. “My folks may have
married Maloneys and Murphys, but never
no monkeys. The idea ! Why, er decent
body would as soon think o’ marrying er
blackfellow. I wish Bill Watkins ud mind
his own business—a nice thing to put in ther
children’s heads.”
“ You don’t understand, missus ; this was
years an’ years ago, afore yer can remember.
An’, as fer that, I disremember meself any
Waybacks being spliced ter these critters,
though Cousin Alf had some monkey tricks
right enough. Why, he’d walk up er gum
tree like er native bear, an’ pick up coppers
with his toes till yer’d died laughing ter
look at him.”
“ I ’spose we may as well go,” said Mums ;
“ but don’t yer let on Dads while we’re there
as we’re not quite strangers. I don’t want
no monkeys hanging round Dingo Flat
cadging vittles, there’s cousins enough as it
is, goodness knows ! ”
An hour later the steam tram landed the
Waybac-k Family at the gates of the
Zoological Gardens.
“ Yer not er goin’ in mister, is you ? ” en-
quired a boy, who had failed to sell Dads a
box of matches.
“ Yes, I’se goin’ in. Why not ? ”
“ Well take my tip, mister ; they’ll never
let yer out agen,” and the boy dived away
as though from an expected blow.
“ Now, I wonder what that kid means,”
said Dads, as the family pushed through the
turnstile.
“ Rather er small serlection,” remarked
Dads, as he looked around at the turf
covered saucer representing the gardens.
“ Only grass enough fer two head o’ stock,
ef there’s that ; but er A 1 water-hole, my
word ! Ef yers only had yer gun, Jabez, yer
might er knocked over er pair o’ ducks.”
The children had spread all round the
ground, rushing from one cage to another,
then back again, shrieking their discoveries
one to the other :
“ Look at them white birds standin' on long
sticks, Delia ? Say, ‘ whoop,’ an’ see em fall
off.”
“ Them sticks is their legs, you stupid.”
“Oh crikey ! How do ’em get on top of
em agen when em’s been sittin’ down ? ”
“ Oh, Dads ! Here’s tlier lions ; Mums,
here’s ther lions ! Real live lions, as can
open their mouths an’ wobble their eyes
awful. Der yer think they’d squeak ef we
shied rocks at em ? ” enquired Rube.


“ So them’s lions,” said Dads, coming into
the midst of the gaping children, “ an’ that’s
ther lion’s den, as I’ve heard tell of. Think
o’ that, now ! But where’s ther British lion
with the gal on his back in er tin hat
holdin’ er hay-fork ? I ’speks it’s her day off.
being as it’s holiday time. An’ Dannel ; I
don’t see old Dannel—him as had ter camp
with ther lions and go whacks in their
tucker ?”
“ Why, Dads,” said Tilly, “ Daniel is dead
long ago.”
“ You don’t say ! Poor old cove ; so they
scoffed him up at last. It was hard lines on
Dannel when he’d stood ’em off so long. Poor
bloke, I’m sorry he’s pegged out. Now,
kiddies, you take er good look at them thtere
lions, an’ ef yer sees ther like o’ ’em in ther
bush don't yer try none o’ ther Dannel busi-
ness ; just yous climb er tree, quick an’
lively. An’ take my tip, they’ll have the
slabs down an’ be out o’ that there cage
afore long, mark my words.”
“ Come an’ see ther little coves wot’s got
whiskers all over ’em.” It was Cris who
had run back to lead the way to the monkey
house.
“ By cripes ! an’ them’s monkeys,” said
Dads, standing transfixed before the cage,
“ Why, I don’t see no family likeness, do you,
Mums ? ”
“ In course not, you old fool ; that Bill
Watkins was only skitin’.”
“ But they does catch fleas like a Christian,
say what yer like.”
“ Look, Mums ! just twig that bloke with
ther sandy beard, see he’s got him too !
Now if that don’t beat everythin’.”
“ Oh, the horrid little wretches,” said
Tilly. “ I hate the sight of them.”
“ Speak soft, gal ; don’t go ter hurt their
feelin’s cause ther down on their luck,” said
Dads. “ Remember they ain’t had ther
chances you an’ me’s had, nor the eddication.
How’d you be ef yer was put in er cage an’
fed on nuts as kids shied at yer ? They may
be ignorant, an’ not as handsome as we be,
but take my tip there’s er cove there with er
blue nose as ud make er better cover point
than any man in the Barjo eleven.”
“Oh ! Mums ! what’s that thing with er
tail both ends o’ him, an’ all ther people
sittin’ on ther roof ? ” enquired little Sid,
pointing to the elephant who came stalking
along with a load of passengers ; “ is ther
men inside, or is it an engine ? ”
“ Good Lord ! child, why it’s alive ! ”
screamed Mums ; “ looks Dads, there’s er
house going about on legs ! ”
“ Why, that’s er elephant; the fust I ever
see out o’ a picture. I thought they was all
lies, but he’s there right enough, an’ broke
ter saddle like a pack-horse. How’d he do,
Jabez, ter draw girders out o’ Hell Gate
Gully ? I’ll just tap ther bloke an’ see what
he wants for him, or maybe he’s got er foal
he’d sell cheap. Ef we’s could only breed
’em up at Dingo Flat there aughter be money
in it.”
“Oh, let’s have a ride ; let’s have a ride ! ”
It was the children who had followed the
elephant to the mounting stool, and now
clamored, shrill-tongued and eager, for the
idea of riding something, more particularly
a new species of animal, appealed irresistibly
to their bush instinct. Tilly and Charlie
Lyons were alone indifferent, having found
apparently some absorbing specimens of
natural history up little sequestered lanes off
the main pathway ; but the rest of the Way-
back family of children were soon mounting
on the strange beast.
“ Now, kiddies,” said Dads, “ hold hard an’
grip tight with yer knees ef he goes ter buck
or play up, an’ when he sticks up that fire-
hose o’ hissun don’t yer stick no pins in it,
Rube, or there’ll be trouble.”
It was a right gladsome sight to see the
elephant moving along with stately step on
his rubber-tyred feet, the Wayback children
on his back, while Dads and Mums followed
behind, their faces radiant with pride and
happiness, for to them their children seemed
exalted and raised to a seat of crowning
honor.
“ I don’t s’pose, Mums, as Lord Hopetoun


himself ever rode er animal like that here,”
said Dads ; “ yer see it wants er lot o’ pluck.
I can tell yer, an’ it shows ther stuff ther
Waybacks is made of.”
After the discovery of the elephant by the
family all other sights in the gardens
appeared poor and insignificant ; all other
pleasures other than riding him paltry and
mean. And in the long days to come, when
all memory of the visit to Sydney, the
celebrations, the procession, and wonderful
illuminations have become vague and misty,
the form of the elephant will always loom
clear and distinct as the crowning glory of
the journey.
#•••••*
“ I hardly likes tellin’ ther Boss o’ this here
Coffee Palace as we’s all goin’ away at once, ’
said Dads to Mums. “ Yer see it’ll be such
er big drop ter his business, an’ er bit rough
on ther poor cove.”
“ I’ll tell him fast enough,” said Mums, and
off she went down the lift, and was back
again in five minutes.
“ Well, how’d he take it ? ” asked Dads.
“ Didn’t he perform a bit an’ carry on ? ”
“ No, he just said, ‘ Sorry your going, Mrs.
Wayback ; hope you’ve enjoyed your visit to
Sydney, and that you will recommend us to
your country friends,’ then he went on
writing in his books as though I’d only asked
the time o’ day.”
“ What ! he never offered to shout drinks
nor nothin’ ? Well, ef that don’t beat all.”
Perhaps the joy of coming to Sydney, great
as it was on the part of the Wayback family,
must take second place to the thrill of
pleasure they experienced at the thought of
going back. But the girls had preparations
to make.
“ Mind, we must go home in our Sydney
hats and clothes, Mums,” said Tilly, “ so the
Barjo people won’t know what they cost at
the store like they do our other things ; an 1
we must have them quite different, so that
when we go to church on Sundays everyone
will be sure they are the latest fashion, and
be real mad because they haven’t got them.
Then it will be grand.”
But there was a yet more secret
preparation, one known only to the girls
themselves, and that arose after a consulta-
tion in their bedroom after a chance question
by Euphemia.
“ What shall us say to cousin Sophy, Aunt
Lena and Mary Jackson when they ask us
about our toff Sydney friends ? You know
we all said we’d be sure an’ get three swells
for sweethearts.”
“ I’ve got Charlie Lyons anyway,” said
Tilly.
“ Who’s Charlie Lyons ? You could pick
him up in Barjo,” said Sarah Jane.
“ An’ he’s not a little bit of a toff,” added
Euphemia.
“An’ he won’t cut up in three,” said Sarah
Jane.
“And won’t they just laugh at us,” moaned
Euphemia.
That was the bitter thought that kept them
awake and scheming half the night till they
had formed a plan to cover their defeat.
The morning following the consultation the
three girls visited a photographer’s and
purchased three photographs. One repre-
sented a tall, dashing officer in military
costume ; the second, an officer in naval
uniform ; while the third, claimed by
Euphemia, was only a poor civilian, chosen
because of his otherwise good looks and
lovely drooping moustache.
“ Now they can’t doubt us,” said Tilly,
“ when we show them the photos.”
“ And the locks o’ hair I clipped off Delia
an’ the boys while they slept,” added Sarah
Jane.
“ And we needn’t say their names, because
that’s a secret,” said Euphemia, “ and a
secret always sounds better and mysterious,
and grand like. It will make Aunt Lena and
Sophy die o’ curiosity to find out. It’ll be
the fun o’ the world, you see.”
When they left the Emu Coffee Palace
Dads and Mums would have shaken hands
with everybody ; yet, beyond the manager,
who said “ good-bye” in a strictly official,
non-committal tone of voice, no face smiled
salutation, or seemed disturbed or aroused


in any way. Bill Watkins and Charlie Lyons
had already returned home, so that at
Redfem Station there was not a soul in the
vast crowd to wave a hand as their train left
the station. No one but themselves seemed
impressed with the fact that they, the Way-
backs, were taking the favor of their
presence from the great metropolis. Dads
looked wistfully and vainly out of the
carriage window till the train drew out of
the station for a sign or nod of recognition.
“ I tell yer what it is, Mums,” he said, as
he sat back in his place, “ there’s no proper
friendship in this yer town ; it’s too big. No
one knows anybody, and them you does
know yer wish yer didn’t ; an’ them as yer’d
like ter know, don’t want ter know yer.
There’s too many stock in ther one paddick ;'
that’s wot’s ther matter, an’ they’s all
pushin’ an’ shovin’ fer ther bit o’ grass near
the creek. Ef yers gets bogged, ‘ their
troubles.’ An’ these townies fancies their-
selves, an’ thinks they knows everythin’, an’
us country blokes knows nothin’, an’ it’s not
er bit er good er speakin’ to ’em, fer I’ve
tried it.”
Dad’s sadness was reflected in the party ,
but when, after the long train ride, they
drew near Barjo, their spirits rose. Station
after station was ticked off and counted.
“ Are we there yet ? ” “Is it ther next ? ”
“ I wonder who’ll be there ? ” “ Did Jonas
get our letter ? ”
The children had to stand ; their seats
would not hold them.
“ Here’s Barjo Creek ! ” shouted Jabez.
from the window, “ an’ the church, an’ Davis’
lucerne paddick, an’ I can see Jonas on the
platform ! ”
“ Hurrah ! Hurrah ! ” and Jabez waved
his hand frantically.
A blast of the whistle, a grinding of brakes,
and they were all helped out on the platform,
bag and baggage, by what seemed a hundred
friendly arms and hands.
“ How are yer, Wayback ? ”
“ How are yer, missus ? ”
“ How yer ’joyed yerselfs ? ”
“ Lookin’ none too tyad after yer trip.”
“ What cher, Jabez ; how yer poppin’ up ?”
“ Hullo, Tilly ! ”
“ Hullo, Sarah Jane ! ”
“ What price us bush blokes now ! ”
“ How yer bin doin’ ? ”
“ How’s things down there ? ”
“Get any rain Sydney way ? ”
“Glad to see yer, old man, comeanaver-
drink ! ”
It was a whirling chorus of voices, all
Barjo and neighborhood there with warm
welcome in their eyes, and a firm grip in
their hands. The family were carried off to
a high-tea, while Dads lingered to take a nip
with Jago, of the Barjo “ Banner,” who was
looking for copy.
“ Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. Way-
back, on your wonderful visit. We have read
about it in the Sydney papers.”
“ You don’t say so, Jago ! What about
me ?”
“ Yes ; you and all the family. There’s
been columns and columns of description. I?
you were a king they could have said no
more. The name of Way back is now knowfr
throughout the length and breadth of Aus-
tralia, and the way you lost Tilly and
tracked her will never be forgotten. You’re
immortal, old man, and so is Barjo and all
of us, and we’re proud of you as our most
distinguished citizen, and if you’d like to go
in the Federal Parliament, say the word, and
in you go, hands down ! ”
“ An’ you say as my name was in ther
papers,” said Dads.
«
“ Yes ; the Sydney paper, ‘ The Sunday
Times,’ and every man that goes to Sydney
now with a sun-tauned face they call ‘ Dads ’
or ‘ Wayback,’ and all the girls in black
skirts, white blouses, and straw hats are
‘ Tilly.’ I tell you it’s the biggest boom
Barjo’s ever had, and I’ve put my advertising
rates up 50 per cent., and never a growl.
We’re proud of you, man, real proud.”
More joys came on the homeward journey.
.Tonas told how the brindle cow had calved
with strawberry twins, and the old sow had
nine new suckers, and the corn was
tasseling first-rate in the flat, and only
2


wanted rain. Mum’s three clutches of eggs
had hatched out with only five misses, and
the chicks were hearty and hungry. Jonas
had shot two gohannas that came after eggs,
and Blucher had killed a native cat. There
had been a fire in Murphy’s Bush, and his
roan mare had dropped dead in leading
harness. Cockran had got the contract for
the new road. Butcher had sold his place
for a song to Stubbins—taken to booze, folks
said. And so on, and so on. The news of
home and district was longer than the
journey. When the homestead came in sight
Aunt Lena was there, and Cousin Sophy,
with more news, more welcome, and more
high tea, and there was so much to see and
so much to tell that it was long after bush
hours, and nearly 9 o’clock at night, before
the Waybacks got to bed.
• .
“ Well, Mums,” said Dads, when the house
was quiet, “ I think ther best thing in goin’
away from home is ther cornin’ back. What
der yer say, old woman ? ”
“ What do I say ? Why, I wouldn’t swap
Bar jo and Dingo Flat fer all ther Sydneys in
ther world ! ”


THE WAYBACKS
AT HOME.
CHAPTER I.
What Came of an Advertisement
44 ■ HERE’S ther soda, where’s ther
111 blue, where’s ther soap ? ” de-
WP manded Tilly, with a huge
bundle of soiled linen in one hand and a
boiler in the other.
“ Why don’t you keep things in their
place ? It’s nothing but hunt, hunt, hunt,
directly anyone goes to do anything in this
house! ”
Then followed an immediate scramble in
the kitchen of the Wayback household for
the articles demanded, for it was the
great day of the week, the centre
of the solar system of bush life, round which
all other days revolve—it was washing day.
And it may be mentioned casually, as a fact
never sufficiently explained, that the amount
of soiled linen to be washed always seemed
to vastly exceed what could possibly have
been used.
Dads had long ago given the problem up.
“ Looks,” he would say, “as though we
was washin’ fer ther whole district; an’ ef
clean-ness lies next ter godliness, as folks
sez, I guess as how ther streets o’ Heaven
must be hung with clothes-lines both sides er
ther tracks.”
“ That’s right, Rube—that’s the soda ! But
how did it get under ther bag o’ potatoes ?
Now, who put it there, I should like to
know ? ” enquired Mums.
No one put it there. No one ever put any-
thing anywhere at Dingo Flat ; things when
done with just crawled away and hid them-
selves in the first hole—or so it always
appeared.
“ Now, look at that child, Mums ! ’’—spank,
spank, spank—“ Ain’t it enough to vex a
saint ?” cried Tilly, as her hand descended
on the wide part of Bubs’ pants.
That industrious infant, unnoticed by the
others, was as busy as a bee in a corn tassel;
he had found the blue bag, and, with the
instinct of his forebears, the ancient Britons,
was giving himself a coat of blue—his face,
hands, and legs being a beautiful study in
ultramarine.
“ Oh, bless ther child ! ” said Mums. “Why
didn’t one o’ yous look after him. You
might er known he was up ter mischief, he
was ser quiet.”
“ We’ll have ter take er new bar o’ soap,”
said Sarah .Tane, as she unwrapped that
article from a sheet of newspaper. “ But,
my word, here’s something good ! Here’s
all about er lovely murder in this yer paper.
Now, just listen,” and Sarah Jane mouthed
the words she read as though they were
lollies :
“ Frightful Tragedy in the East of
London—A Brutal Husband Cuts His
Wife’s Throat with a Razor—The Woman
Found Weltering in Her Gore—The
House a Shambles and Scene of Lurid
Horror—&c., &c.
These were the headlines of what Sarah Jane
read with slow deliberation as she followed


all the gruesome details down to the last
drop of blood, what time the listeners
absorbed the information Avith a delight only
equalled Avhen a pig Avas being killed.
But Sarah Jane, heedless of the ending of
her matter, continued reading :
yyANTED board and residence in the
country by a Sydney gentleman and his
two sisters. Must be quite in the bush,
and have good fishing and shooting. Terms
to X.Y.Z., G.P.O. >
“ Why, that’s the very thing to suit us,”
exclaimed Tilly, as she put down the boiler
smartly upon Euphemia’s toes. “If they
Avould only pay us what we paid in Sydney,
we shall get bags of money.”
“ And plenty more work,” said Sarah Jane.
“ And no end o’ washing,” added
Euphemia, rubbing her foot.
“ What’s the good o’ talking ? ” said Mums.
“ Wherever should we put ’em ? ”
“ Oh, Jabez could soon run up some more
rooms,” replied Tilly, growing more confident
in her scheme, as she was opposed. “ There’s
plenty o’ bark an’ slabs in ther bush, and if
folks Avants to come here, for goodness sake
let ’em. It’ll wake us up.”
In this simple Avay did an historic event
in the Wayback household take its origin ;
because somebody, or nobody, had mislaid
the soap, a neAv bar Avas taken by Sarah
Jane, the newspaper Avrapper contained an
account of a murder that caught her eye, the
murder led to the advertisement, and the
advertisement to a great family debate.
Dads washed his hands of the Avhole
matter.
Mums was neutral.
Jabez. conditionally that the first profits
out of the boarders were to buy him a new
saddle, agreed to erect tAVO lean-to rooms
according to specifications.
Sarah Jane and Euphemia, being assured
in confidence that the gentleman Avas sure
%
to be young and single, and quite probably
handsome and Avealthy, became Avildly
enthusiastic.
As the vote of the little ones did not count,
it was with a feeling of a triumphant dip-
lomat that Tilly sat down to write a reply
to " X.Y.Z., G.P.0.”
Tilly’s letter must have been acceptable,
for four days later a letter came to Dingo
Flat addressed with a strange handwriting,
and after all the family had stared at it,
read the post marks, and Bubs had started
to chew the stamp off, it was resolved to
open it
“ Mr. Gohighly presented his compli-
ments to Mr. and Mrs. Wayback, and was
pleased to accept the terms and accommo-
dation mentioned for himself and sisters for
the term of one month. The party hoped
to arrive by the morning train at Barjo one
week from date. And the missive concluded
—“ Yours faithfully, Horace F. Gohighly.”
“ Oh, crikey ! ” cried Jabez. “ Finish them
there shanties in er week ? Do yer think
I’m er steam tram with three ’bus horses
ter help me ? My Avord, but it’s er bit
sudden ! ”
“ In er week ! ” said Mums, “ why we shall
hardly have time to get half the things
we must have.”
“ What things ? ” enquired Dads, rather
alarmed. “ Seems ter me there’s plenty o’
tucker, an’ plenty o’ bush. What more does
ther folks want ? ”
“ Oh, that’s just like you ! ” said Mums.
“ Can’t yer see ther children must have new
clothes, there must be fresh furniture for
the house, and I don’t know how much table
and bed linen.”
“ Lord save us ! ” cried Dads. “ Didn’t
yous all get a new rig down in Sydney, and
ain’t ther furniture an’ ther rest of it always
been good enough fer us ? ”
“ Yes, but yer wouldn’t like strangers ter
see us as we are now, Avould yer ? ”
“ Why not ? Ef wes good enough fer
ourselves, ns wes think somethink of, why
not fer strange folks Ave don’t tare er bean
fer ? Now that’s what alius beats me—
this tittivatin’ up an’ makin’ yerselves dif-
ferent fer strangers, as though yer was
ashamed er yerselves, and as though them
as knowed yer didn't matter. I don’t hold


I
with this here pertendin’ ter be grand folk
•or summat different from what we are. An’
where’s ther profit coinin’ in, I should like
ter know, after all this yer spendin’ ?”
But the protests of Dads Avere over-ruled,
for Tilly had Mums and the girls to back
her. And .Tabez was silenced by being told
to get Tom ItaAVSon to help him. So Dads
took himself off to the ploughing down the
flat, and even had his meals sent to him
there, so that he might be out of the noise
and stir of house building, house furnishing,
and the general clean up and decoration that
took place immediately at Dingo Flat.
CHAPTER II.
Truly Rural.
It may be well to explain the origin of the ,
advertisement that caused such commotion
in the Wayback household.
Mr. Horace Plato Gohighly, who, with
commendable brevity, writes his name
Horace P. Gohighly, lived at Redfern with
his grown sister Palmira and baby sister
Ernestine. Palmira, or Pally, as she was
known for short, kept home in a terrace
house where the butcher and the milkman
called twice a day, the baker and John once,
and assorted hawkers every hour.
A big dog with an expansive mouth was
kept to receive the hawkers at the back
gate, the front door being kept on the
chain, so that the sewing machine man, the
book canvasser, and the life assurance
drummer could get no more than one foot
in the house at a time. Thus fortified
against exterior assault, Miss Gohighly pro-
ceeded undisturbed—except by a ring at the
bell, a knock at the door, or a cry of “ Any
bottle-oli, Mrs. ? ” from the back lane at
ten-minutes’ intervals—with her household
duties. These duties chiefly consisted in
lighting the gas stove and preparing the
daily meals.
To save the bother of thinking “ What
shall we have to-day ?” Miss Gohighly
had prepared a formula of thirty days’
rations, which, being repeated month
by month, saved a world of bother
*md contemplation. Now, when Horace
had loin chops for breakfast he knew,
without looking at the almanac, that
it was Monday, for leg chops fell on
Wednesday, and bacon and eggs on Sunday,
steaks on Tuesday, sausages Thursday, and
so on, and so on. It was a grand idea ;no
one in that house had to pause to think
what day of the week it was, they had only
to remember what they had for breakfast.
What they had for dinner fixed the day of
the month, whilst tea decided the mouth in
the year.
Mr. Gohighly was “ something in the
city” that swallowed him up every day from
nine till five. He counted himself a great
sportsman, had quite an armory of guns and
rifles picked up as bargains at sales, and
carefully saved and oiled for the time when
circumstances should allow him to invade
the jungles of the wild interior and shoot
the ferocious wallaby in his lair.
In the meantime, Horace P.G. had once
shot at a real wild duck in Botany swamps,
and almost hit it, whilst from the neighbor-
hood of North Head rocks he had landed a
tliree-foot flathead, which fish had been
stuffed and preserved in a glass case suit-
ably inscribed.
When Horace told Palmira that he had
a month’s holiday in prospect, and that they
were free to go somewhere for a change,
Palmira dropped the joint and spilled the
gravy over her apron, she was so pleased,


whilst Ernestine jumped all round the room
till she had knocked down two chairs and a
whatnot.
“ Wherever shall we go ? That’s the ques
tion. It’s always been Manly with us till
now. I’m sick o’ Manly—sixpennyworth of
sea, sand, and sun. But we can go fmrther
now, over the mountains or over the sea,
or right into the country, the wild, wild
bush, where all is Nature unadorned and the
hand of man nowhere appears.”
“ Why that is poetry, ain’t it, Pally ? ”
enquired Horace.
“Well, I saw something like it in a book,
but it’s quite true, and you knoAV what 1
mean. To get out of this smoke and noise,
to get the door-bell off my nerves, and th--
bottle-oh out of my ears, to live truly rural
under the lovely wattle trees—oh, it will be
just lovely ! ”
“ Oh, yes, let’s go in the bush ; right away
in the country where all the country things
come from. Only fancy how delightful it
will be to get up in the morning with the
sun, and wander out in the meadow to watch
the bets making honey, the grasshoppers
making grass, and the butterflies making
butter ”
“ Now, I say, Pally, what are you giving
us ? Don’t you know that butter is made
from buttercups by the butter cow, not the
milk cow—she eats grass. I have seen them
in the Domain.
“Oh, that’s the common butter, you stupid r
—cow butter. The good butter is made in/
a factory, and is always a penny a pound 4
more. But you know what I mean, Horace-
—l’d like to go to a truly country place—a
real farm—where the fowls don’t lay shop*
eggs ; where we could gather strawberries
off the straw and dewberries off the dew
“ Now, I say, Pally, draw it mild ! ” Per-
haps you want to gather pumpkins off the
pump ? ”
“ Well, why not ? You know what I mean.
How delicious it will be to picnic under the
wide spreading shade of the gum trees and
listen to the sweet notes of the goburra as
he merrily pipes his lay.
“ Yes,” said Horace, getting a word in at
last, “ I thought something like that would
suit us myself. It would do Ernestine a
world of good, and I own I should like to
have a bit o’ sport—perhaps gets the skins
for a few rugs—and I might teach the
bushies a wrinkle or two in the fishing line
that would open their eyes. You remember
that flathead I caught ? ”
“ Oh, yes, I remember.” As indeed Palmira
might, for she had heard the history of the
celebrated fish at least twice a week for the
past two years. “ You had best put an
advertisement in the paper, and it will be-
no end of fun to read the answers.”


CHAPTER III.
The Arrival.
The Sydney train drew up at the Barjo
platform, and some dozen travellers de-
scended, amongst them a lanky young man
in correct shooting costume—Norfolk jacket,
knickerbockers, gaiters, eyeglass, and glen-
garry. As he helped a lady and child to
follow him, an old gentleman, for all the
world like Father Christmas, pushed for-
ward and grasped him by the hand.
“ How does yer sonny—purty hearty now ?'
I s’pose yous be Mr. Gohighly, if I’m not
.mistook. An’ how be’s you, Miss ? ” And
Dads Wayback worked the bands of the new
arrivals as though they were levers to lift
up rock. “ How did yer leave ’em all at
home ? An’ this is ther little gal. How
are yer, my dear ? She don’t say much, do
she ? Thinks a lot. I’ll be bound. Won-
derful what kids think, ain’t it now ? ”
While he spoke without pause, Dads had
ushered the party out of the station to
where Tilly sat minding the horse and
buggy.
“ How about our baggage, Mr. Wayback ? ”
demanded Horace, with sudden recollection.
“ Was it on the platform ? ”
“ Oh. yes ! ”
“ Then Jabez’ll bring it along all right in
the spring cart. Never you worry yourself
about that; there’s no confidence men in
Barjo, nor even er bloke in ther district
what’s been to Fiji. Now yous all just
jump up, an’ we’ll be home to Dingo Flat in
er brace o’ shakes.”
As they drove through the town Dads
considered it his duty to act as guide to the
new arrivals.
“ Now I don’t s’pose as Barjo will strike
yers fer size after Sydney ; but ther
quality’s all here, an’ no mistake. Why yer
pays ten bob in ther pound more for every-
thin’, and that talks, don’t it ? That there’s
the Church o’ England ; tlier’s ther Roman,
ther’s ther Methody, and ther’s the gaol. An’
] will say this, they all runs their business
sociable like, an' there ain’t no ill-feeling.
That’s Dan Ryan’s pub. If yer ever want
er nip o’ real good stuff, he’s yer man. Yers
can feel it all over yer like Tectricity.”
While Dads was discoursing to Horace on
the front seat, Tilly had foregathered with
Miss Gohighly on the back. As for Ernes-
tine, she was content to listen with ears,
eyes, and mouth as though spellbound. Pal-
mira was busy explaining to Tilly how to
cut a bodice without a seam down the
back, and illustrating her meaning by
drawing imaginary diagrams with her finger
on Horace’s back.
“Now hold tight, all yers ! ” shouted Dads.
“ We’re cornin’ to ’er place where it’s jest
er little bit rough.”
“oh my ! ” “ Help ! ” “ Lord save us ! ”
“ Stop him ! ” “ Oh, did you ever ! ” “ I’ll
be out ! ” “ Hold me—l’m over ! ” “ We’ll
all turn over ! ” “ Why don’t he stop ? ”
These were a few of the exclamations that
burst from the affrighted Gohighlys as Dads
sent the buggy at a spanking trot over a
half-mile of track, bumpy with rocks,
boulders, and ruts. The buggy, acting as a
springboard, sent the party flying up and
down as though they were momentarily
about to take wing.
“ That track do want er bit o’ mending,”
said Dads when they had drawn on the
smooth once more. “ I was speakin ter
ther road super, about it oney last year.” *
“ Now, what’s that ? ” cried Horace, as- lrf
pulled his eyeglass from his eye to -sko*
clearly, at the same time pointing to a>ttttle
animal running across the track.
“ That’s said Dads.


“ Oh, I say—what a pity I’ve not got my
gun ! But hoAv do you knoAV he Avas bandy ?
He seemed to me to run all right.”
“ All them animiles is bandy—it’s the
nature of ’em—an’ real good they is ter eat
with er pumpkin an’ er feAV cobbler’s pegs.”
“ Oh I say ! You don’t eat wood, do you ?”
“ Cobbler’s pegs is A r egetables. an’ not too
bad at that, I tell yers, when ther grubs ’as
ate all ther cabbages. But here Ave are—
here’s ther old home. Welcome ter Dingo
Flat, all o’ yous, an' come in an’ have er
sup o’ tea.”
The Gohiglilys, stepping from the buggy,
found themselves welcomed by Mrs. Way-
back with motherly effusion, while what,
seemed to them hundreds of eyes gleamed
on them from nooks and crannies, from
behind slabs and doors and stumps and sheds-
where the general household had hidden
itself in bashfulness.
That night Sarah Jane asked Jabez :
“ What do you think of ’em ? ”
“ She’s er proper sort o’ gal an’ no mis-
take,” replied Jabez.
Eupliemia whispered to Tilly : “ I suppose
you will want to grab HIM like you do all
of them ? ”
Tilly tossed her head, but she did not ask
who was meant by “ HIM.”
CHAPTER IV.
The Waybacks at Home.
“ Come in an’ sit ye doAvn—come in an’ sit
ye doAvn,” said Mums, as she ushered her
guests into the dining-room Avhere tea AA'as
waiting.
This room, like others in the building, was
slab-walled, and its calico ceiling bagged
doAA-n with the Aveight of neAv whitewash.
There was a long table spread for a meal,
a roAV of stools on each side, with three
bright neAv chairs for the visitors. The small
square windows, bare of glass, had hinged
doors. noAv fastened back. The fireplace, the
size of a servant’s bedroom, had been
specially decorated with tree boughs,
flowers, and ferns.
Old Dads had seated himself at the head
of the table, smiling and chortling like a
he-goat that had found a sardine-tin. The
family ranged to places, the girls on one
side the boys on the other. A helping
was already on the plates.
Palmira examined cautiously the little
mountain of provisions provided for her—a
foundation of corned beef a quarter of an
inch thick, a damp course of bacon in lap-
ping slices of pink and white, with a layer
of pumpkin, of turnips, and sweet potatoes
the whole roofed Avith baked tomatoes. For
the moment Palmira wondered if this AA’as
her allowance for the AA r eek. and while she
Avondered, Sarah Jane had to ask her twice
if she would take tea ; not that Sarah Jane
doubted, for she had already raised a teapot
the size of a watering-can and filled her cup.
“ Now,” said Dads, who had been talking
all the time, “ef yous is all sarved down
there, yer can unbuckle yer belts an’ wire
in.”
As Horace carefully prospected the con-
tract before him, he could not help admiring
the vigor and energy of the Wayback
family, as, without pause, they kept both
sides of their mouths going by vigorous
stoking with both knife and fork.
Eupliemia sat facing Horace. At first he
had been struck with her youthful charms,
but now, as the big lumps of fat bacon dis-
appeared between her rosy lips, he was
affected in quite another way.
For a feAV minutes there was no sound but


that of mastication, till Dads, feeling it
incumbent upon himself to be sociable, and
keep the conversation going, broke the
silence.
“ Now, yous’ll find that ere er nice bit
•o’ pork, if I’m not mistook. It’s Stumpy-
tail, that’s wliat it is ; she were as good er
sow as ever farrowed, but alius eatin her
young uus, so I sez ter Mums we’ll just
fatten her up fer bacon. So we gives her
plenty o’ pumpkin an’ melons an’ ther like
o’ that, an’ then tops her off with oranges.
That’s ther oranges what gives her that
lovely yaller color an’ makes her extra
prime. Have er bit more, Mister ?”
But Horace’s appetite for pork had'
suddenly slumped in spite of the tempting
“ yaller ” color, and lie put off a fresh help-
ing as premature. He began to realise that
a knowledge of the biography of the joint
before you is not always an advantage.
It was strange to note that when the
Oohighlys spoke, every jaw paused in its
motion, and their mouths opened in listening
-expectation, showing portions of food supply
on the way to their last resting place.
The most casual remark by the visitors
gained an all-round chuckle and laugh as
at something very funny indeed. Horace
began to feel himself quite a humorist.
The speedy methods of the Waybaks at
the meal table left the Goliighlys far behind.
The family were already scraping their
plates with their knife points when the
visitors had made only a preliminary attack.
Poor Palmira fairly shuddered at the moun-
tain yet before her ; but a friend was at
hand she little dreamt of. As she raised
her eyes to reply to one of Dads’ questions,
a little black paw darting under her arm
grabbed her meat and much of the vege-
tables, and as quickly withdrew.
“ Oh, that dreadful child ! Look what he’s
•done now, Mums ! ” cried Tilly.,
It was indeed Bubs, who had now
retreated with his spoil under the dark
recesses of the table.
“ I’ll warm his hide ! I’ll tan his skin !
Ther young dingo ! ” cried Dads, taking off
liis belt with a flourish and lashing under
the table.
Dads hit. But it was Rube that howled,
for the strap had caught him on the soft
part of the leg. Yet presently Bubs howled
louder still, for Blutcher, the dog, had
relieved him of his gains, and, quicker with
his teeth than even the Waybacks them-
selves, was already licking his chops, as
though he found the bacon excellent.
Palmira, having declined a fresh helping,
cakes and pies were handed round. Bubs
was hauled by a leg from his refuge, and
publicly spanked, then coaxed with an extra
large piece of tart to be a good boy. Bubs
accepted the tart provisionally, reserving all
rights as to his future conduct.
Once more the two-handled teapot circled
round the room. Those who wanted sugar
reached their spoons over the heads and
backs of those between them and the sugar
basin. It saved time and trouble passing
the bowl, though it is true a little sugar got
spilt in the process, Horace, who had sud-
denly bobbed up his head, getting a good
measure down the back of his neck, so that
his spine was sticky and gritty for the rest
of the evening.
The girls waited at table—Tilly served
meat, Sarah Jane tea, and Euphemia vege-
tables. But when the cakes came on, the
division of work was less defined —each one
brought from the safe just what was
handiest, or so it appeared. Yet it might
have been noted that Tilly, from her armful
of dishes, placed a plate of tart just in front
of Horace, giving him a smile at the time
of particular fascination. A moment later
and Sarah Jane placed another tart in front
of the male guest, and her hand was hardly
removed before Euphemia had deposited yet
another tart in the crowded space.
“ Will yers take er little tart ? ”
Horace little knew, little dreamt, as his
hand stretched doubtfully forward, how
much hung on his choice, or how eagerly
three pairs of feminine eyes were watching
him. The mystery of the tarts must be
explained. That morning, when the girls


were making pastry and talking sweet-
hearts an inspiration had flashed into
Euphemia’s brain.
“ Now, we can’t all have him, yer know, an’
we’ll just spoil him ef we all try. Now let’s
each make er tart an’ give him, an’ ther one
he takes fust has fust show.”
“ What foolery,” said Tilly.
“ That’s what yer always say when we
wants er show,” retorted Sarah Jane.
Then followed a wordy squabble, finally
settled by majority vote, when it was jointly,
and severally, agreed that Tilly should make
a tomato and apple tart ; Sarah Jane a
loquat; and Euphemia a lemon and water-
melon—the lucky victor to have a clear field
and the help of her sisters.
Arrangements not in the contract were
also concluded before the tarts were placed
in the oven—Sarah Jane made a true-lover’s
knot, in paste, for the middle of her tart ;
Euphemia tied a long golden hair from her
head round her dish ; while Tilly, disdaining
such crude charms, merely kissed the spoon
she ladled out the jam with. Thus were the
three traps baited, and great was the anxiety
of the watchers as the critical moment ar-
rived.
“ Will yers take er little tart ? ”
Horace’s hesitating hand wandered for »
fateful moment over the luscious red con-
serve of tomatoes, the richer red of loquats,
and the golden glory of water-melon, and—
yes ! —there could be no mistake —Euphemia’s.
smile proclaimed the victory, the water-
melon had won !
But this incident was closed suddenly by a
yell and a shriek from the previously silent
Ernestine.
“ Whatever is the matter, Ernie ? ” cried,
the alarmed Palmira.
“ Someone pricked me in the leg—pricked;
me awful ! ” cried Ernestine, pulling up that
member and holding it with both hands.
“ Now, who did that, I should like ter
know ? ” shouted Dads in a voice full of pro-
mise of the vengeance to come. One glance-
round the table told the tale—Rube’s place
was empty !
“ Come but o’ that, yer young vagabond !
What der yer mean by it ? ” for, less alert
than Bubs, Rube had been hauled forth by
the ear from beneath the table. “ Watcher
go to do it fer now ? ”
“ Jabe sez as she warn’t alive, but was-
worked with ’sheenery, an’ I only put er pin
half way up ter see. Booh ! booh ! booh ! ”
CHAPTER V.
In the Watches of the Night.
Mums conducted the visitors to their bed-
rooms by way of the outside verandah, on
which they opened. These rooms had be-
longed to the boys and girls, now shifted to
Jabez’s new additions.
“Be keerful how r yers treads, mister. Yer
see ther white arnts ’as ate holes in ther
floors, an’ ther more we kivers ther holes
with tin ther more they eats. So’s ef yer
foot goes through sometimes don’t yer taise
no notice.”
When Palmira had put Ernestine to bed'
she paused in her own undressing to consider
the novelty of her surroundings. The room,
was very clean, and quaint, and neat, with
its vast wooden four-poster, its bed half-way
up to the low ceiling, and draped with,
mosquito net ; and the muslin-covered toilet
table, made gay with ribbons and flowers.
The prospect pleased with its novelty, and
brightened Palmira’s face as she gazed at
herself in the mirror during the leisurely


runrobing. It was a pretty, fair face she saw,
with merry eyes that laughed back at her.
That eldest son, Jabez—what a pity his
name was Jabez—was really a fine-looking
young fellow, so tall and straight; she felt
sure, positive, she had made an impression.
It would be delightful to be a farmer’s wife.
She had always raved of the country ; now
was her chance, and she would be careful
to show that she knew something about it,
too.
Thus communing with herself, Palmira had
•come to the end of her undressing, when she
caught a mutter of voices, and one sharp
treble whispering distinctly :
“My word ! She’s got things on jest,
like ”
“ Who could it be? What could it mean ? ”
Looking hastily about in the direction of the
sound, she realised the truth. A hole had
been made in the slab and paper partition,
.and the small boy they called Rube had been
watching her. She recognised his voice.
Hastily covering the peep-hole with a skirt
hung over a chair, she blew out the light and
jumped into bed. But not to sleep, for the
novelty of the situation and the moving
•events of the day had stirred her mind to
exceptional activity. And as she lay there,
thinking and listening, she could hear, one by
•one, the family retiring to rest.
The construction of the house, with its
•calico ceilings and slab partitions, made the
lightest sound audible to every part. Bach
word spoken was as though uttered in her
•own room. She heard the girls whispering as
they undressed, telling by their movements
and the souuds of putting down and hanging
up, how far they had got in their night
toilette. She noted the more speedy boys—
a bang on the floor of unfastened boots, a
swish of a cast garment, then the final flop
and bang as they fell into bed. Next, the
voices of the old people in the room beside
.her own.
“Is ther fire safe, Mums ? ”
“ Did yer shut out ther cat, Dads ? She’ll
:get ter that cream as sure as yer alive.”
Palmira thought she would never sleep as
she turned from side to side in that vast
feather bed, with the ’possum skin coverlid.
Her eyes would not close ; but later on they
must have done so, for at some time in the
night, she could not tell the hour, she awoke
from sleep with a frightened start. What
was that sound she heard ? What could it
be ?
There came the noise again—frightful
groans and moanings, a gasping sigh, a
choking gurgling in the throat, then more
groans, like the bitter agony of the dying in
the last extremity.
Dreadful doubts flashed through Palmira’s
mind, recollections of Deeming’s liorroi’s and
countless mysterious bush murders she had
read of. Was there not the case of travellers
who were killed in their beds at the lonely
bush hotel ? The groans continued, ac-
companied by a frightful gurgling sound that
—agonising thought—must come fi*om her
poor deluded brother—trapped and stabbed,
and -weltering in his gore. She could con-
tain herself no longer. She screamed, she
shrieked, as she sprang from the bed.
“ Murder ! Plelp ! Help ! ”
At once there was a commotion in the
house, a scurrying and tramping of feet.
Palmira realised that her turn had come, and
fell fainting and nerveless to the floor.
“ Whatever is the matter, Miss Gohighly ?”
It was Tilly, who, half dressed, had entered
the room with a lighted candle.
“ Oh, Miss Wayback, have pity on me—
they are murdering him—my poor, dear
Horace. Listen ! ”
“ Well, I never ! ” and Tilly started to
laugh so loudly that she could hardly make
herself understood. “ That’s Dads snoring !”
“ Mums ! ” Tilly shouted.
“ What’s ther matter, child ? ” enquired
Mums in a sleepy voice, after she had been
called three several times. “Is that native
cat after ther fowls agen ? Tell Jabez ter
take er gun, quick ! ”
“ No, it’s Dads snoring ! Turn him on his
side. He’s frightened Miss Gohighly and
woke her up.”
“ You see how it is,” said Tilly, now ad


dressing the abashed and reassured Palmira,
“ Dads always makes that row when he
sleeps on his back. You just knock on the
wall to Mums if ever he does it again.”
When the morning came the Gohighlys
were taken round the farm buildings on a
tour of inspection. Palmira grew quite
ecstatic in her exclamations and enquiries
at all the novelties presented ; every other
moment she had to call to her brother to see
the wonders and hear the information she
had gleaned.
“ Horace, dear ! Only fancy ! Black hens
lay white eggs !—Oh, the darling little
things ! And do all those chickens come out
of eggs, Miss Wayback ? ”
“ Of course they do, Pally ! ” said Horace.
“ How dreadful ! ”
“ What’s dreadful ? ”
“ Just think of all the poultry we’ve eaten
—the farms and farms of happy, merry birds
who will chirp no more ! One egg a day—
that’s three hundred and sixty-five chickens
a year, you know, and seven thousand three
hundred in twenty years. I feel like a
cannibal. I declare I'll never be able to look
a hen in the face again.”
It will be seen that Palmira had a turn for
mathematics ; she had also the love of order
and thrift.
“ Oh. the poor dears, how can you ? ”
Palmira was appealing to Tilly at the sight
of some half-feathered Orpingtons.
“ What’s the matter ? ” enquired Tilly.
“ Why don’t you put nice warm jackets on
those poor things—jackets on the gentleman
hens, you know, and petticoats on the lady
hens. They are not decent, now are they
really ? And I’m sure they must be cold and
hungry ! How they cry out ! Do you feed
them with a spoon or a bottle ? And are
those the little pigs you make pork with ?
Holkce. dear ! Only fancy ! All the pigs
have waistcoat buttons down their chests ! ”
“ Miss Wayback,” Palmira whispered very
softly, “ liow is it all the little pigs have such
sweet little curls in their tails ? Do you put
them in fringe pins or curl papers ? ”
“ And that’s a bacon pig ! Is it really ?
It looks just like the others. But I under-
stand. I see—all his food is mixed up.
That’s what makes him streaky, doesn't it
now ? ”
“Horace, dear, come and see the streaky
bacon pig and I’ll tell you how he does it."
Ernestine, busy sucking some lollies that
Tilly had given her, had lingered behind her
sister, and Rube saw his opportunity. It had
been impressed upon him by his mother that
he must make friends with the little
stranger, so like a good boy, he started to
follow instructions.
“ Hullo, Fatty ! How yer poppin’ up ?’’
“ I’m not Fatty ! Go away, you nasty,
rude boy ! My name’s Miss Ernestine Maud
Gohiglily—so there !’’
“ How der yer spell it ? ’’
“ I won't tell you. you nasty, rude boy.”
“ Give me some of yer lollies an’ I’ll show
yer my blue pigeons—such beauties, by
cripes ! ”
“Go away, nasty, rude boy ! I won’t speak
to you r ”
“ Yer might give us er suck, yer know—
I’ll give it yer back, honor bright ! I tell
yer what—you give me three big lollies and
I’ll show yer my sore leg.”
At this proposal Ernestine’s resolve of
strict reserve evidently wavered.
“ Is it awfully bad, rude boy ? ”
“My word ! It’s all green, an’ blue, an’
yaller where Dads clipped me with ther belt.
Now give me two lollies an’ I’ll pull the rag
off and make it bleed.”
The offer was irresistible, the bargain was
concluded, and friendliness progressed so
rapidly that they were soon seated together
behind the cart-shed finishing the last of the
lollies together.
“ Let me have a suck o’ yours an’ I'll let
yer have er suck o’ mine.”
“ Well, promise you’ll give it back then.”
So was sweet peace restored.


CHAPTER VI.
First Bush Journey.
Though Mr. Gohighly was taken round lo
see the farm sights by Dads, given a
biography of all the stock and a history of
every clearing, he was far from showing the
same enthusiastic attention as his sister.
His mind dwelt on other matters. He was
thinking of sport more than agriculture, and
the relative values of a shorthorn or a Jersey
at the milking pails, or their fattening
qualities for the butcher, found him unap-
preciative. Dads could not understand how
any one could see his Berkshires, his stand-
ing corn of Yellow Hogan, or his new Spading
harrow, and not express envious approval.
But he had reserved his chief treasure, the
pride and glory of Dingo Flat, till the last ;
and it was with a kind of preliminary hush,
as though he was leading the way to a holy
of holies, that he opened the stable door of
the Clydesdale mare.
“ Now, Mister,” says Dads, as he waved his
hand with pride, “ain’t she er clinker, ain’t
she er beauty ? Like ther side of er house.
Look at ther bone and substance, an’ the
breedin’. She is er real X.A.L. mare, she is,
by the Devil out o’ Purgatory, who was by
Hell Fire out o’ Brimstone (imported) by
Yellow Imp out o’ Blue Smoke, by Sulphur
from Sheet Lightning, champion o’ the world.
Look how she stan’s—square as a barn—yers
could run er wheelbarrer through er front
legs ”
“ But what would you do that for ? ”
enquired Horace, trying to rise to the
occasion. “ Oh, I see, very handy, of course ;
it would keep the barrow out of the wet ! ”
“Well, I’ll be jiggered,” muttered Dads, “ ef
that don’t beat all ! I’m thinkin’ yer sister be
callin’ yer, Mister.”
Horace was only too glad to escape, for
ever since his arrival on the previous evening
he had been planning an excursion into the
bush on a solitary shooting expedition. The
lowest depths of his romantic nature were
stirred at the thought of going alone into the
vast forest of timber and scrub with no
protection but his trusty rifle, to confront the
herds of wild animals concealed there. Mr.
Wayback had said “ Ther bush is jest chock
er block with game.” What wonder then
that Horace’s soul was impatient, that lie
hungered to try again some of those quick
snapshots by one of which he had so nearly
shot the duck at Botany.
The greater part of the night he had
pondered as to what armament he should
carry. A double-barrelled shot-gun and a
Winchester rifle appeared most suitable.
With the gun he could bring down small
game, while the l’ifle would be necessary for
kangaroos, wallaroos, and wombats. On the
other hand, two guns without a bearer would
be awkward ; one would have to be slung at
his back ; and it might happen that when he
met a kangaroo he would be holding the
shot-gun, and a rabbit was bound to turn up
if he carried the Winchester. Fortunately,
amongst his collection of arms he had a
combination piece—one barrel rifled, the
other 12-bore, a gun that he was assured by
the vendor had been specially built for an
explorer. It is true that it was a ti'ifle
heavy, some 121 b or so, but Horace, blessing
his own forethought, shouldered it manfully,
and. having close filled his bandolier and
fastened on a game bag of ample proportions,
lie sallied from his room unobserved, and,
crossing the home paddock, climbed the rails
at a run, and, with two strides, was hidden
in the bush.


“At last! ”
He drew a long breath of content ; the
moment he had so often pictured had come ;
the blood danced in his veins, and he strode
forward with a cry of delight. Yet, with a
true sporting instinct, strengthened by read-
ing much literature on the subject, he was
careful to tread lightly and to hide his
advance by creeping as much as possible
from tree to tree. He glanced about with
knowing eyes, raising the gun from time to
time to his shoulder so as to get the swing of
it Looking along the barrel he would close
one eye, and take an imaginary sight at
imaginary game in the distance.
His plan of campaign had been carefully
formed ; he would walk straight forward for
a mile or more towards the sun, then, when
he had killed a score or so of game, return
with the sun at his back. This plan would
prevent his being bushed, and enable him to
retrace his steps later, with the cart to carry
home his heavier prizes. He resolved not to
kill more than a score at first, as it would be
wiser to nurse the stock of game in the
vicinity till the end of his visit.
Horace tramped on and on, his gun getting
every moment heavier and heavier, till he
could have sworn it was a cannon he carried
*
on his shoulder. He looked about this way
and that for a sight of fleeing game ; listened
for the scurry of feet or the flutter of wings,
He searched above in the ironbarks and
gums, pushed his way through the under-
scrub of sally bushes, thorn trees, and
Wattle ; but not a sign of life was to be seen
or heard save the hum of insects, and the
croak of a solitary magpie.
It was very strange—more than strange—
where could all the bush creatures have
gone ? The loneliness recalled to him
Sydney streets on a Sunday morning. Had
old Wayback deluded him ? He began to
feel very angry and very hot, for the sun
scorched down as though its furnace door
had dropped off. He struggled on auother
mile ; his hands very busy keeping off the
flies, which in hundreds—nay, millions !—got
in his eyes, nose, and ears with a persistence
not to be denied. Ah, if they had only been
wallabies, what a bag he could have made !
At last he turned back, hopeful that on the
home journey the wind that had perhaps
warned the game of his coming would now
be in his favor. But his luck was out; not
a tail did he see to try his maiden shot on,
so he tramped on wearily till the fence of the
home paddock came in view again. He was
within ten paces of the fence when a clatter-
ing noise sounded right under his feet, the
rushing, crushing, blundering tread of some
big animal. Horace gave a mighty jump as
his whole body trembled with excitement,
the gun dropped from his hands, and he
expected each moment to have claws or
fangs tearing at his throat. Fearful to move,
he stood stock still, and now perceived a
huge crawling creature circling round him.
Instinctively he crept behind a stump and
crouched there, determined to sell his life
dearly. The creature that he had not
ceased to watch, sprang on the fence to a top
rail, and lay extended from post to post.
Horace, as his fascinated gaze clung to the
creature’s every movement, had now no
doubt that his enemy was an alligator
of the most ferocious kind. A cold
sweat ran down his back, the clammy,
malignant eyes of the reptile chilled
him through and through. Before that
awful mouth and those formidable
claws he felt utterly powerless. When
would it spring and make an end of
him ? He thought of the mouse in the paws
of the cat, spared only to make sport. 01),
why—oh, why—had he ever left the safe
haven of George-street West to foolishly
venture in the wild, wild bush ? Fool ’
Fool ! that he was ! But he was not afraid ;
oh, no—he felt his trembling limbs to make
quite sure—and he would not sacrifice his life
if courage and cunning would aid his escape.
To retreat would invite pursuit; to rush for
his gun invite an immediate spring from the
creature : besides, he remembered reading
that the skin of the alligator would turn any
bullet. But he remembered also reading
of the dominating power of the human eye ;


how in the jungles of Africa it had kept
lions and tigers at bay. Now, he felt, was
a moment to try its effect.
Horace stared fixedly at the long yellowish
green beast, shuddering the while at its claw-
like hands, huge pudding body, and malig-
nant eyes of black ice. As he looked, two
gaudy kingfishers made a flying dive at the
reptile’s head, pecking it with their long
beaks as they passed. The beast as suddenly
snapped open jaws like a dingo trap and
darted out a yard of tongue. Horace felt
sick in the stomach, and was quite sure
there must be something wrong with the
mesmerising theory. “ Oh, I say ! ” he cried
aloud in his distress, “ if I could only see a
policeman I’d give the brute in charge ! ”
While the reptile and the man thus gazed
at each other, the stray poultry pecking in
the paddock started the cackle of alarm,
which roused Mums, in the kitchen, to sing
out to Rube :
“Go and see what’s after them there
fowls ! ”
“My word, he’s a wopper, all right! ”
shouted Rube, as his quick eye sighted the
reptile on the fence, and only pausing to fill
his hands with stones, he raced across the
paddock, and with one well-aimed rock sent
the beast flying half-way to Horace’s stump.
That gentleman started to run, and, in blind
eagerness, took a course that headed off the
rushing beast.
“That’s it, Mister ; you’ve got him ! Jumn
on him, jump on him, an’ hold him till I
come ! ”
The bothered reptile ran up a small
sapling.
“ Now we’s got him, Mister ; yous get er
big stick to lay him out when I knock him
down with ther caterpult.”
Horace, feeling his courage rise, seized a
stick, and when the beast was once more on
the ground, managed to hit it one blow out
of three, Rube finishing the slaughter by
jumping on the creature and hammering its.
head with a rock.
CHAPTER VII.
Dad's Gun.
“ So yer’s got er goanna, Mister ! ” said
Dads, as Horace, followed by Rube, holding
the reptile’s tail, arrived at the house.
They bees alius round the place huntin’
after eggs and chicks. He’s a fair-sized ’un,
too, but only er baby ter ther one me an’ Sid
Harkus shot at his place—you’ve heerd tell
o’ Harkus, o’ course. We found ther leg bone
of er year-old calf in him, and he was welted
with yaller fat. We must er got over three
gallons o’ hile out o’ that there fat. Most
wonderfullest stuff that there go’ hile. I call
ter mind how Bill Harpur—you might er
known Bill—put some go’ hile on his cart
axles just ter ’speriment loike, an’ when he
started her, my word she did go ! Bill
reckons he could er beat ther Sydney train
easy ; but I’m jiggered ef he could pull her
up—no, not fer sixty mile, when they come
slap agin er mountain. Yer see that there
blamed bile pushed ther hoes and cart all by
itself, it were that powerful, or that’s what
Bill swore in ther court, fer, yer see, that
there hoss belonged ter Tom Saunders—
maybe yer knew Tom—an’ they thought as
how Bill had shook him. Anyways, Bill got
six months, an’ I’ve been sort o’ skeery o’
go’ hile ever since.”
“ I’ve taken a walk round the bush,” said
Horace, “ and I don’t see much game, Mr.
Wayback. I thought there was lots of it.”
“ So there is, Mister, whips o’ it, ther bush
fair stinks with ’um ; but yer never sees
nothin’, not to speak #f, in ther day time.


They’s all in camp er chewin’ over, silent
like, all my barley as they’s eaten in ther
night. Ef so be as yer wants er bit o’
shootin’, we’ll go huntin’ ter-morrer mornin’
an’ I’ll take ther dorgs—l’m counted ter have
ther best pack o’ dorgs in these parts.”
“ Dogs ? ” said Horace. “ I’ve only seen
one.”
“ I’ll show yers. Here, Blutcher, Rube,
Delia ! ” Bark up ! ” sang out Dads.
Immediately there was a commotion round
the house—Blutcher yelped, while Rube and
Delia ran through the scrub crying “ Hosh,
bosh, hosh ! ” like true hounds on a fresh
scent. Delia, especially, sounded a musical
note like a beagle with its foot caught in a
log.
“ Now, don’t she do it natural ? ” cried
Dads, delighted ; “ beats ther dorg holler.
She’s a real gen’us, that gel ; comes natural,
too ; she ain’t had no teachin’—not er teach !
Mighty strange how cleverness comes in
folk when yer comes ter think o’ it. Now,
some’s clever at singin’, like that gel ; some
at talkin’, like me ; an’ some’s got er talent
for keepin’ their mouth shet up so that ail
they knows soaks an’ soaks in their insides
till they gets that clever they busts.”
“ Now, I’ll jest show yer my gun,” said
Dads, going to the kitchen, and taking down
an old smooth-bore rifle from its hooks under
the bark roof. “ I allows he ain’t much ter
look at ; but lie’s er fair devil ter kill when
he gets goin\ I don’t cotton ter these ere
breech loaders, as they call ’em—sort er
breaks in two, an’ yer loads ’em at ther
wrong end. Now, I put it to yous, as a man
o’ sense : Ef yous was goin’ er new track
wouldn’t yers go straighter ef yer knew ther
way—ef yer’d been there afore ? Now it
’pears ter me as Avhen yer puts ther shot an’
powder down ther barrel fust, it’s more like
ter know ther track out agen. It .stands ter
reason, don’t it now ? ”
“ The gun appears cracked at the breech,”
said Horace as he examined the ancient
weapon.
“So she be—she busted when I was er
kiddy, and me Dad mistook an’ put three
charges in her—but that sort o’ eased her,
give her her bearin’s, as yer might say. We
fills ther crack with solder an’ makes her
fast with greenhide, an’ now I calls her
4 Ther Old Reliable.’ I don’t say she ain’t
er bit slow in goin’ off ; she don’t like yer
sudden shootin’ —takes her time fer er
minnit er two ; but when she do go pop, my
word she lets yer know it. Why, I’ve
knowed her knock me back’ards six foot.
That talks what she can do. All yer wants
%
is ter rest her nose in er forked stick, squint
erlong ther barrel, then aim three feet ter
ther right, an’ she plugs him every time—my
word ! ”
CHAPTER VIII.
The Hunt.
“ Get up Mister ; breakfast’s ready.”
“ What’s the matter ? What’s the
matter ?” Horace rubbed his eyes as Jabez
shook and called him in what seemed to be
the middle of the night. “ Why, I’ve only
just gone to sleep ! ”
“ I thought as how you was goin’ huntin’
with us ? ”
“ Oh, yes ! ” said Horace, as he sprang out
of bed. “of course I am ; but this is very
early—only 3 o’clock by my watch—and 't
looks as black outside as an ink-pot.”
“It will be light enough time we gets
there,” said Jabez.
They had breakfast by candle-light.
Everyone was up and about, for it was only


an hour before the usual rising time. The
party ate their meal hastily, and, going out
took their way for several miles through
thick bush, underscrub, and, what looked to
Horace, impenetrable darkness. But the
journey was not silent—Jabez bellowed a
song, Rube and Delia practised preliminary
dog hoots, and Dads, to make himself heard,
had to shout out his anecdotes.
It was days later, and when he had
accompanied another riotous journey in the
dark, that Horace learned from Rube the
reason of the racket.
“ Yer see, it’s this way, Mister. There bees
all sorts o’ things in tlier bush at night--
snakes, an’ ghosties, an’ tlier bunyip. Wqs
not ter say ’feared of ’em ; but, yer see, we’s
likes ter tell ’em we’s cornin’,”
How far they had come, Horace could not
have told, when they stood on the edge of a
vast sea of blackness—a great cavity in the
earth, with no apparent bottom.
“ Here we are ! ” cried Dads. “ Now, you
dorgs, jest clear along tlier ridge like yous
have before, an’ when tlier sky gets greeny
like, all start together. Come along, Mister.”
For half a mile the three men descended
the zig-zag cattle track on the face of the
gully, feeling their way with their feet.
When they came to the bottom, the first
grey light of morning showed them a narrow
grassy flat that spread into paddocks and
narrowed into lanes as the sides of the gully
opened and closed. At the first of these
narrow places Dads stationed Horace.
“ Now, yous hide behind that rock, Mister,
an’ wait till ther dorgs bark, an’ ef yer don’t
see more game than ever yer see in yer life,
yer 11 have ter shut yer eyes. Me an’ Jabez
’nil go er bit furder an’ take second shot at
’em.”
•••••«
Left alone, Horace found it cold, shivery,
and dark ; blit liis hunter’s heart was brave
and warm ; lie took exercise sights along his
gun at imaginary game in the darkness, and
stamped in his shoes to warm his toes.
Yet he had not long to wait, for already the
grey light in the sky had spread, and, one by
one, the stars were putting up their shutters.
Suddenly the barking of the dogs came ring-
ing down the valley, the deep bass note of
Blutclier, the alto howl of Rube, and the soft
soprano yelp of Delia. It was a musical
treat that only the tuned ears of the true
sportsman could fully appreciate.
Nearer and nearer the cries came, echoing
and re-echoing in the morning stillness, and
each moment the darkness lifted and melted
away.
“ Now they will be coming !” said Horace
to himself as he braced his eyeglass in
place and stood with his gun at “ the ready ”
so as to lose no time.
At that moment, there came a sudden,
thundering noise behind him, smashing
through the scrub ; sounding as though some
heavy cart-horse had broken from its dray
and was playing hopscotch down the hill.
“ Oh, 1 say ! ” cried Horace. “ Whatever
can that be ?—it will frighten all the game.”
As he turned to look about, his eyeglass
jumped from its place with astonishment.
To his excited gaze there appeared a moving
black mountain, twelve feet high, more or
less, coming directly towards him in vast
leaps and bounds. So close was the creature
that, seeing Horace, it had no time to turn
aside, and, with one gigantic spring, leapt
right over him and the rock at his side. By
raising his hand, Horace could have grasped
the long tail that streamed behind, but for
tlie moment he was paralysed with astonish-
ment. The game was not to have come that
way—it was quite an unfair proceeding. Yet
Horace rapidly recovered his first shock, and,
raising his gun, pulled the trigger. No re-
port ! Pulled the other trigger. No report!
Looked at his gun. Damnation ! he had for-
gotten to cock the hammers.
By this time the game had almost dis-
appeared. and Horace, mad with excitement,
rushed after it, shouting as he waved his
gun : “ Oh, I say, stop ! stop ! Wait till I
cock my gun ! ”
Did yer get him, Mister ? ” It was Rube,
who, panting with running, and still yelping,
met Horace on bis disconsolate return to his


place. “ I see er old man wallaroo come this
way.”
“ No,” said Horace ; “he was a bit too
sudden ; but I’ll have him next time for cer-
tain. I’ve got his measure.”
“ Say, Mister, does your gun buck ? Dads’
gun bucks like anythin’—hits both ends—
knocked me down when I popped him off, an'
I only had three nails an’ er marble in him.”
“ No, my gun don’t kick if you hold it
tight,” said Horace ; “ it’s a real Purdy.”
“ Let’s have er pop, Mister—jest one pop
ter feel how he goes.”
Appealed to in this way, Horace could not
well decline, so he handed the gun to Rube,
who, feeling its weight, rested the barrel
in the fork of a sapling, and waited.
This was only the second time in his life
that Rube had fired a gun, though he was
an accomplished sportsman with the cata-
pult and the bow and arrow. Rube had
guessed that a wallaby was about due from
the noise made by Blutcher, and just as
he was ready a small doe hopped by twenty
yards away.
Bang! went the gun, and the wallaby
dropped stiff as a stone. Prompt to think,
prompt to act, Horace seized the gun, ran
up to the prostrate beast, and, firing the
other barrel, blew off its head.
“ I reckon I killed him that time,” said
Horace.
“ Why, it was me as knocked him over,”
cried the indignant Rube.
For a moment Horace paused for a reply,
then, putting his hand in his pocket, he took
out a florin and pressed it in Rube’s hand.
“ I think I killed that wallaby.”
“ We killed it,” said Rube.
Again Horace’s hand dived in his pocket
and another florin changed owners.
“ I think I killed that wallaby.”
“ Yes, yous killed him all right, Mister,”
said Rube, now fully” understanding the posi-
tion. “ Let me have tlier gun, an’ I’ll shoot
—no, I means yous u’ll shoot—er few more.”
And Rube jangled the silver as though he
thought wallabies at. four shillings a head
very good business. ]
They had now returned to cover, Blutcher’s
voice quite near at hand.
Rube sang out : “ Look out, Mister ! ”
A second wallaby hopped before them.
Horace, taking a good sight along the barrel,
shut his eyes and fired both at once.
The wallaby hopped on more quickly.
“ I hit him ! I hit him ! ” cried Horace.
“ Did you see, he hopped away on two
legs ! ”
“Well, yer wouldn’t have him hop away
on his tail, would you, Mister ? ”
They could hear several gun reports in the
distance. “ That’s Dads,” said Rube. “ An’
now that’s Jabez. I bet cher he got one with
both barrels. I bet cher er quid Jabez got
er bigger one than mine—no, I mean yourn.
o’ course.”
As it happened, Horace was not opening
a book just then, so he was forced to de-
cline Rube’s sporting offer.
A fresh wallaby appeared on the scene,
and Rube was just in time to push down the
gun Horace was about to fire, for, close to
the wallaby and gripping it by the tail, came
Delia, shouting and yelping as the beast
dragged her along.
Rube ran after her, Horace followed, and
the procession soon came in sight of Dads
and Jabez.
“ Loose him, Deil ! loose him ! and I’ll
shoot him, sure ! ” shouted Jabez. But, as
before mentioned, Delia was of a resolute
nature, and had no thought of leaving her
prize—no, not if it had towed her to the Gulf
of Carpentaria. Seeing this, Jabez, by a
smart sprint, headed off the wallaby, and
killed it with one blow from a sapling.
Delia immediately jumped on the prostrate
form, shouting :
“ It’s my skin, an’ my trap, so there ! ”
It was then noticed for the first time that
the dead animal had got a trap fast to one
of its legs ; this had crippled its movements,
and allowed Delia to make her capture.
The hunt was now over. The combined bag
consisted of four wallabies, two hares, and
one bandicoot. The skins were promptly
flayed, and the party turned homeward.


Delia insisted on carrying her skin, and her
ti - ap, resolutely refusing all assistance.
“ Not too bad, Mister, was it ? ” said Dads.
“ I see yer popped er nice little ’un ; Jabez
got ther rest. I had one long shot with ther
‘Old Reliable,’ but he stood so long er
thinkin’ that ther blamed wallaby hopped
away. Sittin’ shots suits ther ‘Old Reliable’
—he likes ter see where he bees goin’ ; he
can’t tumble ter this yer new-fangled way
o* hittin’ beasts when they be movin’. It
makes him riled—that’s what it does.”
CHAPTER IX.
The Races.
“ What’s up with Jabez ? ”
The girls were together in the kitchen'
making the first jam of the season from early
Red May peaches and apricots too small for
the market.
“ He’s shaved his chin like Mr. Gohighly.
Did jmu ever ? ”
“ An’ puts on his best clothes every night,”
said Euphemia.
“ An’ blacks his boots,” said Sarah Jane.
“ An’ puts hile on his hair, ’cos I’ve seen
him,” interjected Delia, whose opinion had
not been invited.
“ I believe Jabez is sticking up to some-
one,” said Sarah Jane, with sudden inspira-
tion. “ The idea o’ that kid. She must have
a taste, whoever she is ! ”
The Wayback girls had so far declined to
recognise their six-foot bearded brother as a
man. To them he was still “ the boy.”
“ He’s mighty particular all of a sudden
about his shirts and collars,” said Tilly ; “ I
have been wondering what was up, for his
things are just the same as usual.”
In her own way, Mums also had cause fox-
comment—Jabez’s appetite was now capri-
cious ; he declined a second helping of corned
beef, and seldom took more than a pound at
one meal.
“ The poor lad must be getting delicate,”
said Mums to herself, and she resolved to
make him some new flannel undershirts.
Flannel shirts were always the first remedy
tried for coming sickness at Dingo Flat ; that
failing, a box of Jackson’s pills ; then, if the
patient was still obstinate, a packet of salts.
This was the climax of the family pharma
copoeia, and so far had never been known
to fail.
At night time and dusk, Delia heard
mysterious sounds in the bush, and, going to
explore, found they were caused by Jabez,
who, sitting on a gum-tree root, poured forth
his soul on a jew’s-harp.
Rube had his surprise also. Going about
the bush he found two letters repeatedly cut
on the smooth bark of the trees. The letters
were “ P.G.”
“ Now, who’s er been doin’ that, l
wonder ? ” said Rube. “ ‘ P.G.,’ ‘ P.G.’-there
ain’t no sense in that. It don’t spell nothin’ ;
but I’ll fix ’em.” So with his tomahawk he
chopped out a fresh letter, “ to make sense,”
as he said.
But a young man passing that way later,
swore a big swear, and madly chopped out
the whole inscription, for it now read
“ P.1.G.”
,••' • • * *
It was breakfast time when Dads asked
Mr. Gohighly if he would like to go to the
local races at the Cross Roads.
“ Yer’ll see er bit o’ good sport, Mister.
Barjo’s er clinker fer hosses ; yer can’t beat
’em nohows. They’d all win, every time, only
ther owners saves ’em—runs ’em dark, yer
know—There’s Larry Fegan’s mare—you’ve
heard tell o’ Larry—she’s er real pictur’, an’
as eunnin’ as er dorg. Why. last year in the


Maiden Handicap we had to drag her to the
post with er cart rope. She knew Larry had
no money on. an’ that she’d spile her handi-
cap if she won ; but some o’ ther boys had er
quid on her with Curly, the barber—you’ve
heard tell o’ Curly—an’ they ropes her, an’
hauls her past ther judge.
“ Curly reckoned it were agin the rules, an’
was no race ; but when ther blokes gets
round him with saplings, he soon sees things
more reasonable.”
Horace said he would be delighted to go
to the races, as he wished to sample every
phase of country life, and had a great fond-
ness for horses. He considered the horse a
noble animal, and the way two of them
managed to pull a ’bus with thirty-six
passengers up Brickfield Hill had always
called forth his utmost admiration. There
was no doubt horses were very intelligent,
and made excellent German sausage—he
judged by the look only, for, from a foolish
prejudice, he had always declined to eat that
savory delicacy himself.
“ After taking you to town every day for
twopence, it seems a shame to eat him,
doesn't it V ” concluded Horace.
Later in the day, when three saddle horses
were brought to the door, Horace regretted
his rash promise to accompany Jabez and
Dads to the races. It is true he loved the
horse, but it had always been from a safe
seat beside the driver. To be actually on the
animal’s back, with no conductor to pull the
bell, or driver to put the brake on, was quite
another matter. He knew that bush horses
kicked ; he had seen pictures of them jump-
ing in the air like grasshoppers, with their
riders flying over their heads, and he
trembled at the thought. Y'et it would never
do to show the white feather, before the
girls, too. Rather than that he would risk
his life, and never mention that the only
beast he had ever ridden was the wooden
steed of the merry-go-round.
Dads was mounted on his creamy.
“ Now, Mister ! ”
Horace surveyed the high ridge of back
owned by the horse he was invited to mount
with a kind of dismay ; it seemed as un-
reachable as the ridge capping on a house-
top. If he only dared ask for a chair.
“ Let’s give yer a leg-up, Mister,” said
Jabez, cheerily, and, suiting the action to the
word, fairly bounced Horace in his place.
They started, Dads relating past racing
incidents to cheer the way ; but the whole
attention of Horace was concentrated on the
horse beneath him, for he was confident the
animal was vicious, because it kept looking
at him out of the corner of its eye. Once it
made a backward grab at a fly on Horace’s
foot, but Horace was sure it was his foot the
nag wanted. He gave a jump in the saddle
which tiie horse evidently took as a signal
to hurry, for he started to trot. The nags of
Dads and Jabez ambled in response, and the
pace quickened.
Horace was all over the saddle, on the
horse’s neck, on his rump, but never for more
than a moment. At each step he was fired
up in the air again as though from a spring-
board, which caused him to flop his arms
like a Redfern signal post. And, although
he went up witli a spring, he came down
each time with a thud as hard as a brick.
He felt as though a maul and wedges were
being used to split him in two, and as though
the restful part of his body was being bashed
with a club. With one hand he grasped flic-
saddle, with the other the horse’s mane, and
he was certain at every jump he would be
jumped overboard. His pants had rucked up-
over his knees, while his eyeglass flew by a
string over one shoulder, his hat over the
other.
“ A nice easy mover, ain't she now ? ”
enquired Dads, breaking off one of his yarns.
“ Yous could send er baby ter sleep on that
’ere lioss.”
“ Oh, I say ! ” cried Horace in agony,
“ stop him, or I’ll burst in two ! ”
“ Well, I’m blest ! ” said Dads, pulling up,
“ef that don’t beat all ! Wliat are yer
jumpin’ up an’ down like that fer, Mister ?-
Why don’t cher sit tight an’ hold her ? ”
“ You see I’m a bit out of practice !
gasped Horace between jolts as they slowed;


up, “and tins horse seems a bit awkward.”
“ The boss is all right,” said Dads : “ yous
just stick yer heels in an’ make him canter.”
With much doubt, Horace tried ; the horse
moved forward like a wooden steed on
rockers—it was a gentle swing, as a baby
might get in its mother’s arms, and Horace
soon felt himself as nearly an angel in flight
as he could ever hope to be till his wings,
grew.
CHAPTER X.
Horace Climbs a Tree.
The Cross Roads is not a township, except
of the most rudimentary kind. There is <a
store that is also post-ottice, a blacksmith's
shop, and a pub. On most days the landlord
of the pub. passes his time on the front
verandah staring across the road at the
storekeeper, who sits on a box in the
doorway watching up the roads for a possible
customer.
Being such close neighbors, as is natural,
they are not on speaking terms. Some
quarrel twenty years ago about a bushel of
corn has caused a lifelong feud.
On race day. however, all was animation
at “ the Roads.” Saddle horses hung their
noses all round the pub., and the yard of the
store was stacked with buggies and sulkies.
Groups of men were squatted down upon the
ground, most of them sitting on their heels
with their backs to a fence while they
listened in silence to one of their number
relating an incident full of “blankies.”
When the Waybaek party rode up there
were general salutations all round, and
Horace was introduced to the crowd as a
Sydney sportsman.
Come an’ do a wet, Waybaek, an’ all
yous.”
The publican, his Avife, and two daughters
were serving behind the bar, and as this
gentleman promoted the race meeting by
finding five pounds of the prize-money, it was
considered the right thing on the part of the
most teetotal to give him a turn.
It was Larry Fegan who had first shouted
drinks, and, of course, Dads followed, and:
Horace could do no less. Then Pat from the
Hill and Regan from the Swamp each
shouted, and although Horace confined his.
drink to a medium every time, yet when he
came out in the road again he could see at
least five hundred horses where only fifty
stood before ; and the talk being all of horses
and what they and their riders could do, he
was on the point of challenging the whole
crowd on his new mount for a hundred
“ blooming quid,” to use Larry’s expression,
only in a lucid moment he thought better
of it.
It now being an hour past the appointed
time for the first race, and trade getting
slack over the bar, the crowd made a move
for the racecourse by climbing over the
neighboring fence.
It was a circular course through the scrub,
and was indicated on both sides by barked
trees. A hillock was the grandstand and
saddling - paddock combined, whilst the
butcher from Barjo was clerk of the scales
with his steelyard that liung suspended to a
tree branch.
The publican was clerk of the course,
secretary, and starter. Dads Waybaclc lian-
dicapper, but Sid Marney, the judge, had not
turned up.
“ I tell yer what, chaps,” said Larry Fegan.,
“ let tlier new cove from Sydney be judge ;
that Till be fair all round.”
The proposal was agreed to with acclama-
tion by all, except Horace himself, who


protested he could not tell one horse from
another.
“ What cher givin’ us ? ” said Larry. “ You
can tell er blanky horse from er blanky cow,
an’ that’s all we blanky well want.”
Curly the Barber was there, with a bag in
front of him, and called the odds on the first
race.
“ Two ter 1 Goanna ! Three ter 1 Swag-
man ! Three ter 1 Silvermine ! Three ter
1 bar one ! ”
There was great delay at the scales ;
Goanna was weighted at 12st, but her rider
•could not come within sixteen pounds of it.
The heaviest saddle was hunted for, and
three cornsacks to place under it were got
from the store, and still the jockey was four
pounds short.
“ Go and get er couple o’ beers,” said
Larry ; “ that’ll do ther trick.”
It did.
Swagman’s rider, being over weight,
stripped off his coat, vest, hat, and finally his
boots, when, fortunately for decency, he
turned the scale to “ er hair,” as the butcher
remarked.
The first race was the Selectors’ Handicap,
for bona-fide plough horses only ; entrance
fee, 2s Gd. First prize 30s, second 10s, third
to save his stake. After three false starts
the publican got his field well away with a
friend’s horse nicely in front; this was
♦Swagman, and he kept his lead, and won by
It.
“ I pay Swagman ! ” shouted Curly, very
loud and bold : but as no one but the
publican and his owner had backed that
animal, Curly might have saved his breath.
To impi*ove their luck, the whole crowd
adjourned to the pub. for an hour, where
they listened while the publican proved to
them that the start was quite fair, better than
the machine, in fact, and that Swagman’s
win was a fluke, and in nowise to be
•expected.
Curly was busy bagging coin on the next
race, which was the great event of the day—
“ The Cross Loads Handicap, open to all-
•comers ; prizes GOs, 30s, and 10s.” There
were eleven starters, including the five;
alleged plough horses, in the first race.
Larry’s Goanna was again favorite at 2 to 1,
5 to 1 the others, which Horace thought
singular as the relative weights of Swagman
and Goanna were the same as before.
But a trifle like this did not seem to worry
the crowd ; and soon Horace ceased to worry,
too, for the special brew of beer retailed by
the publican on race days was potent, and
Horace had quite lost count of the number of
mediums he had swallowed. His duties as
judge in the first race had been nominal ; and
no one had even asked him how he placed
the horses ; but his position had its respon-
sibilities, as he was yet to find.
The publican rang a cattle bell vigorously
to call the riders to the post.
Curly shouted : Five ter 1 bar one.
A boy in a high tree called out : “ They’re
off ! ”
A whirl of dust, a thundering of galloping
horses all of a heap, a clashing of screeching
voices :
“ Goanna wins ! Even money Goanna !
Silvermine ! Silvermine ! Go it, Swaggie !
Keep him goin’ ! Hooroo, Bobtail ! Stick
to it ! ” All this and much more in a
combined shout and roar as the field swept
by, and the race was over.
“ Goanna won easy ; I said as how he’d do
it.”
“ No, Bobtail ! Bobtail won by a head on
the post! ”
“ Get out ! Goanna cat-licked him—l’m
goin’ to draw my divvy.”
Curly had a big mob round him gathered
for the same purpose.
“ T pay the winner !” shouted Curly.
‘ Well, Goanna won right enough.”
“ Does the judge say so ? ”
Then the crowd suddenly remembered
there was a judge, and rushed for Horace.
“ Who won, Mister ? ”
“ The brown horse,” said Horace.
Now the only brown horse in the race was
Ploughboy, a rank outsider, who whipped in.
Goanna was a bright bay, which Horace in
his innocence, thought an excellent brown.


“ So you sez Ploughboy won ? ”
“ Yes,” said Horace, “ if that is the
brown.”
“ Gorstruth, you Sydney spieler, I’ll make
it warm for yers ! ”
“ I pay Ploughboy ! ” gaily shouted Curly
loud above the din of rising oaths and
protests.
“ It’s er put-up job ! He’s standin’ in with
Curly. Goanna had ’em donkey licked ! It’s
er blanky swindle, an’ I’m not goin’ ter
blankv well stand it ! ” shouted Larry, who
rushed up to Horace and shook a fist in his
face as big as a leg-o’-mutton.
“You crawler ! I’ll fight yer fer er quid ;
I’ll fight yer fer fifty blanky quid ! I’ll
teach yer how ter take us down afore I’ve
done with yer ! ” And Larry proceeded to
rapidly throw off his upper clothing.
A hundred threatening faces, and still
more threatening voices, surrounded the
alarmed Horace. He looked in vain for
Dads, who had just gone over to the pub.,
or for Jabez, who w r as at the other end of
the paddock rubbing a horse down.
At that moment a louder voice than any
other screeched above the din as a fat man
pushed his way through the crowd. It was
the butcher from Barjo primed with long-
sleevers.
“ Let me cut ther white liver out o’ him—
let me cut ther ”
But Horace did not wait to hear more ; in
mad despair he ducked his head at the
thinnest part of the crowd, and, with a few
bumps and bruises, gained the open bush,
the crowd following in a mad pack. Over
the grass land he went, over a fence he knew
not how, then into a blessed scrub as thick
as a blanket that hid him from view ; but
the noise of the hunters, the threats of the
butcher and Larry were still in his ears as
he rushed madly on.
An hour later Dads and Jabez were
tracking through the scrub as they led their
horses.
“ He come this way right enough,” said
Dads looking at the tracks, “ or one o’ them
as was after him ; though I don’t think they
came this fur. Ilowsomever, he can’t be fur
off. Coo-ee ! Coo-ee ! ”
“Is that you, Mr. Wayback ? Have they
gone ? ”
Dads and Jabez looked about, north, south,
east, and west, for the faint-voiced reply
that seemed to come from the clouds.
“ I’m up here, and can’t get down.”
“ Well, I’ll be sugared ! ” cried Dads, as,
looking about once more, he located Horace
half way up a tall boxtree. “ Did yers go
up there fer er bee’s nest or er ’possum ? ”
With the help of Jabez and the stirrup-
leathers, Mr. Gohighly was safely lowered,
and was quickly in the saddle on the
homeward journey, for he resolutely declined
to return to the Cross Roads to see the
Consolation Race.
“ Yers needn’t be afeared o’ them coves,”"
said Dads ; “ theys all right.”
“ They wanted to cut out my liver,”
shuddered Horace.
“ That’s only their play,” said Dads •,
“ just er sort o’ friendliness, as yer may say.
There’s not one o’ ’em who’d drown er fly
in er glass o’ beer.”
But Horace was not to be persuaded, and
the horses moved homewards.
• • • • •
While the male folks were away at the*
races, Palmira Gohighly had been over-
hauling the library at Dingo Flat in search
of something to read. It was a small
collection—a large Bible, used to register the
family births, and with its other leaver
unsoiled ; a horse doctor ; three school books
without covers ; five dog-eared Family
Novelettes, in all of which dukes and lords
struggled to marry the nursery governess „
Somebody’s Pills Almanac ; and an old
number of “ The Farmer’s Friend.”
With her new-born enthusiasm for an
agricultural life, Palmira found the last
volume the most attractive to dip into ; and
it chanced that the first article to fix her
attention was one about bees. She became
very interested in the social economy of the
beehive, the tragic wooing of drones, the
wholesale maternity of queens, and the
Tyson-like hoarding capacity of workers.


who stored for others to devour. Having
read the article to the last word, Palmira
was convinced that she knew all about bees,
-and was burning to verify her knowledge.
“ Have you any bees, Rube ? ” she
.addressed the first of the Waybacks handy.
“ Yes, ’um ! ”
“ Show me, please ; I want to see them.”
Rube led the way to the garden down the
• flat, giving particulars as they went :
“ We’s got twenty-five swarm ; four’s
mine, one Delia’s, an’ the others is Jabez’s.
Wes had more last year, but they died
:Somehows when us smoked ’em out. An’
don’t they sting awful ? My word ! ”
“ You should not smoke the poor dear little
bees,” said Palmira, “ it was very cruel of
you. Treat them with kindness, and they
Avill never harm you. Love them and they
will love you. Think how they work for
you all day without fee or reward, and then
you go and kill the poor things. It is very
cruel of you ! ”
“ Oh, crikey ! ” cried Rube, opening his
mouth very wide at this view of the subject,
which kept him thinking and silent for quite
two minutes.
“ There they is. There’s black uns an’
yaller uns. Them’s Jabez’s an’ them's mine.
Delia’s bees eats all theys honey—tlieys lazy
coves.”
Rube pointed as he spoke to an assorted
group of upturned gin and kerosene cases
that, sheltered under oak bushes, rested on
a row of slabs.
“ Oh, the darling little things ! ” said
Palmira. “ Those yellow ones must be the
Italians that are so quiet and good that you
can stroke them. How I should like to catch
one ; but there seems such a few of them.”
Rube had cai’efully kept behind while
Palmira walked in front of the hives. Rube
was still indignant at his time-honored
treatment of bees being reproved, so when
Palmira asked to see more bees, he made a
suggestion.
“ If you’ll put er little stick in their hole
they’ll soon come out.”
Confident in her moral intentions, Miss
Gohighly picked up a stick and poked it
gently into the entrance of a hive of yellow
bees.
Buzz, buzz, buzz ! They came out of the
hive in swarms, with a loud whirr of wings,
many coming straight as shots from a gun
at Palmira.
“ Oh. oh, oh ! ” She ran screaming away,
the bees in a swarm after her. “ The brutes
—they’re killing me ! ”
Rube from a safe distance coldly
remarked : “ Treat ’em with kindness, an’
they won’t hurt.”
“ Help, Rube ! Drive them off the
beasts ! ”
“ Love ’em an’ they will love you,”
continued Rube, as he ran to keep up with
Miss Gohighly.
“ Oh. it’s awful ! ” cried Palmira.
“ They’re in my hat, in my hair, and crawling
up my ” She had put her hands to the
bottom of her skirt in frenzied agitation.
“ Go away, you horrid boy ; go away ! ”
“ Love ’em an’ they’ll love you,” repeated
Rube like a lesson, as Palmira made a last
frantic rush for the house and her room,
where Tilly came to her assistance.
“ You young limb ! ” said Tilly to Rube
a little later, as she chased him with her
copper stick.
“ Well, she said they loved her ; now 1
hopes tlieys kissed her all she wants ! ”
retorted Rube as he easily dodged Tilly’s
assault.


CHAPTER XI.
A Little Farming.
The first gloss of the novelty of his bush
visit having brushed off, Mr. Goliighly began,
like his sister, to devote his attention to
purely agricultural matters. He marvelled
that potatoes grew under the ground while
cabbages grew on top ; that peas grew in
the pod and corn outside, wrapped in paper
like a cigarette ; that mulberries were green
when they were red, and strawberries ripe ;
that pumpkins grew on vines and monkey
nuts on roots ; that brooms grew on millet
and egg fruit on trees ; and that hot chillies
and cold cucumbers grew both in the same
bed.
He had found out that the milk cow also
gave cream, but her four teats to serve tAVo
articles seemed to him a gross extravagance
somewhere.
Again, he was surprised to learn that cows
liked bones better than any other diet,
whilst the pigs ate a chicken for breakfast
for choice. What ducks ate made him sick
to think of ; and the way fowls devoured
stinking grubs weaned him from eggs for a
week.
The gander of Dingo Flat seemed to have
taken a personal dislike to him, and always
chased him out of the yard, whilst the
gobbler turkey talked to him like the Barjo
butcher, with many blankies, and made
himself as red in the face as a politician
with indignation.
The horses always “ set to partners ” with
him when he went to catch one in the
paddock, and showed him the end where the
tail hung. Blutcher, the dog, was affable at
meal times, at other moments he showed
marked disrespect.
Horace wondered why springs came out
on hilltops whilst waterlioles formed at hill
bottoms ; why the gumtrees pulled off their
thin coats in Summer while the iron and
stringy barks kept their warm ulsters on
why dingoes never barked and larks never
sang ; and why the jackass always though i
of some funny yarn just as he was going to
bed.
But the practical work of the farm was
of even more absorbing interest. One day
Horace stopped Dads, who was ploughing at
the end of a strip of land.
“ What do you plough the land for, Mr.
Wayback ? ”
“ Why—why, to turn it over, to be sure.”
“ But what do you turn it over for and
scratch it and then roll it all flat like it was
at first ? ”
“ Well, I'll be blessed ! That’s cultivatin’,
that is.”
“ What do you cultivate for ? ”
“ Ter make things grow.”
“ How does that make things grow ? ”
“ Well, yer see, it’s this way : The site’s
asleep, as yer may say, an’ we sort o’ tickles
it ter wake it up like, an’ tlier more we
tickles ther livelier it grows things—slashes
erway like er bloke when he gets riled.”
“ Oh, that’s it,” said Horace. “ And why
don’t you plough that paddock ? ”
“ That’s er bare faller ; we’s spellin’ that
land. You see it gets tired like, an’ wants
er holiday now and agen.”
“ Oh, I say ! ” said Horace, “ only fancy
land getting tired ! But I know how it is—
the soil must be getting very old.”
“ Now you’ve said it, Mister ; ther land
must be older than my granddad, fer I never
hear him tell of a time when there warn’t
no sile. I ’specks they made it when they
made ploughs—made ’em to fit, as yer may
say. Try er bit o’ ploughin’, Mister.”
Horace thought it looked very easy—yom


only had to stand between the handles and
the horses did the rest. So he took Dads’
place, a rein and a handle in each hand.
“ Gee up ! ”
The horses geed, not up the furrow, but
.across the paddock towards home, while the
plough made beautiful esses and curves of
beauty.
Dads got them in their place again.
“ Try agen, Mister.”
“ Yes ; but how can I drive the horses and
hold the handles, or hold the handles and
drive the horses ? And the plough won’t
stick in. What’s the matter with the
plough ? ”
As the plough darted up and down,
Horace did the clog dance behind the
handles and a steeplechase over invisible
obstacles. Dads was driving the horses with
his voice, so Horace only had to hold the
plough handles, or try to, for the plough
seemed bewitched. Out of the furrow it
came with a run, or stuck its share in and
kicked over, went on its side, its back—
anywhere but in its place. Suddenly, without
warning, the plough sprang up on end,
knocked Horace down with a thud like a
sack of potatoes, and stuck fast.
“ Got er bit of er rib buster ? ” said Dads.
“ I guess yer must er hit er stump ; yer
wants ter stan’ well back when yer comes
ter stumps.”
Horace, quite sure that he had at least
three ribs broken, limped off to the house
vowing that ploughing was an invention of
the devil.
Another day he tried harrowing, and, after
dropping the harrow teeth on his toes a
lialf-dozen times, when it was necessary to
lift the harrow to drop the weeds, he got
well into the way of it, and could walk
behind two quiet horses and hold the rope
reins with anybody.
In the anxiety shown by Horace to gain
farm experience, Rube saw his opportunity.
It was Rube’s duty, night and morning, to
cut chaff up in the stable loft for the horses.
He introduced the machine to Mr. Gohighly.
“ Now it’s not as easy as it looks, Mister.
Everyone can’t work that ’ere. She wants
I
er lot o’ finding out, she do.”
Horace willingly experimented by turning
the handle.
“By cripes, Mister, yous do make her
hum ! You beats Jabez, and he reckons
hisself tip-top !” Thus Rube sat on a truss
of straw and flattered, quite willing to take
a spell-oh on the same terms indefinitely.
But the charms of chaff-cutting, much to
Rube’s regret, soon palled on Horace. He
was anxious to give the fish in the creek
a turn, as he felt that his hunting bag had
not given the natives a due sense of his
sporting powers.
“ Like ter do er bit o’ fishin’ ? ” said Dads
at tea time. “ Why, o’ course, we’ll all go
an’ give em er proper doin’.”
“ Yes,” said Tilly, “ and have a picnic
under the wattle trees, and we can gather
mushrooms for catchup.”
The proposal was adopted with acclama-
tion by everyone but Mums, who wanted to
know who was to skim the cream, make
the butter, make the bread, feed the fowls,
fetch and milk the cows, get the housework
done, and tidy up the yard? But all these
things were promised to be done before
breakfast, and the girls made a rush to the
kitchen to prepare the dainties for to-
morrow’s feast.


CHAPTER XII
Creek Fishing.
“ How’s yers gettin’ on with ther Duke ? ”
enquired Sarah Jane of Euphemia, as the
girls rolled out dough and made pies.
“ Has he popped yet ? He seems ter hide
his love behind that eyeglass very careful.”
“ Oh, he’s not too bad,” said Euphemia,
striving to make the best of Horace in his
assigned capacity as her lover, “ only I don’t
think he knows if I’m a boy or girl yet, or
cares, either. I thought somehow as men
were different.”
“It’s ther way you manage them,” said
Tilly, decisively. “ Men are just like a bit
of dough,” and she thumped a lump of that
article with her fist, “ when you know the
way of them.”
“ And what’s ther way, Till ? ”
“ Just flatter them, that’s all it is. Let
them think that you think they are as
clever as can be. And if a man won’t talk
about you, then you must talk about him,
i
then he will yarn fast enough. They are
that soft, soft, soft ! ”
“ All the men are alike. What they want
a girl for is to listen, and start them talking
again, about their beautiful selves when
they leave off for a minute. Never mind,”
continued Tilly, with increasing emphasis,
“ wait till we marry them, an’ we'll pay it
back.”
“ My word ! ” said Sarah Jane.
“ My word ! ” echoed Euphemia.
“ Now, ’Phemia,” said Tilly, “ when he
tells you that fish story again to-morrow,
just you start and ask him all about that
fish, and wonder however he landed it, and
tell him how clever he must be, and that
you are quite sure that no one else in the
world could have caught it as he did ; and
that he must be very strong and very brave,
and, oh, how pleased you would have been
to see him do it. And if that don’t start the-
Duke courting he’s made of wool. And I’ll
tell you what I’ll do. I’ll give you a lead.
Tom Rawson shall come, and I’ll get him
spooning, so that the Duke can see, and if
you can’t pinch a kiss out of him you don’t
deserve a boy, so there ! ”
Sarah Jane could only hope to rake in
the fourteen-year-old kiddie, Teddy Mul-
grave, but she promised to do her best to
make the running as far as could be
expected with such infant assistance, and so.
with bright hopes of victory on the morrow.
Euphemia went to bed.
• • • • •
It was not far to the creek, and early in
the day the fishing party, armed with bags,
billies, and baskets, took their way forward
in sections. Mr. Gohighly had a beautiful
rod, with brass-fitted joints, a hand winch,
landing net, gaff, and bait can ; and he was
astounded to learn that the rest of the party
proposed to find rods at the creek itself.
The party went in pairs, and it appeared
quite by accident that Horace had Euphemia
for a companion. It was not by his seeking,
but as she commenced to express her
surprise at his beautiful rod and equipment
he found her quite interesting, and began
to enjoy himself immensely, and before they
got to the creek even promised to lend her
a gut-line and show her how to bait it.
And once on the banks of the waterhole
it was a sight for poet or painter to see
Euphemia holding the wriggling grasshopper
while Horace lovingly inserted the hook.
“It do seem cruel,” said Euphemia,
blushing as her fingers and those of Horace


held the jumping insect. “ It do seem cruel
ter ther poor thing.”
“ Oh, they like it ; see how they wriggle,”
said Horace.
“ I suppose they’s used ter it ; and you’d
not hurt a fly, would yer, Mr. Goliighly ? ”
The rest of the party were scattered along
the creek at the same or distant waterholes.
Long wattle sticks served as rods, and a
cheerful conversation, carried on by e\Tery-
one, at once gave ample notice to the fish of
Avliat was expected of them.
It was a hot, roasting day, but under the
shelter of the water gums the party found
a cool shade, and could watch their floats
in comfort. Now and again a fish would
rise to the surface, swim round the line with
.an air of quiet surprise, and then as quietly
SAvim away. Or a big splash in the pool
Avould indicate where a three-pound mullet
had jumped for a fly. But for an hour no
one had a bite but Delia, Avho with a great
shout dragged out a tree bough from the
muddy bottom.
Dads, Avho had made himself general
■superintendent, came round to Mr. Goliighly
to brighten matters.
“ It’s this way, Mister, fish is ther most
■contrariest o’ critters, slippery coves, you
never knows when you’s got ’em. They’s
females, that’s Avhat they is. I’se studied
of ’em fer over fifty year, an’ I never knew
er fish as Avarn't a female. See um Avhen
unis got their neAv suit o’ scales on, all spick
an’ span from the seAvin’ machine, as yer
may say ; lioav they lies there on ther top o’
ther water ter slioav off. An’ yet Avhen yer
goes ter look they clears off like kids behind
er door, just miserable fer yer ter look at ’em
an’ prise ’em, an’ yet too skeered ter let yer.
An’ ther Avay they bites tells ther sort they
are. If one goes fer ther bait they all goes,
hot day, cold day, cloud or clear ; but ef
ther fish with ther best rig on say : ‘No,
baits is not fashionable to-day,’ then they
just Avon’t bite, an’ there’s an end of it,
Avorms, insects, paste, it’s all ther same.
“ You can’t argue Avith er fish nor er
woman, or drive sense into um with er
saplin’. Why, I knoAved er cove, Alf Spider
was his name, perhaps you’ve heerd o’ Alf,
he used ter get some scented Idle from th’
chemist an’ put on his Avorms, an’ ther fish
went that mad with ther smell, they’d bite
till he got tired pullin’ them out. That
shows ther sort fish are.”
“ What was the name of that scent ? ”
enquired Horace, anxious to improve his
fishing powers.
“ I disremember the name, but it was one
of them there smells ther gals puts on their
handkerchiefs, an’ that’s why ther fish
wanted ter rub noses on it, no doubt. Take
it from me, what’ll catch er woman u’ll
catch er fish, an’ they both gammons ter
wriggle Avhen they’s caught, as though they
didn’t like it.”
“ I’A r e got him,” cried Horace, with sudden
glee, as with a heaA T e sufficient to land a
shark he Avhirled a six-inch sprat overhead.
“ I’ve got him ! ”
“ Oh ! what a lovely one,” cried Euphemia.
“ Hoav \A r ell you did catch him. I’m sure you
must have some secret way o’ doin’ it. None
o’ the others caught one yet. You are clever,
really now. Oh ! you love ; oh, you sweet ! ”
Rut these last expressions were addressed
to the fish.
Stimulated by this admiration, Horace,
while he re-baited his hook, started to relate
the details of the capture of the flatliead at
Bondi, and Euphemia, Avho had only heard
it three times before, became so interested
that she had to rest her hand on him in
admiration, while Dads walked off grunting.
• • • • •
When Palmira had started with the fishing
party she had insisted on carrying one of the
large baskets, and .Tabez had equally insisted
on helping her, so that this pair did the
journey together joined by the basket. It
swung between their hands and made a
subtle bond of union. .Tabez was delighted ;
he felt that the moment for which he had
waited for days had come. He meant to say
a hundred things to her that so far he had
only spoken to the gum trees ; to pour out
the feelings that surged under his flannel
shirt and spoilt his appetite ; or, as he more
precisely defined it to himself, “ Give her


ther straight tip.” But it was Palmira who
was first to speak.
%
“ How delightful you must find it, Mr.
Wayback, to have this beautiful bush always
about you ; no ceiling but the clear blue sky,
no floor but the tender earth, and no com-
rades but your charming family.”
Jabez, with a chuckle, opened his mouth
very wide, and a grin sprang in his face as
though pulled by a string.
“ It ain’t too bad.”
“ What an intellectual smile,” said Palmira
to herself. “ What an honest, open coun-
tenance ; how restful.” Then she continued :
4 ‘ How lovely it is to be away from the dust
and smoke of Sydney, to wake in the morn-
•ng and not hear the milkman’s voice or the
about of the ‘ bottle ho !’”
“ It’s er bit all right,” assented Jabez.
“ And then you have no cares. You have
never got to catch anything but fish—no
trains, no ’bus, no trams, no nothing. You
must have so much time to think, to ponder
on the beautiful.”
“ Yes ; I do think er powerful lot,” said
•Tabez. I was only thinking yesterday was
Gold finder good fer the Cup, and was it good
enough ter put er crown on him ? ”
Palmira found .Tabez’s question too deep
for her, and was thereby much impressed ;
but, unwilling to admit her ignoi'ance on
what must be an agricultural matter, she
suggested :
“ Unless the Cup is very strong, don’t you
think it will break if you put much on it ? ”
I
“By cripes, ef that ain’t good ! ” And
Jabez laughed so that the basket jumped and
rocked between them, and Palmira smiled
and laughed, too, delighted that uncon-
sciously she had been so clever.
CHAPTER XIII.
A Proposal.
Mr. Gohighly, after his successful capture
of the sprat, would have been quite content
to crouch over his rod for the rest of the
day in fond hopes of another bite. His was
tlie true piscatorial nature, the reflective,
imaginative, contemplative mind. Already
ins sprat had grown, in his thoughts, to the
proportions of a herring, and in the days to
001111 girth and length would propor-
tionately expand, till a time would arrive
when, in all sincerity, it would count as a
salmon to his credit. But the Way back
family lacked this true sporting enthusiasm ;
they had come to the creek for fish, and
were resolved to get them. If they could
not pull them out they would throw them
out. Such was the philosophy of Dingo Flat.
•Jahez started the new operations by
chopping down bundles of scrub, and Dads
went up and down the creek to gather
volunteers.
“ Now, Mister, yous jest come along an’
we’ll show yer er pint ’bout tishin’ they don’t
know down Sydney way. It’s this way :
When we’s can’t yank ’urn out with our fists,
we jest hook ’urn with our feet, so ter speak.
Wes hungry ef tlier fish ain’t, an’ wes
means ter have ’um ter dinner.”
What Horace saw when he followed Dads
was a shallow waterliole, into which Tom
Rawson, Teddy Mulgrave, Rube, and the
rest of the party were busy tossing
branches. These they piled up till the water
was thick with leaves.
“ Now she’s fit ! ” cried Dads, and all the
men pulled off their boots, tucked up their
pants, and waded in, treading the muddy
bottom carefully with their feet.


“ I’ve got one ! ” shouted Rube, as, diving
his hand under his foot, he pulled up a half-
pound perch, and sent it flying to the bank.
“ Come on gals ! ” cried Dads. “ Come on,
Mister ! ”
It was truly a pretty sight to see the
Misses Waybacks and Palmira prepare them-
selves for the water battle by taking off
their shoes and stockings and bunching up
their skirts behind like imitation roosters.
How daintily they approached the water
.with their Trilby feet, as though their legs
were something new and just put on, and as
yet not under perfect control. Palmira, in
particular, stepped as though the ground was
paved with pins and needles, and when,
after much hesitation and many preliminary
gasps, she finally plunged into quite four
inches of water, she threw up her arms and
cried “ Oh ! ”
Tilly, with the best will in the world to be
ladylike, walked less daintily, for, like all
the Waybacks, her feet were half-soled and
heeled with quarter-inch of natural leather.
■On entering the water she also cried “ Oh ! ”
and so staggered about that Tom Rawsou
had to come up and hold her.
Naturally after such a lead, Sarah Jane
and Euphemia also cried “ Oh ! ” as they
touched the water, and shrieked to one
another at half-minute intervals that they
were tumbling down.
“ Oh ! hold me, hold me ! Did you ever ! ”
“ I'm falling ! I’m falling ! ”
So the four girls stood squawking in the
shallow of the waterhole, pretty to see, and
enjoying themselves highly. If they did not
catch fish they caught their breath many
times, and perhaps caught more than that,
when all the bright glances were accounted
for.
Delia, regardless of all dress and decorum,
had waded in up to her middle, chasing a
mullet that the poisoned water had floated
to the surface.
Soon the sport began in earnest, and fish
rained on the bank, tossed by the men’s
hands-silver mullet, yellow perch, and now
and then a black, writhing eel that kept
Mums and the little ones busy in recapturing
as it tried to wriggle back to the water.
Bubs was very busy in this direction, and
chased one active eel right back into the
waterhole, into which he went flop himself
with a big splash. To his great delight Bubs
had to run about for the rest of the day in
the altogether, while his clothes dried on a
•
bush.
It would be impossible to describe the
shock received by Mr. Gohighly’s sporting
instincts when he fully realised what was
going on before his eyes. It seemed to him
a kind of sacrilege, or defiling of the
sanctuary of the late lamented Isaac Walton,
the taking of an unfair and illegitimate ad-
vantage of the finny tribe ; but the laughter,
the shouts, the rain of fish, and, perhaps, the
twinkling pairs of white feet and rounded
feminine calves that glistened in the water,
softened his austerity, and so modified his
first impression that soon he, too, was taking
off his boots and socks to invade the
churned-up water.
Horace was on the edge of the bank, just
about to step in, when Jabez shouted, “ By
cripes ! ” and with a mighty effort threw
what looked like a huge black cat above
Horace’s head. Once on the ground the
creature made a dart towards the w ater, and
Horace, who started up the bank running
for his life, shouted as he went :
“ Oh, I say ! Stop him ; he’s going to bite
me ! ”
Unaccustomed to run in bare feet, Mr.
Gohighly hopped about in the stony, prickly
ground like a cat setting to partners on hot
bricks, so that Rube had no difficuty in
taking him before he was more than half-
way back to Dingo Flat.
It’s all right, Mister. Only er ole man
platypus. Delia’s got him, an’ what she
grabs don’t get erway too quick, my
colonial ! ”
.
The waterhole having been cleared of two
buckets of fish, the girls carried off the spoil
to prepare it for dinner, and soon they weie
all seated round the camp-fire recounting the
incidents of the morning.
Horace had to relate all the details


connected with his capture of the sprat,
which, by the way, he insisted on sharing
with Euphemia, as he generously gave her
credit for helping in the capture by the
skilful manner in which she had held the
grasshopper for him to put the hook in.
r lhe talk drifted to the weight of fish, past
and present, and Tilly, though the matter
had no direct bearing on the subject,
casually mentioned her own weight, which
Tom Rawson doubted. To convince himself
iie had to stand up and lift her, during which
pleasant operation he squeezed her so hard
that she smacked his face, which, instead of
stopping him, only made him lift her again.
Thus encouraged, Teddy Mulgrave lifted
Sarah Jane, and Horace could not do less
than swing Euphemia. Jabez was already
jumping up Palmira like a baby, and Dads
was waltzing round with Mums “just for
company like.”
Rube, to improve on matters, took
Ernestine pick-a-back, and ran away with
her, While her heels kicked vigorously in the
air and she gently bit his ear. Bubs alone
was silent, as he anointed his person from a
stolen jam jar. Altogether, as everybody
screamed, shouted, jumped, and kicked to
their heart’s content, they became very jolly
indeed.
What a meal that was ! What appetites !
The fish were eaten as well as the meat
which had been provided in case there
should be no fish, and the tarts and pies and
goodies innumerable were all likewise con-
sumed, washed down with endless pannikins
of good black tea.
When the plates were packed away, Tilly
suggested “ Jolly Miller,” and the girls
formed a ring, and the men formed a ring,
and they walked round and round, one ring
in the other, with Dads as odd man inside,
saying :
There was a jolly miller, and he lived by himself,
As the wheel went round he made his wealth ;
One hand on the hopper, the other on the bag,
As the wheel went round he made his grab.
Then there was a scramble, a sudden
breaking of the ring, and each boy, with a
girl on hjs arm, marched round chanting :
Oh, a hunting we will go, a hunting we will go ;
Catch a fox and put him in a box, and a bunting
we will go.
When the jolly miller had ground all his
corn they turned to “ kiss-in-the-ring,” and
the way Tilly sprinted from Tom Rawson till
she was caught behind a bush was a sight to
see. Jabez also timed his run well when he
started at scratch for Palmira, and that lady
had not had her hair so rumpled within the
memory of her brother, that is, if Horace
looked, which is doubtful, for Euphemia had
dropped the white token at his feet, and with
the aid of his eye-glass, he was chasing that
lady down the creek.
In the midst of the joyful merriment
there came a sudden peal of thunder, the
sky was covered by a black cloud, and before
the runaways could hasten into camp a
Summer’s storm rained down on them as
though all the fire brigades at Hordern’s fire
had turned their taps on for rehearsal.
A rush was made for a high rock, but the
rain came there —buckets, casks, seas of it
splashed down and soaked them through and
through. The way the girls’ garments clung
to them was in the nature of a
“ disclothes-ure,” and the boys, in holding
them tight to shelter them from the weather,
found wet girls quite a delightful discovery.
It is true they all looked bedraggled and limp,
but the girls were plump and warm, and
their faces fresh and ruddy.
While they were all huddled together
under the partial shelter of the high rock
Dads thought the moment opportune for a
few reflections on clothes :
“ Now, ef wes all gets our death o’ cold,
or rheumatiz, or chest complaint, it u’ll be
our clothes as does it. Rain’s all right
water’s all right; it’s wet clothes is all
wrong. I’ve been er studying o’ that there
question fer years. What kills ther black-
fellers ? Is it rum ? Is it terbaccer ? Don’t
yer believe it. It’s clothes ! Water won't
hurt er blac-kfeller, but wet clothes will kill
him sure.
“ Clothes is ther cuss o’ ther world. When


The Courtship of Horace and Euphemia.-“Do—do you like Meat Pie?”
asked Horace.


we has clothes wes got ter get er house ter
keep ’um dry in. Ter keep ther house wes
got ter work, an’ when we works wes half
dead. When we ploughs an’ chops an’
grubs wes like machines—that’s what we is,
sort o’ steam ingines, as only wants stokin’
an’ hilin’ ter go till they breaks down.
“ A man what works don’t know nuthin’.
think o’ nuthin’, or feel nuthin’ ; he’s just
stupid-like ; while ther bloke what sits on
ther fence, lookin’ at him an’ borryin’ his
terbaccer, enjoys hisself an’ is happy.
“ An’ it’s all fer ther sake o’ ther cussed
clothes. I did say ter Mums er while back
as we’d do without ’em ; but women is dead
set agen reform ; no use talkin’ sence to ’em
—not er bit, Mr. Gohighly. Ef we was made
ter wear pants, pants would er grown ou
trees, I sez, an’ aprons, an’ shirts, too. It
stands ter reason.
“ Why, they tells me as there are coves in
Sydney as wears undershirts, an’ shirts, an’
weskits, an’ coats, an’ overcoats, an’ sox, an’
under-pants, an’ pants, an’ leggins, an’ collar
an’ tie. an’ hat, an’ boots, an’ ther devil
knows what besides.
“ Now, I ask yous, s’posin’ all that ’ere is
true, what sort er coves them must be when
they’s peeled their bark off ? Why don’t
they stop in bed altogether, I sez, ef they be
so delicate. Pants an’ shirt fer every day
an’ coat fer Sunday is enough fer any man,
an’ er sight too much ef we was all in our
right minds. Clothes is er pack o’ lies when
yer comes ter think o’ it. Take all ther
clothes off every back in Noo South Wales
ter-morrer, an’ we should sort up different.
Some o’ ther blokes what is up top ’ud go
ter ther bottom pretty quick, take my word
fer it. You’d see then who works with their
arms, an’ who with their bellies, an’ act
accordin’. Some o’ them walkin’ casks ’ud
have ter take a spell behind ther plough
handles, or I’m much mistook.”
• • • • • •
The weather cleared as suddenly as it had
clouded, and the sun came out with a
blazing apology for its short absence. The
girls went behind bushes to wring out their
clothes. Jabez led the way to a distant
waterhole, where the men had a swim while
their clothes dried on the bank, and in an
hour the party had assembled again—fresh,
dry, and only a little limp in the collar and
tie department as a result of the deluge.
They walked home two and two, but
without measured step, and each pair re-
solved apparently to find a new track for
themselves. So it came about that the party
was scattered in the scrub, and soon only
the shouting voices of men and the squeaks
and squeals of girls told of their presence.
When they arrived at the house for tea
her sisters looked very hard at Euphemia,
whose eyes flamed in triumph, and whose
rosy cheeks were an even rosier red.
“Ho has ! ” said Tilly to Sarah Jane.
“ No ; do you really think so ? ” said Sarah
Jane. “ He’s not game ! ”
But they had to bottle up their curiosity
till they were all in bed together, with no
interested listeners.
“ Did he pop ? I know he popped ! ” ex-
claimed Tilly.
“ Oh, tell us quick ! ” cried Sarah Jane.
“ Yes, he popped,” said Euphemia. “ And
he’s very nice indeed.”
“ Now, tell us how he did it, every word,
there’s a dear,” demanded Sarah, as she
kissed her sister. “ Every little word, and
how he looked, and what you said, and
everything—everything ! ”
Thus pressed, Euphemia gave in detail an
account of the historic incident.
“We were cornin’ home. I held ther
basket, an’ he said he thought I was not quite
dry, and he squeezed me to make sure. Then
he asked me if I liked sardines. I said I
loved sardines like anything. He said that
was wonderful, for he liked sardines, too.
Then he asked me if I liked mustard pickles.
I said I doted on pickles, and most of all on
mustard pickles. He said it was most extra-
ordinary, for he had had a passion for
mustard pickles ever since he was a boy.
Then he seemed to think a bit, and squeezed
me again, before he asked me ‘ Do you like
meat pie ? ’ I told him I just raved for meat
pie. particularly with a flaky crust and
3


plenty of gravy. * Good Heavens ! ’ he said,
‘we are made for each other. Will you
marry me ? ’ Then he squeezed me a lot
more, an’ acted the goat. An’ I said he was
silly, an’ I must ask Mums, an’ I was never
so surprised in me life, an’ all that sort o’
thing. Oh ! he was very nice, only his eye-
glass hurts. He’s not too bad-looking, is he,
now ? ”
It was unanimously agreed that the
proposal had been very romantic, that Mr.
Gohighly had acquitted himself most credit-
ably, and that Euphemia, with the prospect
of a city residence in Redfern. was a girl to
be envied.
“ It was ther tart that did it ! ” murmured
Euphemia finally, as she dropped off to sleep.
“It was the tart. I knew it would ! ”
CHAPTER XIV.
'Possum Shooting.
After tea Jabez suggested that, as the
moon was nearly full they should do
a little ’possum shooting that night. Anxious
to escape the enquiring eyes of the feminine
Waybacks, who were staring hard at him as
though curious to see how a man looked
when he had just “ popped,” and being still
aglow, with sporting enthusiasm, Horace
readily consented, and, filling his bandolier
to its utmost capacity with shot cartridge,
he sallied forth into the night.
Jabez, Rube, and Horace formed the party,
round whom jumped Blucher, barking and
yelping with delight at the sight of the guns.
“ Find ’em, boy ! Find ’em ! ” cried Jabez,
and the dog. with a gleam of white tail in
the moonlight, darted off amongst the trees.
The sky overhead was clear and star-
lit, the air had a gladsome lightness,
and that soft and balmy lusciousness
of temperature that so often makes the
Australian bush a forecaste of the Elysian
Fields. The half-lights gave an aspect of
solemn grandeur to the long rows of tall tree
trunks that rose skywards in a thousand
columns. A feeling of reverence seemed
fitting to the scene, as though in the aisle
of some vast cathedral ; the fretted
moonbeams might have passed through
Gothic windows, so nearly did the gum
leaves serve that purpose.
Horace had little time, however, to note
these impressions, for Blucher could be heard
industriously barking at the foot of a distant
box tree.
“ Where is he ? ” cried Horace, when they
had reached the tree, round which he was
jumping with almost the activity of Blucher,
at the same time trying to brace his eye-glass
in place and locate the ’possum in the boughs
above.
“We must moon him,” said Jabez,
stepping well back and moving sideways so
as to get the whole of the tree, branch by
branch, in a line between his eyes and the
moon.
“ That’s him ! ” cried Rube, “ out there
on the fork.”
“ Where, where ? ” demanded Horace, who
had already brought his gun to the shoulder
in case, no doubt, the ’possum should make
a sudden bolt for it.
After he had screwed his eye-glass on his
nose at least a dozen times, and stared in
every part of the tree but the right one,
Horace finally recognised the ’possum
quietly perched on a branch gazing down at
him.
“Why, anybody could see that,” said
Horace ; “ he’s as big as a cat. But he don’t
look alive ; he’s as quiet as my flathead in
the glass case.”
“ Have er shot at him ? ” suggested Jabez.
Quick to act, Horace had already pointed
his gun, closed his eyes, and pulled the
trigger.


At the report Blucher yelped and barked
like mad, jumping in the air to catch the
falling game.
“ Where is he ?” cried Horace. “ I know I
hit him.”
“ Ran higher up the tree,” said Rube ;
“ there he is, out there on the small limb.”
“ That shows he doesn’t like it,” said
Horace. “ I knew I hit him. Now for the
other barrel.”
Another bang. Again Blucher yelped and
jumped in the air, snapping at some
visionary falling body ; but as for the
’possum, he remained in meditative ease,
looking calmly down on the assemblage as
though to ask them what all that fuss was
about.
“ They do take a lot o’ killing,” muttered
Horace, as he re-loaded his gun ; I think
there must be something wrong with these
cartridges.”
At the third shot Blucher was not so
expectant ; he only wagged his tail. Blucher
was a dog of sanguine temperament, easily
elated, and as quickly depressed, and now,
being for the third time disappointed, he
deliberately turned his stern to the company
and walked quietly homeward. What his
thoughts were could not have been more
plainly expressed.
“ What does the dog do that for ? ”
enquired Horace.
“ Sort er disgusted, thinks ther shootin’
ain’t good enough,” answered Rube.
“ Fetch him back, Rube, an’ I’ll bring ther
’possum down. Yer see, he ain’t used ter
amatoors, that ere dorg. When he finds ’em
he ’spects yer ter shoot ’em quick an’ lively.”
“ Most extraordinary ! Most extraordi-
nary ! ” cried Horace ; “ it’s all the fault of
those beastly cartridges.”
Rube having dragged back the unwilling
Blucher, Jabez fired one shot, and the
’possum fell like a brick on to Horace’s hat,
flattening it down over his eyes, while
Blucher, waking into sudden animation,
sprang at the ’possum, and knocked Horace
off his feet.
“ Ob, I say ! That’s not fair, you know.
You might have said he was coming ; he
might have bit me ; but what a beauty ! ”
continued Horace, when he had recovered
his feet, and was holding the furry ’possum
by the tail. “ And it must have been my
shots killed him, for I fired three times and
you only once.”
- “ Oh, you killed him all right,” said Jabez.
“ I only just blew him off the tree. Now
let’s find another. Sool him, boy ! Find him.
Blucher, find him ! ”
Thus encouraged, Blucher was soon heard
barking again, and this time with determina-
tion, as though he meant to pull down the
tree himself.
When they reached the tree a curious sight
met Mr. Gohighly’s eyes. Half-way up the
tree an old man’s face, with a black-bottle
nose, the head joined on to a dog’s body,
peered down on them.
» Oh, say ! What’s that ? ”
“ That’s a bear. They are no good ; we’d
best leave it,” replied Jabez. “ ’Possums is
better sport.”
“ What! Leave a bear ! ” cried Horace.
“ He’s not dangerous, is he ? Will he bite
or spring on a fellow ? ”
‘‘As harmless as a child,” said Jabez.
“ Shoot if yers like; I’ll go off for
’possums.”
Horace wondered a little why Jabez
should bother to go away so soon when it
would only be a few minutes, and the bear
would be bagged. He took good aim, and
fired. The bear blinked at him. Fired again,
a third time, a fourth, fired now with his
eyes open, and kept on firing, pausing only to
meet the cheerful blink from the bear’s big
eyes, that seemed to say : “ Try again, old
man ; you’ll tickle me presently and make
me laugh.”
With heroic perseverance Horace con-
tinued to blaze away till his bandolier was
nearly empty. He had an idea that in time
the mere weight of the lead he had pumped
into that bear would make him top-heavy,
and roll him over.
“ Are yer shootin’ ther Boers, Mister ?
It was Dads who had come up unperceived.


I thought by ther noise I heard down at
ther house that yous had got that De
Wet cornered fer sure.”
“ No, I’m shooting a bear,” said Horace.
“ I>m sure I winged him last time.”
“ Well Ibe sugared ! ” cried Dads. “ Why
don’t cher knock him down with er stick ?
Shot’s no good fer bears—just knocks ther
dust out o’ their fur. Yous wants rocks or
a bullet fer bears. But they’s harmless
critters where they is, an’ no sort o’ use
when yous got ’em, so best let ’em bide, I
sez.”
“°h ! if that’s the case,” said Horace,
with a superior air, “ I won’t bother to shoot
him.”
It was well he had come to this resolve,
for his cartridges were exhausted ; so he
turned and walked back with Dads.
“ They tell me,” said Dads, “ that you an’
my gal Euphemia has made er match o’ it—
goin’ ter take each other fer better an’ hope
it won’t be wuss, as yer may say.”
“ Yes, Mr. Wayback. I meant to tell you,
to ask your consent,” answered Horace,
apologetically.
“ That’s all right, Mister ; that’s all right.
Shake hands on it—it’s er bargain. An’ mind
yer, you’ve got er good gal—er real good
gal,” and Dads pumped away at Horace’s
arm till it was nearly dislocated at the
shoulder. “ I see yer knows what’s what,
though yer does come from Sydney.
’Phemia’s ther pick o’ ther bunch, that’s
what she is. Not a gal this side o’ ther
Wallaby Ranges can strip er cow dry like her,
an’ she has er natural gift fer pigs as is
surprisin’.
“ It’s ther breedin’ as does it. Yer see, she
comes o’ good stock, sire an’ dam. My folks
an’ Mums’ was both imported, an’ that talks.
Clive me blood, I sez, o’ ther right sort, an’
good heifers is er moral. Then she’s er handy
gal with er hoe or er axe, an’ yers can’t put
her wrong with er long-handled shovel. Tilly
beats her in readin’ an’ spellin’, I allows ;
but ter make ther butter come quick in ther
churn, she’s fust every time. An’ er nice
cold hand she’s got fer saltin’ beef an’ pork,
an’ er hie like er hawk fer findin’ hens’ nests
in ther bush.
“ She’s been er good darter. I disremember
as I ever give er ther belt more than once er
week, an’ I never knowed er fight with ther
other kids more than er share. She’s er real
'fectionate gal when she ain’t crossed an’
gets what she wants. She eats well, sleeps
well, an’ is as sound on her legs as er three-
year-old. Steady in ther collar, yer can’t put
her wrong ; she’s done tip-top in single har-
ness, an’ if I’m not mistook, she’ll go A 1 in
double.”
CHAPTER XV.
Euphemia is Congratulated.
“ We must have er darns an’ do ther thing
proper,” said Mums, when told of Euphe-
mia’s engagement.
“ That don’t mean er new rig-out, do it ? ”
enquired Dads, doubtfuly.
“ Only er dress er piece fer ther gals,”
said Mums.
“ Well, I’ll be sugared ! ” ejaculated Dads.
“ Didn’t they have new bark and slabs down
in Sydney ? ”
“ Yes,” said Mums.
“ An agen, afore these people come, er new
lime-wash inside an’ out, as yer may say, an’
now another coat! It don’t stand ter reason.
My moles an’ bluchers is as good as ever.
Why ain’t theirn ? ”
Dads reasoned from force of habit, for he
knew from experience that if new dresses
were decided on, new dresses it would be,
with the whirr of the sewing machine In the
house and snips of lining flying about the
yard for a week.


“ Which pig can we have for the raffle,
'Dads ? ” enquired Tilly.
It may here be as well to explain that a
party or dance in the district of Dingo Flat
always implied a raffle. A pig worth, per-
haps, fifteen shillings, would be raffled
.amongst twenty members at half-a-crown a
ticket, it being understood that the
subscribers invited to the drawing would
remain for the festivities. The margin of
money received over the value of the pig
paid expenses, and often showed a profit.
Better still, in some houses the pig itself
was always won by a member of the family,
-who had taken an odd ticket. Mulgraves had
a pig they had raffled five times, and it was
still in their sty. Folks laughed at Mul-
grave’s raffle pig, whilst declaring that for
their part they had cut their money’s worth
-out of the tucker.
“ Yous can have ther little stumpy,” said
Dads, in answer to Tilly’s enquiry. “He’s
alius'first in the trough at feedin’ time an’
last out, but he don’t grow ter no size ter
speak of. He’ll do fer pork, but he won’t
make no bacon. Strange when yer comes
ter think o’ it, them as has ther biggest
■swaller alius has ther least ter show fer it.
“ Talkin’ o’ pigs,” continued Dads, “ I been
thinkin’ there’s summat wrong in this yer
marriage business. Yous rears a gal,
tuckers her, heddicates her, an’ breaks her
in, as yer may say, ter all kinds o’ handiness,
an’ jest as she gets useful like, er cove comes
. along as is lookin’ out fer er servant on ther
cheap, an’ he sez, ‘I wants that there gal,’
an’ he takes her without ser much as thank
yer, an’ she goes an’ cooks an’ washes fer
him fer ever arter. You’ve lost yer gal, an’
all yer time an’ trouble, an’ she don’t think
o’ yous no more. So I figures it out gals is
poor stock ter raise, an’ it’s not ther puffect
pumpkin, howsomever yous looks at it.”
.
While ways and means for the coming
dance were being discussed by the heads of
the family, Palmira had drawn Euphemia
into her room for “ a good long talk.”
“ Oh ! you dear ; I’m so glad, you can’t
think ! ” and Palmira kissed Euphemia as
though that young lady were a sugar-stjck
and required much suction. “ I never
thought Horace would—l had no idea of it—
he is so particular, you know. lam really
afraid I’ve spoilt him—and so critical, I
thought no girl would ever please him. And
there were plenty in Sydney just dying for
him—real nice girls, too, some of them—and
he’d not so much as look at them. But I’m
so glad it’s you, for you will be able to
appreciate him. He has a noble soul ; he’s
full of soul, and he likes his chops under-
done.
“ Oh, you darling ! Only fancy ! I’m sure
you’ll make the dearest, sweetest sister in
the world, and mind you take great care of
him, for he’s so delicate, so fragile, you know.
He has tq be ever so careful what he eats
and drinks, but he won’t if you don’t watch
him. He is just mad for pies—meat and
pastry—and they always make him as bilious
as anything. Did you notice how yellow he
looked last Tuesday after he had three
helpings of jam roll ? Now, mind you never
give him jam roll, or he will be sulky as a
bear for a week after.
“ He always has to wear under-flannels.
Now mind you see he never leaves them off.
He don’ like them, but he’ll catch his death
if he doesn’t. So do remember, there’s a
dear ! You’ll find it best to wash the flannels
at home. Those laundry people will put
them into hot suds, no matter what you say.
and make them hard like boards. I do
believe minding one man is worse than two
babies.
“ He has the morning paper for breakfast.
Mind you air it at the fire. There is nothing
so bad for the chest as a damp paper. I give
him three white shirts a week. He always
wants more, but it’s extravagant and
ridiculous, and you must put your foot down
firm at once. We always have breakfast at
a quarter to B—loin chops on Monday, steak
on Tuesday, leg chops on Wednesday,
sausages Thursday, fish Friday, pork chops
Saturday, and Sunday, when there is no
butcher, bacon and eggs. He is only to have
two cups of tea, or he gets that nervous and


fidgety there is no bearing him ; and two
rounds of dry toast. Mind it is dry ; he
always wants it hot, though he knows it
gives him indigestion. And, above all, dear,
remember if he comes home with his feet
wet, he’s to put them in hot water at once
and go to bed.”
• •••••
When Euphemia finally escaped from
Palmira’s sisterly advice and warnings, it
was only to fall in the way of Dads, who
considered it his duty to offer a little fatherly
advice.
“ So yous made it up with this here Sydney
cove, ’Phemia. I don’t say as yer wrong, an’
don’t say as yer right. Gals ain’t got ter be
too particular these times. He ain’t much
ter look at, an’ he don’t shape nohows with*
an axe, nor I don’t think as he’s ther sort as
’ull ever light er bush fire in Sydney Harbor p
but I reckon he’s as good as they make ’em-
down there. All they Sydney coves knows
wouldn’t keep ’em warm in er southerly
buster, an’ they thinks they knows everythin’
— ■which is ther worst kind o’ hignorance.
But there, what can yers expect on ther
tucker they gets. I guarantees ef you filled
him up with corned beef three times er day
fer six months yous wouldn’t know him. An’
0
mind ! Don’t yous be sot on, me gal. Allus-
remember yous er Wayback from Dingo Flat
—pure blood from imported stock ; as good*
as any in ther land, an’ er dashed sight
better ! ”
CHAPTER XVI.
A Bush Family.
To the bush feminine mind there is joy in
getting a young man, or “ boy but it is a
young girl’s supreme delight to display him,
to carry him round, to trot him out before
all the girls who have not got a “ boy.” She
knows how they feel, because she has felt
that way herself, and to see the envy of their
eyes, and to hear the malice of their words,
is the measure of her success.
Of course, Euphemia felt this way, and
Tilly and Sarah Jane, in a less degree, with
a kind of reflected triumph, as close
associates in the victory. And, as in old
times the Roman general paraded his
captives before the multitude, so the Way-
back girls hugged each other at the prospect
of carting Mr. Gohigldy round the neighbor-
hood to show to all their friends. It was a
delight they would not have missed for
anything. And it was vain for Horace to
protest when he had some inkling of what
was in store for him. for Euphemia, backed
and urged by her sisters, had decided that
the husband breaking-in process could not
commence too soon, and that, on principle,
a man at the earliest date should learn to-
know his place.
Selling the raffle tickets for the pig offered'
the opportunity, and Sunday, as the day oa
which everyone was at home, was chosen as
the day of ceremony, and after due pre-
paration the buggy was brought to the door.
There are two ambitions common to all)
dwellers in slab humpies with bark roofs ;
it is not to have a better house, or furniture,
or farm, but to own a 50-guinea buggy in
the first place, and a piano in the next. And
once the buggy is obtained the owner is quite-
content to sleep under a leaky roof so long
as the buggy is safe and dry. And though
the piano may have no company on the clay
floor of the hut but three-legged stools, and
though no one may be able to play it, except
with one finger, it radiates a tone over its


-surroundings to which the most sceptical
bush person succumbs. Such being public
sentiment, it will be readily understood that
when Dads finally got his big cheque, and
the family made their memorable visit to
Sydney, it was with the clear understanding
that sufficient cash should be set aside for
the buggy.
The three girls and Mr. Gohighly mounted
the buggy, and the whole family of Way-
backs assembled to see them off. Everyone
was beaming but Horace, who could not rise
to the occasion, and the glory of the moment.
Tilly drove up to Brown’s selection with a
great dash of speed, and the noise and rattle
brought out from the kitchen old Brown,
Mrs. Brown, and the whole range of assorted
*
younger BroAvns to stand and stare, open-
-eyed and mouthed.
“ Good-day, Tilly ! Good-day, Sarah Jane
and ’Phemia ; how’s yer doin’ ? ” It was old
BroAvn Avho had found his breath first.
“ Mr. Gohighly, from Sydney,” said Tilly,
introducing Horace.
“ Hoav are yer, mister ; think we’s goin’
ter have rain ? Don’t know, sez you, ask
Wragge. Now, what I wants ter know is
this here : What’s ther good o’ havin’ blokes
ter tell yer what ther weather is, if they don’t
serve it out no better than it used ter was,
afore we had these here blokes ? ”
By this time the Avhole party had been
ushered into the best room, and it may be
well, as Brown’s house was a duplicate of
all the others they called at later on, to
describe it in detail : It was a four-roomed
slab house, with shingle roof, slab fireplace,
with boarded chimney. The roof projected
over the front part so that it formed a six-
feet verandah, and the whole of the outside
of the building within reach was whitened
with pipeclay. In front of the house was a
little garden, surrounded by a white picket
fence. Fastened to the verandah posts were
two staghorn ferns. There were glazed
windows to the front rooms, and wooden
•doors to the back. The front room contained
•cretonne-covered furniture, smothered in
white antimacassars, a table bearing a wax
fruit ornament under a glass shade, and an
assortment of highly-colored crockery stuck
about where it would catch the most dust.
Hanging on the wall was a framed photo-
graphic enlargement of old Brown, done by
a sign-painter, with other family portraits in
all stages of “ fade,” and a colored almanac.
“ The Three Graces.” The window was
carefully covered with a dark curtain to keep
the sun and flies out, and there was a smell
in the room like that of an old clothes shop.
The back room contained a bare table, stools,
form, safe, and dresser, and while the front
room had a calico ceiling, this was open to
the shingles, and pieces of bacon hung to the
beams*above. A tired clock ticked over the
fireplace. This was the dining-room ;
the other two rooms were for sleeping ; there
was no passage in the house. When more
bedrooms were necessary lean-to rooms were
added. Twenty feet away from the house
stood a bark-roofed humpy, built of slabs,
open to the weather, and the inside bark
black with smoke. This was the kitchen,
the real home of the family, the fowls, a
stray pig, and the cats and dogs. So little
was the front room of the house used that it
was doubtful if some of the family had ever
entered it ; certainly those who did left it as
quickly as possible. Yet this holy of holies
was inexpressibly precious to the family-
even as a dress-suit is to a man who never
has a chance to wear it.
When Horace had pump-handled and said,
“ I hope you are quite well ” to each one of
the Browns, he was allowed to seat himself
on a very prickly antimacassar and listen
to the words of friendliness uttered by old
BroAvn. As for the women folk, they had all
promptly drifted to the kitchen, and in its
hospitable atmosphere were all talking at
once, and Euphemia was tasting her triumph
in big gulps.
“ They sez,” remarked old Brown to
Horace, “that this here Federation is goin’
ter dew er lot fer we farmers, but since it
come off I never knowed er time when it was
ser dry. That don’t speak well fer it. What
Ave wants is more money circerlated, an’ I


hopes you’ll tell those blokes down in Sydney
what I sez.
“ Now, what we wants is er proper road
inter Barjo ; it ’ud only cost five or six
hundred quid, an’ we coves round here ’ud
do it cheap ef ser be’s we got the job. Now,
will Federation give us that there road, is
what I sez ? Ef it won’t, what’s ther good
o’ Federation, I’d like ter know ? * What’s
ther good,’ sez you, or any cove with sense,
‘ ef it don’t make ther money circerlate ? ’ ”
Horace had not long to listen to old
Brown’s political opinions, for the Misses
Waybacks, having skimmed the cream off the
feminine Browns’ admiration, and sold a
raffle ticket, resolutely declined to remain for
refreshment,, and they were soon driving on
to Mr. White’s, and then to old Asker’s place,
and Bullocky Thompson’s, and Squint-eyed
Grogan’s, and many more besides, and all
the people everywhere were much like the
Browns.
CHAPTER XVII.
The Raffle.
On the night of the dance Dingo Flat
awoke to unusual animation. Not only had
the house been re-decorated throughout with
green bushes and pipeclay, but the kitchen
table and shelves were loaded with all sorts
of solid provisions, as though an army on
trek were expected to call. Anxious eyes
could see the first buggy pull up and stop in
the scrub half a mile away, waiting till
others should come, so as to arrive in a
crowd at the house. Old Dads was outside,
beaming, looking redder in the face, and
more like old Father Christmas than ever.
He took charge of the men folk, and led
them off to an outhouse, where a keg of beer
was tapped, and a range of bottles opened
the eloquence of Barjo men. As this out-
house was next to the stable, and fragrant
with the smell of horse, it was sociable and
home-like, and made all the men feel at ease
at once.
Mums and the girls took possession of the
lady visitors, and it was a point of honor to
make them eat. “ I’m not hungry a bit ; I
could not eat a crumb if I tried.” This was
the general response, after which the lady
visitor concealed enough provisions to feed
an average workman’s family, and then filled
her pocket with lollies.
But old Jack Pegleg was already tuning
up his fiddle in the barn, and little Jim
making groans with his concertina, so the
company began to shuffle their feet to get
them in trim, as it were. The men were
ranged about the barn, all leaning against
something, solemn and silent. The girls
came along in troops, giggling and whispering
one to the other.
“ Now you blokes ! ” shouted Dads, who
was M.C., “ hook on ter yer gals for ther fust
dance ; all coves as don’t wear boots can
stand outside. Ther fust hop u’ll be er
polkey, an’ take yer time from ther fiddle.”
The last instruction from Dads was very
necessary, as little Jim was only invited to
give tone to the band, as he knew but one
tune, with which he chased the fiddle all the
time.
Horace led off the dance with Euphemia,
then Jabez with Palmira, Tilly with Tom
Rawson, Sarah Jane with Teddy Mulgrave,
and assorted couples quickly crowded in on
the previously deserted floor. Shortly they
became so densely packed that with every
jump and kick they bumped and knocked
each other, which was so friendly and jolly
a proceeding that all began to enjoy them-
selves.
In the intervals for refreshment that
followed after the succeeding dances, the


ladies went into the nouse to drink tea and
eat tarts and more solid nourishment, w T hilst
the gentlemen found their way to the shed
and the beer-cask. Time or beer seemed to
wear out the reticence of the men, for, as
interval succeeded interval, they became
more talkative, and bumped each other in the
dances with more freedom than at first. A
spell was called for the raffle, and each
person with a ticket advanced to the table
and shook the dice. Horace, having a ticket,
Euphemia threw for him two 6’s and a 5,
and, much to his alarm, that number won.
“ Oh, I say ; I don’t want it, you know.
What am I to do with it ? Fancy it in our
yard in Sydney ; it would eat the dog. I will
let it go wild in the bush.”
“ May I have it ? ” asked Euphemia.
“ I wish you would, and I’ll thank you for
ever.”
Euphemia immediately got up another
raffle at one shilling a member, pocketed a
pound, and solved the difficulty.
During the intervals in the dancing some
of the couples strolled off in the orchard,
always seeking, by a curious coincidence, the
moonless side of the trees. Jabez and
Palmira were of the couples seeking poetry
under the orange-leaves, and Jabez, who had
helped Dads to be hospitable in the beer-
shed, felt an unusual eloquence, and was
saying :
“ It’s this way, yer know. I’m er particular
sort o’ bloke ; it’s not every piece I pick up
with. I always said I’d go fer er Sydney gal
of I had ther chance ; theys got more style,
an’ I don’t reckon they eats as much, an’
that tells, for I’ve got er good pecker myself.
Now, Howard, down ther creek, wants ter
leave, an’ let his place on halves ; it’s er
ehance in er lifetime, as yer may say ; but
er bloke wants er missus ter boss ther pigs
an’ cows an* ther like o’ that. How d’yer
like ther job ? ”
“ Do you really mean it ? ” cried Palmira,
in a voice eloquent with love, as she sank
into Jabez's arms. “ Only fancy keeping pigs
with you ; how lovely ! ”
The rest of her words were almost in-
coherent. Jabez had to nearly carry her
back through the orchard, and he -was
astonished, like many a male before him, at
the undreamt-of weight concealed in the
person of a little woman.
But Palmira quickly recovered her activity
when close to the barn, and hurried forward
alone to find Horace and tell her joy. She
found that gentleman sitting by the shed,
and as she came up he slid to the ground,
and lay his full length. His face was as
white as flour, and he muttered words she
could hardly understand :
“ When you’ve got him hooked you want
to hold the line tight—now, steady ! Don’t
give him his head. Haul in hand over hand
and shoot behind the shoulder. That hit
him. I made him sit up. Now the other
barrel.”
“ Oh, Horace, dear ! speak to me. What’s
the matter with you ? ”
“ I’m all right ; give me another glass.
The green cartridges are the best.”
“ Oh. my poor brother ; my poor Horace.
He’s in a fit ! He’s raving ; He’s dying !
Oh, my poor dear Horace, what shall I do,
what shall I do ? ”
At her first cry out Euphemia had hurried
to Palmira’s side, and that lady clung to her
sobbing. “ What shall I do ! What shall I
do ! ”
After a critical glance Euphemia promptly
diagnosed the case, and called to Jabez.
“ Take him inside, Jabe, and give him some
Worcester sauce. He’s tight ! ”
Palmira was shocked. “It can’t be. Never
can I believe it. My poor, dear Horace.”
“ Oh, he’s tight all right,” said Euphemia,
“ an’ he’s er poor sort o’ bloke as don’t get
tight sometimes. Does er man good, Mums
sez.”
This was quite a new view of the case for
Palmira, who felt much relieved, and she
was able to draw Euphemia away and tell
her the new and wonderful secret by which
in the future they were to be made doubly
sisters.
In the barn the sport was just warming
up. In the centre of a ring of admiring eyes


Dads and Mums were dancing an Irish jig,
and the shouts that they gaye, and in which
everybody joined, could be heard by the
’possums in the gum trees miles away.
Mums had not a smile on her face, but made
all her steps seriously, as though it was a
religious function. Dads kept shouting to
* Pegleg to hurry the tune, but with a glass of
beer on one side of him, and a bottle of rum
on the other, the fiddle refused to mend its
pace. Other old couples started, man and
woman facing each other, circling round,
stamping, banging, screeching with a joyous-
ness as good as a wake. And the old limbs
never seemed to tire as the young people
urged them on.
As the night passed away everyone
standing shouted and jumped, clapped each
other on the back, and shouted and jumped
again. It was glorious. And it was now
that Euphemia received the congratulations
that most of the men had been too shy to
venture on before.
He seems er real proper sort o’ bloke, my
dear,” said old Brown ; “ he’s talked ter me
a power o’ sense about this here Federation.
* Glad ter hear it,’ sez you, an’ you was about
right, fer er man as can talk sense about
pollyticks knows how ter buy cows, an’ take-
ther pigs ter market.”
“ I wish yer .iie,” said Bullocky Thompson.
“Yer can’t judge er jint by ther paper it’s
wropped in, or er pumpkin by ther color o’
ther skin ; an’ though I don’t hold much with
Sydney blokes meself, it’s like enough there’s
er good ’un among ’em here and there.”
The grey sky of dawn was in the east
when Mums said : “ Gals, you best go an’
, find ther cows fer milkin’.” The last of the
buggies had just hurried away to take the
feminine visitors home for the same purpose.
No one had any thought of going to bed.
Dads had already fed his plough-horses, and.
Jabez was sharpening a scythe for the
mowing of green feed. Only the degenerate
Sydneyites, Mr. and Miss Gohighly, had
retired to their rooms.
Dads found, with a sigh, that the cask and;
bottles were empty ; but the general verdict
of all the district was that Euphemia’s raffle-
had been a great success.
CHAPTER XVIII.
The Barjo Show.
After the dance the Wayback household
was excited over a new prospect. The Barjo
Show was at hand, and preparations had to
be made to arrange the family exhibits. Mr.
Gohighly, as a future member of the family,
was now admitted to its full confidence, and
he learned with astonishment the business
acumen of his prospective relatives.
Dads was entering two exhibits. One was
the best collection of citrous fruits, first prize
five pounds. To obtain the twenty samples
necessary Dads scoured the neighborhood for
miles round, getting Lisbon lemons here,
shaddocks there, and citrons at yet another
place. Four kinds of mandarins came from
up the ranges, and as Dads supplied the
common oranges and lemons himself, there-
was no doubt the collection was genuine. The
second exhibit, for a like prize, was for the
best collection of vegetables. This was a
simple matter, as the whole lot were
purchased of a Chinaman in a distant town-
ship. the addition of one home-grown
pumpkin giving the necessary local flavor.
Mums’ specialty was bottled fruit, in,
which the points of excellence are clearness-
of the syrup and freshness of the fruit. The-
problem was solved with a directness and
simplicity that took away Horace’s breath..
Six bottles were filled with fruit purchased^


tfrom neighbors, filled with cold water, and
sealed. As the water came from the Way-
backs’ well, this was undoubtedly a local
industry.
Sarah Jane had entered for the home-made
bread contest, and arranged with Toms, the
Barjo baker, to make it for her ; but she was
■disgusted to find on calling for it that two
other girls had had the same idea. Sarah
Jane thought it real mean, and expressed her
feelings freely to Mr. Toms.
Euphemia, who was showing lollies,
-secured her exhibit from Sydney by the aid
•of Mr. Gohighly. She was confident that her
•caramels and chocolate creams would be
lhard to heat.
Tilly, who in previous shows had already
-scored twice in the Fine Art section with
her picture of a cow and a haystack, entered
it a third time, also a tracing she had made
by drawing on thin paper placed over
.another.
*
In the needlework section Delia entered a
lace handkerchief worked by a grandmother
.at some prehistoric time ; it was a wonderful
piece of work, and had already secured ten
prizes.
“ I thought, Mr. Wayback,” said Horace,
“ that as this was an agricultural show you
would be taking your grand Clydesdale
horse and some of your fine pigs and
poultry ? ”
“ Not me,” said Dads. “ Taint worth ther
bother an’ risk. None of us coves takes any-
thin’ that’s worth much except er few blokes
as has er pint ter work an’ lives on ther
; game.”
“ Then what’s the Show for ? ”
“ Ter bring Guv’ment money inter ther
■ district —that’s ther racket. Yer see, they
:gives pound fer pound fer all wes put down.
• So we works it this way. ’Sposin I’se got er
one-horned cow ; then I gives er prize o’
twenty pounds fer ther best one-horned cow
in ther Show, an’ I sends my beast an’ gets
■me money back, an’ ther Show gets another
twenty quid from Sydney. They thinks
vtheirselves mighty smart down there ; but
we knows er thing er two in Barjo, I can
tell yer.”
“ Don’t you find the exhibit of the Agri-
cultural Department very instructive ? ” said
Horace. “ I have seen it at the Sydney
Show, and I am sure a farmer who under-
stands it would be delighted.”
“ I understands it right enough ; but its
this way, young feller : There’s er lot er
fat billets fer er lot o’ nice toffs as chuck
sovereigns in ther sile an’ reaps sixpences,
as yer may say ; ther experience is very
pretty and very new, but er farmer as wants
ter keep out o’ ther Benevolent Asylum ain’t
particular struck on ’em. Show us er man
as caq plant sixpences and reap quids, that’s
ther bloke we wants. I knowed one o’ these
here experts. He was er bloke as could
never earn his tucker till he struck that ’ere
job. It was er fust-class lay fer him an’
er lot more.”
• •••••
The news of Palmira’s engagement to
Jabez came quite as a shock to the Misses
Way back.
“ The idea,” said Euphemia, “ of that kid
getting married ! ” (Jabez, by the way, was
four years older than Euphemia). “ And the
scheming, designing little cat. I’m sure she
must have asked him herself. Jabez never
had the cheek to look at a girl. Poor boy,
won’t she keep his nose to the grindstone
to find all her fine dresses and the rest of
it ! A Sydney girl, indeed ! As though we
were not good enough ! Mums ought ter
put er stop to it! ”
Euphemia, being engaged, took the lead
in conversation, but on this question she
only echoed the sentiments of Tilly and
Sarah Jane.
“We ought to have looked after him
better, and not given her the chance,” said
Tilly. “ But then, who’d er thought it ? I
believe some girls would marry a baby in
arms if they could get the chance.”
“ An’ ther slyness of her, never to breathe
er word of what she was up to,” joined in
Sarah Jane. “ An’ now it's all Jabez this an’


Jabez that ; enough ter make yer sick !
What she can see in him beats me.”
But these outpourings were strictly con-
fidential between themselves, and Miss
Gohighly was now saluted effusively as
“ Palmira, dear,” and squeezed and kissed
by her future sisters-in-law a dozen times a
day.
One surprise the Waybacks had. Early
one morning Palmira, as a special favor,
asked Mums- and the three eldest girls to
• *
go on a visit they had often spoken of and
leave Delia with her to manage the house
by herself. This proposal was agreed to
very readily, as Tilly perceived a chance of
dissolving Palmira’s dream of bliss as a
farmer’s wife.
“ What fun when we come home,” said
Sarah Jane. “ Ther’s ther bread ter bake,
ther butter ter make, ther dinner ter get
ready fer ther boys, all the beds ter make,
an’ fowls ter feed, an’ ’er heap er dirty
things ter wash. My word, won’t she wish
she hadn’t.”
But to the lasting astonishment of Mums
and the Miss Waybacks, when, out of pity,
they returned early In the day to give a
hand in clearing up the inevitable mess,
there was Palmira neatly dnessed and calmly
sewing under the verandah, all the house-
work done and the kitchen neater and more
ordered than they had ever seen it. The
bread was baked to a turn, the butter made,
and the house as spick and span as a well-
kept dairy.
How had she done it ? They could not
believe their eyes. It would have taken all
four of them the best part of a long day to
achieve the same result. They eagerly
interrogated Delia.
“Oh ! it's er way she’s got. She never
stops er minute, an’ ther things seems ter
do theirselves ther way she does ’em. By
crikey! yous er lot er chunks er wood,
that’s what yous are. Yous don’t know how
ter do nuffin.”
By this it will be seen that Delia had
gone heart and soul over to the enemy, and
made no bones of expressing her opinion on
her sisters’ capacities. Yet Palmira’s secret
by which she had captured the critical good'
will of Delia was very simple. During her
residence at Dingo Flat she had noted the
household management, and with her
orderly, mathematical turn of mind had
quickly seen how much time could be saved
by method and system. Before volunteering
for her task, Palmira had prepared a
schedule of all the duties to be done and
the order and time necessary to do them ;
and as she did not yarn, or get in her own
way, or spend hours hunting for something
she had just, put down, or sprint about the
house doing three jobs at once at different
points of the building, or stop to do up her
hair, fasten up her skirt, or grumble because
somebody else did nothing while she wore
her hands off, it was really startling how
much was accomplished.
Mums went in the kitchen and looked at
the bread and sniffed, looked at the butter
and sniffed again, looked round the house
without a word, then she said :
*’ Yers ain’t done too bad for er new hand,
considerin’.”
Tilly was more generous. It is true that
she did not make a specialty of house-
work like Euphemia and Sarah Jane, being,
rather the artistic and literary light of the
family, so she kissed and squeezed Palmira
with loving hugs. “Oh you dear ! How-
ever did you do it. You must be a steam
engine or electric tram or something. I’d
never have thought it of you, never.”
••••••
Perhaps no one was more surprised at
the new engagement than Dads, for to the
economy of Dingo Flat it meant so much.
The departure of Jabez would necessitate
the employment of a stranger, and, worse
than that, the paying of wages. To pay
away any money Dads considered a kind of
robbery ; but to pay wages was real sacri-
lege, a desecration of custom and bush
economics. A girl more or less he could
spare—girls always seemed to be plentiful
somehow, growing up like pie-melons, with-


out special culture, and of very doubtful
value when matured. He remembered that a
truckfxil of pie-melons that he had sent to
Sydney had not paid freight. But boys
were different. A boy was as good as a man,
better than a man, for you could work him
from jackass to jackass, and then keep him
chaff-cutting for a couple of hours at night.
Men were getting that unreasonable with
their Union ideas that some of them
expected to knock off after twelve hours’
work. But Dads was too great a diplomat to
openly voice his sentiments, as they touched
him the most closely ; to have done so
might have made Jabez conceited enough to
ask for regular pay. And this marriage
might only end in talk, “ there was many a
slip between the cow and the water-hole.”
So Dads took quite a friendly attitude, as
though his own convenience was not
concerned in the matter.
“ They tells me yer thinks o’ gettin’ mar-
ried, Jabez,” said Dads to his eldest son,
when Mums had told him the news.
“ I was thinkin’ of it,” answered Jabez,
lightly, as though a new saddle or gun or
some other current requisite were the
question.
“ I ’spose yous got ter catch it, like ther
rest o’ them ; same as yer took the
measles ; I mind wes put yer ter bed fer er
week till ther spots came out. Pity there
ain’t no remedy fer gettin’ married, an’ it’s
er real old-fashioned complaint, too. Er
young feller is no sooner able to earn his
own tucker than he wants ter earn it
fer two, an’ ther two soon means er baker’s
dozen; it’s er kind o’ contract, in which ther
specifications is kept dark, as yer may say.
Yer takes on er job as looks er soft thing
till yer starts, an’ then yer finds its like
clearin’ scrub that grows up faster than yer
can grub it out. There’s er lot o’ coves wot
gives advice about marryin’, but they’s all
bin took down theirselves, an’ tries ter make
out they likes it ; same as with the hosses
they wants ter sell. Not but wot I thinks
many blokes is best married ; they deserve
it. O’ course, when yous took that way yer
don’t know what sort o’ gal yers got; she
don’t know herself ; no one knows till ther
days comes as you tears yer pants, an’ asks
her ter patch ’em. Then she begins ter tork.
Yer can’t stop her, she can’t stop herself ;
yer thinks she’ll run down, but she don’t.
The axles of er woman’s tongue never wants
hilin’ or greasin’ ; it’s just er machine, as er
cove takes home ter make himself mad. I
ain’t sayin’ er woman ain’t er reasonin’
animal; she’ll reason fast enough when she’s
made her mind up, an’ what she don’t know
ain’t worth while yer knowin’, as she’ll
pretty quick tell yer. But, lor, yous hooked,
so grin an’ say yer likes it, like the rest ! ”
I , ,
To reach the Barjo Show Ground the
Dingo Flat party had to drive through the
township. As they passed they noticed that
all the shops were closed, and the streets
deserted, and though the Waybacks were
arriving early in the day, it looked as though
the inhabitants of Barjo must all have
started before daybreak. Horace was pleased
to note this anxiety of the rural mind to
gather pearls of wisdom at its annual exhi-
bition, and as they began to overtake
innumerable vehicles of all descriptions
bound in one direction, and with the occu-
pants all smartly dressed, he began to feel
a pride in his country’s toilers.
When they reached the show ground they
found it to be a fenced paddock, with a
racecourse, grandstand, and a few assorted
sheds and tents, the stalls of lolly-vendors
and pastrycooks, a contingent of stall-
keepers from Paddy’s Market, an assort-
ment of spielers from Woolloomooloo, a
steam merry-go-round, shooting galleries,
cockshies, fortune tellers, palmists, pugilists,
a vendor of patent pills, and a show tent
with a fat girl.
The party fastened their horses to the
fence, and then hastened to explore their
sui’roundings. The crowd was already dense,
and they knew everybody, and everybody
knew them, and had to stop at every step
and enquire : “ Hullo, how yer gettin’ on ? ”
or just plain “ Hulloa ! ” so that the Way-
backs soon got separated, and thereafter


drifted in groups, with a vague idea that
they were looking for each other.
Rube and Delia made a bee-line for the
merry-go-round, and stopped on the wooden
horses they mounted till their capital was
exhausted, after which, for the rest of the
day they managed as many rides as they
could by dodging the man who collected the
money.
The three girls and Palmira wandered off
amongst the crowd, finding a continual
excitement in the dress of their friends.
“ Look at Mag ! Did yer see Mag, Tilly ?
Ther same old hat she had last year with
new trimming. There’s Sarah Davis, Ido
declare ; she’s got that blouse on that Jones
wanted ter sell Mums fer twelve-and-six.
•Jones was a draper in Barjo.) Look at
Lavinia Moon ! Don’t she fancy herself *
An’ her mother takes in washin’ ! How
does she get the money fer dress 1 should
like ter know ' An’ there’s Mrs. Allsop;
ther same old silk. Why don’t she turn it
an’ give us a change ? Is that Lizzie
Masters with er bloke ? I wonder who he is,
an’ where she picked him up. Not much of
a catch, anyway ; but there, Liz can’t be
too particular, at her age. Look how she’s
carryin’ on ; you’d fancy no girl ever had
a boy before ; enough ter make yer sick. Do
yer see, everyone’s wearin’ them big flat
hats ? Is they the fashion in Sydney,
Palmira ? ”
The girls walked up in the thickest of the
crowd half-a-dozen times, and finally paused
at the tent of an alleged Gipsy fortune-
teller.
“ I believe it’s all er pack o’ rubbish,” said
Euphemia.
“Of course it is,” said Palmira, very
decidedly.
“ But sometimes they do guess right,”
said Sarah Jane. “There was Mary Mul-
grave ; they told her when she married a
dark man she’d have twins, an’ she married
er fair man an’ had triplets, which was very
near it, anyway.”
“ I wonder if she’d know about Horace,”
said Euphemia.
“ Or Jabez,” said Palmira.
“ We’ll go in,” said Tilly ; “ but not when
anyone’s lookin’. I’m sure I don’t believe
in it ; but there might be some truth in it all
the same.”
The girls went in one at a time, as they
had always gone ever since they had worn
long frocks, and gone to the show, and they
heard the same old fortune, with little
variation, that they had heard many times
before, and each one’s fortune resembled
the other one’s fortune. They were all to be
promptly married to tall, handsome men,
and have male babies shortly after. Trouble
was to follow, succeeded by greater joy ;
good news was to come from over the sea ;
they were to take a long journey and meet
with a great surprise ; a large sum of money
was to come to them, but whether by a
ticket in a sweep or by somebody’s will the
cards did not make clear, though the money
was certain. Besides the tall man they were
to marry, another man, not so good-looking,
was desperately smitten about them ; the
cards even seemed to say he would take to
drink, or commit suicide when they refused
him, and so on, and so on, the same old
weary rigmarole they had heard so often,
and were always glad to hear again.
Dads, Jabez, and Horace had wandered
round the showmen’s tents, but getting along
very slowly, as neighbors were always bail-
ing them up, and each salutation meant a
visit to the refreshment-booth, and a mutual
shouting, and this in turn led to their getting
merry, with a desire for active sport, so that
when a showman called them pro-Boers for
passing his show, they stopped to ask the
reason why.
The showman pointed to some dummy
figures at the end of the gallery. “ Don’t yer
see old Kruger, De Wet, an’ Rangi Sinji ?
Have er shie at ’er fer good old England.
Three shies er scrum, an’ every time yer
knocks one over yer gets er sprat. Three
shies fer England’s glory, boys, an’ ter ’ell
with Kruger.”
Put in this tempting way the visitors
could not refuse, and if Majuba was not


avenged, it w r as not the fault of Dads, or
Jabez, or Horace.
The bell summoned them to the grand-
stand to view the procession and the races
to follow. But as no one wanted to see the
procession they returned to the buggy and
cart to find the others getting dinner ready,
and after dinner they all stood up and saw
the races, which were voted very poor, and
not up to Cross Roads’ form. But the
bottled beer on hand was excellent; so were
the peanuts, which everyone ate, all the time
finding great joy in throwing the shells at
each other, and as they had a long way to go.
and there was a late moon, Mums said they
would start for home.
“ Oh, but I haven’t seen the show,” said
Horace.
“ No one ever sees ther show,” said Dads.
“ Besides, there’s nothin’ ter see.”
“ It was not too bad,” said Mums ; “ but
not ser gbod as last year.” .
It then appeared that Mums and Bubs,
whom she liad dragged after her, were-
the only members of the party who had
attempted to inspect the exhibits.
“ What’s the good,” said Dads ; “ Wes can
see better goods any time in ther shops in
Barjo ; it’s all er fake, anyhow. Wes got
ther prizes this year ; it’s our turn. Mul-
grave ’ull score next show, an’ Brown’s next.
It’s all friendly like. Gie us er song, Mister
Gohighly ! ”
Horace ventured, and sang, and they all
joined the chorus ; then Jabez sang, and Tilly,
and a pause was made in Barjo to get a
bottle of good stuff, which, being empty at
the Cross, Roads, was again re-filled, and the
songs grew louder and louder, so that the
cattle camped by the fences jumped up and
looked at them, young foals galloped away,
and every passer-by, when he shouted
‘ Good-night ! ” had no need to ask if the
Waybacks had enjoyed themselves at the
show. ,
CHAPTER XIX.
Dads' Philosophy
With a view to the marriage ceremony
and its location, Horace had enquired of
Euphemia what church the family attended,
but Euphemia’s reply had been vague, and
she had referred him to Dads.
Mr. Gohighly himself was an eclectic. On
fine Sundays when in Sydney he went fish-
ing ; if medium wet, he dropped in to the
church that had the best singing ; and if
very wet indeed, he stopped at home and
read “ The Sunday Times,” or mended his
fishing lines. Dads took the question with
a long breath.
“ Which church does we go to ? Now
you’ve said it, fer I’m blest if I know. Ter
see that sort o’ thing is more fer ther town
blokes; say yers a butcher or baker or
ther likes o’ that, then yer looks round fer
ther church as ain’t got no butcher or baker,
an’ yer jines on. They buys yer tucker, an’
yous buys off ther other blokes, an’ when
yers get one o’ every sort o’ shop together
it makes er fair crowd, with er lawyer an’
doctor an’ all ther rest all er runnin’ bills
one agin ther other, friendly like. There’s one
long, hairy, Scotch bloke as calls hisself er
Presbeterian at Bar jo ; he’s only got six in
his crowd—three kids an’ three grown-ups.
When ther measles was round the other day
half his congregation was laid out. That
cove don’t know the ropes, someliows. Then
there’s ther Methody ; he’s Welsh, an’ shaves
his top lip. They alius looks thin an’ poor,
like stock after er hard Winter, do the
Methodies. Now, whether they’s Methodies
because they’s skinny, or skinny because


they’s Metliodies, I doesn’t rightly know. Then
there's ther English parson, as shaves his lip
an’ chin : he gets all ther folks as fancies
theirselves, an’ drives er pair o’ ponies, or
thinks he drives, for he’s just spilin’ the
mouths of them there creamies. I ain’t got
no confidence in er bloke as tries ter jerk
er boss’s head off every five minits. Then
1 here’s ther Roman, he’s Irish, an’ shaves
his face clean, an’ puts on beef. He rakes
in ther dollars, do ther Roman. Seems ter
be er game, this here church business, as
them as shaves off most hair pounds the
most coin. Kind er kurious, ain’t it ?
Reason why, maybe, as Australians don't
tackle ther job, as is nice easy graft, an’
should suit some of ’em to er turn, they
don’t take ter shavin’. I don’t say as I’m
agen churches, mind yer. Townies is mostly
er bad lot, an’ want all ther good ther
churches can do ’em. What with thieves an’
burglars an’ confidence men, er Sydney bloke
wants ter have er place where he can sit quiet
once er week an’ button up his pockets, an’
know he won’t be had fer more than er
sprat.
“ Now, there were Steve Morrison. Maybe
you’ve heard tell o’ Steve. He were er book
learned chap, an’ knowed er whole heap o’
things not worth knowin’. ‘ Wayback,’ he
sez ter me one day, ‘ what der yer make o’
this here religious racket ; there’s hun-
dreds o’ brands, an’ they all sez they’s ther
only genuine article, an’ they only agree in
one thing,’ he sez, ‘ they all wants all ther
coin theys can claw hold of.’
Well,’ I sez, ‘ Steve, when yer buys er
boss are yer satisfied ter take ther owner’s
guarantee ? ”
“ ‘ Not much,’ sez Steve.
Then,’ I sez, ‘ when yer buys er religion,
feel ther animal well down ther legs an’ see
if it s sound. Ef er bloke come ter you an’
wants ther loan o’ a quid, would it make any
difference ef yer knew he was er Roman, er
Methody, or any other brand, or no brand
at all ? ’
No.’ sezs Steve, *it wouldn’t ; there’s
good an’ bad amongst ther lot o’ ’em. Six
o’ one, and half-dozen o’ t’other.’
Then,’ I sez. ‘ ef religion’s that harmless
;t don’t improve er bloke’s character with
his pals, it looks mighty poor valley fer
money spent, an’ we’d best lie low with our
coin. Steve, till another brand o’ pigs comes
tei market. But it takes all sorts o’ coves
ter make er world, as ther sayin’ is, an’
ef some blokes didn’t go ter church, when
would other blokes have er chance ter sneak
their water-melons ? ”
“ But all religions are not sold, Mr. Way-
back,” protested Horace.
“ Maybe so ; but don’t see ther brand
round this way. I disremember when we
had these here State schools, ther parsons
was hot ter come an’ preach ter ther kids,
en’ er law was made accordin’ ; but my
youngsters all ther years they’ve been at
school never see ther hide o’ a parson, an’
fer why ? I ask yer that. They’ve got any
quantity o’ time. There’s no pay bangin’
ter it. ‘No pay, no Gospel,’ that’s ther
motto ; ‘ terms is cash, with strict ’tention
ter business ; prayers be contract or day-
labor, ’cordin’ ter agreement. No scab work.
Which is all right an’ proper fer them as
likes it, an’ I ain’t got er word agen it.
“ Seein’ as they were on ther spot, an’ was
like ter know, I was askin’ some o’ ther
Bar jo blokes what they thinks o’ these
here churches. Ther Church o’ England
cove, they sez, is very long-winded, but he
Pays up all right ef yer waits long enough ;
ther Methody wants everythin’ fer nixie, an’
er little cheaper, an’ ther Roman, he pays
all right, but he comes round every week
fer a year after fer er collection. Ther
clergy s er hard lot ter deal with, they sez.
an’ no bloke ’ull look at ’em ef he can get
er job off elsewhere. They wants ther best
o’ everythin’ at the worst price, an’ ’spects
ter get another discount o’ 5 per cent, fer
every time they sez, ‘ God bless yer, me
friend ! ’ It’s ther women runs ’em, they
sez. No women, no church. Every woman
wants er new bonnet, an’ when she’s got


ther bonnet wants er church ter show it in
an’ rile ther other women. An’ when ther
men’s after women, or ther women drives
’em, they goes, too ; but it all hangs on ther
new bonnet. These Barjo blokes is game
ter bet that ef so be yer could hide all ther
new bonnets an’ neAV hats, ther scrub ’ud be
growin’ inside every church in ther country
inside er twelvemonth, an’ ther parsons ’ud
have ter graft t'er their livin’ like other
coves.
“ Now, I don’t say that’s right, an’ I don’t
say it’s wrong, an’ as fer hidin’ ther gals’
hats, I don’t see no sense in it. Ef they
likes ter show off, why let ’em, I sez. Er
bloke gets his fun dotvn his neck, an’ er gal
on her head ; one keeps er pub ’an t’other er
parson ; it’s all good fer trade, an’ circerlates
ther money, friendly like. I’ve met parsons
I could trust Avith a fWer—ef yers looked
after ’em sharp—an’ I can’t say more nor
that, can I ? ”
• •••••
The happenings to Ernestine have so far
been neglected. Early in her visit to Dingo
Flat she had chummed in with Delia. They
were much the same age and temperament,
and found endless satisfaction in comparing
notes. They were seated one day in the
garden eating grapes, not that they liked
the grapes, for, being green and sour, they
made continual faces at each other during
mastication ; but the fruit was strictly
forbidden with dire penalties of belt and
stomachache, Avhich Avas quite sufficient to
make these young ladies leave ripe peaches
in disdain.
“ Your house is not as good as our house,”
said Ernestine ; “ It’s got no stairs. I sup-
pose you had no money to buy stairs. You
can slide downstairs when no one’s looking.”
“My Dad’s got more money nor yer
brother,” retorted Delia. “If Ave ain’t got
no stairs Aves got coavs. How many cows
have yous got ? ”
“ We don’t have no nasty cows ; our milk
comes in a tin in a cart, and is ever so much
better than your milk.”
“ Yer must be poor off to have no cows,
as poor as anythin’. That’s why yer can’t
milk, and don’t know nothin’. Our teacher
would just spank yer with er cane.”
“ Your teacher would not spank me with
a cane. I’d tell my brother ; and I’ve got
seven-and-fourpence in my money-box, and
Pally says I can have a new dress when it’s
ten shillings.”
“ Mum’s goin’ ter buy me two new dresses
some day better nor yours ; she said she
would, so there.”
In such friendly communing the two girls
passed much of their time ; but it was dur-
ing one tea-time, when the whole family
were at table, that Ernestine distinguished
herself. During a pause in the general con-
versation, in a stage whisper, heard by all
present, she said to Delia :
“ I know something, I do ; something you
don’t know, and I won’t tell.”
“ You don’t know nothin’ ; it’s all make-
up,” retorted Delia.
“You’re a story, I saw them with my own
eyes.”
“ Saw what ? ” enquired Palmira, inter-
posing in the discussion.
“ I saw you and Jabez behind the orange
tree, and he was holding you and kissing
you like anything.”
A great silence fell on the assembly.
.Tabez suddenly recollected that a horse
wanted feeding, and Palmira had to go to
her room to look for a mislaid handkerchief.
Ernestine alone beamed with triumph.
“ Yes, he kissed her and squeezed her like
anything, and ruffled all her hair, and Pally
said, ‘ Don’t ! Don’t ! ’ but he went on just
the same. I saw them.”
That night Palmira remembered that
school term had re-commenced in Sydney,
and that it was highly desirable that
Ernestine’s education should not be
neglected, so a telegram having been des-
patched to an aunt in Sydney, Ernestine was
packed off by the next day’s train to resume
her studies, her holiday coming to an abrupt
close. And this explains her absence from
the Barjo show.
But the fun was not all with Ernestine.
Rube had latent talent, all Avaiting for the
occasion that at last came in his way. When


down the creek after the cows Rube had
chanced to come across and kill a big black
snake, and a plan of utilising it at once oc
curred to his fertile fancy. He had noticed
that when dusk came Horace and Euphemia
had acquired the habit of walking together
down the main path of the orchard ; also,
that Jabez and Falmira would often follow
the same road a little later. Now, to make
all, or any of these persons jump seemed to
Rube a desirable thing in itself, and worth
promoting, so a little before the expected
time he secreted himself behind the thick
shade of a mandarin bush, while he held a
kite string that was now attached to the
dead snake lying on the distant path, and
twisted in a most lifelike pose.
He had not long to wait.
Horace and Euphemia had just turned into
the orchard. She was saying :
“ Do you really, truly love me, Horace r
I’m sure you’ve been after lots o’ girls be-
fore.”
“ Never, my darling,” Horace replied.
“ You are my first, my only love. I would
do anything, everything, to prove it. I would
gladly lay down my life ; only try me,” and
the speaker waved his unoccupied hand as
though challenging all the dragons and de-
mons of Tophet to advance and be slaugh-
tered right away.
“Oh ! good gracious ! there’s a snake,”
cried Euphemia ; “ where's er stick.”
“ ril fin d one,” exclaimed Horace, making
a terrific back jump as he sighted the reptile,
and then sprinting at ten seconds’ gait back
to the house. “ You watch him while I get
a stick.”
Left to her own resources, Euphemia
pulled up a tree stake and made a frantic
dart at the snake, which, waking to sudden
animation, darted away with a speed her
eyes could not follow.
After a pause Mr. Goliighly’s voice came
from a respectful distance up the orchard.
“ Are you there, Euphemia ? Oh, be
careful ; mind he don’t spring.” Horace was
carrying a ten-foot prop, and advanced with
all the strategy of De Wet.
“ It’s cleared out,” replied Eupliemia.
“ What a fearful shame ! ” cried Horace,.
now advancing boldly. “ I meant to kill him
and get the skin. Let us walk somewhere
else • of course, I’m not afraid ; but it
would be dreadful if you were bitten ; I
should never forgive myself, never ! ”
When the backs of the lovers were turned
Rube came from his bush and replaced the
snake. He had scarce returned to his
hiding before Jabez and Palmira, eagerly
discussing the probable profits on their pro
posed dairy farm, appeared on the scene.
“ Oh, what’s that, Jabez ? It gave me-
such a turn.”
“ A snake, be cripes ; stand back ; I’ll
settle him.”
Jabez picked up the stake Eupliemia had
dropped, and made a cut that should have
broken the back of twenty reptiles. Tliis-
sample, however, much to Jabez’s surprise,,
darted off at great speed, nor could he track
it.
“ Well, I’ll be jiggered ! I swiped him.
fair, too ; that there snake’s made o’ india-
rubber an’ lightning, that’s what he is.”
Jabez and Palmira passed on.
Rube replaced the snake, and now Dads-
himself came on the scene, carrying a gun
to have a shot at the flying foxes that were-
devastating his orchard.
“So snakes is about,” said Dads to him-
self, eyeing the reptile from afar off ; I’ll
settle his business quick and lively.” With
that Dads raised the old reliable and fired.
“ Well, I’m sugared ! He’s alive yet, an’’
I must er blown his head off ; here goes-
for the other barrel.”
After the second shot the snake began to-
race across the orchard, Dads after it. Dads-
made good time, caught the snake up by the
tail with the idea of whirling it round and
breaking its back, but, to his astonishment,
he found it lifeless and fastened to a string..
Dads said blanky to himself very quietly as-
he carefully followed the direction of the
string, and very soon a small boy was laid
across a parent’s knee while a whirling
snake striking his rear parts kept time to
his howls in front


“ I’ll snake yer, me lad, I’ll teach yer some
funny business. Now, just yous clear up
ter ther loft an’ cut two hundred er chaff ;
that’s ther sort o’ jokes fer yous.”
• •••••
About this time a meeting of the Farmers’
Alliance was held in Barjo, and as it came
to a resolution that had considerable interest
to the Wayback Family, a few words on that
meeting will be necessary.
The chairman, Mr. Full Moon, J.P. and
M.L.A., said the farmers of the Barjo
district were gathered together to consider
their many grievances, and to formulate
suitable remedies, and then if the meeting
-agreed with him, it would be well to form
a delegation from their number to join him
in waiting on the Minister. He called on
their old friend, Mr. Wayback, of Dingo
Flat, to speak first.”
“ It’s this way, mister,” said Dads, rising
to his feet. “ I ain’t much o’ a hand at
speakin’ ter er lot o’ coves all ter once :
'but er dog widout tongue ain’t no good arter
stock, an’ er bloke as can’t express himself
just gets sot on by them as can. My idea
is this here : Wes farmers is ther backbone,
ther spinal marrer, so ter speak, o’ ther
•country ; but because wes set quiet like,
-every one got their rights but us. Now,
there’s this here question o’ regulatin’ ther
hours o’ labor ; hands is askin’ six an’
seven bob er day fer eight or nine hours’
work. (Shouts of horror, and a voice, “ It’s
true ! ” from the audience). ’Cos, sez they,
they gits it from ther Government. Now,
I’s nothin’ agen regerlatin’ wages ef so be
ther Government will regerlate prices o’
produce, an’ see as we gets it. I reckon
that’s fair as between man an’ man. Let
’em tot up what it costs ter raise a bushel
•o’ wheat, er corn, er ther like er that,
allow us er livin’ profit, an’ then buy oui
stuff at ther railway. These here agents
is er livin’ on us, ther merchants is livin’ on
us, an’ all Sydney’s livin’ on us an’ gettin’
as fat as er three-year-old store, an’ er dashed
sight more ’ull live on us if wes don’t take
keer. Now, I sez, ther time’s come fer us
ter buck agin this here, an’ ter demand our
rights an’ as much more as we can claw
hold on. We wants cheap labor or higli
prices. Take yer choice, I sez. I’m not par-
ticlar. We wants er change er weather
prophets an’ ther good old seasons back agen,
an’ we wants ter see all these here new-
fangled diseases sent back where they come
from. It’s very pretty to know all ther long
names they call ’em, but long names don’t
till no bellies, I sez. Let ther rabbits eat ther
Bathurst burr, an’ ther ticks kill ther rabbits,
an’ ther sparrers kill ther ticks an’ fly away
ter blazes. That’s the sort o’ Federation fer
farmers.”
Dads spoke much more to the same effect,
and was well supported by other speakers
and the meeting generally, which finally
agreed that Mr. Wayback, having voiced
their sentiments so well, must be one of the
deputation to represent them in Sydney.
When, later on, Dads told Mums that he
had to go to Sydney as delegate of the
Farmers’ Alliance, Mums answer was quick,
and to the point.
‘‘Ef yer goes, I go ; I’m not er goin’ ter
have yer runnin’ loose with all them painted
hussies down in Sydney. As Euphemia
wants clothes fer er weddin,’ she can come,
an’ we can have ther marriage down there
at the same time as Jabez hooks on ter
Palmira ; it ’ull be er savin’, anyhow, an’ of
course ther others ’ull want ter come, too.”
“ What, more clothes fer Euphemia ? ”
cried Dads. “ Surely ter goodness she ain’t
wore them last things ter rags yet. Why,
when I married yous, Mums, yer only had
one petticoat an’ that was made o’ flower-
bags, ‘ Lily o’ the valley ’ in blue letters all
down ther side o’ it, an’ yous was none the
wuss o’ that. It’s this here pride an’ trying
to be toffs ’ull bring us ter ther Benevolent
Asylum afore we’s done.
Dads talked to relieve his feelings, for, of
course, in the end he had to consent to the
whole family joining him in his visit to
Sydney, and it was arranged that the visit
should shortly follow the return to town of
the Gohighlys.


CHAPTER XX.
Sydney Again.
The Gohighlys’ holiday had closed, and
they had returned to Sydney with many
expressions of regret, for as Horace and
Palmira had both left their hearts behind
them, it was with an empty feeling in their
chests that they faced again the peopled
solitude of town. But, before going, Palmira
had planned out with Mums how best the
Waybacks could be located during their pro-
posed visit. Palmira would not hear of the
Coffee Palace again, on account of the
expense ; apartments and a boarding-house
were equally waived aside.
I will find out a nice furnished cottage,
Mrs. Wayback,” she said at last ; “ a house
just ready to step into, provided with every-
thing you can want, from salt spoons to
serviettes, doormat to dust-bin. There are
lots of them in Sydney. I will hunt round
and let you know at once.”
Palmira’s plan met with general approval.
“ Itn be cheaper,” said Dads. “ I can do
me own cookin’,” said Mums. “Er bloke
can eat his tucker without puttin’ his coat
on,” said Jabez. “ I shall learn town house-
keepin’,” said Euphemia. Tilly and Sarah
Jane, if not so enthusiastic, had no objec-
tions to raise. Only Bubs of the little ones
was to be taken, and his opinion was not
asked. Bubs was to be taken because Mums
said she must keep her eye on him, for he
would be certain to be floating dead in the
creek in less than twenty-four hours if left
behind.
Though the household at Dingo Flat was
highly excited at the prospect of a second
visit, they were far from falling into the
delirious joy of the first occasion.
In less than a week Miss Gohighly wrote
to say that her search for a suitable house
had been more difficut than she expected ;
the rents asked were often out of all
reason, she had had to give up the idea of a
cottage near town, and had taken a terrace
house at Balmain at the rent proposed. She
enclosed the address, and stated that they
could go in next Monday. “ Take a cab at
the station and I will be at the house: to
meet you.”
Palmira’s disappointment in having to take
a terrace house in lieu of a cottage did not
impress the Waybacks, for they had never
yet lived with nine inches of brickwork, and
sometimes only four and a half, between
themselves and another family ; had never
yet had to speak in whispers because the
woman next door, to the right, had got her
ear to the wall, or listen spellbound in bed
at 12 o’clock at night while the man on the
left shied the crockery at his missus. All
these were joys to come.
On Monday the Waybacks managed to
miss tlie morning train. It is true that Dads
had allowed himself half-an-hour’s grace,
but a mile on the road Mums remembered
that she had forgotten to pack a change of
clothes for Bubs.
Ihus it came about that when early on
Tuesday morning they arrived at Balmain in
two cabs the Waybacks did not find Palmira
there to meet them. She had been there,
Mrs. Drawblock, the landlady, told them, the
night before, and on their non-arrival had
gone home, expecting a telegram.
A telegram ! ” said Dads, opening his
mouth very wide.
“ A telegram ! ” echoed Mums. “ I suppose
it had ter be cooked at once, an’ wouldn’t
keep.”
Mis. Drawblock showed them over the


house, counted out all the small articles to
them, and made them sign for them ; also
she demanded the week’s rent in advance,
as though it were a matter of course.
“ Well, I’ll be jiggered ! ” said Dads. “ Der
yer take us fer rogues ? ”
“ Oh, no ! ” said Mrs. Drawblock, very
pleasantly (she was a big, stout, round-
about woman), “ I dare say you’re all right,
but it’s the rule, and I always stick to it.
I’ve let furnished houses now for twenty
years, and I ought to know something of
the people who take them.”
“ What’s that ? ” asked Mums, as Dads
counted out the money.
“ The most of them never pay anyone if
they can help it ; that’s why they live
furnished. The creditors can’t take the
things. I suppose the people in my houses
from first to last owe the Balmain shops
over five thousand pounds. But it’s Sydney
they take down the worst. I only wish I
had half the money my tenants have owed
there. There was Mr. Patrickson ;he lived
in this house, and left last week. He was
very religious, and came to complain to me
because the neighbors played the piano on
Sunday, while his wife looked as innocent
as a baby. They were only here a month,
yet already people have been to me with bills
amounting altogether to seventy-five pounds,
and although I took care to have the rent
Iff
out of them, they took me down for all the
plate and cutlery. It is new goods I have
to give you. It’s this way. People can
move out of a furnished house at any time
—just a box and a bag or two into a cab,
and it’s done ; so that although I live oppo-
site, and keep my eye on them night and
day, as you may say, I am being slipped up
all the time.”
“Oh ! I never heard tell o’ such wicked-
ness,” cried Mums. “ I’d never think it o’
people, never. Sydney must be full o’
wickedness.”
“ Oh, that’s just nothing ! ” said the land-
lady. “ I see you are from the country,
where everyone knows everyone. Here all
we know of each other is sin and scandal j
so the less we know of each other the better
we get on. Good day ! ”
• •••••
“ Now, get us a cup o’ tea, Mums,” said
Dads, when the landlady had gone, and they
had ceased wondering at her information.
“ After that doin’ in ther train er cove wants
er bit o’ somethin’ solid under his belt.”
“ Well, yous go and get some more wood,”
said Mums. “There’s er few bits here, but
hardly enough ter make er damper. And
you, Jabe, go and take ther buckets an’ see
ef there’s er creek handy. This water out
o’ ther tap’s not natural like ; it ain’t got no
flavor.”
Obedient to command, Dads shouldered his
axe and started up Darling-street to look for
a good dry tree. He walked, and walked,
expecting to strike bush at every rise in the
ground or turn in the road ; but not so much
as a sapling met his eye. He became
indignant, and bailed up a passer-by.
“ Say, mate ! Is ther,e er bush round here
where er cove can cut er bit o’ firewood ?
I’m not ter say ’tickler ’bout it bein’ free,
ser long as it’s dry an’ good burnin’ stuff.”
“Well, I’m a bit of a stranger myself,”
answered the man. “ I’ve lived here twenty
years, but I never went farther out than
Iron Cove Bridge. I reckon you’d have to
go ten miles for a bush, and then it would
be private land.”
“ But how do yous coves manage fer
firin’ ?” enquired Dads.
“ Buy it of the wood and coal man, of
course,” replied the stranger, with a smile.
“ Buy it ! Buy wood ?” repeated Dads,
with a sigh that was almost a groan. “ Per-
haps they sells air down here, an’ water ? ”
“ You’ll have to pay for water right
enough ; but air’s free up to date,” said the
stranger, as he passed on. As for Dads, he
stood still as though pegged to the ground.
“ Holy Jimminy ! They sells water an’
they sells wood ! An’ ter think o’ ther
lashins I’d give away fer nixie up at Dingo
Flat ! ”
On his sorrowful return homeward Dads
called in at a wood-yard and ordered a ton.


4ind was still more grieved at the sinful profit
the merchant’s price implied.
On reaching home the house was full of
-smoke, and Mums, with her eyes red and
watering, was saying words much like
folankey in the kitchen.
“Dads, this plaguey fireplace has got no
-chimney ; ther smoke is enough ter choke
ther life out o’ yer, an’ ther oven won’t heat,
an’ ther kettle won’t bile. Take ther fire
•out in ther yard, fer goodness sake, or we’ll
•all be dead.”
At'that moment came a knock at the door,
-and Palmira arrived.
“ Goodness gracious me ! Whatever’s the
matter ? Is the house on fire ? ” These were
her first words of greeting, and, having
•kissed all the girls in the smoke, she groped
her way to the kitchen.
“ Well, I never ! No wonder ! Why,
.you’ve made the fire on top of the stove ! ”
“ Where else would I make it ? ” enquired
Mums.
“ Why, inside. Look here ! ” And Palmira
pulled open the iron door. “ The wood is
-all short on purpose.”
“ But yer can’t put er fire in there,”
protested Mums. “ It’s not much bigger than
Dad’s pipe, an’ how are yers goin’ ter get
ther damper in ? ”
Palmira explained and explained, and with
many misgivings Mums tried the experiment
of putting her fire in a little iron box shut
•out from view.
Then Jabez came back with empty
"buckets and a tale that no creek was handy,
and that nothing but tap water was to be
had for miles around.
Again Palmira had to explain that tap
water was not specially dangerous, and had
to be paid for by the house-holder whether
used or not ; a piece of information that
impressed the Wayback Family painfully.
“ It’s unmitigated robbery ! Why don’t
ther people rise up an’ buck ? ” Dads wanted
to know.
Palmira really could not say. In Sydney
you always paid ; never bucked or did any-
thing, but just paid.
Under the new management the stove
boiled the kettle in a surprisingly quick time,
and the damper was baked in the oven.
Mums contended that neither tea nor damper
had the true bush flavor, but appetites being
keen her remarks passed without support.
Breakfast over, and Palmira, having
explained as well as she could the mysteries
of town housekeeping, departed with Jabez,
giving a promise to return in the evening
with Horace.
“ What did she say ? ” enquired Dads,
when the door had closed on Miss Gohighly.
“Fivepence er pound fer chops and steaks
off ther butcher. It’s clear robbery an’ take-
yer-down, an’ no mistake. I’ll just go out
an’ buy er sheep an’ dress him in that there
yard meself. I won’t be sat on by no
butchers, not me ! ” With this resolve firm
in his mind Dads started out.
Mums and the girls began to unpack and
get their house in order. They had hardly
started when a blear-eyed face poked in at
the back-door.
“ Any bottle-ho, Missus ? ”
The questioner was not chased away
before a rifag came at the front door.
“ Any umbrellas or chairs ter mend,
scissors ter grind, or saws ter sharpen ? ”
“ Not to-day, thank you.”
But if Tilly thought she was going to shut
the door she was soon undeceived. A crim-
son feather brush was poked in over her
hands, a man’s foot and leg came beneath,
and a soft voice demanded in a foreign
accent:
“ Kind lady like to buy handkerchief ;
peautiful handkerchief—silk, cottons, but-
tons, threads, lace, braid, and tape. All ze
tilings ze lady wants, so cheap, I give away.
Buy, kind ladjy ? ”
“ Not to-day ! ” everyone said. “ Not to-
day. And they had to squeeze the Hindoo’s
foot very hard before he retreated.
Then came a banging like thunder at the
back gate. “ Run and see, Sarah Jane;
whatever can it be ? ” cried Mums.
Sarah Jane ran.
“Any rags, bones, old iron, old clothes,
zinc, copper, or brass ? I give top prices.”


“ Not to-day.”
“ Any bottles, wine, beer, pickles, sauces,
or medicine ? I’m ther bottle king ! ”
Sarah Jane had hardly slammed the back
gate in the face of his majesty when Euphe-
mia was opening the front door to another
caller.
“ Good day, Miss. Can I see your
mother ? ”
“ Quite a toff,” Euphemia said to herself
as she ran for Mums.
Good day, madam. I am very pleased to
see you, and find you at home. I am not
come to sell you anything or bother you in
any way, but I represent the Duplex Sewing
Machine Co., and am under instruction to
show a sample of the new overarm 1902
model to the leading ladies of Balmain. It
is a great novelty, a wonderful novelty, and
worth inspection.”
“ Wes don’t want ter see no sewin’
machines,” said Mums, anxious to get on
with her work, and fairly out of temper with
the continued interruptions.
“ You have a machine. lam glad to hear
that, for then you will understand tlfe
wonders of the Duplex. Of course, lam
only an agent. lam not asked to sell, only
to show the machine ; and if I don’t show
I lose my billet and my poor wife and
children go without bread. Surely you do
not wish that. Spare me only two minutes
and I am safe.”
Mums did not wish the man’s wife and
children to starve, though she doubted the
yarn, for sewing-machine men had occa-
sionally penetrated to Dingo Flat; so she
looked undecided. That was enough. In the
twinkling of an eye a machine was whipped
off a cart at the front door and landed in
the front room.
“ With your experience you will see at once
the great advantages of this machine. The
arm is high enough to put your head under,
there is no bobbin or shuttle, no tension to
fix, no feeder to adjust, all parts work auto-
matically on ball bearing. It will hem, braid,
tuck, pleat, embroider, and do any fancy
stitch you can mention. The simple touch
of a lever changes it from lock to chain
stitch or back again to lock. A child can
work it after one lesson, and the needles
refuse to break. Owing to the ball bearings
the wheels run so easily as to require no
exertion. But these are only small matters,
the mere items in a perfect machine ; what
we pride ourselves on are the attachments.
Here is a corn-grinder or sausage machine
two simple motions of the hand connect it
with the fly-wheel, and any kind of grinding;
can be done, bones for fowls, or whole meal
from the wheat itself. Our second attach-
ment works a cradle or a churn, so that the-
mother at her machine can quiet her baby
and make tfte butter while her sewing is in:
progress. Our third attachment recognises
the general love for music, and is an auto-
piano ; removing the top of the machine, you-
push the stand to the piano, and it plays for
you with all the charm of Paderewski any-
one of a thousand tunes. But the garden is-
not neglected. Recognising the love fot-
horticulture, we remove the auto-piano,-
and by a mere clip of the fingers the
stand is converted to a prize lawn-mower.
Yet another change still more simple, and
you have a wringer and mangle, a garden-
roller, a copying press, a type-writer, and,
finally, when the whole machine is closed, a
perfect writing table and stand for books.
These are only a few of the advantages of
this twenty machines in one, which means,
as you can see at once, saving of space, sav-
ing of cost, and saving of temper. No house
can be said to be furnished without it ; while-
it is within reach of the poorest purse in the
land. We do not ask you to buy it. We say
take a free trial, break it if you like and can.
compare it with any of the twenty machines-
it represents, and kindly let me know the
result. Good day ! ”
The storm of words suddenly finished, a
hat was raised with a flourish, and the man
vanished like a shadow, as, mounting his
cart, the horse darted up the street.
“ Well, I’m blessed ! ” cried Mums, finally
finding her tongue. “ Did you ever hear ther
like ? An’ what are we to do with that there-


machine ? I don’t want it as er gift, I’m
sure. It would be lawn mowin’ when I
wanted to churn ther butter, I’m sartin sure ;
an’ if Bubs don’t get his arm in that there
sausage-machine it ’ull be er miracle. Put
it away fer goodness sake, Tilly. An’ where
is Bubs, an’ what’s he doin’ ? He’s mortal
quiet—up ter some devilment, I lay er
crown !”
«*
They all listened a minute, and soon
caught a noise of revelry from the back yard,
with Bubs’ voice loud in a turmoil of words.
“ No wonder he was ser quiet, ther imp er
Satan. Jest look at him ! ”
Bubs had the water-tap turned on full, so
that the yard was a little lake ; in the
adjoining yard another small boy had
apparently carried out the same experiment,
and the two infants were throwing water at
•each other with dippers through the cracks
in the fence.
Bubs was drenched and deliriously happy,
his clothes hanging on him as though stuck
with glue. Tilly had to wade out to him
whilst Mums stood on the doorstep flapping
her arms like a distressed hen. The alterca-
tion that followed between Tilly and her
little brother seemed to arouse an inmate of
the next house, for a furious woman with
red hair poked her head suddenly above the
palings :
“ What do yer mean by lettin’ that kid o’
yourn drown my poor child ? What do yer
mean, I say ? Look at me yard, look at me
poor tender lamb. He’s nearly dead, you
savages ! ”
“ Savages yourself ! ” said Tilly. “ Your
child is as bad or worse ; look at the state
of this one, and mind your own business.”
“ ri] ha ve ther law of yer, I will. I’ll tell
me husband.” Then the box the red-headed
woman stood on was heard to crack, and her
face bobbed down like a jack-in-the-box. As
though waiting for the signal, a face like a
full moon bobbed up at the fence on the
other side of the yard, and stage whispered
impressively :
“ Take my tip, and don’t you take no
notice of that creature. Tell her husband.
indeed ! I should just like to see her marriage
lines. It’s easy to see what she is ! And
her to go and abuse your little angel boy.
Why, her kid’s the terror of the whole ter-
race. He smashed two of my windows only
yesterday. Don’t you take any notice of her.
I’ll deal with her if she starts on you again,”
and then suddenly changing her voice, the
full-moon face continued : “ Could you oblige
me with the loan of a pound of sugar and a
pinch of tea till to-morrow, when my grocer
comes.”
The articles requested were handed by
Tilly over the fence so promptly that th*
full-moon face looked sorry that it had not
asked for more.
“ Now,” said Mums, who had stripped Bubs
to dry his clothes, what time that imp was
being chased upstairs and downstairs in the
altogether by Euphemia, from whose hand
he slipped like an eel, “ perhaps we shall
have a little peace and quietness at last,
an’ get on with our work.”
Bang ! bang ! bang ! at the back gate,
with the sound of a gong like a Chinese
festival.
“ Whatever’s the matter, now ? Just see,
Sarah Jane.”
“Any hares er rabbits’ skins, any old
bones or kitchen stuff, missus ? Any bags
—flour bags, corn bags, chaff bags, sugar
bags, any old iron, er lead, er brass ; any
old clothes, old boots, er hats, any bottles ? ”
Not to-day,” said Sarah Jane, wearily.
But her interlocutor seemed in no way dis-
couraged as he called to his horse and drove
up the lane shouting the while in trumpet
tones :
“ Bottle-ho ! Bottle-ho ! Hares an’ rab-
bits’ skins ! Bottle-ho ! Bottle-ho ! ”
And the gong banged, banged like a boiler
factory.
“Town is very lively,” said Euphemia,
willing to make the best of it.
“ Lively, you call it ? ” said Sarah Jane.
“ It’s worse nor er bush fire ! ”
“It ’ll kill me in less than er week,”
groaned Mums, as another rap came at the
front door.


CHAPTER XXI.
The Bill of Sale.
“ Drat it all ! ” cried Mums, “ who’s knock-
ing now ? See who it is, Till, and ef its a
swaggie give him er pint er flour, an’ er
handful o’ tea an’ sugar, an’ send him pack-
ing.”
It was not a swaggie, but a milkman.
“ I called to see, Miss, if you wanted milk.
I supply milk twice a, day direct from my
own cows ; pure milk, no country trash,
milked by dirty hands in a dirty yard, half
skimmed, and then churned up in the railway
train. My dairy is open to inspection at any
time ”
“ What’s that you sez ? ” cried Mums’
indignant voice. “ Dirty country milk,
indeed ! Dirty yourself ! An’ hows can yer
feed cows when there ain’t no grass here,
not er bite fer er bandicoot ? Yous much
mistook, young feller, ef yer thinks we wants
milk from er cow kept in one of these here
backyards. Shet ther door, Till !’ ’
The door had closed, but the catch nad
not yet clinked when a new cry demanded
attention.
“ Butcher ! Can we serve you with meat,
lady ? I call in this street three times a
day. We only supply the best Riverstone
country-killed meat.”
“ Now that’s er civil sort o’ cove ! ” said
Mums, coming to the door. “ He don’t talk
about ther dirty country and him livin’ in
this muckiest hole out o’ a bog. Howjer sell
yer beef, butcher ? ”
“ Prime cuts, sevenpence, lady.”
“ Sevenpence ! Sevenpence ! If yer thinks
wes fools because we comes from the bush
yous very much mistook. What can yer do
er hundred o’ corn beef, not too fat, not too
much bone, an’ properly salted, for ? ”
“ A hundred ! ” said the butcher, scratch-
ing his greasy hair with his fingers. “ I'll
ask the boss.”
“ An’ mind yers, wes pays cash ; no bills,
not at no price, an’ ef yer price suits yous
can call once er week.
“ We must have er bit o’ beef ter keep us
goin’,” said Mums to the girls, “ till Dads
brings in ther mutton. Now, whatever is
that child up to ? ”
“ He’s got all my hairpins stuck in his
head,” cried Tilly, rushing at Bubs.
“ No, I ain’t ; I found ’em,” said Bubs. And
so it proved, for the hairpins were of all
sizes and makes, an investigation showing
the whole of the house and furniture to be
infested with assorted hairpins, as though
previous occupants had moulted and secreted
them in every available cranny and crevice
in furniture and cushions.
“ Well, I never ! ” exclaimed Mums; “them
larst people must er had hair all over their
bodies, an’ hooked it up with hairpins that
wouldn’t stick. I wonder what else they
left behind them ? ”
Mums might well wonder, and she was to
be informed much more quickly than she
anticipated.
Rat-a-tat, rat-a-tat! bang ! bang ! smash
on the door.
Mums had said she would not have it
opened again till the bags were unpacked,
not even if Lord Hopetoun himself demanded
admittance; but the style of the knock
changed her resolve, and with a bundle of
underclothing over one arm and two skirts
over the other, she herself turned the handle.
A little man with Jewish features and
dressed in clothes of glossiest aspect, stood
on the step.
44 This is No. 39 ? ”


“ Well, what ef it is ? ” said Mums.
Before answering the stranger pushed his
way into the house, despite Mums’ protests,
■and then said :
“ I’ve come to take possession under the
hill of sale. Your husband does not make
the payments as promised, an’ our firm will
stand no nonsense. Come in, Jacob,” and
he called to a shabby man waiting outside.
“ Let us go through the inventory and see if
it’s all right.”
Bill o’ sale ! ” cried Mums, when she
could get her breath. “ What cove is he ?
Never heard tell o’ him in our part. I knows
Bill o’ Bar jo, an’ Bill o’ Stoney Crick, but
not familiar like. Yous make er mistake,
young feller.”
“No mistake, mum. Sorry to trouble you,
•of course ; but your husband showed me all
through this house ten days ago, and should
have commenced his repayments. Best thing
you can do is to hurry him up to the office
to arrange matters with the principal to save
•expense.”
“ Why, yous is fair dotty, young feller ;
we’s only come in this house this mornin’,
an’ my man an’ me was er hundred mile er
more away from here ten days ago.”
“ That may be,” said the stranger, a little
taken back, “ but this furniture is the same,
I’ll SAvear, an’ we shall stick to it, be sure of
that.”
“Kun over, Till, ter Mrs. Drawblock, an’
tell her ter come.”
While Tilly Avas gone on her errand the
stranger and his assistant, taking no further
notice of the family, took out a list and a
book and counted over the articles in each
room item by item.
“ Well, Avhat’s the matter now, Mrs. Way-
back ? ” demanded Mrs. Drawblock, as she
entered the house with Tilly behind her.
“ Had a few callers, I suppose, like all the
new arrivals.”
“There’s er cove here as wants ernother
cove he calls Bill Sales, an’ sez he’s goin’
ter take all ther furniture,” replied Mums, in
-a great flurry.
“ I’ll Bill Sales him, quick and lively ! ”
said Mrs. Drawblock, who seemed to take in
the situation at a glance. “ Where is he ? ”
“In ther kitchen countin’ ther spoons,”
replied Sarah Jane.
“ What do you want here touching my
cutlery ? ” It was the landlady facing the
stranger.
“ I am taking possession under a bill of
sale given by Mr. Patrickson.”
“ For how much ? ”
“ Fifty pounds and costs.”
“ Well, you are a mug ! So he took you
down for fifty pounds, and you never
enquired if this furniture was his to pawn !
Why, man alive, this whole terrace of
houses is mine, and every stick that is in
them. Your Mr. Pat hired this house
furnished, and skipped out last week with all
my plated forks ; but I forgive him if he
took you down for fifty pounds. Now you
just bundle out o’ this, and leave my tenants
in peace.”
“ It’s a tammed svindle ! I vant my fifty
pounds.”
“ I dare say you do, and I wish you may
get it ; but out you come. I’ve no time to
fool with you,” and the landlady put her
heavy hand on the stranger’s collar and
personally conducted him at a rapid march
outside the front door.
“ Is this a friend of yours ? ” asked Mrs.
Drawblock of Mums as she returned from
the passage to the front room breathing hard
from exertion. She pointed to a newly-
arrived gentleman, who had entered the
house unannounced.
“ No -” said Mums. “ I don’t know him
from Adam.”
“ What’s your business, then ?” demanded
the landlady of the newcomer.
“ I take possession of this house of fur
niture under a bill of sale in favor of Mr.
vloldenstein, and I warn you that every
article must be accounted for and nothing
removed.”
“ Well this is a good ’un ! ” cried the land-
lady. boiling with laughter. “So here’s
another taken down. How much, if it’s a
fair question ? ”


“ Forty-five pounds and costs, and none o’
your larks, or it will be the worse for you.”
said the newcomer.
“ Forty-five ! That’s five pound better for
you than your brother, Mr. Israel, who you
can see outside in the road swearing. I’ve
just put him out, and you’d best follow.
Your bill of sale is not worth the paper it’s
printed on. I’m the landlady and have let
this house furnished for years.”
While Messrs. Goldenstein and Israel were
jointly and severally cursing all and sundry
on the sidewalk, Mrs. Drawblock proceeded
to explain events to the still mystified Mrs.
Wayback and her girls.
“ It’s that Mr. Patrickson, who lived a
month in this house before you came in. It
seems that not only does he owe the £7O
to tradespeople I told you of, but he has
raised £95 by giving two different bills of
sale on my furniture. That will show you
the sort of tenants I have to deal with. But
he was a smart chap to take down two Ikeys
like that. I forgive him the forks, and good
luck to him '. Now I must go. I’ve got three
saucepans on the fire and a tart in the oven.”
“ By cripes ! ” said Mums, “ this Sydney is
er drefful place, with their Jew boys, an’
Bill Sales, an’ stealin’ forks, an’ I don’t know
what all ; er body ’ud never er believed it
ef they was told. Now let’s get about our
work.”
And in some way the unpacking and get-
ting dinner ready was accomplished, for they
only had calls in the next hour from one life
insurance agent, two bakers, one milkman,
a Chow vegetable hawker, and two more
bottle-ho’s. That was comparative peace.
• •••••
Dads came home to dinner without the
sheep. He had encountered unexpected dif-
ficulties in finding a vendor of a live animal.
This vexed him, and he was further annoyed
when he heard the history of Mums’
experience during his absence.
“ I’ll fix up those ’ere coves,” said Dads,
“ those bottle-ho’s and door-bangers. I’m
not goin’ ter be sot on—not me ! I comes
from ther bush, from Dingo Flat. I’ll fix
’em.”
Thereupon Dads procured a tin of black
paint, a paint-brush, and two sheets of tin,,
and when Mr. Gohiglily called in the even-
ing he found this notice on the front gate :
K A U SH 0 N
SPRING GUNSE IS HeRE. PISEN LAID
By Horder.
A sign also appeared on the back gate
MAN TrAPS BeWAR 3
TreSPaSaRS will be PerSacuted
P.s. MiND THer DORG.
When Jabez returned that evening, Palmira
and Horace came with him, and, for a time,,
there was a babel of sound in the house with
a general exchange of experiences. The
Wayback household w r hen excited adopted
the fugue method of speech. One would
start to tell the story, a little later another
would break in and relate the same matter
at the same time, and the listener was lucky
if, in five minutes, four of the family were
not shouting at him at once, each voice try-
ing to drown the other, and make itself
heard.
The advantages of this style of conver-
sation are, that the listener, not being able-
for the life of him to make head or tail of
what he hears, the matter has to be
repeated many times under like conditions.
Thus a little conversation is made to cover
a large space of time, everyone has a say,
and if the poor listener does not finally
understand, he says he does, to save his-
hearing.
Palmira was very sympathetic when she-
heard of the trouble caused by the constant
calling of hawkers, canvassers, and bottle-
ho’s, and strongly advised that locked chains
be put round back and front gates, the-
family to be provided with spare keys.
Dads was of opinion that his own strongly-
worded notices would abate the evil. Since
he had fixed them late in the afternoon there*
bad been only three callers. “ Now that
talks, don’t it ? ” said Dads.


Mr. Gohighly put his faith in dogs. He
knew a man who had two savage dogs that
he would part with for a consideration. If
they were fastened near the gates, and kept
properly hungry, he had no doubt their
presence would command general respect.
Jabez thought that something in the
kangaroo-trap line would best meet the case.
4»
He explained to Horace that a kangaroo-
trap is made with a stout sapling, which,
being planted in the ground, is then bent
down by force of two men, and pegged down
with a loop of strong wire attached. On the
’roo touching the trap he is flung into the air
with the wire round him, and there he hangs
till the trapper calls to inspect.
Every one agreed that the sight of half a
dozen bottle-ho’s dancing in the air of the
back yard, with a like number of assorted
canvassers in front, would be worth going
far to see. At the same time, it was noted
that the scarcity of suitable saplings in the
woods and forests of Balmain put an in-
superable obstacle in the way.
Soon after the gathering the party broke
up again, for the two pairs of lovers
wandered forth to explore the shady lanes of
Balmain by moonlight. And as lovers'
conversation is best represented by X, and is
only interesting to the participants, it may
be passed over.
As Euphemia went home with Palmira,
Tilly and Sarah Jane were left alone that
night. “ Alone in the cold ” Tilly called it
when they were safe in their room. “ This
visit is all right for those two,” said Tilly ;
“ but where is our fun coming in. We shan’t
get boys if we stop indoors, and if we go out
we know nobody to introduce us. Eggs,
butter, and girls don’t improve by keeping.
I’m determined not to marry a cocky, if I can
help it. The bush may please Palmira ; it’s
new to her ; but, as for me, I’m full up.
Even the bottle-ho’s, Mums grumbles at, are
human beings, and I like human beings, and
plenty of them.”
“ But what can we do, Till ? ” enquired
Sarah Jane, despairingly.
“ Advertise ! ” said Tilly, as, lighting one
of Jabez’s cigarettes, she sat up in bed and
puffed and coughed with resolution. 4 When
you have anything to dispose of make it
known.’ I read that in a paper the other
day. It said the moss grew on the doorsteps
of the shops that did not advertise, and the
owners formed a contingent to King-street
wherever that is). That the only way to sell
things is to tell likely purchasers, or how
will they know you have got what they want.
Now, I have been thinking that over, and
it seems to me a single girl is something like
a shop, lots of boys might like her and want
her if they only knew she was to be had. A
decent boy can’t stop you in the street, and,
of course, you can’t stop him, so it seems to
me a perfect angel of a girl might live in this
Sydney all her life and never get to know
one nice suitable man, although there are
•
hundreds and hundreds everywhere about.
So I say, let us put in an advertisement, it
will be a bit o’ fun if nothing else : Two fine
upstanding country girls, guaranteed sound
in wind and limb, are open to offers by
eligible bachelors.”
“ But you would not put that in, Tilly,”
said Sarah .Tane.
“ Oh, of course not, but words to that
effect. Putting it the proper way is every-
thing. Now, how shall we begin ?
“ ‘ Two young ladies—no, that won’t do ;
persons who call themselves ladies are
mostly something very different. Two young
girls—no, that means two domestic servants.
4 Two women, two females’—no, plague it
all, how hard it is to say just what you
mean ! ”
“ Two sisters,” suggested Sarah Jane.
“ Yes, that will do. 4 Two sisters from the
country, tall and good-looking’—no, that
won’t do. From the country means we are
softies, and to call ourselves good-looking,
even though it’s true, is vulgar cheek.”
“ Two sisters of gentle blood,” suggested
Sarah Jane again. “I see that in er paper
once.”
“ Then they were bounders,” said Tilly.
“ All people who praise themselves, or crack
themselves up, or say the nice things people
have said of them, are bounders, and
kangaroos and wallabies.”


“ Then how are you goin’ to say anything,”
-enquired Sarah Jane. “ When people adver-
tise they just gasses all they knows about
what they has ter sell, it seems ter me.”
“ That’s the trouble,” said Tilly ; “ girls
want someone else to advertise for them ;
but, anyhow 7 , w 7 e must do our best.”
After a long pause of reflection Tilly
continued : “ ‘ Two sisters, country girls,
would like to enlarge the circle of their
gentlemen acquaintances. References ex-
changed. Address, X.Y.Z., P. 0., Balmain.”
Now that will have to do ; it’s not what I’d
like to say, but it’s as near as I can get.
4 References’ will show that we are respect-
able, and a decent man will think the better
of us for not saying we are pretty, accom-
plished. domesticated, and all that sort o’
thing. I’ll put it in ‘ The Daily Cablegram ’
to-morrow, and you shall go for the
answers.”
So the great question was settled. Sarah
Jane had no objection to offer, but went to
sleep dreaming that the correspondence she
received at the post office was so great that
she had to get a dray to take it home ; and
all the gentlemen that answered were so
handsome and good-looking, that she did not
know whom to choose, and died of a broken
heart, and became an old maid in
consequence.'
CHAPTER XXII.
In the Stillness of the Night.
After fighting the local mosquito with an
axe and fire-shovel for half an hour, Mums
and Dads were safely off to sleep. For a
time the quiet of the evening w r as only
broken by the yelping and barking of some
dozen dogs in the neighboring back gardens ;
the song of the drunken man, who had sat
down against the front gate ; and a glee
by three cats on the roof above. After
the day’s fitful fever, Mums and Dads slept
well. Suddenly a terrible yell close at hand
made Mums sit up in bed and shake Dads
violently.
“ Get up, there’s er native cat after them
there fowls agen. Take yer gun.” A noise
at night-time was always associated by
Mums w r ith a screech made by a hen when
under the claws of the blood-sucking cat.
“ Wos er matter ? ” Dads rubbed his
eyes.
Another yell, sounding as though uttered
in the room, made Dads jump to his feet as
from a spring-board.
“ Murder ! Murder ! ! Help ! Police ! ”
“Go and see. Dads ! Go and see ! They
are killing my poor girls.”
In her excitement Mums was striving to
light match after match by striking the
wrong ends on the box. Dads, in still greater
haste, had got his feet down the sleeves of
his coat, and had lost his arms in the legs
of his pants.
“ Murder ! Murder ! ! Help ! Police !’’
Bang, smash, crash, the noise of a roomful
of furniture tumbling downstairs ; the sound
of a toilet set assaulting a mirror ; a man’s
oaths, a woman’s yells ; a child’s screams ;
more smashing and banging ; a general
pandemonium.
“ It’s only ther red-headed woman next
door bein’ killed,” said Mums, with a sigh of
relief, when she finally located the sounds
and voice. Dads was not so easily appeased,
and as the noise came from the adjoining
house, he very naturally threw up the
window and looked into the adjoining yard,
being the nearest place where nothing
could be seen. But fortune favored Dads.
He had only time to note in the moonlight
that white-clad figures appeared at every
back window along the terrace, when a
golden-haired woman, clothed in a solitary


garment, and carrying in one hand a poker,
and the other a tomahawk, rushed into the
yard below. A bald-headed man followed,
brandishing a frying-pan and a kettle.
“ You brute ! I'll be the death of you.”
“ Not till I’ve cut your throat, you trollop.
I’ll swing for you, you—blanky, blank, blank,
blank, blank ”
Crash went the kettle, and knocked out
three of the palings in the dividing fence.
Dads, not pausing to see murder committed,
had -rushed to the yard and crept through
the opening. Mums, vainly striving to stop
him, had followed. The fighting pair were
already at close quarters, and doing a rough
and tumble on what had once been a flower-
bed. The bald-headed man had his hands
on the woman’s throat, and she shrieked
with a gurgling sound of one being choked.
Dads pulled the man off ; # Mums the
woman. But no sooner were the combatants’
arms free than, striking out wildly, they
began to bash the interveners, and the
language they used helped better than the
moon to light up the narrow yard.
Dads, getting one in the eye, paid it back
with one on the point, and as Dads’ arm had
the strength of forty years of bush work in
it, the bald-headed man fell flat to the ground
like a sack. Before Dads could as much as
turn round the red-headed woman had torn
herself free from Mums, sprung at Dads,
pulled him down by clawing on to his long
white hair, and then kneeling beside the
prostrate bald-headed man, began to sob and
cry.
“ Oh ! my poor darling. Did they murder
you ? Tell me you’re dead, Joe ; tell me
you’re dead, and I’ll scratch his eyes out.”
“ Come along, do ! ” said Mums, grabbing
Dads as he rose to his feet, “ them sort is
best left alone.”
For once Dads took Mums’ advice, and
they crawled back to their own yard rubbing
bruises, and patting the sore places that now
dotted their bodies.
“ Well, you are a pair of old fools.” It
was the cheerful voice of the moon-faced
lady, who spoke down to them from the
vantage of the upstair back window. “ Why,
anyone can see what they are ; they have-
that little game once a week regular. It
costs that old bald-head ten pound er
month for broken things, Mrs. Drawblock
says. I see you’ve got a lovely black eye
(this to Dads), an’ I declare that skirt is
ripped to rags (this to Mums). You take my
tip and stop in bed next time they have a
barney.”
Mums and Dads both said they would as
cheerful as their wounds allowed;
and having got to their own room again,
spent half an hour operating with vinegar
and brown paper, also some healing ointment
of Mums’ own manufacture, a jar of which
she always carried on her travels.
“ Now, I’s wonder ef wes can get er wink
o’ sleep,” said Dads, as his head sank once
more on the pillow. But the tuneful hum of
Dads’ mosquito snore had scarce begun to
chant the night’s refrain when
Kat-a-tat-tat-tat-tat-tat ! sounded on the
knocker of the front door, as though a giant
postman had called for a Christmas-box.
Mums, not yet asleep, gave a start, as
though she had sat on a paper of pins with
the points up.
Rat-a-tat-tat-tat-tat ! again, and Mums
shook Dads till her arms ached before she
could get more than a groan out of him.
“Dads, get up, there’s someone er knockin’
at ther front door enough ter break it in.”
“ Let um knock it down, an’ each other
down, an’ go ter blazes fer all I cares ; I
want ter go ter sleep.”
Rat-a-tat-tat-tat-tat!
“ Ef yous don’t go, I goes,” said Mums,
resolutely getting out of bed. With an
exclamation that was not “ Salvation,” or
anything like it, Dads struggled into his
pants once more, and, descending the stairs,
drew the bolt of the front door.
“ I want to see my little girl. How are
you, my darling ? ” A man with a cherry-
colored nose pushed himself into the passage,
and was about to embrace Dads.
“ Why, it’s Father Christmas ; where’s m.v
little girl. You’re not my little girl ; you’re
not took up with my little girl, an old.
scoundrel like you.”


“I want to see my little girl,” said the Red-nosed Man.


Mums appeared with a lighted candle.
“Oh ! that’s your little girl, is it, Mrs.
Mother Christmas, beg your pardons, I’m
sure, Mr. and Mrs. Christmas. I came for
Mary, my Mary. Where is Mary ? ”
The cherry-nosed man had now seated
himself in the front room, and was looking
round as though he expected to find Mary
concealed under a chair or sofa.
The stranger making no sign of shifting,
and Mums being in negligee costume, she put
the light on the table and returned to bed.
“No offence, old man, no offence. I didn't
mean to call you a scoundrel. Mistake, you
know ; all a mistake. I want Mary, my dear
little Mary. Now, don’t you take on at what
I said, Father Christmas. I know you well ;
most respectable man, fond o’ kids, an’ all
that ; comeanhaverdrink.”
Dads tried to decline, to protest that he
was not offended, that he bore no ill-will
towards the cherry-nosed man for past
insinuations ; but it was of no avail. Nothing
would satisfy the stranger or get him from
the house but Dads’ consent to go up to the
corner and have a drink. As it was 12
o’clock, Dads consented, for he had no doubt
the hotel would be closed, and this would
give him a chance to return to bed.
The hotel was closed, but three irregular
knocks at a side-door caused that portal to
open, and Dads and the stranger at once
stepped into the midst of a convivial
gathering.
Two hours later, when, with the cherry-
nosed man and an assorted collection of
revellers, he was turned out on the side-walk
into the night air, Dads was struck with a
sudden fear that the lamp post close at hand
was staggering and about to fall. Naturally
he had to pause awhile and hold it up. The
cherry-nosed man seemed to have drunk his
brain clearer, for, taking Dads by the arm,
he led him along the terrace, and again
knocked at No. 39.
Mums, who was waiting, promptly opened
the door.
“ He’s all right, Mrs. Christmas,” said the
cherry-nosed man apologetically, “ he’s as
right as rain an’ sober as a policeman.”
“ I’m er Freetrader, I am.” said Dads r
suddenly sitting flop on the doorstep. “ Free-
trade fer ever ! I sez.”
“ He’s only jolly and joyful, Mrs. Christ-
mas. Why, there’s my Mary, my little girl,
Mary.”
Mums here noticed that the moon-faced
woman had put her head out of the front
window next door, but it was quickly with-
drawn, and the noise of the opening front
door showed that the cherry-nose had found
his home at last.
• •••»•
In due time, and after some hesitation,
Sarah Jane called at the post office for any
letters addressed to “X.Y.Z.” She did not
require a cart, or even a bag, at this first
call ; there w r ere only three letters, and in
the sanctity of their bedchamber, with the
door well locked, the two girls opened and
read them. The first ran :
“ Dear Miss,—l have a nice little
business in the cheese and butter line,
and a lovely connection in kerosene. I
am a Marrickville Baptist, and should
like a wife of that persuasion. I should
be happy to treat with a lady with fifty
pounds, who' understood the haber-
dashery line, and was accomplished
behind the counter. There is a good
opening for thread, also darning cotton.
I am fifty, but look much younger, and
no one can beat me at bacon and cheese.
If this suits you, I shall be at Darling-
street Ferry at 9 p.m. (D.V.) to-morrow
night.—Yours, in the Lord,
“ Obadiah Tugmutton.”
“ P.S.—I might manage on forty-five
pounds. I shall be wearing a blue tie
and a red flower.—O.T.”
“ Well, I never ! ” cried Tilly.
“ Did yer ever ! ” echoed Sarah Jane.
“ Now for the next.”
“Flathead’s Hotel, George-st., Sydney.
“To ‘X.Y.Z.’—In answer to your advt.
in to-day’s, I have a very choice upstairs
bar in my hotel at above address, and
am looking out for two nice stylish girls,
of good appearance and good address
and reliable private connection. My
liquors are all Al, and if your style
should suit me we should no doubt come
to terms. A call will find me any
morning.—Yours, &c.. “A. Flathead.”


“ Good Heavens ! ” cried Tilly, “ what
next ? ”
“ This next,” said Sarah Jane.
“ Jumbuck’s Matrimonial Agency and
Universal Marriage Bureau, Pitt-st.
“ Dear Mesdames,— Seeing your advt.,
we beg to call your attention to our
agency as above, and long so favorably
and gratefully known by thousands of
married couples all over Australasia. We
have now on our books a most choice
assortment of bachelors, with a few
selected widowers of fortune, who are
all waiting our introduction to eligible
ladies.
“ We may add that no other firm has
our facilities and wide range of clients.
We have now some extra choice civil
servants, two military men, three naval
officers, and a fascinating doctor in good
practice, on our books, all eager for
immediate marriage.
“Our terms, the lowest of any reputable
firm in the trade, are ten shillings for
booking, and two-and-six each introduc-
tion. Commission on marriage by special
arrangement.
“ Hoping to be favored with your
esteemed patronage.—We are, &c.,
“ Splicem and Co.”
“ Twelve-and-six to be introduced to a
fascinating doctor.”
“ Or er military man.”
“ A naval officer.”
“ Or er Civil Servant.”
“ It looks cheap, don’t it,” said Tilly, “ as
cheap as a pair of boots, and all eager for
immediate marriage. Who would be sad and
single when they can be settled in life for
five half-crowns ? It’s too good to be true.”
“ All them letters seems ter want money,”
said Sarah Jane, sceptically. “Even ther
bloke with ther private bar wants money, I
’spect. They’s all er tryin’ ter take us down,
that’s what they is, ’cause we comes from
ther bush.”
“Well, suppose they are trying to score
off us, what of it ? Aren’t we trying to score
off whom we can ; isn’t everybody ? ”
“ i calls them letters disgustin’,” snorted
Sarah Jane. >
“ Wait till the next post,” answered Tilly.
“ The nice boys have not had time to make
up their minds and find a penny for the
stamp. Only wait. A little bird tells me we
shall have some lovely offers, and that our
visit will end the last page in a novelette.”
“ I only wish yer meant it,” said Sarah
Jane, repeating Euphemia’s old refrain.
chapter XXIII.
The Deputation.
Mr. Flapfuzze, M.L.A., had arranged that
the deputation, from his constituents at Barjo
t# the Minister, should meet him at the Hotel
Australia ; and, an hour previously, he had
hurried round to Macquarie-street to the den
of the great lion. He found that magnate
playing dominoes in an atmosphere fragrant
of whisky, and soda, and tobacco smoke.
“ Now, Bill, my boy,” said Mr. Flapfuzze,
as he clapped the Minister on the back,
“ remember your promise. I’m carting that
truck load of cockies round here in a few
minutes, and I want you to give them toffee,
and shout for the crowd (I’ll stand exes.),
and you must deal them out a couple of
thou’ for roads, or whatever they want, or
there will be trouble, I promise you.”
“ Right you are, old man,” replied the Hon.
Mr. Smoothemall, as he banged down the
double-six, “trot out your pumpkin-eaters,
and I’ll be their long-lost brother.”
Punctual to the minute, the deputation filed
into the Ministerial presence, and was
formally introduced by the Member, who,
having briefly recited their wants, called on
Mr. Wayback, “one of the leading agricul-
4


turists of the Barjo district,” to state at
length the wants and grievances ot'
farmers.
“ It,s way, Mister,” said Dads, as he
stepped forward and unbuttoned his coat and
vest and swung his arms free. “ Times is
Purty bad, no crops, no feed fer stock, no
rain fer plantin’, no nothin’ ; and, we sez,
4 Ther Guv’ment’s got er long stockin’, nows
the time ter tap it fer a few quid.’
“ There’s a power o’ public works as wants
startin’ round our way. They talk o’ hirri-
gation an’ water conversation. Why there’s
•er gully in ther Wallaby Ranges, ef it was
■dammed up, would water my farm and Jones’
place all ther year. I aster surveyor cove
the price of er dam, an’ he said ‘ten thousand
pounds.’ Now, I put it to yous, Mister, as er
fair offer between man an’ man. Jones and
I will pay five pound er year, ef so be as
.you’ll make that dam. We don’t want no
charity, just er fair thing. Some o’ these
other blokes has got some fust-class dam
sites, so you could dam us all round. And.
while yous about it, yous might stack up
■some o’ this ’ere dry weather, agen the flood
times comes, when er few bales ud come
handy to er bloke.
“ And we wants a proper understandin’ o’
this here seven bob er day racket. Last
week er cove comes to Dingo Flat, an’ asks
fer er job. * What wages is yer askin’ ? ’ sez
I. ‘ Seven bob er day,’ sez he, ‘ an’ not er
sprat less, for Smoothemall is payin’ that
down ter Sydney.’ ‘ Well,’ I sez, ‘ will you
take ther farm an’ guarantee ter give me
seven bob er day ter work it ? ’ ‘ Not be er
jugfull,’ sez he, ‘ der yers think I’m er mug ? ’
and off he goes.
“Now, I puts it to yer straight, Mister.
What is us coves ter do ? Wheat, an’ corn,
an’ ther like o’ that, won’t pay seven bob er
day wages at present prices, not when yers
gets er crop, let alone pay fer ther time when
ther ain’t no crop at all ; so we asks yous as
cr fair thing, between man an’ man, ter raise
ther price o’ produce all round. A standard
rate o’ prices goes with er standard rate o’
wages, it stands ter reason. * How shall Ido
it ? ’ sez you. ‘ Easy as peelin’ spuds,’ sez
T. Just tell ther Boss at all these here
railway stations to give five bob fer corn :
and four fer wheat, ter all as brings it ; an’
there yer are.
“Then there’s this ’ere question o’ roads.
I don’t deny as we’ve had a fair lump o’
coin spent round Barjo way ; but ther work
was not ter say handy fer ther lot o’ us.
What we wants, as a fair thing, is er few
hundreds spent on each o’ ther roads near
our own places, so as to be handy-like fer
meals, and feedin’ ther hosses.
“An’ there’s another thing. There’s er
cove named Rag, as seems ter be ’pinted ter
regerlate ther weather, an’ call it all sorts
o’ swear words. Give him ther boot, quick
an’ lively. The weather he serves out ain’t
lit fer er dorg, an’ ther best thing fer all
concerned is fer that ’ere cove ter regerlate
er pick and shovel.
“ There’s er few other little things as we
wants, as will be told yers by the other coves,
as I holds with as right an’ proper, an’ I
hopes as you’ll bear ’em in mind.”
Dads stepped back, and several members
of the deputation having briefly spoken, the
Minister rose and replied :
“ I have listened with great interest to
this deputation, representing as it does one
of the greatest interests in the State, an
interest lying at the very foundation of our
social and financial prosperity, and I have
been impressed by the reasonable and
legitimate claims it has put forward for
Government assistance. I know I shall be
reviled by the scurrilous curs squatting
behind the dirty ink-pots of a suborned and
corrupt Press, and that they will say that as
long as the British money-lender has a
shilling to lend I shall never refuse a claim
made for the spending of it. Let them say it.
Gentlemen, I glory in the charge made by
the vile slanderers ; I never have refused a
demand on the Treasury, and, with the help
of the loan account, I never will. I agree,
without reserve, to your irrigation proposals,
the genuineness of which is shown by your
personal guarantee. The fixing the price of
produce also seems an eminently practical
proposal, though it will doubtless require a


kittle time to put it into thorough working
•order, and, as regards the road work, I wiil
immediately instruct the local road superin-
tendent to adopt your suggestions, and have
work carried out where it will be most
■convenient to the workers.”
With a few more remarks on both sides,
.and an enthusiastic drinking of the Minister’s
health, the deputation withdrew, and not a
small portion of its success was attributed
by general consent to the able exposition of
their wants by Mr. Wayback.
The M.L.A., in bidding them an effusive
good-bye, after standing “ sam ” to a
sumptuous meal at the hotel, whispered to
each one : “ If you would like to be a J.P., or
know a friend who desires the honor, just
mention it, and you may consider the matter
settled. I put through twelve dozen last
week, and this week I mean to beat the
■record.”
• •••••
“ Good-morning ! ”
Mums looked up from the tap in the yard,
where she was filling a saucepan, and saw
The moon-faced woman looking down at her
Trom over the fence.
“ Good-mornin’ ! ” replied Mums. “ Der
yers think we shall have any rain ; I don’t
know what ther stock ’ull do fer Winter feed
ef ther ain’t no rain.”
“ Oh, we don’t bother about stock in
Balmain,” said the moon-face. “ What did
you think of ‘Carrots ’ last night ? Didn’t
she perform ! Why, she’s a disgrace to the
terrace, and I wonder Mrs. Drawblock puts
up with her goings on for a single day. But
there—Mrs. Drawblock is not much herself
when the truth is told.”
“ Yer don’t say ? ” said Mums.
“ As true as I stand here ; she used to keep
that pub. at the corner ; the owner of this
terrace then, was a bit dotty, so she gets
him in the pub., makes him drunk, makes
him sign a will in her favor ; and then keeps
him drunk till he goes to the cemetery,
which was mighty quick, I can tell you.
That man ought to be dug up and analysed.”
“ My word ! ” said Mums, “ that’s awful ;
hut what is all ther women doin’ all along
ther terrace ; I sees they’s all talkin’ ter each
other over ther back fence ? ”
“ Well you may ask. That’s what they all
do, all the morning, till ten minutes before
dinner time, when they rush inside and dab
some steaks or chops in the frying-pan.
Talking scandal and blackguarding their
neighbors, that’s what they’re doing, and
leaving their houses like muck holes from
top to bottom ; it’s perfectly disgraceful the
way they carry on, and the lies they tell.
“ There’s that Mrs. Pinkcheek there, yarn-
ing this last hour with ‘ Carrots,’ she has a
handsome young man, young enough to be
her son, come three times a week to give her
music lessons. Music lessons, indeed ! I'd
give her music lessons if I was her man that
would make her sing a different song with
her crow’s voice. And the way those two
backbite and run dowd their betters is some-
thing awful. Mark my words, there will be
court work over it before long.
“ You see that black-haired woman, with
her bare arms on the third fence. She has
a squint-eye and three false teeth in front,
though she pretends they are genuine. Well,
they do say she was in Darlinghurst six
months ago for shop-lifting. Mrs. Twodecks,
at No. 5, swears to her, and she was in the
court when the trial came on ; but Mrs. Two-
decks herself never said how it was that
she came to be in the court, and no doubt she
had very good reason for not telling, for she
has heaps of jewellery that she certainly
never bought, and you can’t tell me that any
man was ever fool enough to give it to her.
“ You see that little washed-out rag, with
big blue eyes, at the fourth fence ; her second
husband divorced her only last month, and
now she’s married to the man the trouble
was about. And a beauty he is, too ! Some-
thing in the sewerage ; and what he could
see in her Lord only knows. She’s actually
carrying on now with the butcher-boy. You
just watch her when he calls ; he stops there
long enough to sell two shops full of meat.
“ See that creature with her hair in curl-
papers, talking to that fright in the dirty
dressing-gown. I’m sure she’s talking about
me, the scandalmongering cat. It’s shameful


the way the women go on here ; it’s jaw.
jaw, jaw the whole day long, and no decent
woman is safe. Why don’t they mind their
own business, and their own houses, I say,
and leave this backbiting alone. Goodness
knows, there is not one of them with a
character better than a dish-clout. Now,
there’s that Mrs. Watchorn, her with the
gold spectacles, talking to the vegetable
John. They do say ”
“I’m mortal sorry,” cried Mums, inter-
rupting the harangue of the moon-faced
woman, “ I can’t stop another minute, my
dough’s on ther rise,” and with that she
rushed inside and shut the door, much to the
disgust of the moon-faced woman, who had
meant to ask the loan of a bar of soap and
a box of starch.
“ Well, I never ! ” cried Mums, as she
rushed at her dough, and made it into loaves
before it was really fit, just to have the
pleasure of punching it. “Er body ’ud never
believe it.”
“ Believe what, Mums ? ” enquired Tilly.
“ The way these Sydney women carry on,
ther lazy trollops ! That’s whats ther
matter ; they ain’t got no work ter do, ter
keep ’urn out o’ mischief, no wood ter chop,
•or bread ter bake, meat ter salt, butter ter
make, or washin’ down their crick. Every-
thing brought ter ther door already done,
an’ they with all day ter do half an hour’s
work. Mark my words, gals : when er
woman ain’t er workin’, or er sleepin’, she’s
failin’ into wickedness, as sure as fate. Er
man he smokes, or maybe takes er drop too
much ; but a woman, she just goes bad like
tainted meat.”
••••••
On her second visit to the post office Sarah
Jane received five letters addressed to
“ X.Y.Z.” They were as varied in size,
appearance, and handwriting as it was
possible for letters to be.
In number one, the writer said he had a
loving heart and the liver complaint. He
trusted that “ X.Y.Z.,” or one of her, had a
sweet temper and warm toes. Number two
was strictly formal, and proposed an
exchange of photographs and references as-
a first preliminary.
Number three was from a disconsolate
widower, who bewailed the virtues of the
departed, and hoped one of the “ X.Y.Z.’s
was named Rachel, because that was her
name ; he had five beautiful children, who
sighed for a mother’s loving care. His
was insured for £5OO. Also, he was a vege-
tarian, teetotaller, Swendenborgian, and
homoeopathist. He desired a kindred soul,
who would join with himself and the
departed Rachel in a life of bliss in the
world to come, &c., &c. Tilly had not the-
patience to read it all, but turned to number
four. “ Two gentlemen friends, military
men, and strangers in Sydney, are much
struck with the advt. of ‘ X.Y.Z.,’ and would,
like to make their acquaintance, and
exchange references after a first meeting, if
that is thought desirable. They will be at
the band-stand in the Botanic Gardens at 3-
p.m., Thursday, each in uniform, with .1
white flower in the button-hole. In the-
meantime they remained, yours respectfully,
“ A.B.C.
“ 1001 Overwood-street, Potts Point.”
“ That’s our fate ! ” cried Tilly, “ I know
it ; 1 feel it as sure as anything. Of course-
they are officers, and move about from one
place to another, with plenty of balls and
parties everywhere they go. I love a soldier,
don’t you, S.J.? ”
“ Well, I dunno. Fine feathers don’t
make fine birds, an’ sodjers don’t have much
ter do in Australia. ’Spose they went ter
Africa, an’ got killed ? ”
“ Oh, don’t croak,” said Tilly.
“ Or perhaps they’s only In ther Salvation
Army,” added Sarah Jane, “ or maybe they’**
Tommies on er shillin’ er day, with hats
that won’t stick on their heads, an’ coats
with no tails.”
“ You’re enough to make a saint swear.”
“ Well, I’d rather have er cove with er
store than er uniform. It’s more usefuller,
an’ can’t walk off ser quick.”
“ Read number five,” said Tilly. “Of all
the letters this takes the cake ! ”
“ The wages of sin is Death.
*


“ Though thy sins be as scarlet I will wash
them whiter than snow.
“ There is a fountain filled with blood.”
And there’s a lot more of the same sort.
W T hat strange things people do say when
they take up their pens to write. If people
were only like their letters, half the world
would be stark, staring mad.”
“ Shall us go ter-morrer ? ” enquired Sarah
Jane.
“Of course we’ll go. The best of it is we
can have a good look at them, knowing who
they are ; and they won’t know us unless we
like to speak. I wonder what they’re like ? ”
“ Yes, I wonder ! ” echoed Sarah Jane.
• •••••
So far during the Sydney visit Bubs had
been little trouble to Mums. The first thing
in the morning he was out in the back yard,
and there he remained, with intervals for
meals, till bed time. Bubs seemed to have
found a kindred soul in the child of the red-
headed woman. Mums in her ignorance of
town children rejoiced.
On being put to bed Bubs generally howled
himself to sleep ; but, at times, the fit took
him to be amiable; then he would sing
“ Soldiers of the Queen ” till he dozed off.
This night he was in his amiable mood, and
singing ; but the refrain was strange, so
that it drew Mums to listen at the door, and
this is what she heard :
‘‘l’ll hit yer in the'bloomm’ jaw an’ bite yer lug
“I will, yer sanguinary blank ! blank !”
“ Well, I never! Come here, Till, an’ listen
ter ther awful stuff that child has picked up.
It’s that kid next door, an’ I thought he was
an innocent little babe. By cripes ! What
am I ter do ? I can’t lock him up all day,
or turn him on the streets—that ’ud be worse.
Now, all ther villainy kids picks up is some-
thin’ ’strordinary. Ef them was pretty
words now r , he’d er took not er bit er notice ;
but just let ’em hear what they shouldn’t,
an’ they never forget it, but sucks it, over an’
over agen, like lollies.”
• •••••
That night, when Euphemia had gone to
sleep, Tilly and Sarah Jane discussed, and
re-discussed, the vital question of what they
should wear the next day. It was not that
they were troubled with an extensive ward-
robe ; on the contrary, the difficulty of choice
was in proportion to its limitations. It takes
the feminine mind far longer to decide which
of two possible dresses to wear, than which
of a dozen ; and a proportionately longer time
to put on the final selection. Sarah Jane
was all for bright colors, Tilly for sombre
tints, and they argued the matter till Mums
called up the stairs to know w T hy they did
not go to sleep. And when they finally
dropped off the great question was still
undecided.
CHAPTER XXIV.
Mrs. Manger.
“ Now, Mums,” said Tilly, “ you must
really go and see Mrs. Manger. She will be
•ever so offended if she hears we have been
to Sydney again and not called ; and she
lives in Balmain, too—quite close by here.”
“ Well, I ’spose I’s may as well,” replied
Mums, doubtfully. “ She married Jim, an’
•ought ter be comfortable like on ther money
he makes. I mind Jim was as proud as er
turkey gobbler when he tells us he was
rgettin’ spliced ter a Sydney gal.”
“ You go now,” urged Tilly. “ Take
’Phemia and Bubs. We don’t want to swamp
her by going all at once. Sarah Jane and
I will go over vo Sydney and have a look at
the shops.”
It was in this diplomatic manner that Tilly
arranged her visit to the Botanic Gardens.
• •••••
“ This must be the place,” said Euphemia,
as the visiting party came opposite a pretty
semi-detached cottage, where two children


were swinging on the front gate and a third
was chopping the picket fence with a
tomahawk.
“ Does Mrs. Manger live here ? ” Euphemia
demanded of the chief gate-swinger, who
thereupon rushed to the back shouting,
“ Mother ! Here’s er lydie wants ter see
yer.”
A little waiting, and the door opened ; but
they hardly recognised in the woman, dressed
in a striped petticoat, and soiled slip body,
the Mrs. Manger who had visited Dingo Flat.
Her throat was bare, and her hair in curling
pins.
“ Oh ! how do you do, Mrs. Wayback ? Do
come in. I’m a bit upside down to-day. You
see, there is so much to do in a house when
you have no servant.—Get off that gate,
Tommy ! Y'ou know I’ve told you a hundred
times.—You must really excuse me; I’ve not
had time to dress. Come in and sit down,
and please wait a minute while I put a skirt
on.”
It was now 3 o’clock in the afternoon as
the visitors sat down in what was
apparently the dining-room, the remnants of
dinner being still on the table. Mums
noticed a tin of corned beef half eaten, scraps
of bread about the table, and marks of jam
and dirty fingers on the cloth. Her eyes
wandered over the furniture, which, while
looking new, was yet knocked and scratched
about. A sofa had a leg off, two chairs the
top bars missing. The silver cruet, two
bottles broken ; the mirror in the sideboard
was cracked. The white lace curtains, for
lack of washing, had acquired the fashion-
able coffee color. Mums noticed there was
dust everywhere, and quite little heaps in
the corners, as though at some time it had
been swept there in a hurry.
Euphemia picked up from the floor, where
it appeared to have just fallen, a novelette
with a page turned down, “ Lady Isobel, or
The Wife’s Secret.”
Bubs and little Tommy were putting out
their tongues at each other, while the other
two children came in and stared hard at the
visitors.
In what was really a short time for the
operation, Mrs. Manger returned, arrayed in>
a smart gown and her hair fringed. Her
face had also, in the words of Mums relating
to the event, received “ er lick an’ er promis.”
“ This is kind of you. I’m so glad to see
you. And you are all quite well ? That is
right. And that is the baby ; how he has
grown.—Don’t you make those faces at him,
Tommy, you rude imp '—Gladys, clear away
those things, and mind you don’t smash a
plate, as you did this morning.—lt is quite a.
change to have someone call ; it is so lonely
here, you can’t think, with Jim away all day,
and I can’t go out without dragging those
three children with me. Once a woman;
has a pack of children she’s tied to her
house. If it wasn’t for reading, I don’t know
what I’d do. Have you read ‘ The Wife’s
Secret ? ’ I’m sure she did not poison him,
though everyone says she did. You will see
when you get to the end.”
“ Der yer buy tinned meats ? ” enquired
Mums, glancing at the dish. “ I should er
thought it was dear.”
“ Oh ! it saves cooking, and there’s always
so much to do.—Gladys, leave off picking
pieces out of the plates. How often must I
tell you ? —lt’s such a worry, cooking, when'
there is all the other work.”
“ Mumma ! Give me a penny to buy
lollies.”
“ No, I won’t, Reginald. You’ve had two-
pennies already to-day.”
“ 800, boo, boo !” yelled Master Reginald,,
as he kicked the furniture.
“ Well, I’ll give you a penny this time
but, mind, it’s the last to-day ! ”
Reginald took his coin and ran off ; then'
Tommy set up a howl because he had not a.
penny, too, and was pacified, after protest,
with the copper.
“ What an everlasting plague children'
are ! ” sighed Mrs. Manger, after this inter-
lude. “ It’s pennies, pennies, all day long,
and they mount up at the end of the week,
and really I have none to spare.”
“ I thought as Jim made good money ? ”
said Mums.
“But there’s so much expense. Fifteen)
shillings a week for the furniture, five for


the piano, two and six for the sewing
machine, half-a-crown for my drapery, and
the club money, the rent, the children’s
insurance, and I don’t know what besides.”
“But yer not buying furniture and them
things every week? ”
“ Oh ! it’s time-payment. Everyone does
it. We should hardly have a thing if we did
not get it that way. You see, the money
would always go before we had enough.”
“ But yous been married er long time
now.”
“ Yes ; and we ought to have paid off. But
we lost the first lot when we had nearly
finished, Jim got out of work ; and the
second lot went the same way. I think,
sometimes, we never shall have things really
our own.”
“ So yous plays ther pianner ? ” enquired
Mums.
“ No, I don’t play ; but it looks nice in a
house, don’t you think? And Gladys is going
to learn when she is bigger.”
“But yer finds ther sewin’ machine handy,
I be sure ? ”
“ Well, I don’t know. Sometimes I wish l
hadn’t got it. It’s a fearful lot o’ trouble
making your own things, and, really, you can
buy them just as cheap ready made as you
can buy the stuff—at sales, you know.—Now,
Gladys, get the tea ready, and put the kettle
on the stove.”
“ There ain’t no tea, Mumma,”said Gladys,
presently.
“ Well, take the book and run to the shop
for a quarter of a pound, and you can get
a tin of jam and a tin of sardines at the
same time. It’s so handy,” continued Mrs.
Manger, in explanation. “ We have a nice
shop at the corner, and anything I want, I
only have to send up one of the children, and
he enters it in our book, and his book, and
then we pay every Monday.”
“ But ain’t it dearer that way ? ”
“ Well, it is a bit dearer ; but it’s so handy.
Everyone does it, and he’s such a nice man.”
When the tea was ready to pour out, it was
discovered that there was no sugar.
“ Tommy, take the book and run and get
a pound, and you can take a plate and get
lialf of butter at the same time.”
“ No, I wont ! I’ve been three times to-
day, and Reggie’s only been twice. It ain’t
fair ! ”
“ Now, be a good boy, and here’s a penny
for you, and Reggie he can go with you, and
get half a pound of steak at the butcher’s for
your father’s tea.”
When, finally, tea was ready, Tommy
howled because there was no cake, and was
only pacified by receiving a penny to go to
the baker’s and buy a bun, Reginald being
bribed to peace with a helping of two
sardines.
“ It’s the only way I can get a moment’s
quiet,” sighed Mrs. Manger; “ and, really,
I don’t think there is another penny in the
house. It is always so, every week, by
Wednesday, or'Thursday. You have no idea
what it costs to live in town—tram fares,
and ferry fares, if you go out ; and some-
thing so cheap brought to your door if you
stop home. And it all mounts up ; so that
I wonder and wonder where the money has
gone to. Oh ! how I would like to live in the
bush, where there are no shops to spend at,
or trams, or trains, or hawkers, or any-
thing ! ”
Mrs, Manger had much other matter to
communicate—to discuss Euphemia’s coming
marriage, and a whole list of past births,
deaths, and marriages that had occurred in
the extensive Wayback family with which
she was connected.
After Mums and Euphemia had said
“ good-bye,” they paused for a few minutes
outside the shop at the street corner. It was
the general tea hour, and from the strings of
children who went to and fro one might have
tLought the general store was a public school.
And each child brought a memorandum-book,
and carried away tiny packages, half-pounds,
quarter-pounds, and pennyworths.
“ Well, I’m blest! ” cried Mums. “If they
ain’t like er lot o’ ants after er meat bone !
An’ Susan Manger’s right—they all does it
’bout here. Ther trollops ! Ther lazy, idle
trollops ! Why don’t ther husbands take


sticks an’ belt sense inter ’um ? I say. Ef l
thought you, ’Phemia, was er goin’ ter be
like one o’ these here Sydney women, I’d
rather see yer dead ! Dirty, lazy, ’strava
gant, magging hussies ! They make me
sick, they do ; an’ I wish we was all back at
Dingo Flat, away from ther creatures.”
• •••••
W T hen Dads left the Barjo deputation to
return home, he felt himself a friend of all
the world. He reckoned “that ’ere white
fizzy stuff ” they gave him at dinner was, as
he said, “ ther best hop beer I ever put down
’m
my neck.” If. he had been in the bush he
woidd have relieved his feelings in song ; but
here, a small prelude of notes, he tried, so
-drew public attention, and a policeman
addressed him with such serious words of
advice, about going home to bed and sleeping
it off, that Dads was forced to warble to him-
self internally. At the top of King-street he
found a crowd of men assembled, listening
to the harangues of the unemployed orators.
Dads did not agree with the opinions
expressed, and kept interjecting, till at last
the crowd got impatient and cried : “ Get
on the stump, old man ! Get on the stump ! ”
Dads did not want twice asking. He had
long formed his opinions on the unemployed
question, and he never felt a greater desire
to let himself go. Said Dads
“ I’ve er listened ter yous coves several
times, an’ as fur as I can make out, yous is
askin’ fer work, askin’ ther Government ter
put yer on at some nice, easy, handy graft
at seven bob er day, or as much more as yer
-can get. (Hear, hear.) An’ yous been askin’
like that fer this last twelve year. Some-
times ther Minister gives yer er job, an’
sometimes he don’t ; sometimes yer gets
all ther beer yer wants, and some-
times yer has ter stop er cove, like me, in
ther street fer ther loan of er sprat. An’ it
’pears ter me, with all yer talk, yer don’t get
no forrader ; an’ every day yous gettin’ older,
an’ more ordinary; an’ soon ther Government
’ull sool ther dogs on yer, an’ send fer ther
police. Now, ther trouble is, ther Minister
-don’t know what ter do with yer ; and ef so
be yous was Ministers, I misdoubt ef yer’d
know ydf'selves. Now, yous coves (I’ve er
figured this matter out, an’ yous can take it
from me), go ter ther Minister an’ talk
straight. Sez you, ‘We don’t want work.
What we wants is wages.’ ‘Work,’ sez you,
* is a gen our nature ; we was born toffs, we
was, Australian noblemen every one of us.
The muscles of our arms is dough an’ our
hands is tripe ; only our throats an’ teeth is
made for exercise. Workers,’ sez you, ‘is
born, an’ broke in when theys young, an’
kept hiled an’ limber with hard graft all ther
time ; an’ ’cos they likes work, they picks up
all there is goin’. They’s alius on ther job
afore we get up in ther mornin’, an’ don’t
give us coves er chance. Now,’ sez you, ‘ Mr.
Smoothemall, we can tell yers how ter save
money, an’ please all parties. Let them
graft as likes it, an’ let us, ther noblemen o’
Australia, mind ther sparrers in Hyde Park
Give us half wages, er pound er week paid
regular, an’ we’ll count ther bluebottles on
all ther seats from College ter ’Lisabeth
streets ; which will be quite as useful as
shiftin’ sand, an’ more in our way.’ Sez you,
‘ We shall be handy ter ther pubs, an’ ther
pounds ’ull all come back ter yer in beer
tax,’ sez you.
“ ‘ Right yer are, me boys,’ Smoothemall
will say. ‘ Yer’ve relieved me mind of a
great weight. Go an’ look arter ther
sparrers ; I leaves them in your charge, an’
you shall have yer pound er week regular,
as long as ther is er sixpence left of ther
loan account ! ’ ”
Dads might have continued his discourse,
for he was in full swing, had not some larri
kins pulled him from his perch and tried to
bonnet him. But Dads did not prove the
soft thing they expected ; a few prods from
his elbows, and digs from his fists, keeping
them at a respectful distance.
“ My oath ! ” said one to the other, “ that
old cove’s as hard as iron, an’ he hits as
though er horse had kicked yer.”
• «••••
When Mums and Euphemia had gone to
pay their visit to Mrs. Manger, Tilly and
Sarah Jane waltzed round the room with
glee. The way was clear before them. They


liad settled on the question of what dresses
and hats to wear ; but it took a surprising
time to put these articles on to their mutual
satisfaction. The bedroom mirror had a
good hour’s work, and was probably never
so tired in its life.
As they walked towards the ferry, Tilly
was full of suppositions as to the probable
bearing and good looks of the soldiers await
ing them.
“ I hope mine is tall and dark, with a little
black moustache, and strikingly handsome,”
said Tilly. “ I feel he must be ; and smokes
lovely cigars, and not a dirty pipe, and black
tobacco. Strong tobacco makes your clothes
smell so. Of course, they will be on foot in
the Gardens ; but I’m sure they must be
mounted officers. A man looks so much
better on horseback. Don’t you think so,
S.J. ? ”
“ Well, that depends on ther hoss,” said
Sarah Jane. “Er cove on er old crock don’t
look up ter much. Her yer mind Jack Clark
cornin’ ter our place er ridin’ er bag o’ bones
he called er creamy ? ”
“ But military men always have good
horses,” protested Tilly. “ And who is talk
ing of Jack Clarks, and Jim Crows, and all
-that rubbish. For goodness sake, S.J., forget
the bush for five minutes ! ”
As they entered the Botanic Gardens, Tilly
prepared a plan of action. “It won’t do,
S.J., for us to go both together straight up
to the bandstand. If they are there waiting,
they will guess who we are at once. You
stop here on this seat, while I go on and
liave a look.”
With springs in her toes Tilly took a path
that went near, but not directly towards, the
bandstand. At first she could hardly keep
herself from running ; then, as she neared
the spot, a strange hesitation and shyness
made her walk slower, and slower. At last
she came to a bend in the path that gave a
view of the stand, and with eyes fearing
almost to look, she glanced about. Yes,
there were two men there ; but, oh ! horror,
not in bright scarlet, with crimson sash, as
she had pictured—erect, noble men, with the
air of Kitchener, and the commanding dig-
nity of Lord Roberts. But two slouching,
bent-shouldered fellows in volunteer uni-
form.
“ They could not be the men,” Tilly said
to herself, her heart sinking ; for, even as she
spoke to herself, she noticed they each had a
white flower in the button-hole. “It was too
bad ! ” She felt inclined to go over and
punch them, or pinch them. It would have
relieved her feelings to have clawed out a
handful of hair from their heads.
Boiling with indignation, Tilly walked on
without further turning her head. She had
resolved to go back by a circular path to
Sarah Jane, and leave these two louts to
cool their heels. But, hurrying steps
followed her, and a familiar voice shouted :
“ Hullo, Tilly ! How goes it ? ”
She turned about, and (could she credit
her eyes '!) the two volunteers were grinning
at her ; and she recognised them as Tom
Rawson and Jack Clark, in their Barjo
volunteer uniforms.


CHAPTER XXV.
The Military Men.
Only for a moment was Tilly taken aback,
then, with a smile, she held out her hand
and demanded :
“ And who let you two off the chain ? ”
“ 011 ! wes got ther job o’ lookin’ after
M'Ewing’s prize stock till they’s sold. A
toff's billet—my oath !—an’ wes got all day
ter knock about town an’ show the townies
er few pints.”
“ Well, I never ! ” said Tilly. “To think
of you two babies going about all by your-
selves. What will your Mums say ? ”
“ Oh ! chuck that, Tilly ; er bloke ain’t er
kid all his life, an’ I tell yer there’s whips o’
fun down here ef yer knows yer way about.
An’ what are yous arter, dolled up ter ther
nines ? Arter one o’ them Sydney blokes o’
yourn, I’ll bet er crown ! ”
“ I’m looking for Dads. We’ve just lost
Dads,” replied Tilly, with ready prevarica-
tion. “ Now, w r hat are you coves up to ? ”
“ Such er bloomin’ spree ! Shall I tell her,
Jack ? ”
Tos, said Jack, with a grin on his face
that made his hat wrinkle. “ Tilly’s not er
bad sort; but I’ll go back sentry, ’case they
turns up.”
It s this ways, Till,” said Tom Rawson,
as the pair sat down on a handy seat. “ Jack
see an advertisement in ther paper—two gals
as wanted blokes. ‘ That’s good iron fer us,’
he sez. ‘ We’ll get that clerk cove as lodges
with us ter write an answer.’ ‘ Right yer
aie, I sez. ‘I m on.’ So ther cove he writes
er slap-up letter, my word ! We calls our-
selves military men, an’ we’s waitin’ now
ter meet ’em an’ have er bit o’ sport. O’
course, gals like that ain’t much.”
“ I should think not,” said Tilly. “ Girls
that advertise themselves in the papers must
be dreadful creatures. I wonder at a decent
boy like you, Tom, having anything to do-
with the likes of them.”
“Oh ! it’s only er bit o’er spree like. We
means ter cod ’em as wes great toffs ; these
Sydney gals are er bit sultry, take my word.
But wes pretty fly. Wes left all our coin*
at home ’cept half-er-crown er piece, so we*
can’t be took down fer much. I’ll put ’em off
ef yer like. Say as wes got er special
’pointment at ther club, ef yer likes ter take-
er turn round ther gardins.”
“ Don’t let me keep you,” said Tilly. “ Go-
and meet your charming Sydney girls by all
means, and mind you hold tight to that half-
crown. Good-bye ! ”
“ So long, Till ; see yer later.”
When Tilly -returned to Sarah Jane she
related her experience.
“ Did yer ever ! ” said Sarah Jane. “ Ter
think o’ ther cheek o’ them two ! An’ ain’t
we took-in proper ? I never did think much,
o’ this here advertisin’. But wes might er
gone fer er walk with them boys, as we was
here.”
“ No,” said Tilly, emphatically. The idea !
We did not come to Sydney to walk about
with bushies ! ”
•••••«
All this time Palmira and Euphemia were-
very busy, but Horace and Jabez had sunk,
into quite subordinate positions, being at the-
constant beck and call of their prospective
wives, and undergoing a systematic break-
ing-in for domestic harness. The furniture
; n the Gohighly house at Redfern, being the
property of Palmira, was to be taken by her
to her bush home, so that It was necessary
for Euphemia, under instructions from
Horace, to re-furnish the house from ceilings
to basement. It was a task that gave-
Euphemia unending delight, and was the


crowning glory of her engagement. Mums
also gained a new youth, as she thought of
the whole list of delights in bargaining that
were in store. With her daughter she
hunted the town and suburbs, from shop to
shop, always on the look-out for a “job
line,” 44 goods under cost, 14 or second-hands
at half-price.
More than once Mums had said to Euphe-
mia : ' '
“ Now’s ther time ter buy all yer wants,
an’ more than yer wants, Afore yers
married he’ll only look at yous ; afterwards,
ef he’s like ther rest, he’ll look at ther bill.
A man alius fancies er woman can keep
house on next ter nothin’ an’ save out o’ it.”
Mums would not hear of the furniture
being bought in a lump, a method suggested
by Horace as a saving of time and worry.
Every line had to be looked for separately.
Thus, when chairs were purchased, one day
was spent in exploring town shops, a second
in visiting the suburban emporiums, and
then, with a final assurance that they had
found bedrock prices, the bargain was con-
cluded.
“ At threepence er cheer, we saved
eighteenpence on them ther cheers,” Mums
sighed complacently as she drank her tea on
the evening of the second day.
“ Yes ; I think we got ’em at ther cheapest
place, but we spent three-an’-six in tram
fares.”
44 Yer don’t say ! My word, them trams
does run inter money, though they looks ser
cheap. Say whatcher like, yer can’t beat a
spring-cart, arter all ! ”
When Horace came home from business
he had to inspect and praise all the pur-
chases, to try all the chairs by sitting on
them in turn, and find his tea much nicer out
of the new cups. Mums and Euphemia re-
lated to him without mercy the whole list of
prices they had gathered from every firm
they had visited, and then, in triumph, the
final quotation that had gained their ap-
proval and saved him eighteenpence, or it
might be, on a very lucky day, as much as
two-and-sixpence.
44 Yer wants ter be keerful when yer
starts,” Mums told him. “ Yer can’t skim
yer milk till yer cows is calved. Spendia’
day is every day ; but savin’ day is when yer
ken.”
“ Oh, I say ! What’s that ? ” enquired
Horace, as, with great pride and mystery,
Eupliemia produced a pink and gold cup and
saucer from a package.
“ It’s fer yur ! fer yer own dear self. Now
what der yer say ? ”
It was a moustache cup, and as Horace
recognised its use he tried to find with his
fingers his own semi-invisible lip ornament,
equal at most to three hairs and a wax vesta.
“ Don’t you think it’s a little soon, darling
love ? ”
“ No, sweetest pet ; an’ it was so cheap,
an’ will be so useful by-and-bye.”
“ Thank you, dearest love.” (Kisses.)
“ Don’t squash me hair so, yer horrid
darlin’ love ! / ”
At this moment, and others like them,
Mums found something of great importance
to do in the kitchen.
• •••••
Since the arrival of the Waybacks in town,
Jabez was almost lost to his family.
Palmira monopolised him ; he was with her
every day, going on continual quests that
were not revealed to the rest of the family-
His taking of the dairy farm on shares -was
now a settled thing ; and as Palmira, besides-
her home of furniture, had a comfortable
nest egg in the bank, the outlook was pro-
mising. A change was taking place in Jabez,
and his sisters noticed it with increasing
wonder. Instigated, no doubt, by Palmira.
he shaved his face and chin of the ragged
whisps of sun-bleached hair, wore well-
fitting clothes, held his shoulders up and his
mouth shut, and ceased to grin when spoken
to. But the greatest change was in his
speech ; except at odd moments, he was fast
dropping his native patois, and had adopted,
the words, phrases, and even the voice inflec-
tion of Palmira.
“ He’s quite a toff ! ” said Sarah Jane.
“ She’s polishing him up,” said Tilly. “ I
never thought it was in him.”
With her usual thoroughness, Palmira-


now that she knew her future was bound up
in the dairy business, gave her whole mind
and thought to a study of the question, and
read all the books and papers dealing with
the matter. It was she who proposed the
purchase of a cream separator ; but as there
are some scores of different makes on the
market, all claiming to be the best, and they
were both ignorant on the question, it took
some days of enquiry to come to a decision.
Next she proposed a milking machine, after
reading a glowing prospectus of the imple-
ment’s advantages ; but here Jabez was con-
servative.
“ ‘ Tain’t natural,” said Jabez. “ Cows at
Dingo Flat wouldn’t stand it not at no price.
They’d go dry at ther sight of it.”
“ Do you really think so ? ”
“ Fm sui ’e of it ; stands to reason. Make
•any beast go dry ter have a machine pump-
ing them like er thirty-foot well.”
But her next proposal Palmira kept secret,
•even from Jabez, till it had been completed,
nnd then when he arrived one morning at the
Redfern residence, he was, with a smile of
triumph, conducted to the laundry, where
two new bicycles shone resplendent in
blight nickel and smooth enamel, one being
a lady’s, the other a gentleman’s machine.
“ Oh, crikey ! ” cried Jabez. “ What’s them
for ? ”
“To fetch the cows home, dear. Isn’t it a
splendid idea ? no tramping through the
damp grass and soaking your clothes and
boots, like the girls do at Dingo Flat. But
just jump on the machine and off you go,
the cows are home in no time ! ”
“ Well, I be jiggered ef that don’t beat all !
But they’s right-oh machines if a bloke could
ride. Can you ride, Pally ? ”
“No ; we’ve got to learn. Let us start
now, and practice in the yard.”
Jabez took to the bike with little more
trouble than backing a new colt ; and holding
on Palmira while she learned to pedal and
balance was a labor of love. Then, the
bicycle disease fairly possessed them, and
for days they were never happy but on the
wheel. To be going somewhere, no matter
where, to be rushing along, as though some
demon drove with whip and spur ; to talk of
bikes, tyres, and punctures, free wheel or not
free wheel ; to dream of the silvered gridiron
and have their brain tissue crushed in its
spokes till their individuality was lost in
steel and rubber—that was life ! Time was
a sprint, an accident, a puncture, a misfor-
tune, a deflation. The solace for every ill,
from a broken head to a broken heart, was
rubber solution, or cement.
The family wondered. Horse they could
understand, for horse was the natural
worship of man, woman, and child at Dingo
Flat ; but, to get dotty over a bundle of
fencing wire was without their experience.
Palmira seriously urged Mums to have a
bike, or at least to learn to ride, and she
offered to teach her.
“ Good gracious, child ! Me on one o’
them things ! I’d sooner ride er kan-
geroo ! ”
While the women folk were busy shop-
ping or gadding about, Dads had much spare
time on his hands, and naturally he called in
at the corner pub. to debate the day’s news
with the publican. The cherry-nosed man
being also a constant visitor, Dads and he
renewed their acquaintance, and their
friendship came to the point of the cherry-
nosed man inviting Dads to join himself, and
a party of piscatorial friends, in a schnapper
fishing excursion on a hired steamer down
the coast. It was to be a night trip, tickets
half-a-crown, with bait provided, and the
value of the catch of fish, as a moderate
estimate, should be double that amount.
Dads readily fell in with the proposal, as
did Mr. Gohighly, to whom he mentioned it,
and when the gentlemen left their respective
households, on the appointed evening, they
left a warning behind that every preparation
should be made for the receipt of a large
consignment of fish the following day.
The tug-boat Bubonic steamed away at a
great bat from a Balmain wharf on the
eventful evening, and made as much noise
pufling and blowing as though its select
group of passengers were intent on emptying
the Pacific of the finny tribe. Having intro-


duced Dads and Horace to the rest of the
company, the cherry-nosed man proposed to
drive a peg, whereupon a bottle of whisky
was opened, and they “ pegged.”
“ I never heard it called that before,” said
Dads ; “ but it tastes all right, my word ! ”
Horace found himself the youngest of the
party, who, if not generally as old as Dads,
were men of mature age, and mostly grey
whiskers. There were quite a number of
pegs driven to their last resting place before
they reached the Heads ; but the talk that
had now become general was of anything
but fish. Horace essayed to introduce the
history of his famous flathead several times,
but met with no attention, while all eyes
were opened as an old man, with a head like
a billiard ball, related an anecdote about a
barmaid, a pair of garters, and a policeman.
It was dark when they got into the swell
and bumping sea outside the Heads, and a
few white combers fringed the waves ; but
the little tug went up and down the blue
hills as though alternate standing on her
nose and stern was its normal mode of pro-
gress.
“ What say, gents,” said the Billiard Ball,
“ to going inside for an hour or two till the
sea goes down ? ”
No one objecting, the captain was accord-
ingly instructed, and ten minutes later they
were snugly at anchor in Watson’s Bay.
“ Same old game, I suppose ? ” said the
Billiard Ball, as the party sat round the
cabin table ; “ penny nap ? ”
Again the party assented, the cards were
dealt out. Dads did not play, but he joined
in the talk and pegs, “ friendly like,” as he
would have said, and carefully advised each
player in turn from his rich store of
ignorance of the game.
Horace took the opportunity to drop a
bream line over the stern, and sat there in a
kind of ecstatic bliss, for he was certain he
had a nibble.
After a time Dads wandered away from
the card players, who did not appear to ap-
preciate his promptings, and came on deck,
where he found a congenial soul in the engi-
neer, wlio was smoking a contemplative
pipe.
“ I ’spose wes ’ull soon be makin’ er
move ? ” said Dads.
“ Not us,” said the engineer. “ The
skipper’s turned in, and I’d be in bunk my-
self only someone has to be on deck.”
“ Why, I thought we wos goin’ fishin’.”
“Well, this is fishing—all ther hook and.
line business them chaps ever do—and I
ought to know, for I’ve took them out regu-
lar for the past ten years. But they are a.
quiet crowd, I will say that for them. A
push we had on board last week brought a
lot o’ girls with them, and there was the
devil to pay. One case of beer and two of
whisky, that’s the average of this crowd. A
warm lot o’ boys an’ no mistake, and their
families all fancy they are tossing and
pitching outside, hauling up schnapper for
breakfast.” '
“ An’ don’t they ever catch no fish ? ”
“I give you my word, that yellowtail, I
just see your mate has pulled up, is ther first
fish I’ve seen on these decks for six months.”
“ By cripes ! ” said Dads, “ef that don’t
beat ther world ! ”
They sat smoking silently for some time ;
for it took Dads time to fully digest the new
aspect of affairs.
The waves rippled past the boat as she
sat on the shining water ; before them the
giant cliffs opened a great gateway to the
silvery ocean ; over the bay and across the
harbor the grey shore, dotted with lights,
filled the eye like a picture from fairyland.
And presently a big liner came down the
fairway, her black sides eyed with scores of
gleaming portholes, while music and the har-
mony of singing voices came over the blend-
ing water like a lullaby.
“ Pretty, ain’t it ? ” demanded the engi-
neer, as he took out his pipe.
“ Not too bad,” said Dads, “ but did yer
ever see Barjo Creek ? There’s scenery fer
yer—timber as big as er house. Why, ther
scrub on ther banks here ’ud hardly bile er
billy.”
••••••
When Dads woke up from his sleep on the


4eck seat it was just getting daylight, and
the Bubonic was entering Woolloomooloo
Bay. They tied up at the wharf, and
Billiard Ball and the Cherry-nosed Man went
■off in the direction of the fish market, soon
returning with a heavy basket.
Again the moorings were cast off, and they
steered for Balmain.
“ Now, gents, share and share alike ; fish
is cheap to-day, and it will only stand us in
two bob a head.” So said the Billiard Ball
as he emptied out the basket of fish and
divided them.
Dads received three medium fish, Horace
two large ones. On landing, it was almost
in silence that they separated. Palmira
praised the catch, so did Mums, but there
was no boasting or elation on the part of the
fishermen, and to this day they have pre-
served, with Masonic secrecy, the mystery
of that night’s sport.
••••••
After the visit to the Gardens Tilly and
Sarah Jane hurried home. They had no
heart to go shop-gazing, or even to note a
new thing in hats worn by a passer-by in
Hunter-street, or a darling duck of a blouse
sported by a young thing on the ferry
steamer. In the language of Sarah Jane,
“ Tilly was cranky enough ter snap er body’s
head off ! ” and Tilly, herself, owned up to
having “ the grumps.”
Less downhearted than her sister, S.J.
suggested “ chocolate creams” on passing a
lolly shop, as though they were an acknow-
ledged balm for blighted hopes.
“ Bother chocolate creams ! ” cried Tilly.
“ I believe you think of nothing but eating,
Sarah Jane.” And not another word did
they say, till they sat together in the front
room with their hands in their laps, more
tired with disappointment than a good day’s
washing.
“ It’s not fair,” said Tilly, after a long
think. “ It’s not fair on a girl the way things
are. She’s got to get married, and be
mighty quick about it, or she gets old and
cranky, and a nuisance to everybody. She
can’t hunt for a lover, yet she has to find
one ; and when she’s lucky she takes what
she can get, pretends she likes it, and hates
herself ever after. Now a man is not a faded
llower at 30, with his teeth from the dentist
and his voice sharpened on a grindstone. He
can go girl-hunting whenever he feels that
way, and most any girl he fancies will take
him. ’Tain’t fair ; marriage is everything to
a girl, and she should have the settling of
it ! ”
“ By cripes ! ” cried Sarah Jane, who had
been staring out of a window, “ here’s such
a handsome cove er walkin’ up an’ down
starin’ at ther houses. He’s er lookin’ fer
someone.”
“ Where is he ? ” cried Tilly, jumping up
as though from a springboard. “Is he really
nice, or only a cigarette and a bad com-
plexion ?”
“ He’s comin here ; he’s opened the gate,”
whispered S.J. “ Yous open the door, Till,
an’ look at him under yer nose ; yer know
yous can always catch ’em that way. Now
there’s er dear.”
A startling rat-a-tat-tat.
Sarah Jane urged Tilly to immediately fly
to the door, but that young lady diplo-
matically held back so that the caller should
be impressed with the fiction that she was
busily engaged.
At last Tilly opened the door, and her
smile to the caller was all that Sarah Jane
could have desired, and a study in how to
look amiable. Certainly S.J.’s taste was not
to be complained of ; the caller that stood
on the step was, in appearance, quite a
“ Young Ladies’ Journal ” young man—oval
face, dark moustache, gold eye-glasses, and
faultless attire.
“ Ah—er—does Mr. Wayback live heah ? ”
“ Yes,” said Tilly ; “ that’s father’s name.
He is out now, but we expect him in every
minute. Will you come in and wait ? ”
“ Very good of you, I’m suah. Sorry to
put you out, dontcherknow,” as Tilly
ushered him into the sitting-room, and he
took a seat. “ Deuced hot for the time of
year, don’t you find ? ”
Sarah Jane, in the presence of the
stranger, was smiling the Wayback smile
like a Cheshire cat, and had not a word to


*ay. Tilly was more at her ease, and
Answered :
“ Yes, it is hot ; but not like up-country.
There we should call this a cool day, and do
without the water-bag.”
“ By .Tove ! You don’t say so ! Lovely
place up-country must be. Nature un-
adorned, fields and woods and all that kind
o’ thing. And, of course, you don’t work
when it’s hot. Awful bore, work—when it’s
hot. Awful bore any time, dontcherknow.”
“ I wonder where father can be ? ” said
Tilly, for want of something better to say,
and at that moment Dads’ voice sang out
from the kitchen :
“ Is any of yers ter home ? ”
Dads came in, his coat and vest off, and
mopping his head with his shirt-sleeve, while
he smiled from whisker to whisker.
“ llow is yer, young feller ? Sparkin’ ther
gals ? Der yer think as how wes’ll have
Tain ? Pine weather fer crows, sez yous, an’
I don’t say as yer ain’t right.”
“ I came,” said the stranger, rising and
handing Dads his card, as the girls left the
room, “ to see you, Mr. Wayback, on behalf
of * The Daily Cablegram.’ You are now so
well-known as an authority on country ques-
tions that we think our readers would be
interested to hear your views.”
“ Well, I be blowed ! ” said Dads, as he
vainly searched all his pockets for his specs
to read the card. “ Ser that’s what yer
arter ; er newspaper cove, is yer. Think o'
that, now ! ’Tain’t much in my line,
though Bill Jago, o’ ther Bar jo ‘Banner,’
(maybe yer knows Bill—er smart cove, my
word !) he’s er often said I’s ought ter be in
print ; but looke here, young feller, let us
have er proper understandin’ o’ this here.
Der yer wants ther truth, straight wire, or
•er bit o’ diplomessy like I gives Smoothem-
all t’other day ? ’Cause ef yer wants it
straight I don’t want my name ter it, der
yer see ? It might spile me fer a contract
on that there irrigation and conversation
job.”
“That will be all right, Mr. Wayback,”
said the interviewer, pleasantly. “ I will call
it the views of a distinguished agriculturist.
Now what do you think of things ? ” And
the speaker pulled out a notebook.
“ Well, yer axe me on ther strict Q.T., as
yer may say, what I think o’ things, an’ I
tells yer. Ther West is dead, man an’ beast,
an’ ther ain’t enough blokes out ther now
ter tell yer where ther graves is. Near by
wes most of us gone or on ther track. Wes
had no rain, not ter call er rain, fer years ;
we’s er hopin’ and’ er hopin’, an’ ther stock er
gettin’ poorer an’ poorer, an’ ther aint a
blade er grass fer ther lot o’ ’em. That talks,
don’t it ? Most coves round my way has left
ther missus and kids an’ cleared down ter
Sydney ter earn er crust. But take it from
me, Sydney is er eatin’ all its grass, too ; it
stands ter reason.”
“ How is that ? ” enquired the interviewer.
“ It’s this way. ’S’pose yous has er farm
left yer ; er good farm, mind yer, an’ yer
spends all yer makes the first year, an’
borreys er bit on ther farm ; an’ then next
year yer borreys er bit more, an’ ther year
arter er bit more ; won’t yer look all right,
an’ have yer cellar full o’ taters ? In course,
sez you, while ther money lasts. But how
will yer perform when yous can borrey no
more money on ther farm ? Where’s yer
cellar full o’ spuds then ? That’s ther pint ! ”
“ Now, Osstralia is like that there farm ;
we borried an’ borried an’ borried, an’ never
paid back er sprat, an’ don’t mean ter as I
can see ; an’ I asks yous as er man o’ sense,
how is we goin’ ter finish up. Maybe it’ll
last my time, maybe it won’t, but it’ll come
sudden, like them there bank smashes, an’
Sydney ’ull wake up one mornin’ all out o’
work, an’ no taters in its cellar, an’ won-
derin’ what’s up. I tell yer, we coves in ther
bush thinks er lot, an’ we’s sized this matter
up ; that’s why we’s ser keen arter ther
dollars while ther swindle lasts, fer they’ll
be mighty skeerce some day, take my word !
Did yer ever know er cove as took ter
beer ? ”
“ Yes, I’ve met a few,” said the newspaper
man modestly.
“ Well, yer might er noticed that ther more


them coves has ther more they wants ; one
beer alius wants ther company (so ter speak)
of another beer ; they coves just soaks an’
soaks an’ don’t call fer nothin’ ser long as
yer tills ’em up. Well, Osstralia’s gone boozy
on loan beers, an’ she’s that soaken an’
sodden, an’ blear-eyed, she’d suck ’em on all
fours out o’ a feedin’ bottle. But what’s ther
good o’ talkin’, yer can’t drag er swaggie
from his sleever till ther landlord slings him
out; an’ Smoothemall ’ull keep borreyin’ an’
borreyin’ while he can raise er sprat to shout
with.* But, then, talkin’s dry work, yous
come in an’ have er bit o’er snack.”
The stranger was taken into the next
room, where the two girls had got tea ready.
44 My two gels,” said Dads, waving his
hand towards Tilly and Sarah Jane ;
“ Mr. ? ”
44 Smallgoods,” said the stranger, as he
gracefully took the chair offered, and sur-
veyed with astonishment the tea placed be-
fore him. Set out on the table were a huge
round of corned beef, a plate of fried fish, a
meat pie, a cold ham, a series of jam tarts,
and a huge teapot.
44 Now, how’ll yer start, mister ? Fer er
solid foundation yer can’t beat corned beef,
let ’em say what they like ; fish ain’t er bad
finisher, an’ them tarts does ter top off with.
Yer wants ter eat well if yer wants ter
graft well, I sez. I never had er good
collared ’oss that did not like his tucker.”
Mr. Smallgoods willingly accepted the ad-
vice tendered, but he had not bargained for
the half-pound of ham that covered the sub-
stratum of beef on his plate, and it was only
by prompt action that he resisted the at-
tempt of Sarah Jane to add to his helping
with meat pie.# Tilly poured him out half a
pint of tea from the big pot, and asked him
so prettily if he took milk and sugar that he
would have taken both just to please her,
even if he had not liked them.
44 1 suppose you are only on a visit to
Sydney, Mr. Wayback ? ” enquired Mr.
Smallgoods.
44 That’s so ; I’m arter marryin’ two o’ my
kiddies, gel an’ boy, an’ then we’s off ter
Dingo Flat agen, an’ mighty glad I’ll be, I
assures you. Er cove can’t breathe, not ter
say proper, in this place, or do justice to his*
tucker. The town stinks, that’s what it do !
I s’pose yous coves gets used ter it like pigs
in er mucky sty ; maybe yer likes it, there’s
no countin’ fer tastes ; an’ it takes all sorts
o’ people ter make er world.”
“ Do you go to any concerts ? ” enquired
the stranger of Tilly. “ I have tickets for
the Town Hall to-night if you would.like to
go.”
Tilly did like, so did Sarah Jane, and it
was with more than a warm clasp of the
hand that Mr. Smallgoods later on bade them
good-bye, Tilly in particular blushing rosy
red as she returned his greeting.
“ Don’t make yerself er stranger,” said
Dads, heartily ; “ just pop in any time yous
handy. I likes yer talk ; yous knows er
thing er two, yous do.”
“ Isn’t he nice ? ” said Tilly to Sarah Jane,
as they were washing up. “ Quite the-
gentleman, and not so ‘ lardy-da,’ once he
starts talking. Do you think he means any-
thing ? ”
“ Oh, he wos struck on yous all right,”
said S.J., resignedly ; “ he couldn’t eat fer
lookin’ at yer ; yous got him ef yer keeps
him goin’.”
“ I will,” said Tilly ; “ I will, you see,” and
she danced on her toes like a wagtail.
• •••••
“ Where’s we goin’ ter be married?’” It
was Euphemia who put this Important
question.
“ Why, in church, in course,” said Mums ;
“ the fust one handy, fer choice.”
“And S.J. and I. and Palmira’s two
cousins will be bridesmaids. It will be
almost as good as being married ourselves,”
said Tilly.
“Well, I don’t mind the church,” said
Palmira ; “ but I don’t want any white dress
or veil or that kind of foolishness.”
“ Oh ! ”
“ OH ! ”
“ OH ! ”
It was like the wail of a breaking heart
from the bottom of a deep well.
Tilly protested, S.J. protested ; as for


Euphemia, she was too overcome for distinct
utterance.
“ No white dress, no veil, no wreath, no
bridal train ! Why, it won’t be a weddin’ at
all,” said Tilly. “And, besides, everybody is
married that way, and people will think it is
sc strange.
“ Let people think what they like,” replied
Palmira. “ They don’t have to pay for it, and
what is the good of it ? What shall we do
with the white dresses afterwards ? You
can only cut them up or get them dyed ; and
as for the veil, it won’t even do for a
mosquito net. It’s a foolish waste of money
for a few minutes in a strange place, and
Jabe and I may be glad of every penny we
can save ; he says the country is very bad
just now.”
“ There’s a lot o’ sense in what you sez,”
Mums assented ; “ them there weddin’ things
won’t be much use ter yers when yer wants
ter change yer clothes that’s got soakin’ wet
in ther milkin’ yard. Yous ’ll find er pair
o’ blutchers more handy than satin slippers,
take my word.”
“ That is nasty of yer, Pally,” said
Euphemia, fer, o’ course, ef you’re not goin'
in white like er Christian, I can’t go, an’
I’m sure Horace has set his mind on me bein’
in white.”
“ Now, don’t you worry about Horace, my
dear ; the less fuss there is about the
marriage the better he will be pleased. Men
are like that. Jabez was as glad as any-
thing.”
“ Oh, Jabez ! ” said Euphemia, turning up
her little nose. “A fine judge he is ; and,
besides, he will say amen to all you sez.
Horace said he’d just love to see me in
white.”
“ Ef I’m not ter be married proper, I don’t
want ter be married in er church at all,”
continued Euphemia. “Anywheres ’ll do, fer
there will be nothin’ about it in ther papers.”
“ Oh, I’m so glad you don’t mind,” said
Palmira, quite radiant. “ I didn’t like to
object to the church, too ; but it will be so
much more handy to have it at the house,
and cheaper ; and as for the papers, Tilly
can get her newspaper young man to come
to the ceremony and the breakfast, and he
will make a report of it a yard long if Till
coaxes him ; and you can send copies of the
paper to Barjo, and it will look splendid.
Bother the ceremony and the frill ! ”
“ I will say, Palmira,” said Mums, “yous
not sech er fool as yer looks, an’ Jabez made
er good bargain, or I’m much mistook.”
It had been decided that the wedding
breakfast should take place at the Wayback
residence in Balmain ; it was now further
proposed by Palmira, as related, that the
wedding ceremony should take place there
also. Palmira further undertook to find a
minister and arrange outside details. As for
the gentlemen concerned, Jabez and Horace,
they were only informed of the arrangement
as a matter of form, like criminals under
sentence.
Having decided to have a minister come to
the house, Palmira determined to get the
best value possible for the family cash ; and
as though she was going to buy a chest of
tea, went round to the different ministers’
dwellings to get quotations, and demand a
big discount in consideration of the quantity
—that is, two marriages at the same time.
Tilly expressed herself as shocked at this
proceeding, and thought marriage too sacred
a subject to be approached in this com-
mercial spirit.
“ Whatever you pay for is business,”
replied Palmira ; “ and business has no
modesty. If a marriage at ten and six is
just as good as one at ten guineas, why not
save the money and buy a few more
frocks ?”
“ Oh, I never saw such a girl as you,
Pally,” said Tilly. “ I believe you’ll refuse
to die till you’ve made a bargain with the
undertaker.”


CHAPTER XXVI.
The Wedding.
Soon after the arrival of the Way backs in
Balmain, the wadding presents from their
country friends and relations began to arrive.
Cousin Emma sent a glass butter-dish,
Frances a biscuit-barrel, Laura a butter-
knife, Marry Ann a butter-dish, Vergy a
jam spoon, Aunt Maria a glass butter-dish,
Mrs. Tom Wayback a sugar-basin, Miss
Flyspeck a glass butter-dish, Cousin Jill a
biscuit barrel, Sarah a jam spoon, Aunt
Mary a glass butter-dish, Uncle Bill a
photograph frame, Uncle Jim a cruet, Aunt
Jane a glass butter-dish, Cousin Ellen a
set of teaspoons, her mother a glass butter-
dish, Uncle John a carving set, Mrs. John a
glass butter-dish, the Miss Sogrums a butter-
dish, biscuit barrel and jam spoon, Miss
Aylesbury a biscuit barrel, Mrs. Hardpan a
glass butter-dish, the editor of the Barjo
“ Banner” a biscuit barrel, Mrs. Editor a
butter-dish, M’Fadden (the storekeeper) a set
of teaspoons, Mrs. M'Fadden a glass butter-
dish, Cousin Jonas a biscuit barrel, Mrs.
Jonas a glass butter-dish, Jim Manger a pair
of salt-cellars, Susan Manger a glass butter-
dish. Mums gave a clock, and Dads also a
glass butter-dish ; but as he was chased out
of the house with indignation by the whole
family, in spite of his protestations that “ it
seems to be ther right thing as fur as I can
make out,” Dads took his butter-dish back
to the shop and returned with a biscuit-
•
barrel. Delia sent ner silver thimble that
had a hole in it. Rube sent word that he
was going to give a ’possum-skin rug when
he had the skins; he had one skin already,
and would have had two only Blucher ate
the ’possum. Tilly and Sarah Jane combined
to buy table-spoons, Jabez and Palmira a
pickle-jar, “A Friend ” (name unspecified) a
glass butter-dish.
It is hardly necessary to chronicle Pal-
mira’s presents in detail, for they much,
resembled Buphemia’s, the principal
difference being that the latter took pride of
place with butter-dishes, while Palmira
easily led with biscuit-barrels. Horace had
given his bride a gold bangle ; while Jabez,
no doubt at the instance of Palmira, had
presented his with a wringing machine.
Mums’ chief concern, in connection with,
the wedding, was the breakfast. A sucking-
pig and two gobbler turkeys were to arrive
from Dingo Flat ; to these were added a
ham, a round of corned beef, ribs of roast
beef, and two pairs of fowls.
“ Der yer thinks, Tilly, as there’ll be
enough ? I can’t sleep o’ nights fer fear we
should be short.”
“ Heaps o’ tucker, Mums ! Don’t yon
worry ; w r e shan’t know what to do with
what is left.”
But Mums w r as not quite reassured, for
at the last moment, the night before the
ceremony, she w r ent secretly to a well-known
caterer and purchased a large pork pie. That
night she w r ent to sleep easily, her mind
relieved.
If Euphemia had been disappointed in her
choice of wedding garments, she was
allowed a free hand in the choice of wedding
cakes. In a Sydney confectioner’s shop her
heart had been stirred by the sight of a
pyramid in white sugar, florid with orna-
ment. To be married with a cake like that,,
seemed to her a consummation in bliss, a
coronation in happiness. To her consterna-
tion, the price asked for the sugared monster
was prohibitive, and Euphemia could not
restrain her tears.
“ I’ll tell you w r hat I can do,” said the
obliging shopman, “ I can hire you the cake


an fact, that is the regular way. Many
parties like to be photographed with it, and
it stands on the table during the breakfast.
After that you lift the top, and a small cake
suitable for use and presents is underneath.”
This fortunate proposal settled all diffi-
culties, and a photograph having been
suggested, Euphemia grasped at the idea,
and having rounded up the wedding party
and arranged with a photographer, a group
portrait was the result that, later on, flut-
tered all the feminine hearts in Barjo.
The fateful morning arrived, then the
principals in the ceremony, the few guests,
and, in due time, the Rev. Highanlow, whose
smile was a blessing, and who, in the matter
of terms, had undercut all other quotations.
Dads having invited the rev. gentleman to
drive a peg, he very graciously drove a whole
tree trunk, and then read the marriage
service in a voice as unctuous and soothing
.as a chocolate-drop. Neither of the brides
fainted, and the bridegrooms stood up to
their tasks with clenched teeth and a look
-of determination equal to any emergency.
Mr. Gohiglily, having heard of the frightful
consequences that sometimes arise from a
loss of the ring at the critical moment, had
provided himself with two, but had so care-
fully secreted them in his new wedding suit,
that when called upon to produce one he
could find neither, so that, to save delay,
Euphemia was married with a door-key.
Jabez had been more fortunate ; in fact,
Palmira had kept the ring for him, but she
firmly declined to remove it from her finger
once it was placed there, and as it is such a
well-known sign of bad luck, the Waybacks
were the first to agree with her ; even a
door-key for Euphemia was to be preferred.
The ceremony was over, a move was made
to the dining-room, and Dads took the
opportunity to take off his coat and give the
carving-knife a final sharpen with the small
file that he, like every careful bushman,
always carried in his pocket to touch up an
axe or a saw, as the case might be.
The guests included the Mangers, Tom
Rawson, Jack Clark, the Cherry-nosed Man,
and the Moon-faced Woman, several cousins
and aunts of the Gohighlys, and Mr. Small-
goods.
When a vigorous attack had been made
on the gobblers, the ham, and the sucker
(for, in spite of Dads’ urgent entreaty, no one
would lay a foundation of corned beef, and
Mums’ pork pie was only appreciated at a
distance), the Rev. Highanlow rose and pro-
posed, in feeling terms, the health of the
brides, a toast which was duly responded
to on their behalf by Mr. Smallgoods. Then
Dads had a few words to say from behind
the round of beef : “ Wes all ought ter feel
jolly an’ happy like at er time like this, when
i two of our young ’uns is er makin’ er start
on ther own hook, so ter speak ; all ther
same, ther smiles comes sort er upside down.
You rears er boy, or er gal, as ther case
may be, an’ takes heaps o’ trouble bringin’
of ’um up, an’ then, first good chance, off
they goes. It’s Nater. I ain’t a word ter say
agen it, but it’ll never be ser cheerful like
at Dingo Flat with them two less ter carve
for. Theys been good kiddies, I will say
that ; an’ as I didn’t spare ther belt when
they was young, I hopes now theys growed
up they does me credit. Some coves is agen
gettin’ married ; but it’s Nater, I sez, like
bein’ born or gettin’ dead, an’ it don’t pay
ter hide behind er tree. Put yer head in ther
collar an’ pull fer two when yer time comes ;
an’ ef there’s er dozen youngsters er cornin’
as ’ull want er lift, remember theys only
comes one at er time, ser ther hill won’t beat
yer ef yer staunch. I ain’t afeard as these
marriages won’t turn out a good crop ; ther
Waybacks is marryin’ folks ; it runs in ther
family ; my dad was married, an’ his dad
afore him, so we take ter it natural, like er
crow ter er mutton bone. But it makes
Mums and me feel sort o’ old, ring-barked,
so ter speak, ter have ther kiddies growed
up an’ startin’ on their own, an’ theys won't
be our kiddies no more, not like what theys
used to be. Some husbin’s has er lot ter
put up with ; they comes home belted out
an’ finds ther corned beef ain’t half cooked
an’ ther spuds ain’t in ther pot. Some wives
has er lot ter put up with ; they have ter put
up with ther husbin’s. There’s times when


marriage ain’t a success, I don’t deny ; ther
wife, maybe, can’t milk, an’ the old man’s
too fond o’ shandies ; but them sort o’ folk
’ull er come croppers anyways, so they don’t
count. Mums an’ me thanks all friends here
very kindly fer er turnin’ up ter see these
two teams started. We hopes you’ve laid
in er good stock o’ provender, an’ ef so be
ther pig an’ ther turkeys is finished, don’t
forget there’s er round o’ corn beef ter top
off with.”'
Dads sat down, healths were drunk again,
the brides cut the cakes, and in a few
minutes they had put on their outdoor
garments and were saying good-bye.
As they went down the steps a shower of
rice and sundry old boots followed them ;
and the neighbors, who were all at the win-
dows, said one to the other : “ There they
are ! There they are ! ” as though the
married couples were curious savages just
arrived from the South Sea Islands. Palmira
and Euphemia had grains of rice down their
necks, and for hours after could feel it work-
ing down their spines as though it was
alive. Tilly, aiming Mums’ old shoe at
things in general, knocked off Horace’s hat
amidst general applause, whilst Jabez
received a bluc-lier in the back without a
wink. Hands were waved, voices shouted,
and the newty-married looked back and
smiled ; but soon the street corner hid them,
the door was closed, the marriage was over.
We have tried in our humble way to
describe this double marriage in the Way-
back household, but we confess our attempt
seems feeble when compared with the re-
port of the proceedings prepared under the
joint authorship of Tilly and Mr. Smallgoods
that duly appeared in the social column of
the “ Daily Cablegram.” We give a sum-
mary
“ A very pretty and fashionable Avedding
took place on March 5 at the Balmain
residence of Jabez Wayback, Esq., of Dingo
Flat, Barjo, being a double marriage of
Euphemia, his third daughter, to Hugo
Gohighly, of The Cedars, Redfern, son of
Laurence Gohighly, Esq., of Gohighly Castle,
N. 8., and Jabez Wayback, jun., his eldest
son, to Palmira Goliighly, sister to the first
bridegroom. The Wayback mansion was
elaborately decorated for the occasion with
floral devices, and choice flowers decked
every wall with artistic grace. The Rev.
Highanlow conducted the impressive
ceremony. The two brides wore gowns of
white silk, beautifully tucked, and trimmed
with white satin bebe ribbon and chiffon
wreath and veil. The gowns had transparent
yokes and sleeves, and wreaths of lovely
orange-blossoms were not forgotten. Bach
bride carried a shower bouquet, and wore
duplicate gold brooches and bangles, the
gifts of the respective bridegrooms. Four
bridesmaids were in attendance—the Misses
Matilda and Sarah Jane Wayback and
Misses Cecilia and Laura Gohighly, and the
bridegrooms were supported by Messrs.
Thomas Rawson and John Clark as best
men. A special saloon was reserved for the
display of the many rich and costly presents
too numerous to count, and comprising,
besides choice articles of bijouterie, articles
de luxe and jewels of every kind. The two
colossal bride cakes were monuments of the
confectioner’s art, and drew deserved
plaudits of admiration from all beholders.
After the impressive ceremony, witnessed by
a most fashionable gathering, including the
friends and relatives of the brides and bride-
grooms, the whole party sat down to a break-
fast that was never surpassed in the Vice-
Regal residence. The usual toasts having
been eloquently proposed and seconded, and
good wishes lavished on the happy pairs, the
brides retired to assume their tailor-made
travelling costumes, and soon, amidst
showers of applause and rice, they were lost
in the carriages that bore them away. The
Gohighlys spend the honeymoon in the
ancestral home at Redfern, while the Way-
backs go to the bridegroom’s country seat
at Barjo.”
“ Well, I’se glad it’s over,” said Mums, as
she surveyed the wreck of the turkeys and
the sucking-pig. “ I hopes they had enough.
I needn’t er bought that pork pie arter all.
But where is that pie—surely ter goodness
that parson cove ain’t walked off with it ? ”■


“ I hear a sound of munching,” said Tilly.
*• It’s Bubs or a dog somewhere handy.”
“Lord save us!” cried Mums, looking-
under the table, “ef that child ain’t there
with ther pie in his lap, an’ I declare ter
goodness he’s eaten all the top off. Come out
er that ! I’ll warm yer ! ”
Bubs howled ; but whether it was at the
prospect of the warming, or because he could
not eat any more pie, is a matter of doubt.
“As we goes home ter-morrer, we must
pack those vittles up. I won’t have them
wasted ; an’ you an’ Sarah Jane look alive
an’ have all yer things ready ter-night.”
Next morning the Waybacks were in
plenty of time for the morning train, and
their departure from town was not to be
without friendly greeting. The Gohighlys
were there, and Mr. Smallgoods, Tom Raw-
son, Jack Clark, Jim Manger, and the
Cherry-nosed Man. The latter had brought
several pegs in a bottle which he handed
about impartially.
“ I’m sorry ter leave all yous coves,” said
Dads as he beamed down on his friends from
the carriage window ; “ we had er real good
time, me an’ ther old ’ooman. I can’t say
as I thinks much o’ Sydney fishin’, but yer
pegs is first-rate, though the name do seem
curious like. When yous passin’ Barjo
way I hopes yous ’ull give us er look in
an’ take a cup o’ tea friendly like. I hope
my gal there won’t ferget Dingo Flat an’
ther folks at home, as we’ll be alluz thinkin’
of her. Wes glad ter meet yer, and sorry ter
part, but ther world’s all ‘ How-der-you
doosi’ an’ ‘ Good-byes.’ You no sooner gets
friendly like with er few coves than off they
goes, or yous goes, an’ ther things yous
wants ter say is never said, an’ what cher
wants ter do is never done. It’s not satis-
factory, say what yer like.”
In the midst of Dads’ speech the whistle
sounded, the crowd stood back, and the train
moved slowly out of the station. Mums sat
holding Bubs, who was doing his best to try
and crawl out of the window, and she smiled
back at Dads when he resumed his place, but
under her smile, and even under Dads’
broad, merry face, there was an underlook
of deep anxiety. When they had left, the
farm work had been practically at a stand-
still ; no rain had fallen for nine months ;
the stacks saved for Winter feed had been
used by the stock to keep them alive during
the Summer. Long ago every bite of grass
jtad gone, and the stock were struggling to
live on a diet of scrub and tree bark. And
still no rain had come, nor could it do much
good in the cold of Winter if it did come, and
there were inevitable months of hunger for
dying stock to face. Mums thought of their
once fine herd of cows that had taken them
so many years to get together, and dreaded
to see them again.
“ Never mind, old ’ooman, never mind,”
said Dads, cheerfully, with a good attempt
at a smile, in answer to Mums’ thoughts,
“ we’ll pull through all right, never you
fear. It’s a long lane as ain’t got no turnin’.
Don’t go out ter meet sorrer on ther track,
an’ maybe he’ll ferget ter meet yer at the
chimney corner, and (looking out of the
window) I do believe it’s goin’ ter rain.”
Mums tried to smile back as tears ran
down her wrinkled face and made Bubs
wonder.
Tilly was thinking of her last good-bye to
Mr. Smallgoods.
Sarah Jane was eating chocolate creams.
And so the Waybacks sped back to Barjo
and Dingo Flat for the second time.
[THE END.]
Printed by the “Sunday Times” Newspaper Company, Ltd., at 107-9 York-street, Sydney.


THIS OFFER IS GOOD ONLY UNTIL DECEMBER 31 1903
from packages of Quaker Oat>s, have Value.
GOLD-FJLIED WATCHES sent postpaid for 25 Quaker panels and postal
note for 21/. Ladies’ size handsomely engraved, Gentlemen’s size
engine-turned. Seven-jeweled standard American movement, stem
wind and set—guaranteed to run accurately for one year, and case
guaranteed for 10 years.
Warranted for wear
and a:curacy.
Value /^-10.
This advertisement
may be sent
as one
panel.
CERETA SPOON
OR CERETa FORK —(Value 4/ but not sold
retail)— sent postpaid for 4 Quaker Panels and postal order for
1/ . Can be secured only in this way. Heavier than triple plate
—finished in the new French Gray effect. The spoon is designed
especially for eating Cereals, Custards and Puddings. Warranted for
20 years.
The quality of these articles Is worthy of the well-known merit ol
50 Clarence Street ■ = SYDNEY, N.S.W.




