

The RUINOUS FALL in the PRICES
of WHEAT, WOOL, &c.
THE CHIEF CAUSE, THE REMEDY WITHIN REACH,
By EDMUND JOWETT.
To Australian Wheat Growers , Wool Growers , and
other Producers , and to Business Men connected
with them.
Melbourne,
fnod
May 7th, 1894,
THE DEEP IMPORTANCE OF THE QUESTION.
In drawing your attention to the ruinously low prices at which
Australian wheat, wool and other products are selling, I need say little to
make you realise the deep importance of the question. It is true that
most of those who are opposed to us contend that these low prices are a
splendid thing for the world, while some of them go so far as to use the
astonishing argument that even the Australian farmer does not really
suffer by low prices. I am, however, addressing this to practical men,
most of whom know only too well the ruinous effect of low prices upon
themselves, upon their friends and upon the people of Australia as a whole.
The situation has now become so serious that it is a matter of
supreme importance to inquire :
(1) What is the chief cause of this ruinous fall in prices ?
(2) Is there any remedy for it ?
(3) What can the people of Australia in general and the farmers in
particular do towards putting the remedy into force ?
I will answer these questions in their order—
THE CHIEF CAUSE OP LOW PRICES.
(1) What is the chief cause of the ruinous fall in prices? The answer
is that the great weight of opinion among the leading living economists
and statisticians is to the effect that the world’s supply of gold does not
afford enough money to enable the prices of commodities to be maintained
at the old level. In other words these falling prices are the process by
which the increasing commerce and industry of the world are being
adjusted to relatively diminishing supplies of money.
FARMERS MUST CONSIDER THE QUESTION.
No doubt you will be told by the advocates of the present ruinous
system of gold mono-metallism, that our remedy, bi-metallism, is not a
profitable one for farmers to discuss and that it will be far better for them


to stick to their ploughs and their harrows and to leave these questions to
those who are supposed to understand them. My reply is that this is
just what the farmers have been doing for the last 20 years, and they are,
in consequence, brought face to face with ruin. If they w r ant a change it
is high time for them to look into this question for themselves.
PROFESSOR WALLACE ON FARMERS AND THE CURRENCY.
Professor Robert Wallace, one of the highest authorities on agricul-
ture in the world, in speaking on “Australian Agriculture,” on February
14th, 1893, said :
“ I may be blamed for diverging from the subject of Australasian agriculture,,
but I hold that the question of currency is by far the mcst important one which
the colonial farmer can study at the present time. It matters not how well he
may attend to his business and how well he may succeed in producing the article
which is wanted in the British market, if there is a subtle influence at work which ,
apart altogether from the effects of competition and of production, tends to reduce
the price of everything he has to sell , and has already shown its influences by a
reduction of 35 per cent, without in any way approaching the limit of its power
for evil, then, I say, ruin stares thousands in the face. Few doubt who have
studied the bearings of the situation but that the bottom has fallen out of our
monetary system by the influence of the changes which have followed the unfor-
tunate departure from the system of bi-metallism in 1873.”
CONNECTION BETWEEN CURRENCY AND PRICES.
There are some people, however, who cannot or will not see that there
is any connection between the currency or supplies of money and the prices
of commodities, and who contend that the great fall in prices is not in
any way due to changes in the currency. As these people form the
principal obstacle to monetary reform and the realization of remunerative
prices for the producers it may be well to explain :
(1) The close connection which exists between the supplies of money
and the prices of commodities, and
(2) The reason why the supplies of money have proved inadequate to
maintain prices at their old level.
COMMODITIES EXCHANGED FOR MONEY.
The connection between changes in the currency and movements in
the prices of commodities is a very close one, and is, I think, capable of
simple demonstration. In civilised countries commodities are in the main
exchanged, that is, bought and sold for money. It is quite true that the
actual money does not always pass from hand to hand in settlement of
these transactions, very many of which are settled by means of credit
documents, such as cheques, promissory notes and bills of exchange. But
since these documents are in reality delivery orders for money and would
be useless unless those who took them believed they would be honored
when due, it is quite evident that the very existence of all these credit
documents depends upon the reasonable belief that the banks where they
are payable have command of sufficient stocks of money to meet all
demands likely to be made upon them. In other words, while credit is
purchasing power just the same as ready money is, credit is based upon
money.
DEMAND FOR GOODS CONSISTS OF SUPPLY OF MONEY.
The man who sells his wheat or wool therefore exchanges a given
quantity of wheat or wool for a given quantity of money, and what we
term price is simply the quantity of money which a quantity of wheat or
other produce will realise in exchange. Under free competition, supply


and demand determine prices. The supply consists ot‘ the quantities of
goods offering for sale and the demand consists of the quantity of money
which people who want these goods are offering for their purchases. In
arriving, therefore, at the price at which an article will sell, the two
factors are, first the supply of the particular commodity, and second the
demand for it, that is the supply of money offering for its purchase.
It will be seen from this explanation that those who deny the con-
nection between the supplies of money and the prices of commodities are
practically contending that the demand for a commodity has nothing to
do with determining its price.
MORE MONEY TENDS TO RAISE PRICES ; LESS MONEY TENDS TO
LOWER PRICES.
The close relation which exists between the supplies of money and the
prices of commodities is one of the most familiar truths of political
economy. John Stuart Mill in speaking of the tendency for more money
to raise prices and less money to lower prices says :
“ That an increase of quantity of money raises prices, and a diminution lowers
them, is the most elementary proposition in the theory of currency, and without it
we should have no key to any of the others.”
And I am not aware that anyone with even a rudimentary knowledge
of economics has ever disputed this “ elementary proposition ” of Mill.
It is clear therefore that if we wish for an explanation of the great
fall in prices we should take into consideration circumstances which affect
the supplies of money, just as much as those which affect the supplies of
commodities or of any particular commodity.
Enquiry in this direction elicits a prompt and complete explanation
of the ruinous fall in prices since 1873.
REMARKABLE MOVEMENTS IN PRICES.
The last 40 years have witnessed two remarkable and exceedingly
important movements in the prices ol commodities. Setting aside minor
and temporary fluctuations, due to variations in the supplies of special
commodities or the alternate expansions or contractions of credit, there was
a considerable upward movement in prices from 1852 to 1873 and a far
more serious fall from 1873 to 1894.
Those who do not understand the influence the currency has upon the
prices of commodities usually attribute the great k fall entirely to some or all of
the following causes : —The vastly increased multiplication of commodities,
due to the opening up of new lands, and the better cultivation of old lands,
and the diminished cost of production due to the discoveries of science, and
the great mechanical and other labour saving inventions.
Now, while we make the fullest possible allowance for these tendencies
in the direction of lower prices, we have a complete answer to those who
deny or ignore the fact that the insufficient supplies of money are largely
responsible for the fall.
GREAT RISE IN PRICES FROM 1851 TO 1873.
The answer is that the increased multiplication of commodities and
the cheapening processes of science and art were in vigorous operation
during the 20 years prior to 1873, and yet prices rose considerably.
Since 1873, however, the tendency has been for prices to decline. Clearly,
therefore, the explanation of the rising prices prior to 1873 and the falling
prices since that date must be looked for in some other direction.


RISE DUB TO INCREASED SUPPLIES OF MONEY FROM GOLD DISCOVERIES.
That explanation is to be found in circumstances affecting the supplies
of money. For we find that while during the 20 years from f 853 to
1873 there was a vast increase in the supplies of commodities, there was at
least a corresponding increase in the supplies of money. Taking that period
as a whole, prices did not fall ; on the contrary, they rose considerably.
The explanation is well known, and is, I believe, now universally accepted.
The opening up of new sources of supply and the cheapening processes of
science and art applied to money as well as to other commodities. For as
Mill said long ago in dealing with the arguments of those who contended
that a general increase in the supplies of commodities made for lower prices:—
“ Money is a commodity and if all commodities are supposed to be doubled in
quantity, we must suppose money to be doubled too and then prices would no
more fall than values would.'
Owing to the Californian and Australian gold discoveries, which
increased the annual yield of gold from about £5,500,000 in 1849 to an
average of £28,000,000 a year for 20 years after 1850, silver being all the
time fully available as effective legal tender money, the increased supplies
of money more than kept pace with the increased supplies of commodities.
In spite, therefore, of the vastly increased supplies of commodities, prices
did not fall, but on the contrary rose considerably.
GREAT PALL IN PRICES SINCE 1873, DUE TO DEFICIENT
SUPPLIES OP MONEY.
No one, I believe, seriously contends that the supplies of commodities
have increased during the last 20 years in a greater proportion than they
did during the 20 years prior to 1873, for the evidence is rather in the
contrary direction. And yet, while prices rose considerably during the
former period, they have fallen greatly during the latter period. “The one
thing,” says Mr. Kobert Giffen, “ which has changed, therefore, appears to
be the supply of gold and the demand upon it, and to that cause largely,
we must accordingly ascribe the change in the course of prices which has
occurred.”
INCREASED SUPPLIES OP PRECIOUS METALS SINCE 1873.
We have now to see how it is, that, while up to 1873 the world’s
supplies of money kept pace and more than kept pace with the ever
increasing supplies of commodities, this has not been the case since 1873.
Is it because the precious metals are becoming exhausted, or that men
have lost the art of raising them from the earth and treating them
economically ? On the contrary, we find that the same opening up of fresh
supplies and the same cheapening process of science and art have applied
since 1873 to the precious metals as to other commodities. While a
ruinous fall in prices of produce and a serious disturbance in the commerce
and industry of the world are being brought about by a contraction of the
currency ; the fact is that the annual supplies of the precious metals are greater
than they were during the period when prices were rising. From 1851 to
1873 inclusive—when prices were rising—the value of the gold and silver
produced from the mines of the world was about £33,500,000 a year.
From 1874 to 1892 inclusive—when prices were falling—the value pro-
duced was about £41,000,000 a year, in spite of the great fall in the
price of silver. Clearly then the great fall in prices cannot be due to
any falling off in the supplies of precious metals, for these supplies have
actually increased.


tear of the world’s stock of gold. This leaves about £130,000,000 aS
the net supplies available for adding to the world’s stock of gold money.
But gold mono-metallism in various forms is now adopted by the Govern-
ments of about 300,000,000 people while previous to 1874 the system
prevailed among only about 40,000,000 people. The requirements of this
additional number of people areestimated to have amounted to £364,000,000.
There has, therefore, been a fresh demand amounting to £234,000,000
of gold in excess of the annual supplies.
CONSEQUENT GREAT FALL IN PRICES.
The result was, of course, inevitable. Gold left almost alone to do
the work formerly done by gold and silver combined, has simply followed
the economic law governing the value of any article in general demand.
The vastly increased demand for it, in excess of its supply, has greatly
increased its value or purchasing power over commodities.
This will in a large measure explain that great fall in the prices of
commodities, by means of which the wheat growers, wool growers, and
other farmers of Australia and their employees are being dragged down to
ruin. On this point I would again refer you to the testimony of Dr.
Giffen, the head of the Statistical department of the British Board of
Trade.
DR. GIPFEN’s TESTIMONY.
Dr. Giffen is the leading opponent of bi-metallism in the world, and
therefore cannot be suspected of allowing the bi-metallic case a fraction
more than the well-known facts entitle it to. This makes his testimony
on the main facts upon which we base our case against gold mono-metallism
all the more valuable. His testimony is very emphatic and practically
conclusive.
In 1888, in referring to his previous predictions, that prices would
fall in consequence of the extraordinary demands for gold and the smaller
supplies of it, he said
“ If the test of prophecy be the event, there was surely never a better forecast.
The fall in prices in such a general way to amount as to what is known as a rise
in the purchasing power of gold is generally—l might almost say universally—
admitted.”
He then states clearly and unmistakeably his opinion as to the cause :
“We can say positively that the recent change from a high to a low level of
prices is due to a change in money of the nature or in the direction of absolute
contraction.”
STILL LOAVER PRICES IN THE FUTURE.
But ruinous as prices now are, the probabilities are that they will on
the average of years fall lower and lower, until international bi-metallism
be adopted. In 1883 Dr. Giffen said that
“in view of the natural increase in the population and wealth of the gold using
countries, and if the supplies of the new gold were insufficient to keep up the
equilibrium, then we may have a long continued fall of prices from generation to
generation , and this will probably have very great effects as time goes on.”
WILL AUSTRALIA SUBMIT WITHOUT PROTEST.
That was ten years ago : It is terrible to think of the wide-spread ruin
and misery which the producers of the world have suffered, but which they
might have been spared, if the remedy, which must be applied sooner or
later, had been adopted then. During the interval we have had a bitter
experience of what Dr. Giffen’s “ long continued fall of prices from
generation to generation ” means. It is for the wheat growers and wool


growers of Australia to say whether they have had enough of it 01 not.
If they like the low prices then they had better go on ignoring the
currency question, and, to use a favorite phrase of gold mono-metallists—
allow these currency matters to settle themselves—which means in plain
English that very large numbers of the wheat and wool growers of Australia
will find their own business affairs “settle themselves.’' in a very disastrous
fashion. If, on the other hand, they have already had enough of it, it
will be well for them to spend a few hours in studying the currency
question in its relation to prices. If they do this, lam confident that
they will lose no time in having the views of the people of Australia in
favour of international bi-metallism placed clearly and forcibly before the
British Government, which Government, as I will show later on, is, and
has been for years, the chief obstacle to its adoption.
FALL IN SILVER STIMULATES PRODUCTION OF WHEAT IN INDIA.
The above remarks apply to the great fall in prices generally. The
unfortunate wheat grower of Australia has, however, had to suffer from
a further depressing influence, namely, the great fall in the price of silver,
which has tended most seriously to still further lower the price of Indian
wheat in the English market. India has a silver standard, the money of
the country being silver rupees. The exporter of Indian wheat to
England first converts his gold sovereign into # silver rupees, and with
those rupees buys the wheat in India. The lower the price of the rupee
the more rupees, and, therefore, the more bushels of wheat he gets for his
sovereign, and consequently the lower he can sell the Indian wheat in
London.
The effect of the fall in the price of silver upon the price of wheat
in London (which of course governs its price in Australia), is thus
described by Senator Jones, delegate of the United States at the late
International Monetary Conference at Brussels :
“ By the evidence given before more than one Royal Commission we are
assured that the rupee will to-day purchase in India as much as it ever did in its
history. What is the significance of this statement ? It clearly implies that the
farmer of the Punjaub is now receiving more rupees for the thirty shillings (per
quarter), the wheat realises in London than ten years since he obtained for forty
shillings. How is it possible that Europe and America can market their crops
under such conditions of competition ? Should the rupee fall in gold value in
Great Britain to a shilling, while maintaining its full purchase power in India,
the agriculturists of England will see wheat selling in London at twenty shillings
per quarter.”
INCREASED BURDEN OP DEBTS.
One matter of great importance to a borrowing country like Australia
is the fact that the fall in the prices of produce tends to bring about an
enormous increase in the burdens of all debts both public and private.
Professor Francis A. Walker, a distinguished Professor of Political
Economy in the United States, said in 1884 :
“ The public indebtedness of the civilised world to-day probably stands at
between £5,000,000,000 and £6,000,000,000. The volume of private debts, in-
cluding the capitalised value of fixed charges—loans, annuities, &c., is vastly
greater. Nearly the whole of this body of obligations is payable, interest and
principal (where the principal sum is to be paid) in money. The question whether
the supply of money shall increase or decrease is, then, the question whether the
burden of these more or less permanent charges shall be diminished or enhanced.”
The lower the prices of commodities fall, the larger the quantities of
them which those who borrowed money have to produce and sell, in order
to obtain the gold with which to pay the interest and the principal of their


Decreased supplies op money due to a novel and disastrous
EXPERIMENT.
What then has been the sinister influence at work since 1873 ? The
answer is that whereas from the earliest times up to 1873 the world gladly-
accepted for use as money all the gold and all the silver with which the
mines could supply it, the leading monetary powers have since 1873 been
carrying on a novel and most disastrous experiment. They have enor-
mously contracted the supplies of money by greatly restricting the
employment of silver for that purpose, the result being the terrible fall in
prices which has brought the wheat growers and wool growers of Australia
and, indeed, the agricultural interests throughout the world, face to face
with ruin.
During the 20 years since 1873, while the supplies of commodities
and the world’s need for more money have gone on increasing, mischievous
monetary legislation has stepped in and prevented the supplies of money
from increasing in proportion to the world’s need for it. The legislation I
refer to is legislation in the direction of demonetizing silver and in
extending the area of gold mono-metallism.
81-METALLISM EXISTED PROM EARLIEST AGES UP TO 1873.
Bi-metallism has been in existence, and has almost always been the
dominant monetary system of the world, for a period dating for centuries
before the birth of Christ until the year 1873. Under this system all the
gold and all the silver in the world not hoarded nor required for the arts
and sciences were available for use as money.
81-METALLISM V. GOLD MONO-METALLISM.
The vital distinction between the bi-metallism we advocate, and gold
mono-metallism is, that under bi-metallism the mints of the leading nations
of the world will be open for the unlimited coinage of both silver and gold,
both metals, when coined, to be full legal tender in unlimited amounts. Under
gold mono-metallism, however, only one metal—gold—can be coined in un-
restricted quantities, and only gold is full legal tender. Bi-metallism
therefore, by giving the world the supply of both metals, tends to make
money plentiful and prices of commodities remunerative. Gold mono-
metallism on the other hand tends to restrict the supplies of money in the
great markets of the world and to drag prices down far below a remunera-
tive level.
DEMONETIZATION OF SILVER.
From the beginning of 1874, however, has been experienced one of
the most disastrous revolutions that the world has ever seen. Bi-metallism
has been replaced in one country after another by gold mono-metallism.
Under this pernicious system gold alone is full legal tender, or gold alone
can be freely minted. Almost everywhere the supplies of money are
artificially diminished by the demonization of silver, that is by various
Governments refusing to allow silver to be freely minted and to become
full legal tender money.
THE GREAT SCRAMBLE FOR GOLD.
The figures relating to this monetary revolution are most serious. It
is estimated that the production of gold from Ist January, 1873 to 31st
December, 1891 has been £407,000,000, of which two-thirds have been
required for use in the arts and sciences and for supplying the wear and


debts. Thus the Australian farmer Ims to produce nearly two bales of
wool and nearly two bags of wheat in order to pay interest and principal
on his debts, where one bale and one bag of wheat would have sufficed at
the old level of prices.
FALL IN THE VALUE OF LAND.
And this applies not only to individual wheat and wool growers who
have borrowed money, but also to communities such as Australia which are
indebted to other communities. In 1888 Dr. Giffen showed how the fall
in prices had swept away the surplus value of many estates and made them
insufficient to pay the mortgages on them—a position which the farmers
and bankers of Australia have from the same cause become painfully
familiar with during the last few years.
LOW r PRICKS AND AUSTRALIAN BANKING CRISIS.
Five years ago on the same occasion Dr. Giffen made a prediction
which I should like to have indelibly impressed upon the memory of every
man in Australia who is disposed to justify the continuance of gold mono-
metallism as a monetary system. He said :
“ j He would look for troublous times, for instance, both for some of our Aus-
tralian colonies and for a country like the Argentine Republic, even if the apprec-
iation did not grow more serious than it had done. That the pile of debts had to
be paid, principal and interest, in appreciating money, was a most serious consid-
eration. The increase of the wealth of such borrowers ought to be enormous to
enable them to bear safely the debts they were incurring."
THE REMEDY WITHIN REACH, INTERNATIONAL 81-METALLISM.
My second question was : Is there any remedy for this ruinous fall in
price ? My reply is that there is a remedy—international bi-metallism.
If it be true, and I think I have clearly shown that it is, that the
demonetization of silver and the refusal to mint silver freely, as full legal
tender money, are the main causes of the ruinous fall in prices, what better
remedy can we have than the remonetization of silver ? For what
Australia needs to-day is not a palliative nor anytnumber of palliatives,
but a restorative.
The remedy, and I believe the only effective remedy, for these falling
prices is a return to the practice of bi-metallism. What is advocated is
bi-metallism on the basis of an international agreement for the unrestricted
coinage of both gold and silver at a ratio to be fixed, both metals, when
coined, to be unlimited legal tender for money payments.
PRACTICABILITY OF 81-METALLISM.
That bi-metallism is thoroughly workable is proved by its existence
as far back as centuries before Christ until 1873. And to those who
entertain respect for authority in matters of opinion I may mention that a
large number of the leading living political economists of the world are
quite satisfied as to its practicability. Even in England the stronghold of
gold mono-metallism, many of the leading political economists are bi-
metallists.
LEADING MONETARY POWERS ARB READY, BUT ENGLAND! BLOCKS THE WAY.
The leading monetary powers of the world are believed to be willing
and eager to join in bringing about international bi-metallism, but will not
move without the co-operation of Great Britain. At the close of the last
International Monetary Conference held at Brussels, Baron de Rensis, the
Italian delegate, in referring to England’s attitude against bi-metallism, said:-
“ From all sides in this assembly—and this followed from all the speeches
which have been made, whether it was stated openly, or merely alluded to—all


eyes are turned towards England. It is plain that England is recognised as filling
a preponderant rtle in this question. Every one expects that that great country
should give the good example which we hope to see. Since England is the first
market of the world, it is from England that the first gleam of hope should come.”
There is good reason to believe, therefore, that soon after a majority
n its favor can be secured in the British House of Commons, there will be
practically little left to do in the matter except to fix the ratio at which
silver and gold will be coined, and the date on which international bi-
metallism will come into force.
81-METALLISM RAPIDLY SPREADING IN ENGLAND.
The prospects of the requisite Parliamentary majority being obtained
after the next general election have been immensely improved during the
past year, with the likelihood of still further improvement. The bi-
metallists include a large and increasing number of politicians on both sides
of the House. Mr. A. J. Balfour, the leader of the Conservative party in
the House of Commons, has been a leading bi-metallist for years, and
when I mention that the Most Rev. Dr, Walsh, Archbishop of Dublin,
has recently become an ardent advocate of bi-metallism, and has written a
very powerful pamphlet showing the ruinous effects of gold mono-metallism
upon the Irish farmers, it will be understood that there are few Irishmen
to whom the opinions of either one or the other will not appeal. The
agricultural interest in England is in favour of bi-metallism ; the labour
party is mainly bi-metallic ; and, the movement has spread so much in
Lancashire that it is expected to be made a test question there at the next
general election.
THE INDIAN CURRENCY MUDDLE.
The need for international bi-metallism is also becoming more widely
recognised among Englishmen through the almost inextricable muddle into
which the finances of India have fallen, owing to the disruption of the ratio
between silver and gold. The recent action of the Indian Government in
closing the mint against the coinage of silver is almost universally con-
demned, and yet, to use the words of Sir Richard Temple, on the 6th of
December last: “ Objectors can offer no alternative action save one,
namely—bi-metallism.”
LORD SALISBURY ON THE OBSTINACY OE ENGLAND.
And in the debate in the House of Lords a few days later, December
16th, 1893, on the East Indian Loan Bill the Marquis of Salisbury said:—
“ He might suggest the resumption of negotiations to find out whether the
other nations of Europe could not agree with us from time to time on some stable
relation between the two metals, the main obstacle to which was, he understood,
the obstinacy of England”
LONDON CHAMBER OF COMMERCE PROTESTS.
Every day brings the question of bi-metallism further into the region
of practical politics. The resumption of negotiations suggested by Lord
Salisbury has since been further pressed upon the British Government by
so important a body as the London Chamber of Commerce, who, on March
9th, this year, adopted a resolution in favour of a memorial urging the
Government to take such steps as would lead to the meeting of another
International Monetary Conference. It is to be hoped that all the
Chambers of Commerce in Australia will promptly follow this example.
HOW AUSTRALIA CAN HELP.
I now come to the third question. What can the people of Australia
in general and the farmers in particular do towards putting the remedy—■
international bi-metallism—into force ?


Oar gold mono-metallic opponents, who seem to think that it is in
the natural order of things that the “long-continued fall in prices should
go on from generation to generation,” may tell you that Australia is not
even allowed to coin silver for her own use, much less to have a voice in
the currency affairs of the British Empire.
My reply is that the people of Australia have, on this account, pro-
bably more influence and weight in this matter, if they choose to exercise
it, than any similar number of people anywhere else in the world.
ENGLAND AS GUARDIAN OP AUSTRALIAN INTERESTS.
Up to the present the interests of Australia in the matter of currency
legislation, have been deemed to be absolutely safe in the hands of the
British Government. The attitude of Australia towards England in this
matter has hitherto been like the unquestioning acquiescence of a child
towards its parenf, or of a ward towards its guardian and trustee.
We are now finding out, however, that the refusal of England to
co-operate with the other monetary powers in establishing international
bi-metallism is the chief cause of that great fall in prices, with its conse-
quent vast increase in the burden of Australia’s indebtedness, which have
been so ruinous to her.
AUSTRALIA’S RIGHT TO PROTEST.
Australia therefore has a right to protest against this action of Great
Britain—“the obstinacy of England”—and to go on protesting and
protesting until the mother country does agree to co-operate with the other
powers. Australia is of course very much to blame for not having
protested long ago, for her past and present silence in this matter of the
currency, can naturally be taken to mean that she is satisfied, and upon the
whole rather pleased with these falling prices from “ generation to gene-
ration,” which the spread of gold monometallism is so largely responsible for.
AUSTRALIA’S PROTEST WILL BE EPPECTIYB.
When however Australia does enter her united and vigorous protest, and
she will surely not hesitate much longer about doing so, I have too much faith
in the fairmindedness and upright intentions of the British people to believe
that they will turn a deaf ear to the protest. For it is not a boon, a favor, nor
some act of generosity that Australia will ask from England, it is simply
justice. It is that England should no longer exert its undoubted power in
disturbing the standard of value to such an extent that debts incurred by
her own colonies have had their burden so increased that the people are
being ruined in their efforts to repay them.
Are we not therefore justified in believing that united representations
on the part of the various Australian governments will have a very im-
portant effect upon English public opinion, and will tend to bring about
international bi-metallism sooner than it would otherwise come.
81-METALLISM ONLY A MATTER OF TIME.
For after all the question is, I believe, simply a matter of time.
Professor Suess, of Vienna, says :
“ It is not a question whether silver will again become a full valued money
metal throughout the world, but only as to the amount of tribulation through
which Europe will pass before that result is obtained.”
Unfortunately the tribulation is being felt not in Europe alone, but,
as I have shown, still more in Australia. The question is, will bi-metallism
come in time to saye the present growers of wool, wheat and other produce
from the impending ruin ?
IMMEDIATE ACTION SHOULD BE TAKEN.
I think I need say little more regarding the deep importance of the


question and the extreme urgency of the situation. If those of us wh#
are engaged in growing wheat, wool and other raw products are to be
saved from the impending ruin, which is promised us by the highest
authorities on both sides we must take immediate steps in our own
defence. Every day’s delay in settling this matter is a day of disaster
to us and to Australian interests. What is wanted is action, and above all
immediate action. Strong representation should be made as soon as possible
to the British Government by the whole of the Australian Governments.
FARMERS MUST TAKE THE QUESTION UP.
It is for you, whom I am specially addressing—the farmers of Aus-
tralia—to see that the various governments take these steps at the earliest
possible moment. Do not wait for anyone else to take the question up, but
take it up yourselves. To each one into whose hands this pamphlet falls I
would say : “ Wherever you live take immediate steps to have the question
brought forward, and to have resolutions passed and forwarded to the
Government by all the societies with which you are connected, which are in
any way representative of farmers’ interests.” I refer to Agricultural
Societies, Shire Councils, Fruit growers and Dairy produce Associations, &c.
Do all you can to assist in getting up public meetings and petitions in
favor of the movement. The following form contains the substance of
what is wanted, and this applies to all the colonies :
A POEM OP PETITION AND RESOLUTION.
“ That the Government be urgently requested to immediately take
“ such steps as it deems best to draw the attention of the British Govern-
“ ment to the disastrous effects upon Australia of the great fall in prices,
“ and to urge upon it the importance of the early initiation of another
“ International Monetary Conference, to arrange for an agreement
44 between the principal commercial nations for the unrestricted mintage of
“ both silver and gold, at a ratio to be fixed, both metals when minted to be
“ unlimited legal tender.”
LITERATURE SHOULD BE CIRCULATED.
I would ask all those who are impressed with the importance of the
question, to assist in every possible way in the circulation of this and other
pamphlets on bi-metallism among those who are so deeply concerned in
this matter of low prices, and also among those who can in any way assist
the movement.
To those residents of Victoria and South Australia who realize the
importance of the question I would strongly urge the advisability of their
joining the bi-metallic leagues already established. Those who reside in
other colonies may be urged to take immediate steps towards forming
leagues in their own colonies. I understand that arrangements are being
made for forming a league very shortly in New South Wales. I trust
to hear very soon of similar steps being taken in Queensland, New
Zealand, Tasmania and Western Australia.
THE WORKING CLASSES DEEPLY CONCERNED.
Although in this pamphlet my arguments are mainly addressed to
the farmers of Australia, it must not be supposed that the subject is of
any less importance to the working classes. For it is clear that as the
principal employers of labour in Australia are being brought nearer and
nearer to ruin by low prices, they are becoming less and less able to
provide regular employment and good wages. Obviously, therefore, the
irregularity and absence of employment produced by the contraction of the


HOPE 'FOB THE PUTUBE OF PBICES.
THE 81-METALLIC LEAGUE OF VICTORIA.
THE 81-METALLIC LEAGUE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Hon. Sec : John L. Menzies, Esq., 59 Temple Court, Collins St., Melbourne.
Corresponding Sec : J. Fowler Stewart, 14 King William Street, Adelaide.
T. G. RAMSAY & CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE & BENDIGO.
FIIOILb Ki
currency and the fall in prices is, if possible, of even deeper importance to
those whose sole means of livelihood are the wages' they can earn by their
labour. Any slight saving they may effect in being able to make their retail
purchases more cheaply, is trifling compared with their enormous loss in
wages, through the absence and irregularity of employment. For this
reason the leading labour unions in both England and America are warm
supporters of bi-metallism. I have dealt very fully with the matter as it
affects the working classes of Australasia in my recent lecture before the
Democratic Club, entitled “The Monopoly of Gold and the Scarcity of
Employment; their Ruinous Effects upon the Working Classes and their
Employers,” which I hope to publish shortly.
In conclusion I can only urge the farmers of Australia not to despair
about the future of prices. For, although the present outlook for those
of us who are engaged in growing wheat, wool and other products is
gloomy in the extreme, I have sufficient confidence in the good sense of
the people of Australia, and the justice of the people of England to believe
that the present era of ruinously low prices will shortly be put an end to
by England joining the other great monetary powers in the establishment
of the most equitable, most scientific, most convenient and most stable
monetary system that the world has ever seen— lnternational Bi-metallism.
The writer takes the entire responsibility for the statements and opinions con-
tained in this pamphlet, which is however being issued with the assistance of
several gentlemen, who are deeply impressed with the importance of the question,
as it affects the agricultural and pastoral interests of Australasia.
The following gentlemen have already subscribed :
Albert Austin, Esq. (Wanganella Borryalloah Station').
E. H. Labcelles, Esq., (Messrs. Dennys. Lascelles, Austin and Co., Geelong').
John A. Finlay, Esq. ( GoldHhrir , g h , j/.mf JUJT lv>. and Wanna Station^.
G. R. Drysdalb, Esq. ( Bynya Station and Pioneer Sugar Plantation).
C. 0. Murray, Esq. (Messrs. John Sanderson Co.' l
F. A. Keating, Esq. (T 7 essrs ~Gibbs, Bright and Co.).
Wm. Drysdale, Esq. XVnhm MoHgiJge aniTlTqlmcv Co.\_
Wm. A. Smith, Esq. ( Union Mortgage and Agency Ca.).
Jhos. Millear, Esq. (Wanganella and Edgarley Stations).
James Howatson, Esq. (Jit. Derrimut, Deer Park).
John S. Horsfall. Esq. (Go! dshrovqh, Mart and Co. and Widgiewa and
Kerarhury Stations.)
Alfred Hay, Esq. (Boomoonoomana Station).
Lewis Kiddle, Esq. (Australasian Mortgage and Agency Co. and Steam Plains
Station).
H. E. Rowe, Esq. (Messrs Pearson, Rowe and Smith), i
Archibald Fisken, Esq. {Australasian Mortgage Agency Co.).
Jas. Macmeikan, Esq. (Rational Wool Co.).
John MacVean, Esq. (Mootoomoon Station),
Hon. _F. T. Grimwade, M.L.C (Messrs Felton, Grimwade If Co.).
GeorgeTTAGDE, _ Esq. (Messrs G. Hague Co., Geelong)".
Wm. Peterson, Esq. (Messrs Wm. Peterson Co. If Wonnamurra Station).
Molesworth Greene, Esq. (Greystones Bacchus Marsh) .
mr. Stewaßt, Esq. (Moung/mMand 6oT^Elmited).
H. W. Wright, Esq. (New Zealand, Loan ami Mercantile Agency Co. Sydney).
Wm. Robertson, Esq. CMoyhall Station, Narracoote , A'.A.)
James Robertson, Esq. (Struan Bouse, Narracoote , S.A.)
Those desiring further information ancTTlterature on the subject, are invited to
communicate with ;
