

ENLARGED EDITION, to which are added —
THE THREE PHILANTHROPISTS.—
By COLONEL INGERSOLL.
WHERE MUST LASTING PROGRESS BEGIN?—
By E. C. STANTON,
A
Social
Tangle.
A Seque[ anc^
to
“Looking Backw
BY
RICHARD MICHAELIS
Editor of* Chicago Ereie Presse.”
Patee & Knapton, Printers, 290| Little Collins Street* Melbourne.
flbelbourne:
E. W. COLE, BOOK ARCADE.


PAGE FROM
8 Cole’s Reference Catalogue.
COLE’S PUBLICATIONS—Continued.
Lowe’s Shorthand without a Master. An excellent System which may be
learned in a few days. 1/-.
Cole’s Dictionary of Quotations. A book of ready reference to all
familiar words and phrases, forming a valuable handbook to writers,
readers, and thinkers. 1/-.
Cole’s Book of Ready-Made Speeches. With toasts, sentiments, and
appropriate quotations. 1/-.
The Lightning Calculator, Reckoner and Mental Arithmetic. A book of
rapid processes and useful tables. Reduced from 1/- to Gd.
Cole’s Letter Writers’ Guide. Containing over 300 letters. On every
Subject. 3/6.
Cole’s 1/- Letter Writer.
Cole’s Book of Etiquette. 2/6.
Cole’s 1/- Etiquette.
The Ingoldsby Legends ; or, Mirth and Marvels in prose and verse, with
Cruikshank’s Illustrations. 1/-.
Map and Guide to Melbourne. A large coloured folding sheet with in-
formation for visitors. 1/-.
Mrs. Caudle’s Curtain Lectures. Complete edition, with a lengthy life
of the author (Douglas Jerrold). 1/-.
Shakespere (Complete). With introduction to eacli play by Barry Corn-
wall. Cloth, red edges. 2/6.
Cheap Hustraltan lotions of popular IHovcls
Uniformly Bound in Cloth at 2/6 ; posted , 2/10.
1. His Natural Life. By Marcus Clarke.
2. The Broad Airow. The story of a female “lifer” in Van Diemen’s Land.
3. Geoffry Hamlyn, by Henry Kingshy. (The best Australian tale
written).
4. Hillyars and Burtons, by Henry Kingsley.
5. Eulalie, by W. S. Hayward.
6. Wild Life in the Australian Bush, by A Nicols, F.G.8., F.K.G S.
7. Longleat of Kooralbyn, by Mrs. Campbell Praed.
8. Old New Zealand, by a Pakeha Maori.
9. A Chequered Career; or, Fifteen Years in Australia and New Zealand.
10. The Islands of the Pacific, by H. S. Cooper.
flDacmillau’s Colonial Xibran>.
Cloth , 3/6; Paper, 2/6. Postage, 4 d.
Arnold (Matthew)—Essays in Criticism, Ist and 2nd series.
Babkeb (Lady).
Station Life in New Zealand. | A Year’s Housekeeping in S. Africa
Black (Wm.).
A Princess of Thule. I The Strange Adventures of a Phaeton
Sabina Zembra. I
Also, see Page 3 of Cover.


A
SOCIAL TANGLE.
BEING
A SEQUEL & REPLY TO BELLAMY’S "LOOKING BACKWARD"
BY
RICHARD MICHAELIS
EDITOR Or “ CHICAGO FREIE PHEB9B.”
In “ A Social Tangle ’* is continued the story of “ Looking Backwardfrom the point where
Hr. Bellamy leaves it. The tame characters and tome others appear in the new story ,
The hero, learning more about the " realised Utopia." finds that things are not running
nearly so smoothly as he was led to believe by Dr. Leetr, He makes the acquaintance
of a Hr. Forest, who has been disrated and disgraced by the Administration, and it
told by him the true slate of affairs. A series of conversations with this gentleman
follows , in which many grievious errors aud evils are exposed, and remedies for existing
ills are suggested.
Both “LOOKING BACKWARD" and “A SOCIAL TANGLE" contain much food for
thought and discussion. No one can pretend that the world is perfect yet, and the way
to help to bring about the good time coming is to freely discuss, without class bias,
every idea that may be suggested for the. betterment of mankind.
"Cole's Book Buyer's Guide and Magazine of Choice Extracts," published
monthly, is the best Literary Circular published in Australasia.
A copy will be forwarded Gratis, on application.
itfldboutne:
E. W. COLE, BOOK ARCADE-


Cole’s Thousand Best Poems in the 'World is a book eminently
adapted for presentation. Such a book is a never-ending source of enchant-
ment, solace, and entertainment to its possessor. It is got up in a variety of
bindings, morocco padded, 6/6; morocco, gilt edges, 5/-; cloth, 2/-; and in
paper covers for 1/6. Special reductions will be made to teachers who adopt
it as an extra reading book in their classes, or as a text-book for elocutionary
F*" f he letter it is the best book of its kind, as it cont A ’"*
a vast number of pathetic and moving piece*, and touching talec in verse.
WANTED, A LEADER OF MEN.
By WILLIAM HENRY SEAL
Wanted, a light in the darkness, a leader to love and obey,
A guide through the mist and shadows, that darken, endanger the way;
From cottage and crowded city ; from mountain, valley, and fen,
Comes the cry of a nation’s travail, “ Wanted a leader of men : ”
A leader unblinded by passion, with feelings unbittered by hate,
Not all for the voice of the people, nor all for the strength of the State ;•
A heart with a mind to govern, a mind with a heart to control,
-Not always forgetting the body, nor ever forgetting the soul.
Not a man of one party or faction, hut a zealous uniter of creeds;
Not an engine of wordy vapour, but a doer of worthy deeds;
Not a speaker of veiled sedition, but a guide for the struggling mass,
Who crowd through the valley of labor, crying, “Room for the millions to
pass.”
Not a man of a priestly compassion, giving alms at charity’s door,
Who sees through the eye of a needle the woes and wants of the poor;
Nor a man of the people’s passions, who sees through a widening glass,
The faults of those in high places, ever urging on class against class.
But a leader grave and earnest, like some patriarch seer of old,
Who saw with visions prophetic the scroll of the future unrolled,
And heard in his heart a message like love to the ears of a bride,
And felt in his soul’s aspiring the God-given wisdom to guide:
To gather the lost that are scattered, to speak with no faltering voice
To counsel our hearts in sorrow, and joy with us when we rejoice j
Not seeking with blind adoration the praise of idolatrous fame,
Nor making the goal of ambition the bribe of a gilded name:
But to guide in a great re-union, to lead in a righteous cause,
Distributing mercy with justice, not ruling by rigor of laws ;
Not bidding the poor to rebellion, nor teaching the rich how to give,
But telling a sorrowing nation how nobler and better to live.
New faith for the weak and faltering, new paths for the struggling to tread,
New strength for the strong who are fallen, new life for the hopes that
were dead •
New pride for the proud ones vanquished, the great ones we cannot recall,
And the heart of our country’s honor, unbroken, unblemished through all.
From " Public Opinion Dec. 12th, 1890.
a.


PREFACE.
EVERY seeker after truth and reform is entitled to recogni-
tion, even if his ways and methods are not ours. Mr.
Edward Bellamy’s book : “ Looking Backward,” is in effort to
improve the lot of mankind and therefore commendable, but his
reform proposition, stripped of its fine coloring, is nothing but
communism, a state of society which has proved a failure when-
ever established without a religious basis and which without
such basis is.en vogue to-day only among some barbarous and
cannibal tribes.
Chicago has for the last fourteen years been the centre of
the communistic and anarchistic agitation in the United States,
and in defending the fundamental principles of American in-
stitutions against these theories, that were imported from the
overcrowded industrial centres of Europe, I became quite
familiar with them as well as with the notions and peculiarities
of social reformers, who imagine themselves in possession of an
infallible receipt to perfect not only all human institutions but
also human nature.
Of course, Mr. Bellamy holds more moderate views than
those Spiers and Parsons proclaimed, but he has this much in
common with the Anarchists and Communists of Chicago : he
has become incapable of passing a fair judgment upon our
present institutions, conditions and men ; he overlooks all diffi-
culties in the introduction of his proposed changes, he really
believes his socialistic air castles must spring into existence
very soon and vrithout obstruction, and he populates his fairy
■palaces with angelic human beings, who would never by any
-possibility do anything wrong. The surmise, that men and


women in a conmmunistic state, would put off all selfishness,
envy, hate, jealousy, wrangling, and desire to rule, is just a»
reasonable as the supposition that a man can sleep one hundred
and thirteen years and rise thereafter as young and fresh as he-
went to bed.
What queer methods reformers sometimes advocate ! John
Most would in the name of equal rights to all, first kill all men
who are not in absolute sympathy with his opinions, then
abolish all laws and all officers, and then let nature take its course.
Mr. Bellamy on the other hand would, [also in the name of
•■equal rights, deprive all the clever and industrious workers of
a large or the largest part of the products of their labor for the
benefit of their awkward, stupid or lazy comrades ! And this
would be what Mr. Bellamy is pleased to style justice and
equality!
And for the purpose of reaching this state of mock-equality,
Mr. Bellamy would, as a matter of course, have to sacrifice com-
petition, the gigantic power that elevated us all and Mr. Bellamy
with us to the present state of evolution ! It is true that com-
petition has been and is now abused, but every institution is
subject to abuse and the misuse of the thing does not demon-
strate that the thing in itself is wrong. Nobody can deny that
competition during the centuries of Christiarf civilization has
developed the brains and muscles, of the human race and that
the continuous best efforts of humanity, stimulated by competi-
tion during these many centuries, have lifted our race to a
standard where the mode of living of common laborers is more
comfortable and desirable than the everyday existence of the
Kings of which Homer sings.
Every generation has to battle with certain problems, and
it is the lot of ours to overcome the difficulties between capital
and labor, that have been increased by the change in the methods
of production since the discovery in steam power.
We have to find ways and means not to avoid productive
vjorh (spoken of by Mr. Bellamy as an evil), but to cure the
brain cancer of our day: the permanent uncertanty of sub-
sistance and the fear of poverty. And we accomplish this by
co-operation and by mutual insurance companies, without


retrograding to communism, that most barbarous state of
society.
The imperfect nature of man characterizes, as a matter of
■course, all human institutions, and it is the easiest thing in the
world, by “ looking backward,” to find fault with living men as
well as with the present state of affairs and to build air castles
inhabited by angels only.
I will now look forward ! By demonstrating what would be
■the logical conclusion of Mr. Bellamy’s story, if fairly continued,
I purpose to show that he first tries to establish absolute
■equality and then, despairing of success, advocates an equality
in many respects more oppressive than the present state of
things. - I intend to demonstrate that under the regime pro-
posed by Mr. Bellamy, favoritism and corruption would be very
potent factors in public life. I expect to set forth that personal
liberty would fare so badly in Mr. Bellamy’s United States,
that the proud and independent American people would never
tolerate such a system, and to prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the people would be much poorer in Mr. Bellamy’s condi-
tion of affairs than at the present time.
1 do not deny that our society stands in need of many desir-
able reforms; lout lam not prepared to follow blindly Mr.
Bellamy, John Most, or anybody else who pretends that he is
ready to deliver humanity from all evils on short notice, and I
do not intend to jump head over heels into the dark.
If Mr. Bellamy and his followers are quite sure that they
•can establish the millennium, let them try it, like the com-
munists of the Amana Society, who have started a community
in the State of lowa on a religious basis. There are many
thousands of acres of good government lands left, where Mr.
Bellamy and his friends may settle and show the world what
they can do' But they should not ask the people of the United
States to break up their present form of government and state
of society, before they have given their theories a trial and
proved that their calculations are correct.
RICHARD MICHAELIS.
Chicago, April, 1890.


Conduct and Duty. A treasure book of Intellectual, Physical,
Social, and Moral advice. selected from the teachings of thinkers and writers-
of all times and countries. By W. T. Pyke. Dedicated to the natives of
Australia. Elegant presentation editions, padded morocco, 8/6; half-calf,.
//6; library calf, 5/-; cloth extra, 3/6; cloth, 2/6.
SONG OF THE TYPES.
Siass ! who bend ’neath a burden ripe,
Youths! where the rose still lingers,
Come list to the song of the rattling type,
As it falls from the printer’s fingers.
In a dismal garret and dingy town,
Where the Rhine’s blue wares are flowing,
Old Gutenberg conjured my spirit down,
And set my footsteps going.
But I burst on the world like the Morning’s sun r
And lighted its midnight hoary,
And though my long journey has just begun,
1 hare flooded the world with.glory.
I hare torn down the castles of crime and sin,
I have opened the dungeon of sorrow,
I have let the glad radiance of freedom in,
And scattered the legions of horror.
I have broken the fetters that shackled the mind,.
Restored its strength and beauty;
And taught the proud princes that rule mankind
The lesson, that power is duty.
I have rescued from prison the human soul,
And opened its inner portal,
Till it spurns indignant all. human control,
And soars in its flight immortal.
In the realm of science I scatter light,
To the poor bear hope in his hovel,
For never again shall the world in night,
In darkness, and slavery grovel.
Lot no scholar despair, no warrior quail;
Oblivion’s scythe is rotten.
For no more shall the words of wis lorn fall,
Nor the hero’s deeds be forgotten.
The minstrel’s string shall not break again,
And love shall be ever vernal,
For the maiden’s vow and the poet’s strain,
Shall sound through the aisles eternal.
The old world shakes ’neath my giant tread,
And in vain tries to fetter my pinions,
For my voice speaks doom and my arm bears dread,
To crumbling thrones and dominions.
Four hundred years their wails I’ve heard,
And the cause of their dire alarm is
That the pen is mightier far than the sword,
And the types than a thousand armies.
Paper and Printing Trades' Journal.


A SOCIAL TANGLE.
CHAPTER I.
Fob the purpose of introducing myself to those readers of
this hook, who are not familiar with the contents of “ Looking
Backward,” edited by Mr. Edward Bellamy, I will recapitulate
the remarkable events of my life up to the end of that extra-
ordinary narrative.
Born in Boston on the 26th day of December, 1857, I was
baptized Julian West, was educated in the schools and colleges
of my city, but, being in possession of a handsome fortune, did
not devote myself to any particular profession or trade. I be-
came engaged to Miss Edith Bartlett, a young lady of great
beauty, and it was our intention to marry as soon as my new
house should be ready for occupation. The completion of the
building was frequently delayed by strikes of masons and car-
penters, and 1 occupied still the old fashioned house, where my
family had lived for three generations.
Suffering from insomnia, I bad prepared in the basement
and under the foundations of the old building, a large vault,
where the noises of a great city would not disturb me. This
vault was absolutely fire-proof and fresh air was assured by
means of a small pipe running up to the roof of the house.
To obtain sleep I was frequently forced to avail myself of
the services of a mesmerist, and it happened that on the 30th
day of May, 1887, after two sleepless nights, I sent my colored
servant Sawyer to a Dr. Pillsbury, whom I was in the habit of
employing. The doctor was about to leave the city to establish
himself in New Orleans, and this was therefore the last time
he would be able to treat me. I instructed Sawyer to rouse
me at nine o’clock the next morning, and under the manipula-
tions of the mesmerist I soon fell into a deep slumber.
When I opened my eyes again I found that I had slept 113
years, 3 months, and 11 days.
I discovered that the old house had been destroyed by fire
and that Sawyer had perished in the flames. Dr. Pillsbury
had left Boston, the existence of the vault where I slept was
unknown to my friends, the house had not been rebuilt and so
I remained in a mesmerized condition for over a hundred years,


until a Dr. Leete, the occupant of a house which was being
erected on a part of the old lot, commenced to build a laboratory
and unearthed my vault in the year 2000.
I learned that Edith Bartlett, after mourning my loss four-
teen years, had married, that Dr. Leete’s wife was Edith
Bartlett’s granddaughter, and that his daughter Edith was
therefore the great-granddaughter of the young lady who had
been my promised bride 113 years before.
The vigor of my manhood of 30 years overcame the shock of
these discoveries. I soon felt myself at home in Dr. Leete’s
house, the more so, because young Edith soon occupied the place
in my heart once filled by Edith Bartlett, and it was not long
before Edith Leete, a somewhat romantic, compassionate girl,
consented with grace to become the successor of her great-
grandmother; to become my bride.
But the turn of my own fate is even less remarkable, than
the change that has taken place in the social order of
things. Dr. Leete explained to me the new organization of
society.
Individual enterprises have ended. The nation creates
everything that individuals and corporations were producing at
the end of the nineteenth century. Every able bodied man,
every healthy woman belongs to the “ industrial army.” They
enter the force at the age of 21 and are released at 45. Only
in rare cases of necessity are men over 45 years of age sum-
moned to work.
Money is abolished, but all inhabitants of the United States
receive an equal share of the results of the work of the in-
dustrial army in the form of a credit card, a piece of paste board
on which dollars and cents are marked. There is one store in
each ward where people can select such goods as they may
desire. The value of the goods one purchases, is pricked out of
his credit card and his account is charged in the Government
books with the amount of goods so purchased.
The meals are furnished by large cooking houses. Washing
and repairing are done in large laundries. One may take his
meals home or eat them at the cooking house. The bill of fare
is very elaborate, and one may have even a special dining room.
The amount to be paid for the meals differs of course according
to the bill of fare ordered and to the place where the meal is
taken.
Each family occupies a separate house, the furniture being
the property of the tenant. The rent, which depends on the
size of the house, is also pricked out of the credit card.
, > All inhabitants of the United States are obliged to attend
school until they have reached the age of 21. Then they be-
come members of the industrial army. During the first three
years of their services they are called recruits or apprentices
and have to do the common labor under the absolute command


of the officers or overseers. A record is kept, in which are
entered the ability and behaviour of each recruit.
•After the first three years of service, each recruit may select
a profession or a trade. As far as possible the volunteers are
placed in the trades they prefer. Recruits with the best
records are given the first choice. Some of them have to take
a second or third choice, and some are obliged to accept posi-
tions assigned to thpm by their superiors.
All members of the army are, according to their ability and
behavior, divided into three grades, and apprentices with a
first-class record may, after their three years service, enter at
once the first grades of the different trades selected by them.
The general of the guild appoints all the officers of his trade.
The lieutenants must be taken from the members of the first
grades. The captains are chosen by the general from the lieu-
tenants, the colonels from the captains. The general of the
guild himself is elected by the former members of the trade,
that is, those who have passed the age of forty-five. The ex-
members of all the guilds also elect the chiefs of the ten great
departments or groups of allied trades. The chiefs are taken
from the generals of the guilds. And the former guild members
also elect the President of the United States, who is taken
from the ranks of the retired chiefs of the ten great depart-
ments. ‘The President, the ten chiefs of the great departments
and the generals of all the guilds live in Washington.
The members of the industrial army have not the right to
vote for any of the officers by whom they are governed. They
have no representation during their 2t years of service; but if
they have a complaint against one of their superiors, they may
bring their case before a judge, whose decision is final.
The judges are appointed by the President from the ranks
of the retired members of the guild for the term of five years.
Courts, lawyers, jails, sheriffs, tax-assessors, collectors and
many other officers have been abolished. Criminals are treated
in hospitals as persons mentally ill.
The National Government regulates the production. When
it sees that certain trades attract a very large number of volun-
teers, while other trades fall short, the administration increases
the working time of the preferred trades and shortens the
working, hours of those needing more volunteers.
The women have their own officers, generals, judges, and
form an auxiliary army of industry. They receive the same
credit cards as the men. Since the cooking and washing and
repairing of household goods are done outside, the women of
the twentieth century have more time for productive labour
than had the women of a hundred years ago.
Recruits who have passed three years service, during which
they were assignable to any work at the discretion of their
superiors, may enter schools of technology, medicine, art, etc.;


but if they cannot keep pace with the ''lasses, they must with-;
draw. 'Physicians who do not find sufficient employment are
assigned to work of another character.
If people desire the publication of a Newspaper, they must
club together and give up enough of their credit cards to com-
pensate the nation for the loss of the work of the persons edit-
ing and printing the paper.
If one desires to publish a book, he can write it in his hours
of leisure and can have it printed by giving up a part of his
credit caid. For the copies sold he receives again a new credit.
Preachers are in a similar way employed by persons who
desire to hoar their sermons.
Crip-ples or other people unable to do full work or any work
at all, receive their full credit cards, because the fact, that they
are human beings, entitles them to their full share of all good
things produced on earth.
The state governments within the United States have been
abolished as useless.
All other nations have organized themselves on a similar
basis and are exchanging goods with each other. The yearly
balances are settled witli national staple articles.
The new order of things enables people to live without cares,
and one of the consequences is the fact, that most of the men
and women of au average constitution live from eighty-five to
ninety years.
Such was the description of the new order of things given
me by Dr. Leete in a number of conversations. The doctor is
very enthusiastic over the organization of society of the
twentieth century and does not hesitate to call it the mil-
lennium.
The fear and uncertainty which I entertained in regard to
my employment were set at rest by Dr. Leete, who said that I
could, if I wished, have the position of professor of the history
of the nineteenth century in the Shawmut College of Boston.
I have accepted the offer and shall enter upon my duties next
Monday.
CHAPTER II.
When I first entered the large hall of Shawmnt College,
where I was to deliver my lectures, I noticed near the door of
the room a gentleman of about forty years of age. He was t< o
old to be one of the students and as I had not seen him when
Dr. Leete introduced me to the professors of the institution, I
was somewhat curious to know in what capacity he honored my
debut.
The cordial reception I had met at the hands of the pro-
fessors, the fact that every seat of the large hall was occupied,
acted as a stimulus and when Dr. White, the president of the-


Bhawmut College, had introduced me with a few complimentari-
remarks as to a living witness of the nineteenth century, I
began my first lecture in the best of spirits.
My speech contained naturally many of the points that Dr.
Leete had most dwelt upon, when, in his conversations with me,,
he had compared the organization of society of the nineteenth-
and that of the twentieth centuries.
I said, in substance, that my hearers must not expect a-
synopsis of the civilization of the two centuries or a panegyric
of the present state of affairs. I would point out but a few-
conditions, regulations and institutions that could serve as-
criteiion of the spirit of their times.
As characteristic of the spirit of the civilization of the-
nineteenth century, I described the insane competition, where-
a man in a foul fight must “cheat, overreach, supplant, defraud,
buy below worth and sell above, break down the business by
which his neighbour fed his young ones, tempt men to buy
what they ought not, and to sell what they should not, grind
their laborers, sweat their debtors, cozen their creditors,”* in
order to be able to support those dependent on him. I showed
“that there had been many a man among the people of the
nineteenth century who, if it had been merely a question of his-
owu life would sooner have given it up than nourished it by
bread snatched from others.” I pictured the consequences-
of this insane and annihilating competition as a constant
wear on the brains and bodies of the past generation, intensified'
by the permanent fear of poverty. The spectre of uncertainty
walked constantly beside the man of the nineteenth century,,
sat at his table and went to bed with him “ even whispering in
his ears; “Do your work ever so well, rise early and toll till-
late, rob cunningly or serve faithfully, you shall never know
security. Rich you may be now and still come to poverty at
last. Leave ever so much wealth to your children, you cannot
buy the assurance, that your son may not be the servant of
your servant or that your daughter will not sell herself for
bread.”
And while one hundred and thirteen years ago all men
worked like slaves, until completely exhausted, without having
even a guaranty that they would not die in poverty or from
hunger, the men of the twentieth century were walking in the
sunlight of freedom, security, happiness and equality. After
receiving an excellent education in standard schools, and then
passing through an apprenticeship of three years, the young
people of the twentieth century select their vocation. Short
hours of work permit them, even during the years of service in
the industrial army, to spend more time for the continuation of
their studies and for recreation than the people who lived
. * Sucli parts of IVTr. Bellamy’s book as are characteristic of his manner of dealing*
the present and with the future, I give with marks of quotation.


•one hundred years ago had ever believed to be consistent
with a successful management of industries, farming or public
affairs.
Free from all cares, in perfect harmony with each other,
without the disturbing influence of political parties, enjoying
•a wealth unprecedented in the history of nations, we might
verily say: “ The long and weary winter of our race is ended.
Its summer has begun. Humanity has burst the chrysalis.
The heavens, are before it! ”
I had spoken with enthusiasm, yes, even with deep emotion
and I expected if not a warm, at least a sympathetic reception
of my address. But only a faint and very cold applause
followed my remarks. I had the impression that not one-fourth
of the young men present had found it worth their while to
•show their approval of my lecture, and that the applause of
•even these few had been an act of courtesy rather than .a
-spontaneous outburst of feeling. The chilly reception was such
a great disappointment to me that I could not rally courage
•enough to leave my chair and pass through the students as they
were leaving the hall.
I busied myself at the little desk before me until everybody
had gone with the exception of the gentleman who had arrested
my attention when I entered the room. He remained at the
door evidently waiting for me.
“ You belong to the college ? ” I asked, to hide my
embarrassment.
“ Indeed 1 do,” he answered with a light smile, that
challenged another question.
“ I suppose I have the pleasure of meeting one of my
colleagues,” I continued. “My name is West.”
“ Until about a month ago I was Professor Forest, your
predecessor in teaching the history of the nineteenth century;
to-day I am one of the janitors and my chief has been good
enough to recommend this room to my care.”
I had during the last few days seen and heard so many new
and strange things, that I was prepared to be surprised at
nothing, however astounding.
But the information, that to a professor of history was
assigned the duty of cleaning the rooms, where he had once
lectured, sounded so incredible and opened such an unpleasing
,prospect for my own career, that I could not conceal my
amazement.
“And what has caused this singular change of position,” I
inquired.
“In comparing the lot of humanity in 1900 and 2000 I
cams to conclusions very different from yours,” responded Mr.
iF orest.
“You do not mean to say that the condition of the people of


the nineteenth century -was better than that of the present
generation ? ” I asked with some curiosity.
“ That is my opinion ? ” said Mr. Forest.
“ The only way I can understand you holding such extra-
ordinary views, is that you are personally quite acquainted with
the civilization of which you speak so highly,” I declared.
“ I have as a matter of course, drawn my information from,
our libraries, and I am forced to admit that you can support'
your argument in regard to the civilization of the last century
by pointing to your personal knowledge. But lam afraid that
you are not so familiar with the present state of affairs, at the
fountain of your information in regard to the twentieth century
is only one man. Dr. Leete. I may therefore claim that my
information of the civilization of your days is better than yours
of our institutions, because mine is based on the testimony of
more witnesses than one.”
“ Then you must of course disapprove the views developed*
in my lecture.”
“ Your address will undoubtedly be published in extenso
in all the administration organs, that is, in nearly every news-
paper in the land,” said Mr. Forest, evading a direct answer to
my question.
“ Administration organs, yon say,” I asked with surprise :
“Has the administration organs, and why does it need them?”
“ Of course the administration has organs,” answered Forest.
“ And it is both difficult and unpleasant to edit an opposition
paper. Therefore we have only a few of them.”
“ But Dr. Leete said: ‘We have no parties or politicians-
and as for demagoguery and corruption, they are words having*
only a historical significance.’ And yet you speak of opposition
and of administration papers ? ” I said this very likely with an
expression of some doubt in my eyes.
My companion broke into a loud laugh, after which he asked:
“Excuse, please my merriment, but Dr. Leete is a great joker,
who never fails to ‘bring down the house.’ Well! Well! That
is too good. I wish I could have seen his face when he gave
you that information.”
And Mr. Forest laughed again.
“ I beg your pardon, Air. West,” he continued, when I met
his merriment with silence ; “but you would not only excuse
but share my laughter, if you were familiar with our public
life, if you knew Dr. Leete as well as I do and then learned
that he had claimed, we were suffering from a want of
politicians. But I wish to say right here,” added Mr Forest in
a more composed tone, “ that I have not a poor opinion of Dr.
Leete. He is a practical joker, a shrewd politician, but other-
wise as good a man as our time can produce.
“ Dr. Leete is a politician ? ” I asked in the utmost*
astonishment.


"Yes. Dr. Leete is tje most influential tender of the
administration party in Boston. 1 owe it to his kind interference
Tthat 1 am still connected with the college.”
Noticing that I did not know how to construe this statement,
Mr. Forest added ;
“ When in comparing the civilization of your days with ours,
I came to the conclusion, that communism had proved a failure,
II was accused of misleading and corrupting the students and
the usual sentence in such cases: “confinement in an insane
asylum,” was passed. Because, it is claimed, that only a
madman could find fault with the best organisation of society
ever introduced. Dr. Leete, however, declared that my insanity
was so harmless, that confinement in an asylum seemed unnecessary,
besides being too expensive. I could still earn my living by
doing light work about the college building; and my case would
serve as a warning to all the professors and students to be
careful in their expressions and teachings. So I retained
the liberty in which we glory and was spared doing street
cleaning or some such work, which is generally awarded to
“ kickers ” against the administration.”
“ The students seem to share your opinion, at least, they
received my remarks very coldly,” I remarked, in order to avoid
a discussion of the qualities of my host.
Mr. Forest’s keen grey eyes rested for a moment upon my
face, and then he said in a friendly tone:
“ I believe you w’ere convinced of what you said, Mr. West;
but did it not occur to yon, that you treated your time and your
contemporaries very severely ? Did competition really demand
that one should defraud his neighbour, grind his laborers,
■sweat his debtors, and snatch the bread from others P Were
the majority of the men of your time swindlers and Shylocks ?
Were the laborers all slaves, working each day until completely
exhausted ? I remember distinctly that the wage-workers of
your time struck frequently for eight hours, declining to work
nine or ten hours per diem for good pay. I think you had a
strong, proud and independent class of laborers, who could not
fairly be regarded as slaves. And as for girls, I have seen the
■statements and complaints, that help for house-keeping was
very scarce in your days and was paid from |2 to |5 per week,
with board, so that there was no excuse for any decent girl to
sell herself for bread. Of course your state of civilization was
very far from being faultless; in fact, there is no such thing as
perfection in anything. But your description of the civilization
of the nineteenth century is painted in such dark colors, that
• our students, w T ho are somewhat familiar with the history of
those days, could not very well enthuse over your lecture;
especially as many of these young men do not regard our present
institutions with such complete admiration as you do. I speak
frankly, Mr. West, and I hope you will excuse my frankness,


tecause of my desire to serve you in describing men, things and
institutions as I see them.”
The warm tone of his voice, and the sympathetic expression
of his eyes caused me to shake hands with Forest, although
everything he had said went directly against my friends, my
views, my feelings and my interests. I left him in an uneasy
mood and walked home revolving in my mind his criticism of
my lecture.
I met Dr. Leete and the ladies, and Edith inquired whether
my debut as professor had satisfied my expectations.
I have always tried to be frank and true: so I gave Dr.
Leete and his family a synopsis of my speech, mentioned the
cool reception of my address and my disappointment I spoke
of Mr. Forest’s criticism, leaving out, of course, his obser-
vations relative to Dr. Leete, and confessed that his censure
was not wholly undeserved inasmuch as I had gone too far
in charging upon the whole people the bad qualities which
reckless competition had stamped on certain individuals.
Dr. Leete was evidently not altogether pleased with my
remarks. After a short pause he said: “ I think the reckless
•competition of the last part of the nineteenth century could not
fail to demoralise more or less, in most cases more, all the
people, who were conducting a business or who had to work for
■a living. I think furthermore that your lecture was an excellent
exposition of principles and that you have no reason to yield an
inch of your position. The cold reception you met with, ought
not to worry you. It is due to Forest, who has planted in the
hearts of our students his idiosyncrasy, his blind admiration of
competition and his aversion to our form of civilization;- It is
your task to enlighten the young men in regard to the com-
parative merits of the two orders of things. —Mr. Forest is
placing a heavy tax on the patience of his fellow citizens by his
persistent efforts to mislead the students. —Did he mention the
fact that he was your predecessor ? ”
“ He did, when I asked him if he were a member of the
college staff of teachers. He said that he was discharged for
his heresy and that he owed his comparatively lenient treat-
ment to you.”
“ It is not Forest’s habit to conceal his opinions and he may
have given you a nice idea of Dr. Leete,” my host said with a
smile.
I thought best under the circumstances to repeat Forest’s
remarks in regard to Dr. Leete, which remarks were very good
natured and rather complimentary to my host. I may add that
I desired very much to know what Dr. Leete would say in
answer to the charge of being a politician and a leader of the
administration party.
So I said : “ Mr. Forest laughed heartily when T repeated
font remarks that you have no party nor politicians. He called


you a great practical joker, a shrewd politician, the leader of
the administration party in Boston and a good man.”
Dr. Leete smiled somewhat grimly as he replied : “ That is
a character I ought to be grateful for, considering that it cornea
from a faultfinder like Forest. Concerning his references to me
as a politician I will say that I never held an office, but that
the administration has occasionaly consulted me and other
citizens on important questions. Political parties we have not.
There are of course a few incurable faultfinders like Mr. Forest
and a few radical growlers, but we pay but little attention to
them so long as they do not disturb the public peace. If they
do, we send them to a hospital where they receive proper treat-
ment.”
Although these words were spoken in the tone of light
conversation, they impressed me deeply. “If they do, we send
them to a hospital, where they receive proper treatment.” Did
not this confirm Forest’s statement, that the usual sentence
against the opponents of communism was confinement in an
insane asylum s' ”
My unpleasant thoughts were interrupted by Edith’s sweet
voice remarking: “ I think Mr. Forest is an honest well
meaning gentleman and he should be permitted to express his
views, even if they are wrong and queer. The students will
certainly eventually be convinced that our order of things is as
good as it can be made, and besides it is so entertaining to hear
once in a while another opinion.”
With an expression of fatherly love, Dr. Leete placed his
right hand on Edith’s thick hair and said; “ The ladies of the
court of Louis XYI. of France also considered very entertaining
the ideas that caused the revolution and cost many of the
“entertained” ladies and gentlemen their heads beneath the
guillotine.—ldeas are little sparks. They may easily cause a
conflagration if not watched.”
CHAPTER III.
My studies had never been directed to questions of national
economy. I had never thought of comparing the merits of
competition with those of communism. When Dr. Leete had
explained in his positive and still fascinating manner the new
order of things I had hardly noticed that it was based on
communistic principles. I thought humanity had reached at
last the millennium, and when Dr. Leete stated that his easy
and even luxurious way of living represented the average style
of the people of the twentieth century, I had no doubt that
everybody was satisfied with the new order of things.
My cool reception by the students and my conversation
with Mr. Forest had convinced me, that not every inhabitant


■of the United States in the 2000th year of our Lord considered
the present order of things the millennium and I must say that
I noticed the dissatisfaction with sincere sorrow. For a sweet
peace, a tranquillity never felt before, had filled my heart, when
Dr. Leete spoke of the absolute happiness of the men of the
twentieth century.
My new profession imposed upon me the duty of studying
national economy. Of course I could have pictured simply the
social and political circumstances, in which the people of the
United States had lived 113 years ago, but this would not
satisfied me. I desired to learn, how the civilizations of the
two centuries, if impartially judged, would compare. Therefore
I cultivated my acquaintance with Mr. Forest, to hear from
him the arguments against the theories set forth by Dr. Leete,
although a feeling of discomfort always overwhelmed me,
whenever the thought came to me, that Forest’s ideas might
prove victorious over the principles advanced by Dr. Leete.
For a victory won by Forest could mean nothing else but a
return to a state of affairs, which I thoroughly disliked, and
■which I knew to be full of cares and discomforts.
I confined my next lecture to an accurate description of the
state of the labor market of Boston in 1887. Avoiding carefully
all exaggerations, I drew only indisputable conclusions from
the facts given, showing how capital and labor had lost equally
by the numerous strikes in those days and complimenting the
present order of things, for making such irrational economical
•conflicts impossible.
After my lectures I always conversed with Mr. Forest, who
was quite as willing to discuss the new order of society as
Dr. Leete.
“ The friends of the administration are calling me a fault-
finder,” said Mr. Forest, “ and they are right, although they
might express their opinion with more civility, if they said,
that lam critically disposed. I would criticise every ad-
ministration under which it chanced to be my destiny to live,
however good or bad that administration might be. Ido not
harbor any animosity against the men, who rule the United
States to-day. I even admit that they exercise a little more
wisdom, energy and tolerance, than did the members of the
■government, which ruled twelve years ago. But the funda-
mental principle of their system is decidedly wrong and so the
consequences must be bad ; —whatever the members of the
administration may do to patch up the shortcomings of their
system.”
“ So yon think that the present system is absolutely
Wrong ? ” I queried.
“ Can you entertain any doubts ? ” answered Forest. “ Look
around ! Is the leading principle in creation equality or variety ?
You find sometimes similitude but never conformity. Botanists


have carefully compared thousands of leaves, which looked
exactly alike at the first glance, but which after close examin-
ation were found to possess striking dissimilarities. Inequality
is the law of nature and the attempt to establish equality is
therefore unnatural and absurd. Wherever such experiments
have been made, they have ended in unqualified failure. Even
some of the first Christians, moved by brotherly love and charity,
failed in their efforts to establish communism permanently.
And the lamented Procrustes used two bedsteads in which he
placed his victims. He could not get along with one size for
everybody. We may just as well try to make every man six
feet long, forty-two inches around his chest, with a Grecian
nose, blue eyes, light hair and a lyric tenor voice, as to attempt
to equalize all lives and reduce them to a communistic state. —
Now consider, in connection with the difference in the mental
and physical powers of men, their different inclinations and
tastes, the variety of their occupations, and then say, whether
the establishment of society on the basis of communism, of
absolute equality is possible.”
“ If I have formed a just appreciation of the organization of
your society, you have recognized the right of all men to a liv-
ing by giving everybody an equal share of the products of
labor,” I objected; “but at the same time you give everybody
the chance to select the profession or trade most to his taste
and you have graded the men, belonging to a guild, thus incit-
ing the worker to reach a higher grade, and creating a diversity
of positions adapted to that disimilarity of men you were just
speaking of.”
“Yes,” said Forest, “we first established the principle of
equality and then proceeded to arrange our system upon a basis
of inequality, thus avoiding an open avowal that the new organi-
zation of society was a failure in both theory and practice.
The question before us is a very plain one : ‘ Are we all alike?*
If we are, then communism is the proper form of society and
everybody should have an equal share of the products of labor.
If we are not alike, if we differ in mental power and in physical
ability, if the results of the labor of men are different, then
there is no reason why the wealth of the nation should be
equally divided. But we first proclaim equality and pretend
that we divide the products of labor equally among all; and
then we divide the “ workers into first, second, and third grades,
according to ability, and these grades are subdivided into first and
second classes.” Here we see the workers subdivided into six classes
for the reason, expressly stated, that their ability differs. That
their diligence also differs is not admitted, but it is nevertheless
the fact. The inequality of men is thus distinctly recognised ,.
but the products of labor are equally divided in the name of
equality ! Now, everybody has a natural right to the products
of his activity, but we are taking a large share of the results of


the labor of a clever worker of class A of the first grade to give
it to a lazy fellow of class Bof the third grade. This is down-
right robbery, not even hidden beneath the shabby cloak of the
leading principle governing all the acts of the administration ;
and all those who cannot admire this stealing, are denounced as
enemies of the best organization of society ever known in the
history of mankind.”
'“You are to a certain extent an admirer of the civilization
of the nineteenth century,” I answered; “ and yet in our times
the employers were accused by some of the labor agitators of
“ stealing ” a large amount of the products of work by reaping
very large profits and paying small wages. I would rather
favor an equal division of all properties than a system by
which a comparatively small number of employers can enrich
themselves at the expense of the masses of the laboring people.”
“ I am not an admirer of the civilization of the nineteenth
century, Mr. West,” Forest exclaimed. “I simply maintain
that the principles of competition under which society worked a
hundred years ago was far superior to the communism, under
which we are laboring. The unjust profits of the employers, of
which you complain, could have been easily done away with, if
your workmen had organized themselves into co-partnerships or
associations. There was no law a hundred years ago to prevent
a dozen shoemakers renting a loft for Steam power, purchasing
a few sewing and other machines and making boots and shoes
at their own risk. There was no law to prevent all the other
workingmen buying their boot and shoes at the shop of the co-
operative association, thus securing for the members of the
latter the profits of the manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer 'knd
workman. The laborers of all the different trades had a perfect
right to organize such co-operative societies and thus secure all
the profit that was in their labor. If the workmen preferred
not to make use of this chance, if they did not care to assume
the cares and risks of conducting a business for themselves, if
they would rather work for an employer, leaving the cares and
risks of the management entirely to him, they certainly had no
reason to complain of the profit of the employer. And if they
■were not satisfied with their treatment, they could at any time
seek other employment;—a thing that the workmen of our
days can not do, for there is only one employer, the national
administration. The principal that a man has a right to what
he produces, was not questioned under your form of production.
But we have in the name of equality and Justice established the
“ right,” to rob an industrious man of a part of the product of
his labor and give this booty to his lazy comrade. If the work-
ingmen of the nineteenth century, instead of sacrificing enorm-
ous sums in strikes, had organized one trade after another into
co-operative associations, they would have solved what they
styled the social questions with comparatively little trouble.


And they would have saved us from the present outrageous
form of society.”
“ The strikes were an effect merely of the concentration of
capital in greater masses than had ever been known before,”
I said, repeating the views of Dr. Leete on this .question.
“ Before this concentration began . . . the individual work-
man was relatively important and independent in his relations
to his employers. Moreover, when a little capital or a new
idea was enough to start a man in business for himself, work-
ingmen were constantly becoming employers and there was no
hard or fast line between the two classes. Labor unions were
needless then and general strikes out of the question.”
“ In your place, Mr. West, I would not endorse those sen-
tences of Dr Leete,” said Forest with a smile, “ for the Doctor
has had frequent occasions to change his mind on this subject
and persists in repeating his erroneous statements, although I
and others have disproved them until further repetitions of our
arguments become tedious. Strikes are not, as Dr. Leete pre-
tends to believe, comparatively late appearances on the battle
fields of national economy. One of the biggest strikes that
ever occurred, the “ secessio in montem sacram,” took place in
Rome as early as 494 before Christ, and, during -'the centuries
of the middle ages, strikes for higher wages frequently occurred,
although in those days labor was much better organized (in
trades unions, guilds, and ‘ Zuenfte ’) and more powerful than
capital. And as for the impossibility of laborers ever becoming
employers, I can show you in the college library a copy of the
German paper, the Freie Presse, published in the city of Chicago
anno 1888, where the editor, in contradicting similar statements
of the communists of those days, points to the fact that in 1888
there were 12,000 German house owners, find
well to do or rich business men in Chicago, who all had"corno
to the city poor. When these Germans came to Chicago only a
very few of them spoke English, still they were able to ac-
cumulate fortunes. This disproves the statement that the
people at the erd of the last century were in the clutches of
capital and unable to free themselves. It is the easiest thing
in the world to make wild statements, but it is sometimes diffi-
cult to substantiate them. And Dr. Leete is an adept at mak-
ing statements.”
“ But are you not getting along in good style ? ” I asked,
hoping to stop Forest’s complaints by pointing to an undisput-
able tact. “ Are you not enjoying an unprecedented pros-
perity, and is not this general result, the definite annihilation of
poverty, an achievement worth small sacrifices ?”
“We are not getting along in good style. We are not en-
joying an unprecedented prosperity. You will discover very
soon, that yon are overestimating the character and the fruits
of our civilization. And so far as the annihilation of poverty


is concerned, it amounts practically to nothing but the enrich-
ment of the awkward, stupid and lazy people with the proceeds
of the work of the clever and industrious women and men.
You could have done that 113 year sago, but you were not foolish
and unjust enough to commit such a robbery.”
“ If the people don’t like the present organization of society,
why do they not change it P” I asked. “ From your remarks, I
have drawn the conclusion that you have no opposition party
worth speaking of, for you said there are only a few opposition
papers published in the country. This seems to prove that the
people are satisfied with the present state of affairs.”
Forest looked very severe as he answered: “You are of
course under the impression, that we are acting with the same
liberty you were enjoying 113 years ago. But everything in
political life has changed since those days. With the exception
of a limited number of government officials and a few con-
tractors, your citizens were perfectly independent of the ad-
ministration ; to-day the administration rules everything, and
everybody is more or less dependent upon the good will of our
rulers. Whoever dares to openly oppose the ruling spirits may
be sure that all the wiath and all the unpleasantness at the
command of the administration, will be piled upon him and his
relatives and friends. Therefore the number of men who are
daring enough to challenge the ire of the government is very
small, although a great many are discontented with the present
state of affairs.”
‘‘But why don’t people elect men to congress who would
pass laws that would change a state of things so unsatisfactory
to the masses?” I asked, satisfied that Forest in his fault-
finding mood, was using his dark paint altogether too freely.
“ Congress has very little influence nowadays,” Forest
answered: “ The power rests almost entirely with the Presi-
dent and chiefs of the ten great departments. They have well
nigh absolute power and resemble somewhat the council of ten
in Yenice, when that aristocratic Republic was at the height of
its power. As it lies within their discretion to assign each and
every person to a good or a poor position for twenty-four years
and even to order a draft from the ranks of the men over forty-
five years of age, thus being able to get disliked men back
under the direct discipline of the industrial army, they have a
power over all the people that no tyrant of your times ever
dreamed of establishing.”
“You know of course,” Mr. Forest continued, that all re-
cruits belong for the first three years of their service to the
class of unskilled or common laborers. It is not until after
this period, during which ho is assignable to any work at the
discretion of his superiors, that the young man is allowed to
select a special avocation.’ You can readily see that the young
tnan is during these three years at the absolute mercy of his


superiors. They may assign him to easy and clean work, or
they may send him to do a dirty and unhealthy job. He has to
obey orders. For ‘ a man able to do duty and persistently re-
fusing, is sentenced to solitary imprisonment on bread and
water until he consents.’”
“ You know furthermore, that ‘individual records are kept,
and that excellence receives distinction, corresponding with
the penalties that negligence occurs.’ Dr. Leete has un-
doubtedly told you this and furthermore ‘ that it is not policy
with ns to permit youthful recklessness or indiscretion, when
wot deeply culpable, to handicap the future careers of young
men and that all who have passed the unclassified grade with-
out serious disgrace, have an equal opportunity to choose the
life employment they have the most liking for .... Now
not only are the individual records of these apprentices for
ability and industry strictly kept and excellency distinguished
by suitable distinctions, but upon the average of his record
during his apprenticeship the standing given the apprentice
among the full workmen depends .... While the
internal organizations of the various industries, mechanical and
agricultural, difier according to their peculiar conditions, they
agree in a general division of their workers into first, second
and third grades, according to ability, and these grades are in
many cases subdivided into first and second classes. According
to his standing as an apprentice, a young man is assigned his
place as & first, second or third grade worker. Regradings takes
place in each industry at intervals, corresponding with the
length of the apprenticeship .... One of the notable
advantages of a high grading, is the privilege it gives the
worker to select which of the various branches or processes of
his industry he will follow as his specialty’ .... Dr.
Leete has of course further informed you ‘ that so far as possible,
the preferences of the poorest workmen are considered in
assigning him his line of work .... While however the
wish of the lower grade man is consulted so far as the exigen-
cies of the service permit, he is considered only after the upper
grade men are provided for, and often he has to put with
second or third choice or even with an arbitrary assignment
when help is needed. This privilege of selection attends every
regrading, and when a man loses his grade, he also risks having
to exchange the sort of work he likes best for some other less
to his taste .... High places in the nation are open
only to the highest class men.”
> These regulations bear out what I just said in regard to
the power of the administration. The lieutenants, captains
and colonels, are appointed by the generals of the guild, who
in turn are under the command of the ten chiefs of the ten
great departments. These officers may give their young
friends, who enter the industrial army as apprentices, easy


jobs and good records and enable their friends on the strength
of their records, as soon as they have passed the first three
years of service, to enter the first class of the first grade of
a trade. And such a favorite, ■who, backed by influential
friends, has passed an easy time as an apprentice and who
has received at once the first-class of the first grade of his
trade is immediately appointable to a lieu tenantship and he
can run up to the higher honors in a few years. You can
not deny, Mr. West, that our regulations permit such a
favoritism.”
I had to admit that such things were possible.
Mr. Forest continued: “On the other hand, the young
men, who are not the sons and friends of our leaders, are
fortunate if they can secure a second grade position, with a
record, that does not exclude all hopes of further promotion.
Relatives of out-spoken opponents of the administration, can
be placed in the second class of the third grade of their trade,
and their record can be so kept, that they can never hope to
secure a higher position. And such a favoritism is not only
possible, but it absolutely does exist. The sons and relatives of
men, who are known as opponents of the administration, have
practically to live worse than slaves, and are sometimes treated
like footballs.”
“Is there no court of appeals ? ” I asked.
“Yes, such an abused man or woman can go to a Judge,”
Mr. Forest answered. “But the minor Judges are merely men
who have passed the 45th year of age and have been appointed
to such a position for five years by the president. They—
as Dr. Leete of course told you adjudicate all cases
where a member of the industrial army makes a complaint
of unfairness against an officer. All such questions are heard
■and settled without appeal by a single Judge, three Judges
being required only in graver cases. The efficiency of industry
requires the strictest discipline in the army of labor ” —The men
appointed by the president are of course trustworthy friends of
the administration and not expected to decide in such cases
against the officers of the government, and in favor of the
“ Kickers.” And as such cases are settled without appeal,
the ill-used member of the industrial army has to go back to
his old position, where the superior whom he has accused
will certainly not treat him better than before. On the
contrary, such an officer has a first-class chance to “ get even ”
with his dissatisfied subordinate, especially at the next
regrading, when he can put him into the last class and grade,
if the unfortunate fellow is not already there. If such is
the case, the offended officer can at least assign the “ Kicker ”
to the most objectionable work.”
The picture, thus drawn by Mr. Forest, appeared so dreadful
especially when compared by me with the descriptions of Dr.


Leete, that I could not collect myself sufficiently to try an l
argument against the conclusions of my predecessor in the-
professorship of the history of the nineteenth century.
After a short pause the present janitor continued : “ Now
consider in connection with all the facts and institutions that I
have mentioned, that “the workers have no suffrage to exercise or'
anything to say about the choice ”of their superiors. “ The
general of the guild appoints to the ranks under him, but he
himself is not appointed, but chosen by suffrage among the
superintendents by vote of the honorary members of the guilds,
that is by those who have served their time in the guild and
received their discharge. So my dear Mr. West, the members-
of the industrial army are twenty-four years absolutely at the-
mercy of their superiors. If they desire to have a good time
they must blindly obey orders and seek favor by all means in
their power. They must influence their friends who have votes
not only to stand by the administration, but to do it in a
demonstrative manner. Occasional presents of wines and
cigars may secure the friendship of some of the officers.
Otherwise the member of the industrial army may lead for
twenty-four years a life, compared with which the lot of a-
plantation slave or of the poorest coal-digger 150 years ago-
would be called an enviable fate. For a plantation slave was
considered a valuable piece of property and not recklessly
destroyed, while the poorest coal-digger could leave his job and
go to some other place, until he found more suitable employment.
A member of our industrial army, who has drawn down upon
himself the ire of the officers of the administration or who is
placed on the list of the enemies of society on account of the
opposition of his voting relatives, leads a life that may be
termed as “ twenty-four years of hell on earth! ” I have
demonstrated to you now, Mr. West, why congress has no-
influence. The vast majority of its members are continually
trying to please the administration, for the purpose of securing
f.ivors for themselves, their relatives, and their friends,” said
Mr. Forest in conclusion. “ And this is the equality of the
best organisation society ever had ; this is what Dr. Leete calls
the millennium.”
CHAPTER IV.
It is in conformity with the laws of nature and, therefore,,
right that a man should push his son, his relatives and friends,
and I would not blame a man for doing this ; 1 should rather
denounce him for not doing it—always provided, of course,
that said son, said relatives or friends were qualified to fill the
positions to which they are appointed,” said Mr. Forest at our
next conversation. “ I remember that I have read in certain


books a great deal about the nepotism shown at your time f»
the distribution of tne federal patronage, and that General l
Grant was accused of always preferring his relatives and friends
in making appointments. I sympathize with that great com-
mander in the sturdiness with which he stood by his friends,
and I am inclined to excuse the mistakes he sometimes mads
in his appointments, because they were mistakes of his heart
that was always true to his friends and sometimes was inclined
to overestimate their ability, or sense of honor. If the ties of
blood and friendship are not to be considered, what else should
be ? And since a man is bound to know the character and'
ability of his relatives and friends better than the qualities of
other people, he should certainly first appoint those next to him-
to positions for which they are qualified.”
“ But the trouble with our political and social system is,
that it is bound to breed not only favoritism, but also corruption
on the largest scale. One hundred and thirteen years ago, the-
men at the head of the National Government or those who were-
influential with them were also sometimes filling places, where-
for little work a good salary was paid, with unworthy women
and men, but such sinecures were comparatively few and far
between. The number of federal officials in your days was, if
I am not mistaken about 80,000, and the postmasters of the-
small country towns, who made up the largest part of the-
-80,000 were paid such a beggarly commission for the sale of
postage stamps, that no one could afford to accept such positions-
except trades people, who kept a store, where they had to be
all day anyhow, and to whom the honor and small profits were-
an object. And then the incumbents of all the offices that
could be classed as sinecures, were changed every four or eight
years. Our administrations have a very long life. The one
ousted twelve years ago lasted twenty-six years. And the-
number of positions at the command of the government is very
large. There is one lieutenant or overseer to about each and'
every twelve men or women, not to mention the captains,
colonels, etc ; and the amount of bookkeeping done, is simply
enormous. We are keeping books as you know, I suppose, in
all the producing as Well as in the distributing departments,
and more than that: every citizen has an account in the police
hooks.”
“ When you take into consideration our great and growing
population, you can form some idea of how enormous this work
1 8. You are aware, that the North American territory, formerly
under British rule, has been annexed to the United States, and
that the population, according to the census of 1990, numbered
414,000,000, It is now estimated at 600,000,000. The com-
plicated system of bookkeeping required by the communistic'
Plan of production, and the shortness of working hoars granted
the bookkeepers, who are all preferred men and women,.


ifavorities of the members of the administration, made it
necessary, to appoint a bookkeeper for every fifty people.
Under the former administration we had one bookkeeper for
every forty-two people. This gives to the government a chanee
to provide, at its own pleasure, over 10,000,000 of men and
women with clean and easy work. Add to these 10,000,000
of positions about 10,000,000 officers of the industrial army,
from the lieutenantships up to the positions of colonel ; add
furthermore, the clerkships in the distributing places and many
other preferred positions, and you can see at a glance what an
■ enormous power the administration possesses and how tempting
■this power is.”
“ But is it not necessary for those applying for the respon-
sible position of a bookkeeper to have passed through a course
■of study in order to be qualified for such important duties ? ”
1 inquired.
“ Bookkeeping is part of the instruction in our schools,”
Mr. Forest answered, “ and the bookkeeping in the public offices
is not well done. So the responsibility, resting on the shoulders
of the favorites of the members of the administration, does not
(harass the minds of these preferred people very much. It is,
of course, impossible for an outsider to obtain an insight into
the workings of the present administration, and to know how
dhe books are kept. But when the late administration went
out of office twelve years ago, an unfathomable pool of corrup-
tion was uncovered. An inventory of the goods on hand was
taken, and it was stated that the books showed a shortage of
more than four hundred and thirty-two million dollars. The
■members of the ousted administration declared this statement
to be entirely false, that it had been “ doctored ” by the experts
•of the administration, for the purpose of casting discredit upon
the members of the old government. The accused officers
admitted that shortages were possible, for the reason, that all
the clerks whose duties it was to measure goods, were inclined
to give the people good weight and large measure, but that
these shortages would not reach the figure of $432,000,000, and
■that the deficiency could not be considered as a proof of want
■of honesty on the part of the old officers. On the other hand,
the new officers claimed, that the enormous shortages were due
to the corruption of the members and prominent supporters of
the ousted administration, who had always overdrawn their-
-accounts, and had not been charged with the goods taken out
fin excess of their credit cards.”
I asked Mr. Forest what he thought of these charges.
“ I think, they were to a large extent well founded. The
temptation under our wretched system is too great. That the
leaders should give to their relatives and next friends good
positions would not be blameworthy, if the appointees were fit
■to fill the places given to them. # But the best places, numbering


in all about twenty millions, a?e not filled with the best and
most able men. They go, so far as they are not given to the
relatives and friends of the leaders, to friends of the adminis-
tration, in order to keep the latter in power. They are given
to the sons and relatives and friends of the most active sup-
porters of the government. And even this would be tolerable,
if the favoritism stopped there, at the boundary of corruption
and tyranny. But it does not.”
“ Are yon accusing the present administration and all its
friends of corruption and tyranny ?” I asked, feeling that I
should have to end my conversations with Mr, Forest, if he
should make disparaging charges, even indirectly, against my
host.
“ I am speaking of a system and I am mentioning only such
facts and deeds as I can prove,” Mr. Forest answered, “ I am
not accusing men for any pleasure it gives me to do so. I
know that your question refers to Dr. Leete and, though it is
not a direct one, yet I will meet it squarely. I regard Dr.
Leete as one of the best and purest of men among the party-
leaders ; but he, also, is making use of the advantages that our
system offers to the men in power.”
“ Will you be kind enough to substantiate what you say ?”
I asked quietly, but sharply.
*• I will leave it to you to say, whether I am going too far in
my statement,” Forest continued. “ Did not Dr. Leete inform
you that he has been “ cherishing the idea of building a
laboratory in the large garden of his house?” And did he not
tell you that he sent for the workmen and that they unearthed
the vault in which you slept ?”
“ Indeed, Dr. Leete said that he intended to build a chemical
laboratory,” I admitted ; “ but is not the amount of his credit-
card large enough to permit him such an expenditure ?”
Forest looked somewhat amused and asked me, if I had
ever looked at the total amount the credit-card called for. I
confessed that I never had ; noticing that the style of living of
Dr. Leete was luxurious enough for anybody, I had not troubled
myself to ascertain how much the country allowed each and
every inhabitant per year.
“ Well,” said Mr. Forest, “ we will discuss the wealth of the
nation at some other time. To-day we will continue to invest-
igate the tendency of the communistic system to breed favoritism
corruption, servility and suppression of opponents.—As for Dr.
Leete, he is building his laboratory in spite of the fact, that
such an enterprise is entirely against the intention and spirit
of our institution. There is a very good laboratory of the kind
m the basement of this college, and Dr. Leete would certainly
be welcomed, if he should ask permission to experiment there
his pleasure. His influence, if nothing else, would secure
him a permit. But vanity causes him to erect a superfluous


building, which will give the Radicals a new and visible-
argument against the ruling clique.”
“ What Radicals are you speaking of ?” I asked.
“ I am refering to the radical communists who object to the-
present state of affairs, because they desire to abolish religious
services, matrimony and all personal property, institutions that
are at present tolerated. We will speak of our political parties
and their principles later. I simply desired to establish to
your satisfaction, or dissatisfaction, the fact, that Dr. Leete is
erecting for his private use and in violation of communistic
principles, a chemical laboratory, a very expensive affair, for
which the credit-cards of ten men would not pay, aud thus
challenging the criticism of all the enemies of the adminis-
tration.”
“ Cannot Dr. Leete pay a fair rent for the laboratory ? ” I
rejoined. “ I should think that the abundance of labor could
not be used to a better advantage than to erect buildings, the
rent for which will increase the income of the nation.”
“ But there is no abundance of labour as you will discover
in due time,” said Forest. “ And if you will imagine what
would happen, if every citizen should demand a similar outlay
of labor and instruments to please his notions, you will un-
doubtedly see that Dr. Leete is assuming an exceptional
position, which, not only savors of favoritism but, also, involves
an indiscreet abuse of power, calculated to create bad blood.”
could not very well refute the arguments of Mr. Forest,
and so was silent.
“ But favoritism and the occasional abuse of power for the
accommodation of men like Dr. Leete, are not the worst features
of our present form of government,” he continued, “ and the
fact that influential men frequently receive presents of silks,
furs, and jewellery for their wives and daughters, and of wine-
and cigars for themselves, from people seeking the intercession
of these powerful men, in order to procure preferred positions
for themselves or for relatives and friends, could also be borne-
although, of course, they are proofs of political corruption. But
the worst consequences of this damnable communism are tyranny
and the possibility of brutal persecution of the opponents of
the administration on the one hand, and servility, adulation
and calumny on the other. Every man and every body of men
who have gained certain advantages or occupy desired positions
will defend themselves against all attacks of their opponents.
So will political parties try to keep themselves in power by
rewarding their faithful workers and by crowding back their
opponents. It is, therefore, very dangerous to invest a great
government with arbitrary powers, which permit the rulers to
make the people dependent upon the good-will of their officers,
even in their daily occupation, all their life long.”
“ According to your description the present state of society


appears to be an unbearable condition of affairs,” I said.
“If yon inquire among the members of the different guilds,
especially among the farmers,” Mr. Forest continued, “you will
find that I am describing things just as they are. Every member
■of the industrial army knows that ability and industry alone will
■secure a desirable position only in exceptional cases, if at all;
that political influence is the almighty factor in every affair of
our lives, and that the industrial army is governed by officers
whom the worker must try to please, by personal adulation, by
presents, by a slavish devotion to the orders of their superiors,
and indirectly by inducing all the members of his family and
all his friends to support every measure and every member of
the administration. If the members of the industrial army
could elect their officers, the discipline would of course, not be
so strict, as it is now ; but even an occasional row amongst the
men would be preferable to the present state of affairs, where
everyone who happens to be unpopular with the ruling party
is leading a terrible existence. The number of suicides is
therefore becoming larger every year and is to-day four times
greater than in your times.”
“ The number of suicides in European armies 113 years ago
was very large,” I remarked thoughtfully, “ although the men
had everything they needed in the line of lodging, food and
clothing.”
"Yes,” said Forest, “the necessilies of life without liberty
are of little value. The soldiers of your time threw away their
lives, because they did not consider a life without freedom worth
living, and still their term of service lasted only three or five
years, and they had but a comparatively easy duty to perform
in times of peace. The service in our industrial army lasts, at
the best, 24 years of our life. The men and women are at the
mercy of their officers, and they can appeal against maltreat-
ment to other members of the administration only to judges
who decide definitely such cases, generally by simply sending
back the complainants to their work with an admonishment to
try to win the good will of their superiors, and thus secure
promotion.”
“ You have been speaking about politicians, Mr. Forest,” I
said. “Do many men take an active part in political life?”
“ I should say they do,” my predecessor answered. “ Many
of the men from 45 years upwards, and many women do little
else, except busy themselves with politics. They can live on
their credit-cards wherever they please, and many of them
prefer to spend their time in Washington, “hustling around ”
in a very lively fashion, trying to gain favors for their friends,
and for such people as address themselves to the hustlers. The
lobby in the hall of Congress in your days is described as a bad
crowd. But to compare it with the hustlers of our days, would
be like comparing a Sunday school with pandemonium. Million*


at people Who desire better work or promotion, and who have
nothing to hope from the influence they are able to command
at home, write to the hustlers at Washington to secure their
services.”
“ But what can the seekers of favors offer to those who live
in Washington for the purpose of gaining favors for other
people, and whom we may call the lobbyists of the twentieth
century F” I inquired. “In the present day, men do not ac-
cumulate fortunes. 1 '
“ Indeed, they do not,” answered Mr. Forest with a smile.
“ But some people desire to have occasionally a “ high time ”
and to spend five or ten times the amount of their credit-cards-
during each year. Borne of our administration leaders keep,
what we may style, a “great house.” They receive guests and
entertain them with delicacies and wine. Some of the most
prominent lobbyists do the same thing. An applicant for
favors has to give up a part or perhaps nearly all of his credit-
card, and he may look to his future subordinates for a rich
compensation.”
“ But why are people not satisfied with their legitimate
income ?” I asked, painfully surprised to see that wire-pulling
and corruption were quite as prevalent as they had been 113
years ago. “ Is*not the income a credit-card affords sufficient
to support people ?”
“ You can never satisfy the people,” Forest said. “ Nowadays
the clever and industrous part of the people feel that they are
robbed for the benefit of their lazy, awkward or stupid com-
rades, that they have to submit tj the impudence and black-
mailing of some of their superiors, or else undergo humiliating
treatment. And even the men and women of the lowest ability,
who are benefitted by our present system, are not all of them
pleased. Some of them would rather do away with personal
property and separate housekeeping. In fact, but a very small
portion of our citizens are really satisfied. —And people who are
fond of good cooking, costly meals and Havana cigars, certainly
cannot pay for such luxuries, and have to depend upon others
if they desire to enjoy them. We have in Washington, also, a
great many young women, who prefer flirtation, fine meals and
a fast life to the regular employment in the industrial army or
< he life of an ordinary good wife.”
“ Then prostitution still flourishes in Washington,” I
exclaimed with amazement.
“Indeed it does,” Mr. Forest assented. “Of course, these
girls hold clerical positions in the different departments, but
these positions are sinecures. I understand from friends who
have seen part of the secret life at the capitol, (and it is not so
very secret either) that some of the higher officials spend fifty
times the amount of their credit-cards with these women. A
part of their income is obtained from those seeking favors, who


willy-nilly give up a part of their credit-cards. «, Another part!
of the values squandered by influential persons, comes from the
public storehouse, where only a small proportion of the value
taken out by the influential people, is pricked from their credit
cards by the clerks, who are fully aware what is expected of
them, if they desire to retain their positions; for if they should-
treat the leaders of the ruling party like common laborers, they
would be degraded to class Bof their third grade. The glitter
of corruption proves attractive to many men and women, as I
have stated before, and the population of Washington, therefore,
exceeds that of any other city on the American continent.”
“ But, I cannot understand, why the people tolerate such a
corrupt and tyrannical government as you describe,” I said,
“and I am satisfied that your hypochondriac disposition is
befogging somewhat the keenness of your eyesight and the
clearness of your judgment.”
“ It is your own fault if you remain in doubt as to the perfect
correctness of my statements,” Mr. Forest said. “If you, for
instance, should desire to take a vacation for the purpose of
giving our rulers in Washington one of your enthusiastic
lectures, you will cheerfully be granted leave of absence from
your duties as professor and will be received at the capitol in
grand style. For the enthusiasm displayed by you for our
institutions, as compared with the civilisation of the nineteenth
century, will pour water on the mill wheels of our administration.
You will find the state of affairs precisely as I have described
them to be, and by conversing with the rank and file of the
supporters of the administration, you will find that they are
upholding the present state for the reason that they despair of
their ability to improve public affairs, and because they are
afraid of a rule still worse, under the radicals.”
“How could a state of public affairs be worse than tire one
you have pictured to me in your conversations,” I exclaimed.
“ Many people are afraid that the Radicals would prohibit
marriages and would force free love with all its consequences
upon the people. In fact, the radical newspapers—the only
sheets that speak out boldly against the administration and
strike from the shoulder—are denouncing religion, marriage,
separate housekeeping and the limited amount of property
people are permitted to own.”
“But, how can the tone of the Radical press be reconciled
with your statement that the administration is treating its
opponents so badly ?” I asked. “If it is the custom of the
government to confine its opponents in insane asylums, why are
the Radical newspapers permitted to advocate such abominable
principles ?”
Mr. Forest laughed and replied : “The Radical editors are
favored exceptions. They are doing good service for the
in scaring the mass of the people into submission.


“Whenever an election of generals of the guilds is near at hand.
The Radical press is permitted to howl to the best ability of its
editors. Then, a few days before the election, the administration
organs copy extracts from the rabid and nonsensical utterances
of such papers, and ask the people, if they desire that kind of
government, urge the voters to stand by the administration
which can, of course, not please everybody in all points, bub
which is the best any people on earth ever had, and so forth ad
■ infinitum,
“ Then the Radical editors are simply tolerated as bugbears,
while the more moderate writers are not permitted to oppose
the administration ?”
“Exactly,” rejoined Mr. Forest. “But lam afraid, the
■government is playing a very dangerous game. The Radicals
are undoubtedly gaining ground and have amongst their
'followers very desperate men, who may at any time raise the
'black flag of destruction. If we had a free and independent
people, the danger would not be so great. Then the masses of
■free men would rally to the defence of their beloved institutions.
But as matters now stand, the masses are accustomed to sub-
mission under a rule of a minority, and the determined uprising
of a body of desperate men would find but a comparatively
small number of citizens ready to fight for the present order of
things. And it will be a bad day for humanity, when the
Radicals come into power.”
“ But, you said that about twelve years ago the government
lost an election. That shows, that it can be beaten in a square
fight, and you further said that the present rulers are better
citizens than the men that formed the last administration.”
“ There is certainly some improvement, but it is nothing
very remarkable. It amounted in substance, to a change of
men, but not to a change of system. Favoritism, corruption and
prostitution have decreased somewhat, but they have not been
.stamped out. They still flourish. People who were very
enthusiastic at the time of the election and hoped for a clean
and popular administration, have now lost all confidence, that
under the communistic rule there can be such a thing as a just
government. In substance, it has been, as I said, merely a
change of personalities and, therefore the confidence of the
people in the prevailing system has been destroyed. Con-
sequently, the change has actually done more harm than good.
The strongest and most reliable element to-day in favor of good
government is the farming population; but although the farmers
are very numerous, they represent one guild only. They have
but one general and one department chief, and are outvoted by
the representatives of the other guilds. And on account of the
opposition of the farmers to the administration they are not
■ treated as well as the members of the other guilds.”


“ Do they not receive the same credit cards as other people ? ”
I queried.
“ They do, but they complain that they receive the poorest
goods, and that their share of public improvements and benefits
is comparatively small; and whenever there is a chance to
discriminate against their representatives, that chance is not
lost. The farmers would be the most reliable opponents to the
Radicals, but the treatment they are receiving from the adminis-
tration, has created so much dissatisfaction amongst the farming
population, th&t we cannot count upon them in a fight for the
maintenance of the present system or the present government.
To give you an instance of the discrimination against the
farmers, I will mention the erection of music halls, theatres and
■other places of evolution, recreation and amusement. It is, of
course, impossible to build a theatre or a concert hall at every
■country crossroad, but the number of such public places erected
in the cities, is entirely out of proportion to those erected in the
•country towns and villages. The administration relies for its
support; upon the city people, upon such guilds as are recruited
from the population of the cities, and, therefore bends all its
energies to benefiting them. Then there is another thing to be
taken into account. The nation is frequently left with small
lots of goods on its hands, through changes of taste, unseasonable
weather and various other caases. These have to be disposed
of at a sacrifice, and the loss charged up to the expenses of the
business. These goods the administration can dispose of at any
time when it chooses to claim that the best prices can be realised.
The members of the administration are also judges as to what
goods are to be sold at.a sacrifice. It has been charged by the
representatives of the farming population that such of these
goods as are of poor quality are largely given out to farmers,
while other things that are in first-class condition are disposed
•of in the storehouses of the cities, at reduced prices, and that in
such instances favoritism and corruption are coming in. I do
not care to endorse all the complaints our farmers make. They
may lack foundation to a great extent, but they prove the
•existence of a deep dissatisfaction, and such charges could
simply not be made if our administration were not clothed with
power hitherto unheard of in the history of mankind. It is
the system itself that breeds all these evils.”
l ' Have you not, besides the radical and the administration
parties, other organisations fighting for the control of the
government?”
“ We have the temperance people who have organised them-
selves : but they are - simply striving within the administration
party to secure the control of the government. The adminis-
tration does not discriminate against the members of this
organization. It gives them a chance to do their very best, but
so far they have not succeeded in making much headway.’


" I notice that you are not giving the present system of
society much credit for anything done under its auspices.
Don’t you think that the abolition of absolute poverty, the
elevation of all men and women to a standard at least nearly
equal, is a great and priceless gain to humanity ? I remember
too well the inexpressible sufferings of some of the poor people
of my days, and while I am not sufficiently familiar with the
present state of society, to endorse or to contradict your
statements, yet 1 prize the abolishment of poverty so high, that
I still cling to the hope, in spite of your arguments to the
contrary, that the present form of society and of production
may overcome all the difficulties inseparable from all human
efforts and institutions.”
“My dear Mr. West, I am glad to see you using now in your
last remarks in defence of communism the same arguments the-
defenders of the old form of production used against the com-
munists of your days. This simply proves two facts, viz.: that
nothing is perfect under God’s sun, and that every form of
government is forced to admit this. The abolition of absolute-
poverty could have been accomplished as I can and will prove
later on, beyond a reasonable doubt, without a descent into
communism and the terrible consequences of this worst system
of production. The fact, that the members and the officers of
the administration may at their pleasure, treat the friends of
their opponents, members of the industrial army, like slaves ;
that even the friends of the government’s opponents who have
gained comparatively good positions, can be placed in the second
class of the third grade at the yearly regradings, and that
favoritism is shown to all friends of the administration, has
caused adulation, servility, columny and corruption, and there-
was never a time in the history of the Saxon race when there-
were in public business and social life so little independence
and manhood among the citizens. When two hundred and
thirty years ago England tried to levy a tax upon tea, the
Americans rose up in arms, because they would not permit the
government to collect a tax unless it granted to the Americans
representation in the parliament which imposed this tax-
To-day the government controls the labor of all men and women
for twenty-four long years, without giving the flower of the
American people a chance to cast a vote, which shall shape the
form and policy of the government in conformity with the
wishes of those who produce the wealth of the nation. This
state of slavery which never existed before in the history of
civilized nations, can not last many years longer. It will go
down in an ocean of blood. For as the German poet Schiller
says; Fear not outrages from free men; but tremble when
■laves break their chains.”


CHAPTER V.
From a heaven of peace and joy, from an ideal state inhabited
by good people only, Forest had thrown me into a deep dark sea
of pity and doubt.
Dr. Leete and his family noticed, of course, the disturbed
state of my thoughts, and while the doctor was evidently wait-
ing for me to bring about a discussion of social problems, Edith
was anxious to console me. She seemed to think that the
strangeness of my surroundings and of my present position was
depressing me.
I carefully avoided an explanation. I had resolved to con-
tinue the conversation with Mr. Forest, but to form a clear
opinion of my own by examining into the actual state of things,
and thus find if the real facts bore out the statements of Dr.
Leete or those of Mr. Forest. Therefore on my way to and
from the college I strolled along the streets and conversed with
all the people I met. I noticed with some surprise that every-
body was reserved, yes even shy, when I commenced to ask
about the administration of public affairs, about the principles
underlying our form of government, about the behaviour of the
officers, the management of the storehouses, and whether the
people were satisfied and pleased, or not.
Hardly ever did I meet an expression either of cheerful con-
tentment, or of decided dissatisfaction. Only a few Radicals
expressed themselves in strong language against the present
state of things and against the leaders of the country, and a few
women said that they did not like the work in the factories at
all. But, although people were very reserved in the expression
of their feelings and thoughts, I became convinced that content-
ment is as rare a flower in the garden of communism as it was
in the United States of 113 years ago. The abominable
language used by the Radicals against the highest officers of
the country could not, of course, convince me that the latter
were guilty of the charges preferred. Bur I could not elicit
from any other man or from any other woman of the rank and
file of the industrial army a defence of the accused men. They
evidently did not care to antagonize any body when they were
not called upon by one of their superiors to stand by the ad-
ministration.
Thus, I was forced to the conclusion that communistic rule
did not create the universal happiness I expected to find after
my conversations with Dr. Leete. But I was inclined to think
that people lived well enough, without great cares, neither on
the one hand particularly content with their lot, nor on the
other inclined to change their system of production. And it
seemed to me that most of the people were rather dull and did


not take much interest in anything. One day when I reached
the house of Dr. Leete after one of my promenades through the
streets of Boston, as I entered the hall, I heard a very loud con-
versation in one of the rooms. The first words that arrested
my attention, spoken in a deep voice, trembling with emotion,
were : “ Miss Edith has encouraged me to repeat my visits.”
“ We are always glad to see you here, Mr. Fest,” Dr. Leete
replied. “We have all invited you.”
“Yes, you have; but you understand very well what I mean,”
the deep voice continued. “ I have called here so frequently
and have to-day asked Miss Edith to become my wife, because
your daughter has encouraged my hopes to win her love. And
now I am coolly informed that I have made a great mistake,
and I feel my suspicion confirmed that this Bostonian of the
nineteenth century, dug out by you from his grave in your
garden, is the man whom Miss Edith prefers to all others, even
the one she encouraged until a few days ago.”
“ Mr. Pest, I wish you would respect the civilization of the
twentieth century with more dignity when you are speaking of
my daughter and of my guest,” said Dr. Leete with some emo-
tion in his voice.
“ Of course I must preserve my dignity when I have been
fooled by a base flirtation for over a year, and make the dis-
covery that the girl I love is to marry a man 143 years old, in
preference to me,” Mr. Fest said in deep bitterness and some-
what sneeringly.
“ How can you utter such cruel and untrue words,” Edith ex-
claimed with angry excitement. “Never has the thought en-
tered my mind that your feelings towards me, your friend for
over ten years, were anything but brotherly affection.”
“ It is time to end this conversation,” interposed Dr. Leete,
“ after the explanations given, Mr. Fest undoubtedly feels that
our relations cannot be continued.”
“Of course, our relations cannot be continued,” cried Mr.
Fest in a rage. “I leave you now, and give you, now and here,
fair warning that I shall not enter your house again as a friend.
If I ever come again, it shall be as an enemy to be avenged for
the destruction of my happiness and the peace of my heart.
Beware of that day ! ”
“ The reckless manner in which this man addressed Edith
and her father aroused my anger, and, entering the room, I
said: “Please save your cheap pathos for amateur theatricals
and leave this room at once.”
The man before me was about six feet three inches tall, with
broad shoulders and two heavy fists. He looked down upon me
with an ironical glance and said: “ I will spare you this time,
old man, but the next occasion that you indulge in impudent
language, I will put you in a bag and dump you into Massa-
chnssetts Bay.”


Before I could answer this pleasing threat, Mr, Feat had left
the room and the house.
“Who is this man ?” I asked, turning to Dr. Leete, with no
attempt to conceal my displeasure.
“ He is a machinist, a very clever man in his trade and a
captain in the industrial army,” explained the doctor. “His
parents lived next door and when he was a little boy he used to
play with Edith.”
“ If I were to judge the social manners of the officers of the
industrial army by the experience of this hour, I should have
to say that civilization has moved very slowly and rather back-
ward than ahead.” I remarked.
“It is an extraordinary case of atavism,” said Dr. Leete.
“ Such hotheadedness is very rare in our days.”
I did not care to begin now a conversation that might have a
very unpleasant termination. But I could not repress the
thought that 113 years ago the manners and morals were such,
that lines were drawn between the two sexes that were invisible
but still recognized by every one having a little sense of pro-
priety, and that a man would hardly have felt as if he had been
encouraged, if it were not the case. I entertained not the
slightest doubt that Edith had behaved as well as any girl of
her time. It was the consequence of the tendency to equalise
everything that had, perhaps, effaced to a certain degree the
fine lines existing 113 years ago between good women and men.
I remember my question put to Dr. Leete: “And so the girls
of the twentieth century tell their love?” and the doctor’s
answer: “If they choose. There is no more pretence of a con-
cealment of feeling on their part than on the part of their
lovers.” Yes. if girls tell their love just as men do, then the
fine lines between the two sexes must be obliterated, and a feel-
of uneasiness and repulsion took possession of me.
“ It may become necessary to place Mr. Fest, at least for a
few months, under medical treatment,” remarked Dr. Leete
thoughtfully. “He is certainly in a high state of excitement,
and it is not unlikely he may commit a rash act which he would
repent afterwards.”
“ One hundred and thirteen years ago we would have placed
such a man under bonds to keep the peace.” I said, consider-
ing with terror the idea that a man should be placed in an in-
sane asylum for uttering a few rash words.
“ And if, in violation of his bond, he committed a breach of
the peace,” said the doctor, “ what did you then do with such a
man ?”
“We punished him according to the laws covering the case,
either by imprisonment or by a fine, or in cases of murder, ly
putting the criminals to death.”
“We place a man in whom atavism makes its appearance in
a hospital where competent physicians take care of him until


they consider him sufficiently cured to be released,’’ said Dr.
Leote with an expression of great satisfaction and kindness, as
he lighted a fresh havana cigar.
“ I think you are running no great risk, papa, if you allow
that man to attend to the duties of his position,” Edith re-
marked. “He is quick tempered and hot-headed; but he will
soon become composed.”
“I am not so sure about that,” Dr. Leete said slowly. “ I
remember that he has always shown deep strong feelings when-
he has set his heart upon anything. He may, and he may not,
calm down. It is dang'erous to take any chances with such a
man.”
Conflicting statements and ideas filled my heart and head.
I felt that if I continued the conversation it might end in a
conflict with Dr. Leete, and I was in no mood to engage in any
discussion with him. So I excused myself on the plea of a bad
head ache, and left the house to take a walk.
The experience of the past few hours did not savor much of
the millennium. Here was a man holding the rank of an officer
of the industrial army, and roughly and rudely accusing Edith
of flirtation. His behaviour certainly did not correspond with
the high praise Dr. Leete gave to the culture and education of
the young people of the twentieth century. At all events this
conflict between Eest and the family of Dr - Leete demonstrated
that contentment is not secured to humanity by the simple in-
troduction of communism, by securing for everybody lodging,
clothing, and a sufficient quantity of good food. Envy and
jealousy threaten our love, and Mr. Fest seemed to be just the
kind of a man to make his displeasure felt. The manner in
which Dr. Leete proposed to prevent a rash act of the enraged
lover appeared to me even more disagreeable than the prospect
of a personal encounter with Mr. Fest. And again the question
arose before my mind whether Edith Bartlett, my fiancee of
1887, would ever have given a man an opportunity to accuse
her of flirtation or to assert that she had encouraged him to de-
clare his love.
When I met Mr. Forrest after my next lecture, 1 remarked :
“ I understand the girls of the twentieth ceutury are somewhat
of the style that we would have called emancipated.”
With a short but sharp glance at my pale face which testified
that 1 had passed a sleepless night, Mr. Forest replied : “ The
mad endeavor to equalize the variety,, established by nature,
has not spared the relations between women and men. Both
sexes belong to the industrial army, both have their own officers
and judges, both receive the same pay. The queen of your old-
fashioned household has been dethroned. We take our meals
in great steam-feeding establishments, and if our Radicals, who
are in fact the local communists, are victorious, we will all live
together in lodging houses accommodating thousands of people.


Marriage will be abolished, together with religion and all
personal property free love will be proclaimed and we will live
together like a flock of rabbits. The natural sense of propriety
which is a distinguishing quality of the finer sex, fortunately
prevents most of our women and girls becoming victims of the
low and degrading theories of communism. But the real girl
■of our period is a very remarkable although by no means agree-
able specimen. Do you know Miss Cora Delong, a cousin of
Miss Edith Leete F”
“ I have not the pleasure.”
“ You will not escape her,” Mr. Forest predicted with a
•smile of amusement. “Miss Cora is very enthusiastic over the
absolute equality of women and men. And since some of our
young men are courting their young lady friends, Miss Cora
■thinks it but fair and proper that she should court some of the
.young men. She does not hesitate to tell them that she admires
their good looks, that she loves them; she asks them for kisses,
invites them to a drink—just as young men talk to young girls
and just as they invite them to have a plate of ice cream.—She
smokes cigars and plays billiards with her male friends, and is
doing all she can to “ equalize ” the sexes. And Miss Cora as
well as the other “girls of our period” complains very loudly
that she cannot abolish all the differences between woman and
-man.”
“I am not very anxious to make the acquaintance of Mias
Cora Delong,” I confessed. “And I agree with yon from my
own personal experience that the old style of housekeeping is
very agreeable. I would prefer it. But do not the women of
the twentieth century lead a more comfortable life than even
the wealthy ladies of my former days F And are you not
getting more toil out of the women than we did F Dr. Leete
says you are.”
“ Dr. Leete is a great optimist whenever communism is
■discussed,” answered Mr. Forest. “It is, of course, impossible
to state with any degree of certainty, how much the girls and
women of the year 1887 produced. But I doubt very much the
statement of your host that we are getting a great deal more
toil out of our women than you did.”
“ The separate cooking, washing and ironing at the end of
the nineteenth century must have caused a great deal more
work than the present way of doing these things,” I remarked.
“ And Dr. Leete said ; There is no housework to be done.”
“This is one of the many wild statements of Dr. Leete,” Mr.
Forest answered. “ Who is sweeping the rooms, making the
beds, cleaning the windows, dusting the furniture, scrubbing
the floors ? I have no doubt that Dr Leete’s family is an
exception, because women of the industrial army do a great
■deal, if not all, this work is the house of the leader of the
•administration party. Have you ever seen Mr. Leete or Miss


Edith doing’ any housework of the kind I have mentioned r 1”
I had tp confess that I never had, and, indeed, Miss Edith
had never done anything except arrange a bunch of flowers.
If she were a member of the industrial army, it must be in a
capacity, where there was but very little work to do. She had
never mentioned that she had duties to perform, and I remem-
bered that Dr. Leete had once spoken of his daughter as an
indefatigable shopper, thus indicating that she had much spare-
time.
“ In the houses occupied by the rank and file of our indust-
rial army the women have no help from other members of the
auxiliary corps (the women of the industrial army). These
women have to do all the work I have mentioned, and for them
the cooking in the public eating houses is not such a great help-
as Dr. Leete seems to believe,” began Mr. Forest. “ These
women have to change their dresses three times a day, for they
cannot appear at the table in the wrapper they wear while
working at homo, and they have to wash and dress their
children, if they have any. And lam inclined to believe that
by having the cooking done in the public eating houses, a great
deal of material is squandered that would be saved in a private
house. Besides, the public cooking houses have to prepare a
large bill of fare, and there is, as a matter of course, a great
deal left over that cannot be used afterwards.—Therefore the
women who are members of the industrial army find actually
very little time to do any work besides the labor connected with
housekeeping, and the majority of them would rather do the
cooking at home. They could do it while busy with their
housework, without losing more time than the dressing and
undressing for breakfast, dinner and supper consume. And the
complaint has frequently been made that families with many
children would fare much better, and the mothers of such
families save much time if the cooking were done at home.
When there is sickness in the family, it is very annoying to the
healthy members to be obliged to go to the eating houses to
procure proper food for the invalid. A Mrs. Hosmer said to-
me the other day, she and her seven children had frequently
missed a meal, because she could not wash all her little ones
and dress herself and the children in time.”
“ How do you employ the married women ?” I asked.
“ This is a very weak point in our social system,” Mr, Forest
replied. “ Most of the married women do not at all relish
doing outside work, and they make all kinds of excuses to avoid
it. Trouble with their children and personal indisposition are
frequently used as excuses for the absence of married women
from their positions in the industrial army.”
“ I suppose it is very difficult, even for the physicians, to
ascertain whether such statements are well founded or not,” I
remarked.


“ Of course, in the majority of cases it is impossible to make-
file charge of shamming and prove it,” Mr. Forest continued.
“ It is this trouble with the married women, and their excuses
that their small children prevent them doing any duty in the-
industrial army, that the radical Communists are using in
support of their demand for the abolition of private housekeep-
ing. The Radicals claim that their system would be more
prosperous than ours. It would be much cheaper to lodge
hundreds or thousands under one roof, than to have houses for
one, two or three families. They furthemore claim that if
marriages were abolished and free love introduced as the
principle governing the relations of the two sexes, the passing
alliances of men and women would produce better children than
the offspring of the present marriages. These children would-
be kept and nursed, after they had passed their first year, in
large nurseries, so that the mothers would have nothing to dc
with them and could attend all day to their work as members
of the industrial army.”
“ How beastly are these theories !” I exclaimed. “To
establish all human institutions, the relations of the sexes,
simply on a basis of calculation, and to separate the mothers
from their children, because it is cheaper to raise two hundred
mammifers by the bulk even if the mortality should be ten and
twenty per cent larger ! ”
“ But the Radicals are the logical Communists,” Mr. Forest
said. “ The fundamental principle of communism is equality.
You can base the demand for the equal division of the producte-
of labor on that principle of equality only, and if we are all
equal, then there is no reason why we should live in houses of
different architecture, why we should wear different clothing,,
why we should have a variety ©f meals, why one man should not
have just as good a right to the love of a certain girl as any and
all other men, and why one girl shoul not have just as fair a
claim to the love of any man she may select as any other girl
has. And there is no reason why one baby should have more
care than another and why one mother should spend more time
on her child than another, thus perhaps losing time that would
have enabled her to make herself useful by peeling a plate of
potatoes. The Radicals are the only Communists.”
“ But every girl can not love all the men, and every man can
not very well love all the girls,” I objected, somewhat amused
by the grim humor displayed by Mr. Forest, although my
deep disgust for the abominable brutality preached by the-
Radicals prevented real merriment.
“ Our radical reformers have never been able to explain to-
my entire satisfaction how the principle of free love should be
regulated, if regulated at all,” Mr. Forest answered. “ Some
of them seem disposed to grant permission to live together, so
lorg as both parties like each other. But the more radical and


'logical communists object to the stability ot an institution as
incongruous with the spirit of institutions based on the prin-
ciple of absolute equality. Perhaps they favor the choosing of
a, new partner every day, and in order to place both sexes on
•equal footing they would give the right of choice to the women
-on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, and to the men on the
other three week-days, leaving the Sundays in addition to the
ladies. And to avoid strife, when a number of reformers de-
mand the love of the some girl, or when more girls than ore
■fall in love with the same man, they could draw lots or could
raffle for the first chance, thus doing justice to all.
“ It is inconceivable,” I said, “ that men, proudly considering
•themselves the crown of creation, or if they do not believe in
'God, at least considering themselves intellectual free-thinkers,
can breed in their brains such horrid theories. I should deplore
•the fate of womanhood if these theories should ever become
victorious, if free love in this damnable form should ever be
(proclaimed ; or if the nursing and education of children should
•"be taken away from the mothers and entrusted to others.”
“ I should consider it the most terrible blow ever aimed at
humanity if the nursing and the first education of the young
•children should be transferred from their mothers to other pei-
sons. No women and men, however good they may be, can feci
the love and the patience for a child that fills a mother’s heart.
The ties that bind men and women together, marriage and the
'family, are institutions which even our communistic Solons have
'SO far respected. Humanity is doomed to barbarism on the day
family life is broken up, when mothers are separated from their
children, when men are alienated from the constantly elevating
influence of good women, when the relations of men and women
are stripped of that sublimity conferred upon matrimonial life
toy the permanent exchange of feelings and thoughts, when
then these relations are degraded to nothing but sexual inter-
course. Nearly all our good qualities can be traced back to
the influence the unfathomable love and patience of the mother,
in her efforts to make her beloved child good and true, have
exercised upon our minds and hearts. Nearly all great men
had good mothers. There is nothing on earth that can com-
pensate a child for the loss of its mother, or that could in-
demnify humanity for the loss of the beneficial influence
mothers have on the growing generation.”
“Do you suppose that your Radicals will ever have power
enough to dethrone the mothers and abolish matrimonial life?”
I asked, with great curiosity.
Mr. Forest’s reply to this question sounded very cheerful and
confident, more so than anything he had thus far uttered in my
presence.
“ The Radicals may rise and overthrow the present govern-
ment, they may change many things,” he said, “ and they may


■not meet with much resistence, because the great mass of the
people simply tolerate the present rule, have no love tor it, and
will not rally to its defence. But the experience of our Radicals
will be very unpleasant when they attempt to separate man and
wife, mother and child. Almost every mother will fight like a
lioness before she will give up her children, and I know one
man who does not care a straw for the overthrow of the present
government hut who would fight to his death before he would
yield to a separation from his spouse. For a good and loving
wife always has been, is, and always will be the greatest bless-
ing of God, and no man of honor and courage will permit any-
body to rob him of her ! ”
CHAPTER VI.
“Now, Mr. Forest,” I said when I again met my predecessor
.as professor of the history of the nineteenth century, “ please
tell me how much is the average yearly income of every
inhabitant of the United States of America P”
“ The average yearly income was figured up to be $204-,” Mr.
Forest answered.
“ Two hundred and four dollars you say. Is that allp” I
queried with astonishment. “ I expected from the statements
■of Dr. Leete and his style of living that it amounted to at least
three times that sum.”
Forest smiled. “ How much was the average income of the
people of the United States in your days ? ” he asked.
I was forced to admit that I had not the faintest idea.
“ It was $165,” said Mr. Forest, “ or about twice the average
amount earned by the people of Germany or France.”
I was perplexed. I had never looked into the statistics of
national economy. I had spent about twenty times $166 every
year. I remembered having read in the papers of my time that
the average yearly earnings of the working men, working
women and children were over four hundred dollars, and I was
inclined to estimate the average yearly income at about sir
hundred dollars. I stated this to Mr. Forest.
“ You have left out of your calculation the women arid chil-
dren who were not earning anything, but who depended upon
the income of their husbands, fathers, and brothers,” Mr. Forest
•explained. “An income of two hundred and four dollars for
every man, woman and child would, therefore, represent a large
increase, if the figures were fairly given. But they are not
correct. In order to make the income of the nation appear
greater than it really is, the value of the various productions is
quoted higher than in your days. Consequently, the
purchasing power of every dollar or our credit-cards is less
than that of the dollar of your time. I have carefully com


pared the prices of all the necessities and commodities as they
are now and as they were in your time, and I have found an in-
crease of about 95 per cent. The real average yearly income of
all the people of our country is about one hundred and twelve
dollars, so there is not an increase of about 24 per cent., but a
decrease of 33 per cent.”
“ How do you account for this remarkable statement ?” I in-
quired.
“ That is a question easier asked than answered,” replied Mr.
Forest.
“ I am very curious to hear your explanation,” I remarked.
“ Dr. Leete has given me so many plausible reasons for the
“ poverty resulting from our extraordinary industrial system ”
that I was quite convinced of the greater wealth of your people.
He mentioned the frequent wrong speculations of the nineteenth
century, the insane competition, the periodical overproductions
and consequent crises, the waste of idle capital and labor, and
he especially dwelt upon the point that four or five enterprises
of the nineteenth century failed where one succeeded.”
“ Yes, I know Dr. Leete’s arguments from occasional speeches
be has made, and from articles he has written for the adminis-
tration organs,” Mr. Forest responded. “And he has un-
doubtedly mentioned many other causes that crippled the
production of your days. He has, or he may have, pointed to
the expenditures for your army and navy, to your custom and
revenue officials, to the tax-assessors and collectors you employ-
ed, to the larger number of judges, sheriffs and other officers
you needed, to the greater amount of labor made necessary by
domestic washing and cooking, to the large number of middle-
men needed in handling goods before the articles made their
way from the factory to the retail store, the latter correspond-
ing to our storehouses. And Dr. Leete has or may have, mentioned
the lawyers, bankers and their clerks who were nominally
engaged in work that was really not done, and which has all
been done away with to-day”.
“ Indeed,” I said, “ Dr. Leete has enumerated most of these
causes of the poverty of our days, and, since these evils have
been abolished under your system of production, I think it would
be simply a matter of course that the total yearly income of your
people should have increased, and I wonder that the increase is
is not even greater than you have stated it to be.”
“ I will not waste much time in investigating all these points
and ascertaining how great was the loss thus inflioti-d on the
production of the nineteenth century,” Mr. Forest continued.
“But you seem to be inclined to overestimate their effects.
Unlucky speculations, for instance, caused sometimes heavy
losses to the speculator, but in most cases they produced values
that benefitted others and increased the wealth of the nation.
The ‘ insane competition ’ made goods cheaper, thereby stimnl


ating both production and consumption and not harming, but
on the contrary to a certain extent benefitting humanity. The
statement that four or five enterprises failed where one succeed-
ed is a ‘ licentia poetica ’ of which Dr. Leete makes free use.
You must know yourself that it is a gross exaggeration.
The saving from the employment of steam-cooking we have
already investigated. If there is any, it is small in the cities
and smaller still in the country districts, and offers no compen-
sation for the loss of comfort involved. Furthermore we take
into consideration that many of the men engaged as judges,
lawyers, bankers, officers, middlemen, or clerks were over forty-
five years or under twenty-one, so that you would have to deduct
them from the force that you have to consider as a loss to the
industrial army.”
“Still, these misplacements of capital and labor, these losses
in various ways were enormous,” I insisted, “and they account
for the greater poverty of the people of the nineteenth century,
compared with the inhabitants of the United States in the year
2000.”
“ They would, undoubtedly,” Mr. Forest argued, “ if there
were no other reasons for a decreate of our production. But
there are causes as you will readily see, when I point them out.
The principle reason why both the quality and the quantity of
our production are constantly abating, is the abolishment of com-
petition. Competition was the gigantic motor that caused nearly
everybody during the first nineteen centuries of Christian
civilization to use all his mental and physical powers to “get
ahead.” Since the introduction of communism, since the good
workmen are robbed of a part of the products of their labor for
the benefit of the poor workers, and since everybody is sure of
an equal share of all the necessities and commodities of life, no
matter how much or how little he produces, the masses of the
people are becoming more and more indifferent. They are not
putting forth their best efforts to furnish much and good work.
They are taking life easy. Their mental and physical ability
has decreased. The people of the United States, once famous
for their energy, are degenerating. Promotion might have
acted as a spur, had not favoritism of the politicians monopolized
all good positions for the tools of the administration.
“ The second reason for the decrease of production is tho
shortening of both the years and the hours of work. It is
difficult to ascertain how many persons of different ages were
employed in your time in productive labor. The census of the
United States government taken before you went to sleep for
one hundred and thirteen years, the census of 1880 is in many
respects a very creditable work but it does not give the ages of
the persons who then formed the industrial army. The report
is very elaborate as to the number of persons of all ages, their
nationality, and so forth. But in regard to the age of the


workers it only gives three classes, one comprising all the persons
under 15 years of age, another, all persons between 16 and 69,
and the third, the number of employees of 60 years and over.
Of the people under 15 years of age, 1,118,356 were employed,
of the men and women over 60 years 933,644 were males and
70,873 females. The whole industrial army of your day
numbered, out of an entire population of 60,165,783, not less
than 17,392,099, only 2,647,157 being girls and women, includ-
ing the servant girls.”
“ I remember reading some of these figures,” I remarked.
“ The census of 1880 thus shows that over 12 per cent, of
the population of the United States belonging to the industrial
army were under 15 and over 60 years of age,” Mr. Forest con-
tinued. “ This is, of course, a very bad showing. Girls and
boys under 15 years of age should certainly belong to the schools,
while people over 50 years ought to have permanent rest and a.
good living. But there can be no doubt that the working-force
at the close of the last century was comparatively larger than
ours. According to the census of 1880, there lived in the United
States 15,527,215 persons of the age, that would make them
to-day members of our industrial army. You employed there-
fore, 2,173,184 more persons than your whole population between
the ages of 21 to 45 numbered, and this calculation figures, that
all the people of that age are really active. You must consider
the fact, that many of our population who are of the age, when
they ought to do work in the industrial army, are excused from
service for various reasons, for instance : permanently sick
people, the weak-minded, cripples, mothers of babies, etc. You
must, therefore, recognize that your people furnished a much
stronger working-force than does our generation.”
“ I guess we did,” I admitted, convinced by the figures
quoted by Mr. Forest.
Drawing a piece of paper from his note book the gentleman
continued: “ Here is a list of all the avocations you may call
unproductive, taken from the census of 1880. 1 have given
every point, which seems contrary to my views, the benefit ol
the doubt. I have embraced all the trades, professions and
occupations Dr. Leete himself could fairly claim as non-produc-
tive in this compilation, though a good many of the people
engaged in them were, at least, saving time for members of the
producing classes. Many men and women of your time would
not have been able to produce pictures and works of art, or tc
sing in operas and so forth, if it had been impossible for them
to secure help in housekeeping. Now, in your day, the year oi
our Lord 1880, the people engaged in the occupations, trades
and professions that Dr. Leete would call non-productive, num-
bered 1,654,319 including all the servants. Deducting these
1,654,319 from the 2,173,084 persons under the age of 15 and
over 60, there still would be a surplus of 518,765 women and


men of your time over the number of people, that would belong-
in our days to the industrial force.”
“ Your figures are correct, as far as you state them,” I said,,
desirous to encourage Mr. Forest to proceed with his argument.
“ So you had, undoubtedly, in 1880 a surplus of productive
persons above the age that would place them in our industrial
army, which amounted to over one per cent, of the population,
and to over three per cent, of persons at the age where they,
to-day, would have to be members of the industrial army, even
if we deduct all the persons from the working force whom a
man like Dr. Leete would classify as non-productive. Now,,
deduct, furthermore, all our ladies occupied by their duties as
mothers, before and after the birth of their children, deduct all
the persons permanently sick, all the cripples and all the other
people unable to do productive work, and you will have to admit
that you had in your days a comparatively much larger force
engaged in productive labor than we have. Consider, that
these people were stimulated by competition, that they desired
to establish themselves on an independent basis, that they put
forth their best efforts, in order to secure a life free from care
during their old age, and that, therefore, the years of productive
labor of each individual were much longer than they are at
present, and that the stimulus to succeed was a potent fact in
obtaining more and better work than we can secure nowadays.
“ That I will admit,” I answered.
“And the working hours to-day are much shorter than they
were at the end of the nineteenth century,” proceeded Mr.
Forest with an expression on his face -like that of a victor in a
gladiatorial fight. “The natural tendency of an organization,
of society like ours is in that direction. And there are many
reasons to encourage such a tendency. I have mentioned already
that the farmers are complaining of the small number of
theatres and concert halls and other amusements and advantages
for country people, which city people enjoy to the full. The
consequence of this is, that the country people flock to the cities..
'The nation would have suffered from a want of agricultural
products if all the people crowding into the large cities had been
accepted. But they were not welcomed. They were appointed
to farm work. That settled their desire to live in the cities,
and at the same time destroyed their ambition. The country
people are satisfied that they cannot improve their lot, that they
have to do farm work and that the city people are imposing
upon them. The consequence is that they are working as little
as possible, and the farming products have decreased to such an
extent that we have to appoint city workmen of class B of the
third grade to farm work, in order to protect the city people
from starvation.”
“ Say your worst,” I remarked with a forced smile, for I saw


Dr. Leete’s beautiful structure crumbling under the fire of Mr.
Forest’s artillery of logic.
“You have seen,” Mr. Forest continued' “ that the industrial
army of 1880, engaged in productive labor, was, in proportion,
much larger than ours, that the members were stimulated by
'Competition to use their best mental and physical efforts to
‘ get ahead,’ and that they worked longer hours than we do.
You must, furthermore, consider that we squander a greater
amount of labor in overseering and bookkeeping than you ever
did. Most of your retail business was transacted on the cash
basis, and the small tradespeople did their own bookkeeping
after closing their stores and shops. We, on the other hand,
■have an account for every man, woman and child in the country
in the books of the national administration. We have a bureau
which keeps an account of the visits of all the physicians. We
have another bureau where you can secure help for housework
as well as for other purposes, where accounts are kept, both of
■the helpers and of the people who demand help. We have
bureaus for each industry and they are excellent examples of
the most thorough manner in which a government can waste
■human labor. The entire field of productive and constructive
industry is, as you know, divided into ten great departments,
each representing a group of allied industries, each particular
industry being in turn represented by a subordinate bureau,
which has a complete record of the plant and force under its
control, as well as of the present product and the means of
increasing it. The estimates of consumption of the distribution
■department (an organization independent of the great product-
ive departments) after adoption by the administration, are sent
as mandates to the ten great departments which allot them to
the subordinate bureaus representing the particular industries,
and these set the men to work. Each bureau is responsible for
■the task given it, and the responsibility is enforced oy depart-
mental supervision and that of the administration ; nor does the
distribution department accept the products without its own
inspection, while, even if in the hands of the consumer, an article
turns out unfit, the system enables the fault to be traced back
•to the original workman.”
“ This amount of overseering and bookkeeping, by which
the government can trace back to the original workman a bad
pin or a poorly rolled cigar, enables the administration to pro-
vide for its favorites many desirable places, but it certainly
lessens the productive power of the industrial force, thus, again,
decreasing the production. And at the same time the number
of consumers is larger than in your days.”
“ How do you account for this ?” I inquired.
“ Has not Dr. Leete informed you that persons of average
constitution usually live to be from eighty-five to ninety j ear#
-old r


“ Indeed, he has.”
“ This accounts for an increased number of consumers who
all draw their full share of the products of labc r in the form of
a credit card,” Mr. Forest continued. “ Our people live longer
than your contemporaries did. They take life easy, and while
the spirit, the energy and the enterprise of our generation are
gradually decreasing and degenerating, their bodies last longer.”
“Ah? now at last you are admitting one gain,” I ex-
claimed.
“Ifit is a gain, I do,” rejoined Mr. Forest. “ But even the
favored members of our industrial army do not seem to consider
it a very valuable acquisition. Because the only way to secure
a desirable position is to sacrifice their own independence and
that of their relatives and friends, and even to employ base
means of corruption, downright bribery of their superiors with a
part of their own credit cards, many of the favorites of the ad-
ministration are, in fact, enemies of the leaders.”
After a short pause Mr. Forest concluded his arguments.
“ I suppose I have successfully demonstrated that our organiz-
ation of society, with its pretended basis of human equality has
proved to be a failure, that there prevails to day an inequality
in many respects more oppressive than that of your time, that
favoritism and corruption are about as potent under our com-
munistic rule as they were at the end of the nineteenth century,
that personal liberty is almost entirely destroyed, that the
members of the industrial army, without having the right to
vote at the election of their superiors, are at the mercy of their
officers, that the members of the industrial force who are con-
sidered enemies of the government are leading a life that very
properly may be styled as twenty-four years of hell on earth,
that since the abolishment of competition the people are mentally
degenerating for want of intellectual exercise, and that not
even a greater wealth is a consolation for the loss of the greater
liberty and independence the people enjoyed in your time. The
shortening of both the years and the hours of productive labor,
the abolition of competition and the increase in the number of
consumers have reduced the average daily income of the in-
habitants of the United States to such an extent that the amount
inscribed upon our credit card is so small, that it affords only a
very frugal living to the people of the twentieth century. And
there is no doubt in my mind that a continuation of the present
system for a few hundred years more would so degrade and
degenerate the people that a relapse into barbarism would
ensue.”
CHAPTER VII
“ Yon have given me your ideas and objections in regard to
the present state of affairs,” I commenced my next conversation


with Mr. Forest, “ you have expressed, occasionally, your con-
viction that the organization of society at the end of the last
century needed reformation. Will you, now, kindly state how
you would have reformed the evils of my time ?”
Mr. Forest smiled. “I do not pretend to be a reformer who
can perfect mankind or even all human institutions. Please do
not forget that we are all cooking with water. What many
people style the social question is insolvable. The variety es-
tablished by nature will always be felt. You can never create
conformity. We will always have smart and stupid, industrious
and lazy people. The clever women and men will not submit
to an equal distribution of the product of labor, nor feel satisfied
under such a state of legal robbery. And if the results of labor
are distributed according to the ability of the workers the
people earning less than others will always grumble. It is,
therefore, impossible to make all men content with their lot,
no matter how you may distribute the earnings of the working
force But the fact that it is impossible to make everybody
absolutely happy does not release us from the obligation to use
our best efforts toward improving the lot of mankind.”
“ I understand your position. But let me hear what reforms
you would have inaugurated or proposed, if you had lived at
the close of the last century.”
“ The society of your day suffered chiefly, said Mr. Forest,
“ from unsystematized production, the monopolies that made possible
the amassing of immense fortunes at the expense of the people, and
the leant of intelligence on the part of the workers who would either
submit to these extortions or strike, instead of forming mutual pro-
ducing associations. Another great evil was the injustice of your
taxation. In all the fields of human activity the workers produced
values without a clear knowledge of what was really required.
There was, generally, such a surplus of the products of farming
that the farmers had to sell everything so cheap that they could
hardly earn a living. Some factories worked day and night until
the markets were overstocked with goods. Then these goods were
sold at any price obtainable, sometimes below cost. Numerous
bankruptcies followed, the factories had to stop their work, and the
manufacturers as well as the working women and men had to suffer
from a term of idleness until the surplus of goods was exhausted
Then a feverish activity commenced again.”
“ How would you have remedied this evil ?” I asked.
“ A national bureau of statistics should have ascertained
both the average yearly consumption and the capacity of the
different trades and their plants for the production of the
necessites of life.”
” Should the government have given to each trade an order
for the work to be done during the year ?” I queried, “ and
how should the trades have divided such an order among the
members so that all would be satisfied ?”


“ The National Government should simply have ascertained
the amount of the yearly consumption of the various articles,
the capacity of the respective trades for furnishing such articles,
and should then have left the regulation of production to the
members of each trade. Such an arrangement would have
given each trade a clear idea of its task. The chosen represent-
atives of each trade could have subdivided the work. A heavy
overproduction would easily have been prevented, while com-
petition both among the factories and the individual members
would have been maintained, thus securing the best kind of
work, while under the present system of production we are
suffering from a want both of quantity and quality.”
“ But if any trade should have produced more goods than
needed,” I objected.
“ That would have been its own fault, and it would, as a
matter of course, have had to stand the consequences,” Mr.
Forest replied.
“ But, suppose, the members of a certain trade had formed a
trust, thereby forcing the people to pay exorbitant prices for
the products of their guilds ?’ I objected again.
“ A national law should have protected the people against
an attempted robbery of this kind, threatening all guilty parties
with confiscation of all their property and with the operation of
all the plants by men hired by the administration, until the
plants comld be sold to operators. The importation of the
respective goods from other countries would cover the deficiency
until all the plants were again in full operation.”
“ But how would yon have stopped the frequent strikes of
our days ?” I asked.
“By encouraging the workmen to start mutual producing
associations,” Mr. Forest answered. “ I have mentioned already
how mutual producing associations could easily have been started.
A dozen tailors or shoemakers conld have rented lofts with steam
power, purchased a few sewing and other machines and sold their
products directly to other workmen, thus securing the profits of the
manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer and workman, or in ether words
all the profit that was in the labor of the members of the association.
There was no law in your time to forbid such enterprises or to pre-
vent all other workmen from buying their boots, shoes, clothing,
furniture and all other articles from such associations soley. As
soon as the manufacturers noticed that all the laborers were com-
mencing to deal with mutual associations they would gladly have
sold their plants at a very fair price, and yet cheaper than a new
association could have procured them. I imagine there was very
little pleasure in conducting a factory or any other business
having many employees in 1887, judging from the frequent
strikes that made it almost impossible for many business men
to figure on prices six months ahead, or to close contracts. There-
fore, the owners of factories would, I fancy, have sold their


plants at very fair prices. And the workmen could not have
done a smarter thing than to cause the former manufacturers
to remain with them as business managers at a fair salary.
This would have secured a smooth running of the concern.
Under such an arrangement the workers would have become
the owners of the business concerns, paying for them in install-
ments, they would have secured full pay for their work, and the
former owner would have disposed of all his former cares r
receiving a fair compensation for his plant and his services.”
“ I think that most of the manufacturers and businessmen
of my days were so worried by the constantly increased demands
of their employees, that they would have gladly sold their
property,” I remarked, “ but what would have become of the
wholesale and retail dealers ?”
“ They could hare sold their goods and have either joined
the producing associations as salesmen, or gone into another
business,” Mr. Forest replied. “ And in a similar way the
workmen of your time could have organized one trade after
another, until the entire manufacturing industry had been based
on large guilds, the latter consisting mostly of mutual producing
societies.”
“ But our workmen preferred to avoid the responsibility,
care and risk of business enterprises. They would rather have
worked for wages and, occasionally tried to increase them,
sometimes by striking and preventing other laborers taking
the places of the strikers,” I said. “ You are aware of this state
of affairs ?”
“Yes,” Forest answered, “ and it must have been a sad
spectacle to see intelligent men who could just as well have
been independent, remain journeymen, trying to bulldoze their
Employer to pay them more than he volunteered, and to intim-
idate other workers from performing duties at a rate of wages
that would have satisfied them. The fact that your workingmen
did not possess sufficient enterprise, mental discipline and
independence, to establish mutual producing associations, has
driven humanity into communism. That this damnable form
of society is a failure is a matter of course, When humanity
was at so low a standard that shoemakers had not spunk or
smartness enough to start and run the shoeshops on a co-operat-
ive basis, and tailors could not manage tailorshops on a similiar
plan, it was simply impossible to make successful an organization
which had the power to regulate all production and all con-
sumption. But the principle of mutual productive associations
is, in my opinion, the one best adapted for the solution of the
labor question, because it secures for the members of the
associations the pay for the full real value of their labor and
keeps alive competition, the strongest factor in securing the
progress of mankind. But whether we shall ever reach this
solution of the labor question seems doubtful.”


“ I am inclined to believe in jonr plan,” I admitted, “ so far
as laborers engaged in manufacturing establishments are
concerned. But how would you have organized the work on
the farms, the employment of professional men, railroad officials
and laborers, employees on streetcars, merchants and bankers
and their clerks and those who follow many other avocations ?”
“ Let us go slowly,” Mr. Forest answered with a smile.
“ Let us first look into the agrarian question. Reformers of
society have always met the greatest difficulty when they came
across the farmers. Under communistic rule the country people
have but very little love for the soil they are tilling because
they know it is not theirs, that their toiling does not benefit
them, and they feel that the city people are favored at their
expense. If I had been asked at the end of the last century
how I would treat the land question I would have advocated a
law ordaining that no farmer should have more than forty acres
of land. If any farmer had more at the time of the passing of
the bill he could keep it during his lifetime, but he would be
compelled to dispose of it in his last will, so that a single person
should not receive more than forty acres. On a forty acre piece
a farmer can make a fair living, and although the farmers were
by no means prosperous in your days, yet there was still a fair
prospect for the increase of the value of land by reason of the
increase of the population, augmented as it was by immigrat-
ion.”
“ But how would you have proposed to stop overproduction
by the farming population through which the agricultural
interests were suffering in 1887 ?” I inquired.
“ The National Bureau of Statistics would have served the
farmers just as well as the rest of the people. The farmers
should have formed state associations and should have laid out
plans for the production according to the capacity of the farms.
And, after ascertaining that their capacity of production was far
ahead of consumption, they should have used the surplus of land
for the production of new things that could, perhaps, find a
market, or they could have saved their labor by not producing
more goods than they could sell in supplying the real demands
of the market, thus working less.”
“ Under your plan every person would not have had a right
to land,” I remarked.
“ Yes, everybody would, who could pay the price the owner
demanded for it,” Mr. Forest said. “ Not everybody can own a
farm. Did you own one ?”
“ I did not.”
“ Yery well. Under your communistic system nobody owns
a piece of ground large enough to put a stick into.”
“ How would you have regulated the professional services ?”
“By passing laws establishing rates to be charged for
professional services. And the laws I would have simplified


by doing away with the abominable confusion resulting from
the innumerable decisions forming precedents. For a long
time I did not believe it until I found positive statements to
the effect that a trading nation like the Americans, at the end
of the nineteenth century, had neither a national criminal law,
nor a national commerce law. This fact and the confusion
caused by the conflicting precedent decisions that could always
be quoted by either of the contesting lawyers in a suit must
have made the United States, in your days, a paradise for
swindlers and for lawyers who cared not so much for the
upholding of the law, as for a retainer.”
“ Such were the charges frequently made against the law
and lawyers in my days,” I said. “ But now tell me what you
would do with the railroad and telegraph employees, with—”
“Let us stop right here,” Mr. Forest interrupted. “I
would have purchased all the railroads and all the telegraph
lines of the country at a fair price. I would have issued
United States bonds to pay for them. I would have used
the income of the roads and lines to pay running expenses
and the interest on the bonds issued, and the surplus in the
United States treasury I would have applied to paying off
the bonds.”
“ Bat would not this proposition of yours, if carried into
effect, have brought about the same horrors you declare the
concentration of power in the hands of the administration
has brought down on humanity of the twentieth century ? ”
I asked.
“ No. For that the officers would not be numerous enough,”
Mr. Forest replied, “ and I remember distinctly, that in your
days, civil service reform had been instituted, to a certain extent,
in the appointment of federal officers. I have read conflicting
opinions about it. Some writers claimed a frequent change of
the officers to be a fundamental principle of republican institu-
tions. Others ridiculed this notion. Every man of common
sense would keep a man who knew and performed the duties of
his position well. And the nation should simply do the same
regardless of the party affiliations of the employee, thus securing
a good public service. I remember that letter carriers and other
employees of the post-office department could not be removed
without cause. Now, if this principle had been applied to all
clerical and subordinate officers, if all the railroad and tele-
graph officials, when the nation took charge of these institutions,
had been retained at the salaries they were receiving at that
time, so long as they did their work well, then there would have
been no trouble. Uncle Sam would have paid just as much, if
not more, than the former corporations did, and by retaining
the whole force he could have united the railroad and telegraph
lines with the postal service after the fashion already prevailing,,
at that time, in Germany.”


** That theory sounds very plausible, certainly.”
“It is very remarkable that such a smart energetic people,
trading as much as our forefathers did, should have allowed the
the principal means of commerce, the railroad and telegraph
lines, to be in the hands of private corporations which, as a
matter of course, managed them simply with a view of paying
as large dividends as possible to the shareholders, —sometimes
for a “ wheel within a wheel,” for members of the inner circle.
In the historical works of your time I frequently note ex-
pressions of astonishment and wrath because knights, during the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries in Europe, stopped merchants
passing the roads below their castles, and demanded a part of
the travellers goods as a toll, or the payment of a certain sum of
money for which they agreed either to let the merchants travel
in peace or to furnish them with protection for the rest of their
journey. These knights had to risk their lives when they under-
took to collect a toll from the merchants, for the latter not un-
frequently showed fight; they knew how to handle a lance or
a sword and they had their goods protected by armed men.
More than one of the enterprising, toll-levying knights died on
the highway, where he had tried to attach a share of the
merchant’s earnings. But the gentlemen controlling the
highways of traffic at the end of the last century could levy
new tolls, whenever they pleased. All they had to do was
to sit down in Delmonioo’s or some other good restaurant,
and over a few bottles of champagne resolve to do so. There
was no danger connected with this business of toll-levying in
your days, Mr. West, except the danger of a headache when
the champagne happened to be poor. It was a very remarkable
state of affairs, and it is a striking proof of the general fairness
and good nature of the railroad magnates of 1887 that they
treated the people as well as they did. Still, it was a ridiculous
spectacle to see the principle highways of such a business people
controlled by private corporations that virtually did precisely
what they pleased.”
“ The gas works, street railways and waterworks of cities
you would have had managed by the city authorities, I suppose? ”
I said.
“ Indeed, that is what I would have done,” Mr. Forest
replied. “ But I would first have extended the power of the
national administration over all the forest and mining lands
then in the possession of the United States. If the national
government had taken care of the remnants of the immense
forests that once covered tne larger part of this vast territory
we would not at present suffer from a lack of timber.”
“ What would you have done with the bankers and
merchants ? ”
“Nothing,” Mr. Forest answered. “The different mutual
productive associations would have needed men to manage such


business affairs as were outside the management of the factory,
attended to by the former manufacturer. For the workmen
would soon have found out that it required more than the
manual labor of the toilers to build up and run a large business
establishment And the owners of grocery stores would, if
similar establishments had been started by consuming societies,
have sold their stock on hand and secured places as managers
and clerks of the new stores.”
“ I suppose that under the system proposed by you all old-
fashioned stores would have been forced to close out,” I said,
because the different guilds would have purchased goods at
wholesale and would have sold them to their members at a low
cash price. The storekeepers that are not able to secure posi-
tions in the stores of the different guilds would have been forced
to look out for some other employment; —a rather hard lot for
many of them.”
“The change in the mode of production would not have been
sudden,” Mr. Forest explained, “but would have been brought
about gradually, thus giving the business people perhaps thirty
year’s time to let their children join guilds instead of becoming
storekeepers and traders. And there is no reason why enter-
prising merchants who had a fine taste in selecting goods,
should not have retained a large number of customers. It is
not cheapness alone that attracts buyers, and in the country,
where there were no factories, etc., close to hand, stores would
have to be kept.”
“ You said you would have passed laws preventing farmers
owning more than forty acres of land,” I said. “ Would you.
have also limited the amount of city property to be owned by
any one man ? ”
“ The possession of one house ought to have satisfied every
fair-minded man,” Mr. Forest continued. “ Nobody can deny
that the accumulation of fortunes amounting to many millions
in the hands of a few people, while hundreds of thousands
could earn hardly more than a living, was a state of affairs
which made this damnable communism possible.”
“ But how would you have been able to prevent this,” I
queried with same curiosity.
“By making the taxation on inherited property the principal
assessment fur the maintenance of the national, state and local
governments as well as the schools. I would have proposed that a
tax of one per cent, on all property inherited by a single person,
amounting upward to SIO,OOO. An inheritance amounting to
820.000 I would hare taxed two per cent., 130,000 three per cent.,
8100.000 ten per cent, $200,000 per cent., $500,000 fifty
per cent. If anybody left a fortune yielding a larger sum than
$250,000 to each heir, the surplusshouldhave been considered as an in-
come to humanity, the national, stats and local governments sharing
therein in a just proportion.”


“ Would not such a law acted as a check upon the ambition
and the enterprise of the people?” I asked.
“If I had prevented people amassing immense fortunes it
would have served » rood purpose. It would not have lessened
but protected competition,” Mr. Forest answered. Men possess-
ing twenty or fifty million dollars and using them without regard
for the rights of other people, were very dangerous. They were in a
position to annihilate their competitors, and they frequently used
their power unmercifully. Thus by increasing their millions and
by hilling competition they would be paving the way for com-
munism. And was it not unfair that a man who had amassed by
all manner of means such an enormous fortune could leave it to a
son who would continue the work of hilling competitors with smaller
means ? What could the most able man accomplish in an avoca-
tion, if he had against him a man who possessed, perhaps, very
little ability , but who was unscrupulously using his millions to at-
tain his ends ? Parents might leave their children enough to place
their dear ones beyond the reach of want but they should not enable
them to prevent the children of poorer parents having a fair show to
get ahead in life.”
“ You would have met with considerable resistance to such
a proposition in my days,” I remarked.
“ I fancy the millionaires would have objected,” Mr. Forest
assented. “Still, I think that such a law would have served the
best interest of both the children of rich parents and humanity in
general. Nothing but a law of this kind could have stemmed the
tide of communism and anarchy. A child inheriting $250,000
ought to be satisfied with his lot and ought to let the surplus go to
the defraying of the expenses of the government. By sacrificing
a part of their enormous fortunes, the heirs would have saved the
rest, and would have weakened the communistic tendency of your
days. And it appears more than doubtful to me whether the
possession of such enormous properties made these wealthy people
good, or even happy and contented.”
“ If such a law had been passed in 1887 most of the million-
aires would have converted their property into cash, and
emigrated to Europe,” I objected.
“ I suppose they would have done so,” Mr. Forest admitted.
“ But I am nevertheless, convinced that a law of this kind would
not only have been just but that it would have done a great
deal to save humanity from communism. Civilized countries
would have been obliged to pass a similar law at the same
time.”
“ The temptation to avoid the consequences of the statute
would have been very great,” I remarked. “ Many people
would have tried to evade the tax by declaring to the authorities
a smaller amount of property than they really owned, or by
presenting during their life time, a part of their fortune to their
children.”


“ Any attempt at fraud should have been punished hy a
confiscation of all the property,” said Mr. Forest. “ And as for
gifts they could have been taxed at the same rate as inheritances
from one per cent, up to fifty. —But such a law would have been
necessary only during the first fifty or sixty years of a new order
of things. As soon as mutual producing associations were in
sreneral operation, selling their goods directly from the factories
ro the consumers, and buying all the necessities of life and com-
modities, as far as possible, at wholesale, and selling them a
little above cost price, there would have been little occasion for
men to amass millions of dollars. The number of middlemen
and traders would have largely decreased. Everybody would
have been compelled to do work of some kind and would have
received a compensation according to both the quantity and
quality of his performances.”
“ But would not cliques like the one you are charging with
having control of your government have taken possession of a
mutual producing association, thus depriving the clever worker*,
of a part of their earnings and paying the poorer men more for
their work than they deserved ?” I queried.
“ In such a case the good men could have left an association,
where they were cheated and joined another partnership. Good
laborers are always appreciated wherever competition rules.
But the association, thus driving away their ablest members,
would soon have been unable to compete with others. Difficul-
ties. therefore, could have been regulated without much trouble.”
“You must advocate, as a matter of course mutual insurance
companies among the guilds for the protection of the members
against accidents, sickness, infirmity and old age, and these
mutual insurance companies would, perhaps, have also written
life and fire policies ?” I suggested.
“That would, indeed, have been a consequence of the whole
system that would unite the few advantages of communism with
the benefits of competition,” Mr. Forest answered.
“ Would you have encouraged immigration ?” I asked. “At
the end of the nineteenth century, many honest, liberal and
fair-minded people, whom nobody could fairly class as know-
nothings, were of opinion that the United States had all the
foreign elements the country could assimilate, and that the rest
of the public lands should be preserved for the children of the
people living in the Union, in the year of our Lord 1887. The
objection against further immigration was largely due to the
actions of the German and Irish dynamiters.”
“ I can imagine,” Mr. Forest answered, “ that some of the
customs and notions of the numerous immigrants of your time
were objectionable to the native Americans, and that the crimes
of the anarchists, their crazy revolt against the laws of the
country that had offered them hospitality, must naturally have
created a deep emotion among the Anglo-Americans, But I


think they had, nevertheless, many reasons for encouraging
immigration, especially under your form of production. A strict
execution of the laws of the country,” he continued, after a pause,.
“ against all transgressors, native as well as transplanted, would
have done the country good and have made all attempts to restrict
immigration entirely unnecessary, all the more so, as the really
objectionable foreigners could reach the United States via
Canada or Mexico if they desired strongly to become inhabitants-
of the United States.”
“ These arguments were frequently used in my time I re-
marked.
“The comparatively small harm done by immigrants was-
largely over-balanced by the many advantages the citizens of
the United States obtained through the large influx of people
from Europe,” said Mr. Forest. “ The very fact that hundreds
of thousands of able-bodied people, whose rearing and education
had cost the European countries millions of dollars, landed on
American shores was a great gain to the United States. The
very presence of these men and women increased the value of
the lands or city lots where they settled, thus enriching the
property owners. Many of the immigrants were well trained
laborers and mechanics, others artists and scholars. All these
men and women were not familar with the ways and means of
their new country, many of them were unable to speak the
English language, and they all had, therefore, to start in the
very lowest places of American business life —thus naturally
elevating all the inhabitants of the United States in a more or less :
degree, to higher positions in life. Many of these people, coming
from all parts of Europe, were ably and well trained, and they
became successful competitors of those, who were here before-
their arrival. But the constant stream of people from Europe
to the United States was, nevertheless, steadily enriching and
elevating the American people, and all the blows aimed at im-
migration were, therefore, unwise, and the legislators who
proposed such blows remind me of the man who intended to kill
the goose that laid the golden eggs.”
“It is, of course, impossible to advance social theories to
which everybody will agree,” Mr. Forest said in conclusion. “ I
maintain, however, that all such theories should be based on two
fundamental principles. They should have as an aim the establish-
ment of a state of society, where everybody should be protected
against an undeserved poverty, where the braincancer, fear of un-
deserved poverty, should be cured; and they should preserve
competition, the power that is permanently spurring everybody to
use his best efforts to elevate himself and humanity .’


CHAPTER VIII.
When I left Mr. Forest after onr last conversation, I was
convinced, partly by his arguments, partly by my own observa-
tions, that communism had not established the millennium, as I
had first supposed, after the lectures of Dr. Leete; but that it
had degraded humanity in every respect.
1 felt that I must speak frankly to Dr. Leete about the
change in my convictions, resign my position as professor of
Shawmut College, and that this would give my life in the
■society of the twentieth century a new and unpleasant direction.
Dr. Leete had treated me with the utmost kindness, and if
I, from the commencement of our relations, refused to become
enthusiastic over communism, my amiable host, I think, would
have not only tolerated my views but would have continued his
friendship for me, provided I did not join the active administra-
tion. He might even have consented to my marriage with
Edith. But now the circumstances were such, that my change
of mind involved the most unpleasant consequences for Dr.
Leete. He had recommended me as a man especially qualified
above others to become the successor of Mr. Forest as professor
of the history of the nineteenth century. I owed my appoint-
ment solely to his influence, and there could be no doubt that
my apostacy from communism would seriously injure the re-
spect in which Dr. Leete’s advice had been held heretofore.
My host would feel this keenly. The rather sudden change in
my opinions, the consequence of my very limited knowledge
of national economy, could have no other effect upon Dr. Leete’s
family than to destroy their good opinion of me. They would
be forced to believe me a shallow, superficial, and ungrateful
man, who had changed from an enthusiastic advocate of com-
munism to such a decided opponent of this theory that I would
resign a position granted to me through Dr. Leete’s efforts,
and thus place my kind host in an embarrassing position.
And how would bldith regard my resignation of the pro-
fessorship ? She was attached to her father by a well founded
affection and esteem. Would her love for me prove strong
enough to overcome the shock my step involved ? My blind
enthusiasm for the present order of things had been heralded
all over the country by the administration organs; they had
pointed to the fact that I, a living witness of the civilization of
the nineteenth century, had become an almost fanatic advocate of
communism. The fact that I had changed my mind after be-
coming familiar with the facts and circumstances, would compel
the administration to treat me as a deceitful, unprincipled
demagogue, if not as a scoundrel. There was very little doubt
that I would be assigned to the most ojectionable work, even if
I was spared a term in an insane asylum. And how could I


ask Edith Leete, blooming like a beautiful flower in a well pro-
tected garden, the house of her highly esteemed father, to join
her lot to a man who would be regarded by most of the people
either as a superficial babbler or as an unmasked hypocrite, de-
serving his fate to be degraded to class B of the third grade.
The fear of losing the love of Edith overshadowed for a
while all other considerations, for I loved in Edith Leete, Edith
Bartlett! And the reflection that my resignation would cause
the loss of Edith to me weighed upon my mind like a night-
mare. Never in my life had I felt so distressed and miserable
as on my way to Dr. Leete’s house after my last conversation
with Mr. Forest.
For a moment I harbored the idea of ending my misery by
my own hand, but I resolved to be a man and face my fate.
So I walked to Dr. Leete’s house determined not to deceive my;
friends nor to shrink from my duty as a man of honor.
I found Dr. Leete, who generally appeared so gentle and!
composed, in a rather excited mood. He looked both careworn
and threatening. Before I could address him he stepped in
front of me and said :
“I have positive information that our mutual friend, Mr.
Fest, is plotting to incite a rebellion of the Radicals. Frequent
secret meetings have taken place during the last few days, and;
I learn that Fest intends to start the rebellion here in Boston.”
“ What means will you employ to prevent it ? ” I asked.
“ Will you call out the citizens and arrest the conspirators ? I
am at your service,” I added, very glad to demonstrate my
readiness to serve my host at least against the Radicals whose
abominable theories I hated—not to mention any dislike to
their leader.
“ I doubt very much whether it would be good policy to
appeal to the people,”replied the doctor. “Such a step would at-
tach too much importance to the conspiracy. I wish I had
placed that man Fest under medical care when be left our
house. He is the real danger of the hour. His followers do
not amount to much, but under a leader like Fest, who com-
bines a certain rude eloquence with reckless audacity and
physical power, a rebellion may become a dangerous movement.
To prevent this I have given orders to arrest the archcon-
spirator and to put him in a safe place under medical treat-
ment.”
I could not endorse this step, although it would perhaps
prove successful. I suppressed my objections, however, and
asked Dr. Leete if he could give a few minutes attention to my
own affairs, for I considered it my duty not to keep secret my
convictions any longer from Edith’s father.
With his usual kindness Dr. Leete turned to me and re-
quested me to defer the conversation until next morning if the-
delay would not be very disagreeable to me.


1 consented.
We took our places at the table in the dining room. Mrs,
Leete had sent for a light supper to the common eating house,
but none of us did justice to the meal. We all felt apprehensive.
Dr. Leete looked at his watch.
“ By this time Best ought to be in the care of the officers
■and physicians,” he said. “ I expect a report.”
After a few uneasy minutes we heard a noise in the street,
.as if a great number of people were coming up to the house.
The house door was opened, and a brawling crowd entered
the hall and pressed forward into the dining room. The mob
was led by Best, who, evidently, had just been through a hot
-fight. His woollen shirt was torn, and he swung a heavy
•butcher’s are stained with blood.
“ Here I am again, Dr. Leete,” he cried in his stentorian
-voice. “ I gave you fair warning that I would not enter your
house again as a friend. And since, you damned old hypo-
critical tyrant, you have given orders to imprison me in a mad-
house ; I have resolved that you shall die this evening. The
people of Boston shall be relieved from your tyranny.”
I seized a knife and stepping to the side of Dr. Leete, I stood
•ready to cover his body with my own.
But at this moment the mob’s attention was distracted by the
sudden appearance in the room of Borest, who jumped on the
dining table and addressed the crowd without losing a second.
“I suppose you know who 1 am,” ho said. “I am an enemy
•of this man,” and he pointed to Dr. Leete. “ Because I would
not defend this miserable administration I was removed from
my place a# professor of Shawmut College, and it was Dr. Leete
who assigned me to the position of janitor.”
“ That’s just like the miserable old tyrant,” shouted a dirty
looking fellow.
“ Therefore, I say: Down with an administration that
■strangled free speech,” continued Mr. Borest. “ Down with
tyranny! But let us not butcher this miserable old fellow. It
is not worthy of young and vigorous men like us to kill an un-
armed old creature. Let us place him in an insane asylum, where
he intended to imprison our friend Best.”
“Tea, yes, put him in a madhouse,” the mob yelled.
It was evident that Borest was trying to save Dr. Leete’s
life. My eye wandered to Edith. She was very pale but com-
posed. She had put her left arm round her father and she met my
look with an expression of sympathy. Unfortunately, Best
noticed that expression in Edith’s eyes, and his jealousy broke
forth with increased force.
“Ton damned fools,” he cried in a hoarse voice, “ dont’ you
see that this man Borest is trying to save the life of that tricky
and dangerous old tyrant ? Bnt I demand my share of the
booty : the life of Leete and his daughter.”


“ Do as you please, Bob! ” the mob yelled.
“ Leave this room, Forest,” commanded Robert Fest. “ I
have no grudge against you ; but if you stand in my way you
will have to suffer the consequences.”
“So long as I live you shall not commit murder in this
house,” Mr. Forest replied. “ You ought to be ashamed, Fest,
of a conduct so unworthy of a gentleman.”
“ Shut up you fool,” Fest screamed with rage. That hypo-
critical scoundrel, Leete, has bull-dozed the people long enough.
He must die, and if you don’t get out of our way, you will die
with him.”
A rage I had never felt before carried me away. “ What
has this old gentleman done to challenge your thirst for his
blood, you mean, cruel coward ? ” I cried and jumped at Fest,
trying to put my knife into his heart. But a dozen fists disarmed
me, while Fest commanded : “ Put that old Bostonian in a bag
and dump him in the harbor. Although not a gentleman in the
eyes of the professor I am a man of my word, and I have promised
that resurrected spectre, I would drown him like a puppy when
ever again he crossed my path.”
He lifted his axe and advanced towards Dr. Leete who
remained silent, with his grey eyes fixed upon his brutal enemy.
Once more Forest tried to save the life of the leader of the
administration, but in vain. A dirty-looking ruffian buried a
knife in Forest’s true and fearless breast, and with the words:
“We are even, Leete,” he sank to the floor. Edith struggled
with two men who had seized her arms and were trying to lead
her away when Fest’s axe descended on Dr. Leete’s grey head.
Without a murmur he fell to the ground, while Edith with a
loud cry fainted. Fest seized her around her waist.
“ She refused to be my wife,” he said with a satanic grin,
“ now she will be mine without the ridiculous ceremony of
marriage,” and while stepping to the door with Edith’s lifeless
body clasped by his left arm he said : “ Kill every friend of the
administration, boys, I will meet you at the city hall in an
hour or so.”
I made a tremendous desperate effort to shake off the men
who kept me back : I uttered a despairing cry and —awoke in
my bed, May 31, 1887. At my bedside a physician, and my
servant Sawyer had been busy for some time awakening me from
my deep mesmeric slumber. They had labored very hard until
they succeeded, but more than an hour passed before I liad gained
my ability of reasoning, and then I felt greatly relieved.
With the swiftness of lightning all the details of my
interesting but terrible dream passed through my mind. I
weighed all the arguments of Dr. Leete and Mr. Forest
carefully again, and felt delighted that I was living in the nine-
teenth century instead of in the communistic state that appeared


Federation of the "World Prize Essays. — The first series r
comprising 53 Essays written in response to Mr. Cole's invitation, is now
ready. The hook contains the Fifty-three Essays (including the Tatf
Prize Essays) selected from 650, 53 Portraits of types of nations , and an
Introduction hy E. W. Cole. Among the essayists are journalists , school
teachers, legislators , clergymen , lawyers , students , etc. It is thus a represen •
tative hook, written hy men of many shades of opinion and of every walk
life. Price 2j- in limp cloth cover.
to me now like a large penitentiary on the eve of a rebellion of
the convicts.
“ I would rather wort harder at liberty than remain idle for
a number of hours every day in a prison-like life,” I said reflect-
ively, “ for work is not an evil. And I would rather work a few
years longer and miss some commodities of life than submit to-
communistic slavery. Most of the luxuries for which we are
struggling appear most desirable so long as we do not possess
them, and we do not care much for them when they are ours.”
I resolved to use hereafter my best ability for the advance-
ment of all desirable reforms for the benefit of mankind, and to
preach contentment, the only solid basis of happiness. Felicity
is so independent of wealth, in fact glory and opulence are
almost stumbling blocks in the way of happiness. Happiness
depends largely on our acceptance of our lot. In Victor Von
Scheffers famous poem “The Trumpeter of Siickingen ” young
Werner when he parts from his beloved Margaret, as he supposes
forever, sings .
To life belongs the most unpleasant feature,
That not a rose without sharp thorns does grow.
Though love eternal stirs our human nature
Through pangs of parting we at last must go.
But Margaret is at last re-united to young Werner, she
becomes his wife, and it would have been much more in conson-
ance with the final result, if young Werner, when departing from
Margaret, had sung thus :
To life belongs this very pleasant feature,
That next to thorns the blooming roses bend,
And love eternal conquers human nature
In joy uniting lovers' in the end.
Fatbb & Kkaphob, Printers, 290-i Little Collins Street, Melbourne.


THE THREE PHILANTHROPISTS.
(Re-printed from the “North American Review”)
BY COLONEL ROBERT G. INGKERSOLL.
I.
“ Well, while I’m a beggar, I will rail,
And say there is no sin but to be rich.”
Mr. A. lived in tlie kingdom of . He was a sincere
professional philanthropist. He was absolutely certain that he
loved his fellow men, and that his views were humane and
scientific. He concluded to turn his attention to taking care of
people less fortunate than himself.
\\ ith this object in view he investigated the common people
that lived about him, and found that they were extremely
ignorant, that many of them seemed to take no particular interest
in life or in business, that few of them had any theories of their
own, and that, while many had muscle, there was only now and
then one who had any mind worth speaking of. Nearly all of
them were destitute of ambition. They were satisfied if they
got something to eat, a place to sleep, and could now and then
indulge in some form of dissipation. They seemed to have
great confidence in to-morrow —trusted to luck, and took no
thought for the future. Many of them were extravagant, most
of them dissipated, and a good many dishonest.
Mr. A found that many of the husbands not only failed to
support their families, but that some of them lived on the labor
of their wives ; that many of the wives were careless of their
obligations, knew nothing about the art of cooking, nothing of
keeping house ; and that parents, as a general thing, neglected
their children or treated them with cruelty. He also found
that many of the people were so shiftless that they died of
want and exposure.
After having obtained this information, Mr. A. made up his
mind to do what little he could to better their condition. He
petitioned the King to assist him, and asked that he be allowed


to take control of five hundred people in consideration that he
would pay a certain amount into the treasury of the kingdom.
The King, being satisfied that Mr. A. could take care of these
people better than they were taking care of themselves, granted
the petition.
Mr. A., with the assistance of a few soldiers, took these
people for their old homes and haunts to a plantation of his
own. He divided them into groups, and over each group placed
a superintendent. He made certain rules and regulations for
their conduct. They were only compelled to work from twelve
to fourteen hours a day, leaving ten hours for sleep and recrea-
tion. Good and substantial food was provided. The houses
were comfortable and their clothing sufficient. Their work was
laid out from day to day and from month to month, so that
they knew exactly what they were to do in each hour of every
day. These rules were made for the good of the people, and to
the end that they might not interfere with each other, that they
might attend to their duties, and enjoy fhemseves in a reason-
able way. They were not allowed to waste their time, or to
use stimulants or profane language. They were told to be re-
spectful to the superintendents, and especially to Mr, A,, to be
obedient, and, above all, to accept the position in which Provi-
dence had placed them, without complaining, and to cheerfully
perform their tasks.
Mr. A. had found out all that the five hundred persons had
earned the year before they were taken control of by him —just
how much they had added to the wealth of the world. He had
statistics taken for the year before with great care showing the
number of deaths, the cases of sickness and of destitution, the
number who had committed suicide, how many had been con-
victed of crimes and misdemeanors, how many days they had
beeen idle, and how much time and money they had spent in
drink and for worthless amusements.
During the first year of their enslavement he kept like
statistics. He found that he had earned several times as much;
that there had been no cases of destitution, no drunkenness ;
than no crimes had been committed ; that there had been but
little sickness, owing to the regular course of their lives ; that
few had been guilty of misdemeanors, owing to the certainty of
punishment; and that they had been so watched and superin-
tended that for the most part they had travelled the highway
of virtue and industry.
Mr. A. was delighted, and with a vast deal of pride showed
these statistics to his friends. He not only demonstrated that
the five hundred people were better off than they had been
before, but his own income was very largely increased. He
congratulated himself that he had added to the well-being Of


these people not only, but had laid the foundation of a great
fortune for himself. On these facts and these figures he
claimed not only to be a philanthropist, but a philosopher; and
all the people who had a mind to go into the same business
agreed with him.
Some denounced the entire proceedings as unwarranted, as
contrary to reason and justice. These insisted that the five
hundred people had a right to live in their own way, provided
they did not interfere with others ; that they had the right to
go through the world with little food and poor clothes, and to
live in huts, if such was their choice. But Mr. A. had no
trouble in answering these objectors. He insisted that well-
being is the only good, and that every human being is under
obligation, not only to take care of himself, but to do what
little he can towards taking care of others; that where five
hundred people neglect to take care of themselves, it is the
duty of somebody else, who has more intelligence and more
means, to take care of them; that the man who takes five
hundred people and improves their condition, gives them on
the average better food, better clothes, and keeps them out of
mischief, is a benefactor.
“These people,” said Mr. A., “were tried. They were found
incapable of taking care of themselves. They lacked intel-
ligence, or will, or honesty, or industry, or ambition, or some-
thing, so that in the struggle for existence they fell behind,
became stragglers, dropped by the wayside, died in gutters ;
while many were destined to end their days in dungeons or on
scaffolds. Besides all this, they were a nuisance to their pros-
perous fellow citizens, a perpetual menace to the peace of
society. They increased the burden of taxation; they filled the
ranks of the criminal classes; they made it necessary to build
more jails, to employ more policemen and judges; so that I, by
enslaving them, not only assisted them, not only protected them
against themselves, not only bettered their condition, not only
added to the well-being of society at large, but greatly increased
my own fortune.”
Mr. A. also took the ground that Providence, by giving him
superior intelligence, the genius of command, the aptitude for
taking charge of others, had made it his duty to exercise these
faculties for the well-being of the people and for the glory of
God. Mr. A. frequently declared that he was God’s steward.
He often said he thanked God that he was not governed by a
sickly sentiment, but that he was a man of sense, of judgment,
of force of character, and that the means employed by him were
in accordance with the logic of facts.
Some of the people thus enslayed objected, saying that they
had the same right to control themselves as Mr. A. had to con


trol himself. But it only required a little discipline to satisfy
them that they were wrong. Some of the people were quite
happy, and declared that nothing gave them such perfect con-
tententment as the absence of all responsibility. Mr. A. in-
sisted that all men had not been endowed with the same
capacity ; that the weak ought to be cared for by the strong;
that such was evidently the design of the Creator, and that he
intended to do what little he could to carry that design into
effect.
Mr. A. was very successful. In a few years he had several
thousands of men, women and children working for him. He
amassed a large fortune. He felt that he had been entrusted
with this money by Providence. He therefore built several
churches, and once in a while gave large sums to societies for
the spread of civilization. He passed away regretted by a
great many people, —not including those who had lived under
his immediate administration. He was buried with great pomp,
the King being one of the pall-bearers, and on his tomb was
this :
HE WAS THE PROVIDENCE OF THE POOR.
11.
“ And, being rich, tny virtue then shall be
To say there is no vice but beggary.”
Mr. B. did not believe in slavery. He despised the institu-
tion with every drop of his blood, and was an advocate of
universal freedom. He held all the ideas of Mr. A. in supreme
contempt, and frequently spent whole evenings in denouncing
the inhumanity and injustice of the whole business. He even
went so far as to contend that many of A’s slaves had more
intelligence than A. himself, and that, whether they had intelli-
gence or not, they had the right to be free. He insisted that
Mr. A. philanthropy was a sham; that he never bought a
human being for the purpose of bettering that being’s condition;
that he wont into the business simply to make money for him-
self ; and that his talk about his slaves committing less crime
than when they were free, was simply to justify the crime com-
mitted by himself in enslaving his fellow men.
Mr. B. was a manufacturer, and employed some five or six
thousand men. He used to say that these men were not forced
to work for him ; that they were at perfect liberty to accept or
reject the terms; that, so far as he was concerned, he would
just as soon commit larceny or robbery as to force a man to
work for him. “Every laborer under my roof,” he used to say,
“ is as free to choose as I am.”


Mr. B. believed in absolutely free trade; thought it an out-
rage to interfere with the free interplay of forces ; said that
every man should buy, or at least have the privilege of buying,
where he could buy cheapest, and should have the privilege
of selling where he could get the most. He insisted that a man
who has labor to sell has the right to sell it to the best advan-
tage, and that the purchaser has the right to buy it at the
lowest price. He did not enslave men —he hired them. Some
said that he took advantage of their necessities; but he
answered that he created no necessities, that he was not re-
sponsible for their condition, that he did not make them poor,
that he found them poor and gave them work, and gave them
the same wages that he could employ others for. He insisted
that he was absolutely just to all; he did not give one man
more than another, and he never refused to employ a man on
account of the man’s religion or politics; all that he did was
simply to employ that man if the man wished to be employed,
and gave him the wages, no more and no less, that some other
man of like capacity was willing to work for.
Mr. B. also said that the price of the article manufactured
by him fixed the wages of the persons employed, and that he,
Mr. 8., was not responsible for the price of the article he manu-
factured ; consequently he was not responsible for the wages of
the workmen. He agreed to pay them a certain price, he tak-
ing the risk of selling his articles, and he paid them regularly
just on the day he agreed to pay them, and if they were not
satisfied with the wages, they were at perfect liberty to leave.
One of his private s lyings was: “The poor ye have always with
you.” And from this he argued that some men were made poor
so that others could be generous. “ Take poverty and suffering
from the world,” he said, “ and you destroy sympathy and
generosity.”
Mr. B„ made a large amount of money. Many of his work-
men complained that their wages did not allow them to live in
comfort. Many had large families, and therefore but little to
eat. Some of them lived in crowded rooms. Many of the
children were carried off by disease; but Mr. B. took the ground
that all these people had the right to go, that he did not force
them to remain, that if they were not healthy it was not his
fault, and that whenever it pleased Providence to remove a
child, or one of the parents, he, Mr. 8., was not responsible.
Mr. 8., insisted that many of his workmen were extravagant;
that they bought things that they did not need ; that they
wasted in beer and tobacco money that they should save for
funerals ; that many of them visited places of amusement when
they should have been thinking about death, and that others
bought toys to please the children when they hardly had bread
enough to eat. He felt that he was in no way accountable for


this extravagance, nor for the fact that their wages did not give
them the necessaries of life, because he not only gave them the
same wages that the other manufacturers gave, but the same
wages that other workmen were willing to work for.
Mr. B. said, —and he always said this as though it ended the
argument, —and he generally stood up to say it: “ The great
law of supply and demand is of divine origin; it is the only law
that will work in all possible or conceivable cases; and this
law fixes the price of all labor, and from it there is no appeal.
If people were not satisfied with the operation of this law, then
let them make a new world for themselves.”
Some of Mr. B.’s friends reported that on several occasions,
forgetting what he had said on others, he did declare that his
confidence was somewhat weakened in the law of supply and
demand ; but this was only when there seemed to be an over-
production of the things he was engaged in manufacturing, and
at such times he seemed to doubt the absolute equity of the
great law.
Mr. B. made even a larger fortune than Mr. A., because
when his workmen got old he did not have to care for them,
when they were sick he paid no doctors, and when their
children died he bought no coffins. In this way he was relieved
of a large part of the expenses that had to be borne by Mr. A.
When his workmen became too old, they were sent to the poor-
house ; when they were sick, they were assisted by charitable
societies; and when they died, they were buried by pity.
In a few years Mr. B. was the owner of many millions. He
also considered himself as one of God's stewards ; felt that
Providence had given him the intelligence to combine interests,
to carry out great schemes, and that he was specially raised up
to give employment to many thousands of people. He often
regretted that he could do no more for his laborers without
lessening his own profits, or, rather, without lessening his fund
for the blessing of mankind —the blessing to begin immediately
after death. He was so anxious to be the providence of pos-
terity that he was sometimes almost heartless in his dealings
with contemporaries. He felt that it was necessary of him to
he economical, to save every dollar that he could, because in
this way he could increase the fund that was finally to bless
mankind. He also felt that in this way he could lay the
foundations of a permanent fame —that he could build through
his executors, an asylum to be called the “ B. Asylum,” that
he could fill a building with hooks to be called the “B.
Library,” and that he could also build and endow an institu-
tion of learning to be called the “B. College,” and that in addi-
tion, a large amount of money could be given for the purpose of
civilizing the citizens of less fortunate countries, to the end


that they might become imbued with that spirit of combination
and manufacture that results in putting large fortunes in the
hands of those who have been selected by Providence, on
account of their talents, to make a better distribution of wealth
than those who earned it could have done.
Mr. B. spent many thousands of dollars to procure such legis-
lation as would protect him from foreign competition. He did
not believe the law of supply and demand would work when
interfered with by manufacturers living in other countries.
Mr. 8., like Mr. A , was a man of judgment. He had what
is called a level head, was not easily turned aside from his pur-
pose, and felt that he was in accord with the general sentiment
of his time. By his own exertions he rose from poverty to
wealth. He was born in a hut and died in a palace. He was
a patron of art and enriched his walls with the works of the
masters. He insisted that others could and should follow his
example. For those who failed or refused he had no sympathy.
He accounted for their poverty and wretchedness by saying:
“ These paupers have onlv themselves to blame.” He died
without ever having lost a dollar. His funeral was magnificent,
and clergymen vied with each other in laudations of the dead.
Over bis dust rises a monument of marble with the words:
HE LIVED FOE OTHEES. |
111.
“ But there are men who steal, and vainly try,
To gild the crime with pompous charity.”
There was another man, Mr. C., who also had the genius for
combination. He understood the value of capital, the value of
labor; knew exactly how much could he done with machinery;
understood the economy of things ; knew how to do everything
in the easiest and shortest way. And he, too, was a manu-
facturer, and had in his employ many thousands of men, women
and children. He was what is called a visionary, a sentimen-
talist, rather weak in his will, not very obstinate, had but little
egotism; and it never occurred to him that he had been selected
by Providence, or any supernatural power, to divide the pro-
perty of others. It did not seem to him that he had any right
to take from other men their labor without giving them a full
equivalent. He felt that if he had more intelligence than his
fellow men he ought to use that intelligence not only for his
own good but for theirs; that he certainly ought not to use it
for the purpose of gaining an advantage over those who were
his intellectual inferiors. He used to say that a man strong
intellectually had no more right to take advantage of a man


weak intellectually than the physically strong had to rob the
physically weak.
He also insisted that we should not take advantage of each
other’s necessities; that we should not ask a drowning man a
greater price for lumber than you would if he stood on the
shore; that if yon took into consideration the necessities of your
fellow man, it should be only to lessen the price of that which
you would sell to him, not to increase it. He insisted that
honest men do not take advantage of their fellows. He was so
weak that he had not perfect confidence in the great law of
supply and demand as applied to flesh and blood. He took
into consideration another law of supply and demand: he knew
that the workingman had to be supplied with food, and that his
nature demanded something to eat, a house to live in, clothes to
wear.
Mr. C. used to think about this law of supply and demand
as applicable to individuals. He found that men would work
for exceedingly low wages when pressed for the necessaries of
life; that under some circumstances they would give their
labor for half of what it was worth to the employer, because
they were in a position where they must do something for wife
or child. He concluded that he had no right to take advantage
of the necessities of others, and that he should in the first place
honestly find what the work was worth to him, and then give
to the man who did the work that amount.
Other manufacturers regarded Mr. 0. as substantially in-
sane, while most of his workmen looked upon him as an ex-
ceedingly good-natured man, without uny particular genius for
business. Mr. 0,, however, cared little for the opinions of
others, so long as he maintained his respect for himself.
At the end of the first year he found that he had made a
large profit, and thereupon he divided this profit with the
people who had earned it. Some of his friends said to him
that he ought to endow some public institution ; that there
should be a college in his native town; but Mr. C. was of such
a peculiar turn of mind that he thought justice ought to go
before charity, and a little in front of egotism and a desire to
immortalize one’s self. He said that it seemed to him of all
persons in the world entitled to this profit were the men who
had earned it, the men who had made it by their labor, by days
of actual toil. He insisted that, as they had earned it, it was
really theirs, and if it was theirs, they should have" it and
should spend it in their own way.
Mr. C. was told that he would make the workmen in other
factories dissatisfied, that other manufacturers would become
his enemies, and that his course would scandalize some of the
greatest men who had done so much for the civilization of the


world and for the spread of intelligence. Mr. C. became ex-
tremely unpopular with men of talent, with those who had a
genius for business. He, however, pursued his way, and
carried on his business with the idea that the men who did the
work were entitled to a fair share of the profits ; that, after all,
money was not as sacred as men, and that the law of supply
and demand, as understood, did not apply to flesh and blood.
Mr. 0. said : “ I cannot be happy if those who work for me
are defrauded. If I feel I am taking what belongs to them,
then my life becomes miserable. To feel that I have done
justice is one of the necessities of my nature. Ido not wish to
establish colleges. I wish to establish no public institution.
My desire is to enable those who work for me to establish a few
thousand homes for themselves. My ambition is to enable them
to buy the books they really want to read. Ido not wish to
establish a hospital, but I want to make it possible for my
workmen to have the services of the best physicians —
physicians of their own choice. It is not for me to take their
money and use it for the good of others or for my own glory.
It is for me to give what they have earned to them. After I
have given them the money that belongs to them, I can give
them my advice —I can tell them how I hope they will use it;
and after I have advised them, they will use it as they please.
You cannot make great men and great women by suppression.
Slavery is not the school in which genius is born. Every
human being must make his own mistakes for himself, must
learn for himself, must have his own experience; and if the
world improves, it must be from choice, not from force; and
every man who does justice, who sets the example of fair deal-
ing, hastens the coming of universal honesty, of universal
civilization.”
Mr. C. carried his doctrine out to the fullest extent, honestly
and faithfully. When he died there was at the funeral those
who had worked for him, their wives and their children. Their
tears fell upon his grave. They planted flowers and paid to
him the tribute of their love. Above his silent dust they
erected a monument with this inscription:
HE ALLOWED OTHERS TO LIVE FOE THEMSELVES.
“ Whoever to-day feels in himself that there is a better standard
of life than the higgling of the market, and a juster standard of wages
that ‘ what A. or B. will take,’ and a more important question is an un-
dertaking than ‘ how much per cent, it will pay,’ contains or conceals in
himself the germs of a new social order.” — Kdw. Carpenter.


WHERE MUST LASTING PROGRESS BEGIN ?
(Re-printed from " The Arena")
BY ELIZABETH CADY STANTON.
To the calm observer there is nothing more impressive in
society to-day than the varied and multitudinous associa-
tions for the amelioration of human poverty, ignorance, and
crime; and nothing more depressing than the seeming immense
waste of force scattered in these innumerable directions with
results so intangible and undefined. From all the discussions
we hear in the halls of legislation, and on the popular platform,
on the relations of capital and labor, finance, free trade, land
monopoly, taxation, individualism, and socialism, the rights of
women, children, criminals, and animals, one would think that
an entire change must speedily be effected in our theories of
government, religion, and social life, and so there would be if a
small minority, even, honestly believed in these specific reforms.
But alas ! our reading minds are yet to be educated into the
first principles of social science ; they are yet to learn that our
present theories of life are all false. The old ideas of caste
and class, of rich and poor, educated and uneducated, must
pass away, and the many must no longer suffer that the few
may shine. Our religion must teach the brotherhood of the
race, the essential oneness of humanity, and our government
must be baaed on the broad principles of equal rights to all. A
religion that seeks to make the people satisfied in their degraded
conditions, and releases them from all responsibility for its
continuance, is unworthy our intelligent belief, and a govern-
ment that holds half its people in slavery, practically chained
where they are born, in ignorance, poverty, and vice, is un-
worthy our intelligent support.
The object ot all our specific reforms is to secure equal
conditions for the whole human race. The initiative steps to
this end are :
I. Educate our upper classes, our most intelligent people,
into the belief that our present civilization is based on false


principle?, and that, the ignorance, poverty and crime we see
about us are the legitimate results of our false theories.
2. They must he educated to believe that our present con-
ditions and environments can and will be changed, and that as
man is responsible for the miseries of the race, through his own
knowledge and wisdom the change must come. To-day, men
make their God responsible for all human arrangements, and
they quote Scripture to prove that poverty is one of His wise
provisions for the development of all the cardinal virtues. I
heard a sermon preached, not long ago, from the text: “The
poor ye have always with you,” in which the preacher dwelt on
the virtues of benevolence and gratitude called out on either
side. Poverty, said he, has been the wise schoolmaster, to teach
the people industry, economy, self-sacrifice, patience, and
humility, all those beautiful virtues that best fit the human soul
for the life hereafter. “ Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven.” Thus the lessons of submission and
content have been sedulously taught to oppressed classes, in the
name of God, with fair promises of heaven to come.
The rich must be taught that they have no right to live in
luxury while others starve. The poor must be taught that they,
too, have inalienable rights on this green earth, the right to life,
liberty and happiness, and to the fruits of their own industry,
and it is the imperative duty of each class to concede the one
and demand the other. The apathy and indifference of the
masses in their degraded conditions are as culpable as the pride
and satisfaction of the upper classes in their superior position.
As the only hope for the lasting progress of the race and a
radical reform in social life lie in the right education of children,
their birth and development is the vital starting-point for the
philosopher. A survey of the various unfortunate classes of
society that have hitherto occupied the time and thought of dif-
ferent orders of philanthropists, and the little that has been
accomplished in our own lifetime, to go no farther back gives very
little encouragement for this mere surface work that occupies so-
many noble men and women in each generation. In spite of all
our asylums and charities, religious discussion and legislation,
the problems of pauperism, intemperance, and crime are no
nearer a satisfactory solution than when our pilgrim fathers
landed on Plymouth Rock, in search of that liberty in thought
and action denied in the old world. The gloomy panorama of
misery and crime moves on, a dark picture in this young
civilization.
If we would use the same common sense in the improvement
of mankind that we do in the ordinary affairs of life, we should
begin our work at the foundations of society, in family life, in
parenthood, the source and centre of all these terrible evils


whose branches we are trying to lop off. A family, living in an
old house, on unhealthy ground, with water in the cellar, a
crumbling foundation, the beams like sponge, the roof leaking,
the chimney full of cracks, would not spend large sums of money
year after year, generation after generation, in patching up the
old house on the same old spot, but with ordinary wisdom and
economy, they would build anew, on higher ground, with strong
foundations, soundtimber, substantial chimneys, and solid roofing.
True, they would patch up the old at as little cost as possible,
merely to afford them a shelter until the new home was built.
And all our special reform work to-day is but patching the old,
until with a knowledge of the true laws of social science we can
begin to build the new aright. There is much surface work we
must do in reform, for decency’s sake, but all this patching up
of ignorant, diseased, criminal, unfortunate humanity is tem-
porary and transient, effecting no radical improvement anywhere.
The real work that will tell on all time and the eternities, is
building the new life and character, laying the foundation-stones
of future generations in justice, liberty, purity, peace and love,
the work of the rising generation of fathers and mothers at this
hour. Those of us who have long since passed the meridian of
life, can give yon the result of our experience and researches
into social science, but with the young men and women of this
hour rests the hope of the higher civilization which it is possible
for the race to attain through obedience to law. The lovers of
science come back to us from every latitude and longtitude, from
their explorations in the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms,
from their observations of the planetary world, bearing the same
message. “All things are governed by law,” while man himself
who holds in his own hand the key to all knowledge and power
seems never to be in unison with the grandeur and glory of the
world in which he lives. The picture of struggling humanity
through the long past is not a cheerful one to contemplate.
What can be done to mitigate the miseries of the masses ? This
thought rests heavily and with increasing weight on the hearts
of all who love justice, liberty and equality. The same law of
inheritance that hands down the vices of ancestors, hands down
their virtues also, and in a greater ratio, for good is positive,
active, ever vigilant, its worshippers swim up stream against the
■current. Could we make all men and women feel their
individual responsibility in the chain of influences that tell on
all time, we could solemnize in our own day such vows for
nobler lives as to make this seeming herculean work light as the
wings of angels. If, henceforward, all the thought, the money,
the religious enthusiam dedicated to the regeneration of the race,
could be devoted to the generation of our descendants, to the
conditions and environments of parents and children, the whole
face of society might be changed before we celebrate the next


centennial of our national life. Science has vindicated our right
to discuss freely whether our ancestors were apes ; let it be as
free to ask whether our posterity shall be idiots, dwarfs, and
knaves, and if not, by what change, if any, in our social institutions,
such wretched results may be avoided. Gatton, in his work on
“ Heredity,” says our present civilization is growing too
complicated for our best minds even to grasp, and to meet
successfully the issues of the hour, humanity must be lifted up
a few degrees, as speedily as possible. And where must this
radical work begin ? The best hope for the progress of the race
in political, religious, and social life lies in the right birth,
education, and development of our children. Here is the true
starting-point for the philosopher.
Let the young man who is indulging in all manner of
excesses remember that in considering the effect of the various
forms of dissipation on himself, bis own happiness or danger, he
does not begin to measure the evil of his life. As the high
priest at the family altar, his deeds of darkness will inflict
untold suffering on generation after generation. One of the
most difficult lessons to impress on any mind is the power and
extent of individual influence ; and parents above all others
resist the belief that their children are exactly what they make
them, no more, no less; like produces like. The origin of ideas
was long a disputed point with different schools of philosophers.
Locke took the ground that the mind of every child bom into
the world is like a piece of blank paper ; that you may write
thereon whatever you will, but science has long since proved
that such idealist as Descartes were nearer right, that fhe human
family come into the world with ideas, with marked individual
proclivities; that the pre-natal conditions have more influence
than all the education that comes after. If family peculiarities
are transmitted to the third and fourth generation, the grandson
clothed with the same gait, gesture, mode of thought and
expression as the grandfather he has never seen, it is evident
that each individual may reap some advantage and development
from those predecessors whose lives in all matters great and
small are governed by law, by a conscientious sense of duty, not
by feeling, chance, or appetite.
If there is a class of educators who need special preparation
for their high and holy duties, it is those who assume the
responsibilities of parents. Shall they give less thought to
immortal beings than the artist to his landscape or statue.
We wander through the galleries in the old world, and
linger before the works of the great masters, transfixed with
the grace and beauty of the ideals that surround us. And with
equal preparation, greater than these are possible in living,
breathing humanity. Go in imagination from the gallery to the


studio of the poor artist, watch him through the restless days,
as he struggles with the conception of some grand ideal, and
then see how patiently he moulds and remoulds the clay, and
when at last, through weary years, the block of marble is
transformed into an angel of light, he worships it, and weeps
that he cannot breathe into it the breath of life. And lo ! by
his side are growing up immortal beings to whom he has never
given one half the care and thought bestowed on the silent ones
that grace his walls. And yet the same devotion to a high
ideal of human character, would soon give the world a genera-
tion of saints and scholars, of scientists and statesmen, of
glorified humanity such as the world had not yet seen. Many
good people loose heart in trying to improve their surroundings
because they say the influence of one amounts to so little.
Remember it was by the patient toil of generations through
-centuries that the Colossus of Rhodes, Diana’s Temple at
Ephesus, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, the Pyramids at
Egypt, the Pharos at Alexandra, the Hanging Gardens at
Babylon, the Olympian Zens, the seven wonders of the world,
grew day by day into enduring monuments to the greatness of
humanity. By individual effort the grand result was at last
achieved. So the ideal manhood and womanhood, so earnestly
prophesied, will become living realities in the future. Remem-
ber it took three hundred years to build an Egyptian pyramid.
Allowing four generations to a century we have twelve genera-
tions of men who passed their lives in that one achievement.
Was not the work of those who first evened the ground and
laid the foundation-stones as important as of those who laid
the cap-stones at last ? Let us, then, begin in our day by the
■discussion of these vital principles of social science, to even the
ground and lay the foundation-stones for the greatest wonder
the world is yet to see, —a man in whom the appetites, the pas-
sions, the emotions are all held in allegiance to their rightful
sovereign, Reason. The true words and deeds of successive
generations will build up this glorified humanity, fairer than
any Parian marble, grander than any colossal sculpture of the
Bast, more exalted than spire or dome, boundless in capacity
in aspiration, limitless as space.
“ I should like to make every man, woman, and child
whom I meet discontented with themselves, even as lam dis-
contented with myself. I should like to awaken in them, about
their physical, their intellectual, their moral condition, that
divine discontent which is the parent, first of upward aspiration,
and then of self-control, thought, effort to fulfil that aspiration
even in part. This is the very germ and first up-growth of all
virtue.
Charles Kingsley.


Trice, 3d; posted, 4d.
THE LABOUR QUESTION.
CONTENTS.
LAY SERMON—By Colonel R. G. Ingxrsoll ... ... 3-16
LABOUR DISPUTES—By C. Bradlaugh, M.P. ... .. 17-19
DUTY OF LABOUR TO ITSELF—By The Rev. D. O'Donnell 19-21
WELFARE OF THE MILLIONS—By The Rev. F. Minton. M.A. 22-24
HONOR AND WEALTH—By John Buskin ... ... ... 24-27
MASTERSHIP—By John Ruskih ... ... ... 28-29
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF WEALTH—By G. P.
Macdonell, M.A. ... ... ... ... ... 29-31
PROGRESS OF PUBLIC OPINION—By H. H. Champion ... 32
DUTIES OP THE RICH—By Mrs. Carter ... ... ... 32-33
UO-OPERATION—By R. Cowdekoy ... ... ... 33
SOCIAL AFFAIRS—By Henry Georgs ... ... ... 34
TRADES UNIONISM—By G. Howell, M.P. ... ... 35-36
IDEAL UNIONISM —By Mann and Tillbtt ... ... ... 36-38
THE ROOT OF THE MATTER—By H. H. Champion ... 38
TEMPERANCE REFORM AND THE LABOUR QUESTION—By
Professor Ely ... ... ... ... ... 39-48
A FINAL WORD —By Professor Ely ... ... ... 42-44
WHAT CONSTITUTES A STATE?—By Sir W. Jones ... 44
PREFACE.
THE opinions brought together in this little book are culled from many
sources. The writers, whose names are appended to each article,
are men in many walks of life, and their views on the labor question
or problem arc in many respects as diverse as their various vocations.
They have one thing in common however, I believe. Each one gives his
honest thought's, and they should be accepted as such, even though dis-
tasteful to the listener or reader. The great want of our age is honest
thought fearlessly and respectfully uttered, and earnest truthseeking
unbiassed by class feeling or the accidental surroundings of every day life.
As a seeker for more light on subjects of human welfare, I have thus
compiled this small contribution to the problem of the labor question. I
hope it will help a little to promote discussion—full, free, and independent
inquiry and criticism from every point, of examination. It has been very
hastily put together, amid other pressing business, but I hope in a little
while to return to the subject, and to give the results of my reading in a
larger volume. I shall be thankful and happy to receive from any of the
readers of this present hook, their helpful thoughts with a view to in-
corporation in the larger book.
“Advance Australia” is the motto of our country, and the motto ought
to inspire us to step forward manfully in the path of progress to a better and
a higher life. We are blessed with opportunities possessed by no other
nation in this world, and we do a wrong to the whole of mankind if we
perform not our duty as thinking and acting men. We certmnly are in
advance of Old World standards in many respects, but there is yet much to
be done. Too many of us, the largo majority I may say, are iudifferentists
or worse, taking no thought for the morrow, and living but an animal
existence. Every man of us ought to be a thinker, a worker for the good
of himself, his family, his country, and mankind. We ought to enquire
into the whys and wherefores of things. Many of our habits and customs
are mere slavish copies of Old World habits and ought to be shaken off*
or we should at least look closely into our reasons for following them.
For instance the drinking habit, which costs the little colony of Victoria


CONDUCT AND DUTY.”
A TREASURE book of intellectual, physical, social, and moral
advice, selected from the teachings of thinkers and writers of
all times and countries; by W. T. Pyke. Padded morooco, 8/6 j
half-calf, 7/6; library-calf, 6/-; cloth, extra gilt, 8/6; and cheap
edition at 2/6 cloth.
6$ millions of pounds sterling per annum. This demands inquiry; can a
nation which spends the large sum of i)6 10s. a year per head on intoxicating
liquors for every man, woman and child boast of its civilization and
progress. This evidently requires reformation; our resources are very much
wasted here. It certainly is a question in which the worker should take an
'intelligent interest.
Our land laws, too, require thoughtful and careful consideration. The
power of the laud owner over both capital and labour is enormous. They
both pay tribute to him, and are very much in his power. They pay most
of the taxes; he pays very little. His land is increased in value by their
industry. The rent or tribute they are obliged to pay him is increased,
but he returns none of the unearned increment to the State.
The labour question, the laud question, and the drink question, are
all closely connected; they are largely one question. The labour question
and the drink question can be adjusted or settled by the workers and their
employers without the aid of legislative enactment. The land question is
a political question, and must be settled by the whole community through
their representatives in parliament when we can get honest politicians con-
trolled by intelligent and wntchful electors. At present, politicians are
mostly humbugs.
It only remains for me to add the names of the books from which the
present excerpts have been taken. The extracts by John Buskin are taken
from two books, entitled Mutiei-a Pulverit and I'nio this Last. Of the latter,
which consists of four essays, John Buskin says in his preface “that they
were reprobated in a violent manner by most of the readers of Cornhill
Magazine,” where they originally appeared, and he adds “ Not a whit the
less, I believe them to be the l>est, that is to say the truest, Tightest worded,
and most serviceable things, I have ever written; and the last of them. Ad
Valorem, having had special pains spent on it, is probably the best I shall
ever write." Every sentence of these valuable humanitarian essays is worthy
the consideration of all true men and women. Labour Disputes, by Mr.
Bradlaugh, is taken from an excellent compilation entitled “Socialism,
Labour, and Capital," issued by Messrs. Routledge, London. The articles
signed Rev. D. O’Donnell, and R. Cowderoy, are from two pamphlets issued by
the Cnpital and Labour Federation League, to whose publications on co-
operation and profit sharing I would refer the reader. “ The Welfare of the
Millions, by Rev. F. Minton, is from an excellent little book of the same name.
“Social Affairs“ is from Henry George’s “Social Problems." Howell's
“ Trades Unionism " is from the preface to the “ Conflicts between Capital and
Labour,” a book which should be in every working man’s library, as also
should be Professor Ely’s “Labour Movement is America.” from which is
selected “The Relation of Temperance Reform to the Labour Movement.”
H. H. Champion’s articles are selected from contributions to the “Age”
newspaper and a paper in the “New Review” entitled “The Federation of
Labour.” An excellent little monthly paper entitled The Australian Herald ,
edited by the Rev. Charles Strong, contains in each issue some weM considered
and helpful articles on the labour question and other questions of social import,
which certainly deserve a much wider circulation than they attain at present.
Believing with Burns that —
To make a happy household clime
For weans and wife
Is the true pathos and sublime
O’ human life.
I dedicate thess pages to the employers and workers of Australasia, trusting
that the majority of them have at heart a genuine desire to advance Australia
to the foremost rank among the nations of the world, intellectually, morally,
physically, and socially.
Mki.bournr, October 6th, ligo,
W. T. PYKE.
Patke A Kwaptoe, Printers, 290 f Little Collins Street, Melbourne.


PAGE FROM
Cole’s Reference Catalogue.
9
MACMILLAN’S COLONIAL LIBRARY—Continued.
llOLDEEWOOli (Rolf).
Robbery Under Arms.
The Miner’* Right.
The Squatter’s Dream.
Conway (Hugh).
A Family Affair.
Coebett (Julian).
For God and Gold.
Cbawfoed (Marion).
Mr. Isaacs.
Dr. Claudius.
A Roman Singer.
A Tale of a Lonely Parish.
Saracinesca.
Sant Ilario.
Marzio’s Crucifix.
Cunningham (Sir II.).
The Cccruleans.
The Heriots.
A Colonial Reformer.
A Sydney Side Saxon.
Nevermore.
| Living or Dead,
| Eophetua the Thirteenth.
Paul Patoff.
With the. Immortals.
Greifenstein.
A Cigarette-maker’s Romance.
Khaled.
The Witch of Prague.
Zoroaster.
I Wheat and Tares.
Caemaethkn (The Marchioness of)—A Lover of the Beautiful.
Dillwyn (K A.)
Jill. | Jill and Jack.
Embeson (R. W.)
The Conduct of Life. | English Traits.
Fabbab (The Yen. F. W.) —Seekers After God.
Fotheboill (Jessie) —The Lasses of Leverhouse).
Forbes (Archibald).
Souvenirs of Some Continents. | Barracks, Bivouacs, and Battles,
Falcone E (Lano) —Cecilia De Noel.
Gbaham (J. W.) —Neaeri, a tale of Ancient Romi
Hameeton (P. O.).
Human Intercourse. | The Inte
French and English. |
Haedy (Thomas).
The Mayor ot Casterbridge. I The Woi
Wessex Tales.
Habeison (Fred) —Choice of Books.
Haeeison (Joanna) —A Northern Lily.
Hughes (T.) —Tom Brown’s Schooldays.
Haete (Bret).
A Millionare of Rough and Ready :
Devil’s Ford.
The Crusade of the Excelsior.
The Argonauts of Northern Liberty.
50802293731
Cressy.
The Heritage of Deadlow Marsh.
A First Family of Tasajara.
4
Jennings (L. J., M.P.)—The Philadelphian.
Also, see Page 2 of Cover.


“ Knowledge must precede Virtue , for no chance act can be a moral one.
We must KNOW in order to DO”
THE
SCIENCE OF A NEW LIFE
A Book for the Married and those about to Marry.
BY
JOHN COWAN, M.D.
EXTRACT FROM PREFACE;—
THERE has been no subject that so immediately concerns life and
happiness as does that of the reproduction of the best, most beautiful
and original forms of humanity. To this end hare I recorded in
these pages, in a plain, practical, and thoroughly systematic way, my thoughts
as to how this great desideratum can be reached by all classes—high and low,
rich and poor.
Beginning with the requirements necessary to a perfect union of the man
and woman; the importance involved in the right use of the social faculties ;
the positive and immense influence of the mother in the health, character,
capabilities and beauty of the new life, and the preparations necessary to this
end, a child is born—a child that, if originated under the conditions herein
involved, must embody perfection of body, brightness of intellect, and purity
of soul. In proportion as these principles are observed, just in that proportion
will this earth be freed from sin, and happiness unalloyed prevail . and in no
other way, that I know of, can it bo done so promptly and effectually.
In the last part will be found that which goes to make up the shadows of
life, and the mode to be pursued to catch a glimpse of the bright side—the
“ cloud with the silver lining.”
And in the last chapter of all will be found hints and suggestions as to how
to bring within the bonds of love those who are “ matched but not mated.”
In the inscribing of the subject-matter in these pages, not a word has been
employed that would offend the sense of the most pure in thought, let alone
those who may possess the quality termed “mock” modesty.
Out of the fullnes of an observing, earnest, truthful nature have come the
words of instruction, of advice, and of warning that go to make up the pleasant
and inviting pages of this book —words that apply to and concern every boy
and girl, man and woman—married or single.
JOHN COWAN.
Price, 7/6; posted, 8/-.
E. W. cole; BOOK ARCADE, MELBOURNE.
