

MASONITE
Today
AND
Tomorrow
MASONITE CORPORATION (AUST.) LTD.
SYDNEY-MELBOURNE-BRISBANE-ADELAIDE-PERTH


MASONITE
THE WONDER BOARD OF 1000 USES
ITS ORIGIN AND NATURE.
ITS PRESENT USES, ITS WAR
SE R VIC E. AND IT SFUT U R E
POTENTIALITIES.


The Discovery of Masonite...
AND ITS BEGINNING IN AMERICA AND AUSTRALIAN
On this hand operated flat press were formed the original samples
of Masonite exploded wood fibre hardboards.
The explosion process for separating wood fibres was discovered by
William H. Mason using this miniature gun.
It was in 1924 that Mr. William H. Mason,
inventor, scientist and former associate of
Thomas A. Edison, discovered the process which
enabled the manufacture of boards which
to-day are marketed under the trade name of
"Masonite".
Mr. Mason dedicated himself to finding some
process by means of which waste timber could
be put to some useful purpose.
He had made a close study of trees and knew
them from a standpoint of their chemical
constituents, as few other men. He reasoned
that he could separate the fibres without break-
ing or otherwise changing them. To test this
theory, Mason built himself a "gun" from a piece
of hollow steel shaft. He filled the chamber
with wood chips and water and then forced a
steel plug into the end. He then directed two
blow torches against the outside of the shaft
until he calculated the inside temperature had
reached approximately 800 degrees Fahrenheit.
He then tapped out the plug and the resultant
explosion proved the soundness of his theory.
The plug was never retrieved, but he gathered
from the ground enough fibre to convince him
of the correctness of his reasoning.
Many months of further experiment, often
heartbreaking, resulted in the making of the first
(Left): The original Masonite Corporation plant (U.S.A.)
in 1926, and (below) the mammoth plant as it appears
to-day.


sheet of board which was basically the Masonite
Presdwood of to-day.
A company bearing the title of the Mason
Fibre Company was born in 1925. In 1928 the
name was changed to the Masonite Corpora-
tion and it forged ahead by leaps and bounds
until to-day its output from the one plant in
Laurel, Minnesota, totals over 120,000,000
square feet annually.
Other plants were erected in other countries
of the world, but it was not until 1937 that a
plant was erected in Australia. After consider-
able investigation, Raymond Terrace, near New-
castle, was selected as the site. Even in the
short period which elapsed before war changed
Australia's industrial outlook, the Wonder Boards
had become firmly fixed in the favour of Aus-
tralian builders and home makers. The demands
of war have, of course, for the time being,
switched the supply of Masonite from civilian
needs to defence requirements. So great have
these been that already extensive additions
have been made to the original plant, and a
sawmill has been acquired, to facilitate pro-
duction.
In this year of war, 1943, the factory is work-
ing at its capacity producing Masonite, almost
entirely tor defence purposes, at the rate of
27,000,000 feet per year.
Dragging logs by tractor from the bush to the saw mill for eventual
treatment at the Raymond Terrace works.
(Above): An aerial view of the Raymond Terrace works.
(Below): The Raymond Terrace (N.S.W.) Plant of the
Masonite Corporation (Australia) Limited
(Right Lower Corner): The Canadian Saw Bench in operation at
the Masonite sawmill.


How Masoniteis Made in Australia
Cut timber in 5 ft. lengths at Masonite works.
Loading cut timber on to conveyer.
The chipper which reduces logs to 1 in.
x ¼ in. Chips.
Drawing out the water from the blanket of fibres.
At Raymond Terrace the Masonite Corporation's factory is situated
in the heart of thousands of acres of heavily timbered country —
timber hitherto regarded as being commercially useless. On the site
are practically inexhaustible supplies of subterannean water. Coal,
too, is in the immediate vicinity.
Here the huge spotted gum, ti-tree, stringy bark, and blackbutt
logs are transformed into Masonite boards. The illustrations on these
pages give a continuous picture of the process from the log to the
finished board.
(Below): Trimming and cutting "wet lap"
into 12 ft. lengths.
Lengths of fibre blanket on their way to
the forming machine.
The hydraulic press, where chromium
platers give the board its smooth surface.


Where the chips are screened and re-
screened.
The "gun" where chips are exploded
under 1000 lbs. pressure.
Fibres being piped to stock chests, where
the "wet lap" is formed.
Logs are split into 5 ft. lengths and conveyed
to the chipping machine which in a matter of
seconds reduces them to tiny chips. These are
carried to the top of the building and showered
into a great overhead storage bunker. From this
the chips are fed into the "guns". This is really
the most spectacular part of the Masonite process
—the firing of the "gun". Steam is introduced
into a charge of chips and the release of a valve
expands the steam with terrific velocity, disintegrating
the chips into a mass of separate wood fibres.
These go through various grinding, cleaning, and
refining processes, and in the form of fibre mats, or
"wet lap", are cut into lengths and placed into enormous
hydraulic presses which exert a pressure totalling millions
of pounds. The combined processes of terrific pressure
and great heat produce sheets of fully formed Masonite.
Upon the pressure used and on subsequent treatment
depend the finished type of board, Presdwood, Tempered
Presdwood, Quartrboaid De Luxe or Temprtile.
Rack of TEMPERED Presdwood leaving
the tempering oven.
Finishing the boards, after rigid inspection.
Crating and marking the finished Mason-
ite boards.


Masonite in the Services
HOW MASONITE IS BEING USED FOR THE
FIGHTING FORCES AND IN DEFENCE WORK
An Australian Army Hut built of Masonite.
Masonite Partitions and Walls at Heidelberg (Vic.) Military
Hospital.
The outbreak of war brought tremendous new
demands for Masonite, which practically elim-
inated any supply for civilian purposes. One
after another, new uses were found for these
versatile boards, until the Masonite factory was
working every possible hour to cope with the
needs of the services.
All over Australia, sleeping, living, and recrea-
tion huts tor the Army and Air Force were being
built of Masonite. Masonite was being used
for lining hospitals, for partitions, for mess tables,
counters, desks, and innumerable other purposes
in camps and offices everywhere.
Very quickly it was found that Masonite with
(Below): Soundproof booths at Army Hostel (Sydney) with
Masonite-Cane-ite insulated walls.
Installing Masonite ceiling in an Army hospital.


its hard glass-smooth surface was ideal for para-
chute-folding tables, as the fine silk could be
handled on this surface without fear of splinters
or irregularities tearing the canopy.
More and more, Masonite boards took the
place of steel and other metals essential in
the manufacture of armaments.
Ambulances and army trucks needed Masonite
for floors and walls. Canteens wanted Masonite
for counters. Masonite was needed for a score
of uses on board ship and for many other
ashore. The Masonite boards became the most
sought after building materials for a thousand
uses throughout all the fighting services.
One of the Masonite lined dormitories in the Army Hostel
(Sydney).
Interior of portable refrigerator lined with Masonite.
Masonite walls in Army Hostel (Sydney).
(Below): An Army Mess Table, with Masonite top.


Masonite in use by
the C.C.C. and for other
National Works
When the Civil Constructional Corps was
organized as a great working army behind the
army in the field, problems of accommodation
at the various projects had to be faced and
solved immediately. The answer was found in
Masonite. Designs were drawn for standard
prefabricated huts, constructed from Masonite
boards, and thousands were at once put into
production. These huts provide the living accom-
modation, dining, and recreation rooms for the
workers of the C.C.C., and they are now erected
all over Australia where the C.C.C. are busy
on the vital works which are their responsibility.
A Regimental Aid Post Trailer built of Masonite.
(Left and below): Masonite-topped tables used for
folding parachutes at Turner Parachute Co., Sydney.


One epic case of the use of Masonite for
C.C.C. huts can now be told. Towards the
end of 1942 the army demanded the construc-
tion of 430 miles of a vital defence road in
Northern Queensland. There was not a minute
to lose; the road had to be completed in four
months before the commencement of the rainy
season. Eleven strategically placed camps were
planned and orders were placed by telephone
with a group of New South Wales firms to con-
struct 1,400 sleeping, messing and hospital
huts necessary to accommodate the 3,000 men
who were being sent north to the eleven camps.
Ten days later the portable huts, entirely con-
structed of Masonite, were completed and were
being loaded under special priority into goods
trains bound north.
In many other works of national importance
Masonite is being used for constructional pur-
poses, particularly in concrete forming, in which
Tempered Presdwood has been found to be par-
ticularly effective and economical. Masonite
boards have also been used for lining coffer
dams, and for many other purposes for which
their unique characteristics make them especi-
ally suitable.
Masonite used for concrete forming on large project.
Masonite pre-fabricated mess-hut in a C.C.C. Camp.
Interior of the Masonite Mess-hut.
(Below): Masonite used for lining Coffer-dams (Vic.).


Masonite
in A.R.P. Work
With the entry of Japan into the war, the
necessity for taking immediate precautions
against air raids became imperative. One
essential step in this direction was the covering
of plate glass windows to prevent injury from
shattered glass. For this purpose Masonite
immediately became popular. Its strength and
attractive natural finish and the fact that it
could be painted or lacquered easily made it
first choice by the majority of business houses.
Not only was Masonite used extensively for
external protection of plate glass, but it also
was used to cover partitions and doors inside.
For blackout window screens and for articles of
use in A.R.P. work, such as rakes, buckets, etc.,
Masonite also was found particularly suitable.
In many capital cities glass was removed from
tram and bus windows and replaced with
Masonite. Fortunately, these precautions have
so far been unnecessary, but should the neces-
sity arise, Masonite may well prove the means
of saving countless civilian lives.
Brisbane draper's windows screened with Masonite.
Masonite on a Sydney draper's island window.
(Below): Another example of Masonite window screening.
Masonite gives protection and adds distinction to a
shop front.


Masonite
replaces Metal
Masonite used throughout the ceilings in new Melbourne trams.
Melbourne 'bus with Masonite gas con-
tainer.
Metals of all kinds are essential for the making
of munitions of war, and their use for civilian
purposes must be kept down to a minimum.
To achieve this, and to conserve metals, wher-
ever a substitute could be found suitable it
has been used. Masonite boards have been
used in innumerable instances as substitutes for
metal. On this page are photographs which
indicate some of the purposes for which
Masonite has been used in lieu of metal.
As time goes on, more and more jobs requir-
ing the use of metal are being done by Mason-
ite, its unique characteristics making it particu-
larly valuable as a substitute ... in many
instances experience has proved that it does
a better job than the material it is replacing.
A valve rack made from Masonite.
(Below): Masonite-built caravan made in Melbourne for American
Museum of National History.


M asonite serves Overseas
U.S.A. Army hut in Londonderry (N.1.) lined with Masonite.
U.S.A. Army hut with Masonite interior and exterior walls.
U.S.A. Army clubroom with Masonite walls and ceiling.
(Below): U.S.A. Army laundry with Tempered Presdwood walls.
It was only to be expected that the American
Army would find many uses for Masonite . . .
particularly as before the war this product
entered into the lives, in some form or other,
of most of Uncle Sam's fighting men. Although
censorship does not permit the illustration of
many of its uses in actual fighting equipment,
many vital implements for waging modern war,
which formerly were made of metal, are now
being made from Masonite boards. These
range from tank and aircraft parts to plungers
in aerial bombs.
In the housing field, Masonite boards are
finding their way to virtually every post or
station in the U.S.A. forces both at home and
abroad. For example, the Londonderry Naval
Base in Northern Ireland billets its personnel in
Masonite lined huts.
A newer type of military structure, the "Pacific
Hut", makes use of Masonite boards for both
exterior and interior walls. Soon, these all-


Expandable trailer built of Masonite.
A Masonite portable small house.
Masonite barracks will be housing American
soldiers and sailors in many parts of the Pacific
war theatre. Meanwhile, portable service facili-
ties, such as laundries, shower units, and the
like are following American troops in sturdy
Masonite trailers.
America's second Army, fighting the battle of
production on the home front, is using Mason-
ite products, too. From housing units to concrete
formers, from assembly table tops to blackout
panels, Masonite is working on the home front.
War housing is a vital need to-day as un-
precedented numbers of workers are re-located
in production centres away from their homes.
Expandable trailers that open into four-roomed
structures: sectional houses and demountable
pre-fabricated houses—all built of Masonite —
are helping to solve the adequate living quarter
problem. Many of these designs and construc-
tion improvements are expected to be retained
and incorporated in post-war building.
Blackout panel made of Masonite.
(Below): Assembling aeroplane motors on Masonite table.


Industrial Uses For To-morrow
A motor cor body built from Masonite.
Masonite used for tube lighting reflectors.
As is only to be expected, practically all of
the Masonite products now being furnished to
industrial users are for war or the necessary
home requirements. It is not possible to enum-
erate, however partially, the ever growing list
of new uses which manufacturers are finding for
Masonite. They include such diverse products
as furniture and heels for shoes, shower stalls
and motor car bodies, domestic furniture and
road signs.
Although the automobile industry, formerly
one of the largest industrial users of Masonite
boards, is dormant for the duration of the war,
an American coach company is using Masonite
to extend five passenger sedans to fifteen pas-
senger coaches. The Masonite is used for the
roof, floor and interior and exterior door panels
of the added sections.
Similarly all-metal office furniture has now
become all-Masonite, and the filing cabinets,
supply cupboards, industrial lockers and similar
equipment of Masonite Boards are functioning
so satisfactorily that qualified observers are
A Masonite-built office desk.
An attractive line of all Presdwood furniture.


predicting a continuation of their manufacture
in post-war years.
Shortage of metals in the United States to-
day has led to an ingenious replacement by new
materials of normal metal uses. Masonite Boards
are high on the list of materials serving in this
vital capacity. Many manufactured or fabri-
cated articles of major importance to domestic
and industrial economy are now made wholly or
in part of Masonite boards.
To-day more refrigerators are being made
from Masonite Boards than from any other
material. These ice refrigeration units have
proved to be approximately 10 per cent, more
efficient than their metal counterpart. In the
lighting field, industrial fluorescent lighting
reflectors are being manufactured from Mason-
ite. In both of these fields it is confidently
predicted that Masonite will continue to be a
product in extensive use in years to come.
Overnight War has forced changes which would
have taken years to achieve in the more con-
servative times of peace.
(Left and right): Lockers built from Masonite.
(Centre): Wall and floor cupboards of Masonite.
Exterior and interior views of a refrigerator with Masonite cabinet.
Light delivery truck body built of Tempered Presdwood.
(Left): A Masonite shower cabinet. (Centre): Employees' time-
card racks of Masonite. (Right): A Masonite switch panel.


New Fields for Semi-Plastics
AIRCRAFT DIES OTHER USES
Shearing end forming of thin-gauge metal parts with semi-plastic
Masonite Dies.
A deep draw die of Masonite Die Stock forms landing wheel
pockets for aeroplanes.
Typical of America's war production achieve-
ments is the phenomenal development and ex-
pansion of the aircraft industry. Many factors
must be credited for the steady stream of
fighter, bomber and reconnaisance planes that
pour from U.S. factories. High on every pro-
duction man's list is the relatively new semi-
plastic material, Masonite Die Stock. Fighting
ships of the sky contain thousands of thin gauge
metal parts formed on Masonite dies and have
fuselage, wing sections, etc., assembled on Die
Stock jigs or cradles.
Shearing, forming and shearing, and forming
dies weighing but one-sixth the weight of steel
are produced of Masonite Die Stock in a frac-
tion of the time needed to tool metals. This
durable hard semi-plastic is also replacing hard-
woods and metals tor assembly jigs and cradles,
router dies and templates and now even for
pressure ring dies, mating dies and similar intri-
cate patterns formerly tooled from only the
highest grades of tool steel.
Tooling a new type semi-plastic Masonite Die.
This huge fixture for assembling aircraft fuselages is
constructed partially with Masonite Die Stock.


The war time uses for Masonite Die Stock
to-day are indicative of future development
possibilities for this new semi-plastic material.
For example, spinning chucks on which are spun
the huge cowlings for radial aeroplane motors
and the "horns" for the United States Army's
newest aircraft detectors are comparable in
principle and application to the chucks on
which pots, pans, lighting fixtures and similar
circular objects are spun.
Experimental use is being made of Die Stock
for aircraft dash panels. The communications
field is using Masonite Die Stock, too, as re-
placements for both rubber and certain types
of flat sheet plastics. A leading manufacturer
of telephone and radio equipment has just
begun production of switchboards with Die Stock
jack panels and key boards. Other industrial
fields are making similar progress to an extent
that indicates already that industry of to-morrow
will have varied and multiple uses for Masonite
Die Stock.
Lofting Board, Masonite semi-plastic used for precision master
drawings.
Metal spinning on huge Masonite Die Stock chucks.
This stretching machine uses semi-plastic Masonite Die
Stock.
A drill and rivetting pattern jig of Masonite Die Stock.


The Building Market of Post-War Years
AGRICULTURAL PROGRESS RESIDENTIAL TRENDS
Arched roof brooder houses built of Masonite Presdwoods
are erected in a matter of hours.
A four-pen hog house utilizes Tempered Presdwood, wood
walls and arched roof type construction.
Considerable attention has been given in the
United States to the post-war agricultural con-
struction programme. The Masonite Corporation
was one of the first to experiment with arched
roof farm service buildings. They appear
destined to play an important role in the future.
Masonite products are ideally suited for the
arch roof type of construction since they make
possible substantial savings in labour and
material. It is anticipated that there will be
a greatly increased use of Masonite products
by manufacturers supplying equipment tor the
farms. With materials no longer available,
articles, such as feeders, incubators, electric
brooders and the like, are being fabricated from
Masonite.
In the houses of to-morrow it will be possible
to use Masonite products not only for walls,
ceilings, floors and partitions and insulations,
Tempered Presdwood is
being used for silos.
Masonite's Agricultural Division has developed this new type
20 ft. x 30 ft. Tempered Presdwood arched roof poultry house
Grain storage bins are
built with Masonite.


Straight line motif of functional modern home is ideal for
the use of Tempered Presdwood as walls.
This virtually all-Masonite Products pre-fabricated house is
one solution to low cost post-war housing.
but as mouldings, trims, etc. It is quite obvious
that both in the United States and in Australia
the question of housing will be an important
item in the reconstruction programmes of any
Government. Already in Australia, Masonite
homes for workers have been designed and built
and the advantages of these boards for stand-
ardised pre-fabricated homes suitable for
workers' housing schemes have been recognised
by Government housing authorities.
An Australian version of a low cost Masonite pre-fabricated
worker's house.
All wall, ceiling and floor surfaces, including mouldings,
trim and baseboards are Masonite hardboards.
The bending qualities of Tempered Presdwood make it ideal
for curved type acoustical surfaces.


The
PRESDWOOD
The ideal interior board. The ordinary bumps and thumps
of daily life cannot injure this dense, hard, smooth-surfaced
board. It will not split or crack and has no equal for interior
designs which include bevelled edges, groove, or metal strip
effects.
For shelves, walls, and furniture the handy man regards
Presdwood as his most valuable ally.
TEMPERED PRESDWOOD
Has the permanence and smoothness of steel. Just as
beautiful as wood, yet stronger, more durable and moisture
resistant. Used for floors, garages, trailers, caravans,
partitions, wall panels, concrete form work, etc. Converts
old porches into attractive sun-parlors, makes the best
ping-pong tables, kitchen cabinets, table-tops, etc. Will
not split or warp, not affected by heat and water and
gives you real beauty and endurance.
TEMPRTILE
Temprtile walls in kitchen and bathroom give all the beauty
and convenience of ordinary tiles—yet they cost far less.
Temprtile walls are smooth and clean and cannot chip,
crack or warp. A damp cloth and a mild soap, free of
alkali, cleans them with a minimum of rubbing. Fitted in
a few hours by any handy-man and decorated with lacquer
or enamel. The "tiles" are 4 ins. square on 4 ft. panels
up to 12 ft. in length.
Q UARTR B OAR D D E LUXE
Masonite Quartrboard De Luxe is a less dense all wood
fibre board than Presdwood, and primarily used for wall
and ceiling panels, partitions and the like, where very high
strength and great resistance to moisture are not necessary.
MANUFACTURED BY:
MASONITE CORPORATION (AUST.)
117 PITT STREET, SYDNEY
MARKETED BY;
THE COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING CO.
(Building Materials Division)
SYDNEY • MELBOURNE • BRISBANE • ADELAIDE •
3 15
LTD.
LTD.
PERTH


