

“THE STEVENSON CASE”
A COMPLETE EXPOSE OF THE
SYSTEM OF ALLEGED FRAUDS;
ALSO A
SELF-VINDICATION OF THE WRITER.
by T.J. TROWELL
“Fiat justitia mat caelum
Melbourne
W. H. WILLIAMS, PRINTER] AND ‘PUBLISHER,
G8 Elizabeth street.
1876.




“THE STEVENSON CASE:”
A COMPLETE EXPOSE OF THE SYSTEM OF ALLEGED FRAUDS ;
ALSO A SELF-VINDICATION OF THE WRITER ;
BY T. J. TROWELL.
“ Flat justitia ruat caelum."
AS my name has been prominently brought before the public in
connection with the “ Stevenson case,” I consider it advisable
to place the whole facts before the said public, on the ground that it
is for the public benefit that the facts should be published.
I may premise that I have been in the colony for twenty-three
years, and five and a half years of that time in Stevenson’s employ.
During the whole period of my residence in the colony not a single
word was or could have been said against me. lam well known to
hundreds of influential men in Melbourne and in other parts of
Victoria, as well as in the other colonies, who can bear testimony to
my good character and general rectitude of conduct. All unpreju-
diced men must consider it a great disgrace that an honourable
■citizen should be treated as if he had committed a crime, when the
“ head and front of his offending” has been simply the endeavour to
expose one, and one of such a magnitude that every well-wisher of
his adopted country ought to be heartily glad to see it sheeted
home.
I shall now proceed to state the circumstances (bearing upon the
case) as they occurred from the time when
I ENTERED STEVENSON’S EMPLOY.
This was in July, 1870, when I was engaged to manage their “Hosiery
and Glove ” department. On that occasion Mr. Stevenson told me
that my department would be charged with the nett English cost of
the goods, with 6| per cent, transit charges (which covered the cost
cf home buying, freight, insurance, &c.); also the duty, and a few
minor charges ; and that he should require me to show 17*1 per cent.*
as a minimum profit upon the total cost of the goods landed here.
Thus, take an
Invoice of goods—of say ...
£100
0
0
Add transit charges, 64 per cent.
6
10
0
,, Casing, 24 per cent.
2
10
0
„ Duty, 11 per cent.
.. 11
0
0
£120
0
0
The actual cost when placed in the department would thus be
si? 120, on which I had to show 17|- per cent, minimum profit, which
would amount to £2l , so that the amount which I should have to
realise for <£*loo worth of goods at English cost would be <£l4l.
* Although 174 per cent, was stipulated as a minimum profit, he expected more,
and calculated upon a profit of 20 per cent., as the department ledger will show.


ÜBLIC
le on the 29th inst
ers lane east,
bourne, June 29th, 1876.
i publishing a pamphlet
written by the informer, Trowell, this is to caution you that if
the] pamphlet contains matter in any way libellous against us
we shall hold you responsible for the consequences in an
action at law.
We are, Sir,
Your obedient servants,
L. STEVENSON & SONS.
Mr. W. H. Williams, Elizabeth street.
Whatever the motives were which prompted Messrs. Stevenson and Sons
to make the above communication is of no moment to me; but, in justice
to myself, as well as in consideration of public rights and morals, I, pre-
vious to receiving it, took steps, by consultation with a solicitor, a barrister,
and several members of the press, to ascertain that, in printing and pub-
lishing Mr. Trowell’s pamphlet, I should not be lending myself to any
unworthy purpose, or placing myself wrong in the eyes of the law. In
fact, I print the pamphlet only in the ordinary way of business, and, in
doing so, I disclaim any personal or party feeling; and, indeed, would be
glad to print a reply to it for Messrs. Stevenson and Sons.
W. H. WILLIAMS.
June joth, 1876.




A DISCOVERY.
I found, after I had been a short time in the establishment, that the
rates at which the goods were marked and sold would not enable me
to show the 41 per cent, upon English invoice price, after allowing
for losses on bad stock, Ac.
.On the first opportunity I mentioned it to Mr. Stevenson, who
said—“ I dare say that you will find some goods upon which you will
be able to get an extra profit,” and then turned upon his heel and left
the department. This answer was. not satisfactory to me, and on
referring to the stock books for previous half years I found that the
goods had been taken into stock at English prices ; but that in 1868
and 1869 the rate of
DUTY HAD ONLY BEEN ENTERED AT 8 PER CENT.,
and prior to 1868 at 5 per cent.; but that the stock book for the
half-year ending June 30th, 1870, showed 11 per cent. duty. I
mentioned the matter to Mr. Stevenson, who merely said—“ When
was the duty 8 per cent. ? ” (in a semi-abstracted style). I replied
—“Never,, on hosiery and he said—“l thought not,” in a pecu-
liarly evasive manner, and walked off.
I then consulted the junior in my department, and he intimated
that the firm had been
USING TWO SETS OF INVOICES :
One set undervalued to pass the Customs, and the other showing the
genuine cost which was charged to the department ; that Mr. "Hill
had been employed to make out the former, but that during the
early part of 1870 the firm had got frightened in consequence of a
large fancy goods firm having been fined, and that they had paid the
duty upon the genuine invoices for a month or two, and those were
the reasons why the stock had been taken in at June, 1870, at 11 per
cent, duty, and prior to that at 8 per cent, and o per cent.
In July or August, 1870, Mr. Hill used to come to the depart-
ment for the departmental invoices, and after copying them at
reduced values bring them back to the department. I afterwards
discovered that reductions had been made by him of 20 per cent, and
upwards off English invoices upon which
NO TRADE DISCOUNT WAS ALLOWED
By the London houses or the manufacturers from whom the goods
were bought; and if Mr. Hill had been asked the question he could
have answered it. On the strength of what my junior had told me,
I subsequently tried to discover from Mr. Hill whether he was still
COPYING INVOICES AT UNDERVALUE.
I, therefore, put the question to him, “Are you not afraid,
Mr. Hill ?” He said, “Of what ?” I replied, “Of copying those
invoices V “Well,” he said, “I am; I don’t like it, and I mean to
give it up.” Shortly afterwards, I asked him whether he had given
it up or not ; and he said, “ Yes.” I asked, “ How did vou manage
it 1 ” He replied, “ I told Mr. Stevenson that I wouldn’t do it any
more, and Mr. Stevenson said, ‘lf you won’t, somebody else will.’”


The fact that he was relieved from it is significant, as, if the work
was not of an improper character, why should Mr. Hill decline to do
it any more ? and why should Mr. Stevenson tamely submit to such
refusal ? Would an employer, under ordinary circumstances, tolerate
it ? Sometime after I heard that
THE INVOICES WERE BEING MADE AT HOME IN THE
LONDON OFFICE,
And subsequently I saw some invoices on the shipping clerk (Bell’s)
desk, which were evidently being prepared for use at the Customs.
I observed that the case numbers and contents of one or two cor-
responded with the invoices which I had in my department. I took
notice of the prices, and on comparison found that the said invoices
were undervalued more than 25 per cent. The goods consisted of I.
and R. Morley’s plain “ List ” hosiery, upon which no trade discount
is allowed. At subsequent intervals I had glimpses of similar in-
voices, which were similarly undervalued ; but although it produced
an impression on my mind that the firm were using them to
DEFRAUD THE REVENUE,
I had no absolute proof, as they had not passed the Customs, nor yet
bore the Customs stamp. Still, as the firm only had the two sets, and as
one set was in charge of the department managers, they must have used
the undervalued set at the Customs, as they would receive no dupli-
cates until the following mail. I had conversations with one
intimate friend and fellow employe in the warehouse on the subject,
and he was evidently satisfied that the system had been adopted.
ADDITIONAL GROUNDS FOR BELIEF.
It was the rule at Stevenson’s for the manager of each department
to (what is technically called) “go into figures ” with the manager,
Mr. Blind, each half-year. The process consisted of making an
estimate of the following character :
Proposed amount of order, say for half-year ending
£
s.
d.
December, 1875
10,000
0
0
Transit charges and casing, 8 per cent.
800
0
0
Duty
800
0
0
Manufacturing and colonial purchases
600
0
0
12,200
0
0
Amount of stock held on June 30tb, 1875
8,000
0
0
£20,200
0
0
This would give an amount of <£20,200 at actual cost to do the
(half-years trade upon. Now, it is a significant tact that the duty,
which, is 11 per cent., was reckoned at only 8 per cent. The calcula-
tion was based upon the amount of duty which had been paid on
the imports for previous half-years. When Mr. Blind was examined
in the Police Court, he was asked about the “ going into figures,”
and he said that he supposed he had reckoned the duty at 11 per
cent., but that it might have been less, to allow for transhipments and
exports from bond ; but the absurdity of that will be seen when we
know (as Customs documents can prove) that the transhipments and
exports from bond of goods belonging to the hosiery department


was never i? 500 in any single half-year between 1870 and 1876, and
seldom exceeded d? 100. Now, as the hosiery department orders aver-
aged for winter half-years £1 3,000, and for summer half-years about
«£ J II,OOO, the difference of duty upon ,FSOO transhipped or ex-
ported from bond would only amount to £55, or less than \ per cent,
on the winter shipments, and exactly § per cent, on the summer
(taking the maximum amount of <FSOO). If we take id 00, the
difference on rate of duty is infinitesimal.
I did not take particular notice of the rate of duty which Brind
had calculated until about twelve months ago; when, having the
“ going into figures ” documents for previous periods in my posses-
sion, I found the rate, on comparison, to be the same. I had con-
versations with the employe before mentioned, with whom I was in-
timate, about it, and he told me that the rate of duty charged to his
department was about 8 per cent, on his imports, although I believe
that some of his goods were liable to 22 per cent. duty.
About February last I also hinted at the matter to
ANOTHER MANAGER OF A DEPARTMENT,
And he seemed to be quite au fait with the whole thing. We dis-
cussed the morality part of the question, and I spoke very freely,
and repeated what another employe had said, viz. : —“ That George
Stevenson had a mine under his feet, which might explode at any
moment.” Soon after this
MR. HENRY, THE HOSIERY AND GLOVE BUYER, ARRIVED
From England. I put the question about the undervalued invoices.
He smiled, and said that he had nothing to do with them, as they
were made out in the English office.
From the foregoing (what some some people may consider indiscreet
endeavours on my part to ascertain the particulars of the system of
fraud being carried on) it can easily be conceived that my remarks
came to the firm’s ears ; that they looked upon me as a dangerous
man, and determined to get rid of me, and in such a way
that I should not be able to do them any injury afterwards.
It was necessary to damage my reputation with the trade if
possible, so that any reports I might give would not be credited.
The sudden dismissal was quite sufficient to cast a stigma upon me,
for no kind of reference could account satisfactorily for such treat-
ment after nearly six years highly satisfactory service. The profits
made by me for the firm during my term as manager were much
greater than those made during any previous period of similar du-
ration, and it is absurd to suppose that I should be dismissed for un-
derselling when Mr. Stevenson told me, at the time of engagement,
“ That he didn’t care what I sold the goods for, as long as I brought
out the average profit that he required.”
I may state that I have shown profits for the half-year as high as
24 per cent., which represents an advance on the English invoice of
49 per cent., and a turnover of the average stock equal to nearly five
times per annum. There couldn’t be underselling with such results.


SYSTEM OF BUSINESS.
When a manager took charge of the department he was placed in
possession of the stock, which was charged at English cost price (dis-
counts on bad stock of course being deducted) ; a rate for transit
charges, which, as stated before, includes London office expenses for
buying, &c., and averages about 5 or 5J per cent.; and the duty on
dutiable goods. The stock is taken at the prices shown .in the de-
partmental invoices, and not from the Customs invoices, which
Stevensons allege show the true value of the goods. How would
this fact affect the insurance in the case of fire? They would want to
claim upon the true departmental invoice value with 11 percent,
duty added, and not upon the undervalued Customs invoices.
When a manager of a department makes out his orders for home
they are submitted to the general manager, who revises and approves
of them. They are then copied in the said manager’s department in
triplicate, and placed in the general manager’s hands for transmission
to London. A copy of the orders is made in a book kept in each
department and denominated
THE HOME ORDER BOOK.
When the invoices of the goods arrived it was the custom to enter
the items as shown in the invoice opposite the items in the “ Home
Order Book,” with numbers and prices attached. On one occasion,
when I was overdone with work, Mr. Brind rated me for delay in
entering the items received opposite the order as stated. Some de-
partments now enter the details of the invoices direct in to an “ Ab-
stract book,” in which the details of each order also appear. The
object is to enable the manager to ascertain at a glance the goods
which he receives according to order, both in price and quantity,
and also to dates specified.
If Stevensons had been candid enough to show the “ Home Order
Book ” kept in the hosiery department, and containing the order for
the gloves and flannel which were the subjects of prosecution in the
police court, the system would have been shown ; but they did not
dare to do it, anymore than they dare to produce any of the 3000
(three thousand) invoices marked ofl and initialled by me when in
their employ.
Allusion was made during the police court inquiry to
DISCOUNTS AND ALLOWANCES.
The trade discounts allowed by the principal manufacturers in
England and Scotland, with whom Stevensons do business, are
universally known in the trade. The London wholesale warehouse-
men allow no trade discount; such as I. and R. Morley; Dent,
Allcroft, and Co.; Leaf,Sons, and Co.; Ellis, Everington and Co.; Cook,
Son and Co.; and others. Amongst manufacturers, the Nottingham
Manufacturing Co., Walker and Kempson, Angrave Bros., Elliot of
Hawick, allow no trade discount. Hadden, of Aberdeen, allows
from sto per cent. ;C. Noon, of Leicester, allows 2| per cent,
off fancy hose and half-hose, 5 per cent, off fancy knitted hosiery, as
scarfs, etc., and 10 per cent, off his children’s sock list. Harris and Co.,


Leicester, allow 5 per cent, off fancy knitted hosiery ; 8f per cent, off
children’s sock list ; but nothing off plain hosiery. There is no
trade discount allowed by Schofield or other flannel or blanket
manufacturers, and yet goods from those houses, which allow no
trade discount, have been passed through the Customs at 25 per cent,
less value than is shown by the genuine invoices supplied to the
departments to mark their goods by. How, in the name of common
sense, is it possible that Stevensons could get
A PROFIT OF 75 TO 100 PER CENT. UPON MOST OF
THE DUTIABLE GOODS
which they have imported for years ? for that is the advance which
has been got upon most of the “ Customs invoice ” prices. Take, for
instance, the gloves which were produced in the Police Court a short
time ago. If the “ North West Driving” only cost Stevensons 325.
per dozen, and they stated that they were prepared with 50 or more
witnesses (experts ?) to prove that to be their London value, how, in
the name of the trade, were they able to get 575. per dozen for them,
and 90s. for gloves which, according to their experts, were only
worth 455. to cost? There are customers who have imported from
Dent’s, and who have bought at the above selling prices from
Stevenson. Is it likely that they would pay an advance on the first
line of nearly 80 per cent., and on the latterof 100 per cent. ?
Again, take the flannel, which was invoiced at 14|d. a yard (Cus-
toms invoice ; but genuine price invoiced to the department, 18|d.
a yard). I was required to get at the rate of 2s. 2d. per yard for it.
How could that be done, if any retailer in Melbourne could buy it in
England for 134 d. to 14|d. per yard? The difference would
represent an advance of about 87 per cent.
Stevensons cannot disprove my statements that the prices I allege
were those in the departmental invoices ; but they try to get out of
the difficulty by citing
THE LACKERSTEIN CASE.
There is no analogy. If Stevensons imported the leather and other
materials into London, and manufactured the gloves, and then
shipped them to Melbourne with two invoices, the one representing
the value of the materials unmanufactured, and the other the value of
the manufactured articles, there would be some slight analogy ;
although that would not save them from such a charge as that recently
heard at the Police Court. The Customs Act requires them to declare
that the entry represents the true market value of the goods in the
country from which they are exported ; and, if the Lackerstein case
could be used as an argument, a man could import broadcloth and
declare the value at the Customs to be that of the raw wool and the
dye only. In Stevensons’ case the gloves were bought direct from
Dent, Allcroft and Co., and the flannels from Schofield, at the regular
market value, upon which duty is required to be paid. In Lacker-
stein’s case the two price-lists were shown, and the Chief Justice left it
to the jury to decide what were reasonable deductions to make from
the higher priced one; but Stevensons only produce the one invoice,


the higher priced one being studiously kept back, for transparent
reasons. The quotation of the Lackerstein case is, however, a tacit
admission on their part of the existence of the higher priced invoices.
When the order was placed for the gloves, and flannels by the
home buyer, Mr. Henry, he wrote the usual report to the department,
naming the house at which the order was placed, and the prices
they were to pay for them. If Mr. Henry had been called as a
witness (prior to his departure by the IV orthumberland') he could
have corroborated my statement; but the firm knew that they
could not upset my testimony, and so endeavoured, by questionable
means, to try and injure my character and credibility.
REASONS FOR LEAVING STEVENSONS’.
I may now advert to the reasons given by Mr. Stevenson for dis-
pensing with my services on the 6th March. But, first, it will be
necessary for me to allude to what occurred six weeks prior, viz., in
January, on the occasion of the usual half-yearly interview which
the manager of each department has with Mr. Stevenson in his office,
when the°past half-year’s results are discussed, and also the future
prospects of the department.
On the occasion referred to in January Mr. Stevenson expressed
himself satisfied that I had done the best I could for my department
for the past half-year, although it had not shown so satisfactorily as
it hitherto had done under my management; but he asked, “ How
do you account for the difference between the result and your
estimate of what it would show ?” (the difference was about 3 per
cent.). I replied, that I could only account for it upon one sup-
position, viz.:—That, knowing at the commencement of the half-year
that we should have great difficulty to hold our own in the face of
the great competition we were being subjected to, I gave instructions
to my juniors to never lose the sale of goods if it could be avoided
by making a slight reduction in price to customers ; and I told Mr.
Stevenson that possibly goods might have been sold at lower rates
than I was aware of. He merely remarked that I was responsible
for what goods were sold at, and that it was my interest to watch
and see that goods were not sold at unnecessarily low rates. I told
him that I made no complaint; and that, of course, if such had been
done, I was alone to blame for giving my juniors the discretionary
power to reduce prices. He then expressed a hope that we should
succeed in getting better profits during the current half-year, which
I assured him we should, and the interview terminated.
Six weeks afterwards , viz., on the 6th March, I was summoned to
Mr. Stevenson’s office, when he informed me that he had some
charges against me. He said, “ You blamed your junior
for selling goods at low prices, but you had been doing it
yourself; ” and specified some goods sold to Myers and Zox, and
Stern of Swanston street. I denied emphatically having blamed my
junior, and admitted at once having sold the goods alluded to, upon
which there was a profit (upon the Customs invoice there would be
a very large profit), and the selling of which was good business


policy. He brought one or two other charges : one of copying
music during business hours. I had done this once, for three
minutes at lunch time (the finishing lines of a cantata in praise of
the firm —o temporal 0 mores!). I was too much disgusted at
the paltry charge to give him a full explanation. He also accused me
of having offered to let a customer have good gloves and take back
unsaleable ones after stocktaking, which I denied, and appealed to
Mr. Blind, who was acquainted with the transaction alluded to,
and who acknowledged that my version was correct.
NO MENTION WAS MADE
Of “ the offer which was deposed to by Blakeney,” or “ the trans-
action sworn to by Miles.” The character of each of these speaks
for itself. Blakeney stated that on 10th May, 1875, 1 made a pro-
posal for him to take <£loo worth of gloves and keep them till two
or three weeks after stock-taking, and that I would take them back
and give him credit for £llO. Stevenson’s stocktaking was on the
80th June, and if the proposal had been stated to have been made
on the 28th or 29th June, it might have had just a tinge of probability
about it ; but to believe that the proposition was made seven weeks
before stocktaking, with thousands of pounds worth of trade to be
done in the interval, is rather too great a stretch upon ordinary
credulity, leaving out of consideration the fact that such a transac-
tion would be an impossibility without the knowledge of the
manager, Brind. The very fact of £IOO worth of gloves going out
to Blakeney for a small Williamstown trade would be sufficient of
itself to excite suspicion. Another statement of Blakeney’s was, that
on the same day on which he says the offer was made to him, he re-
ceived a parcel of gloves which he had not ordered, and that he re-
turned them some two months afterwards, and did not get credit for
them until five months after. Such a transaction could have occurred
and be capable of explanation on very simple grounds, but the ob-
ject of the statement was to connect it with the alleged offer of 10
per cent upon the £IOO affair. The facts of the case are, that, on my
asking Blakeney on one occasion for his glove list, he said that he
wanted some, but there was one size which he did not require.
I said, “ Never mind ; give me your order for a round of sizes, and if
you find when you get home that there is a size you don’t want
send it back.” He gave me an order for, I think, dozen, and two
days afterwards 5 or 5| dozen were returned ; and I remarked
to my junior at the time, “ What a duffer that Blakeney is
for returning all but a dozen or a dozen and a half of the gloves
that he bought and next time Blakeney came into the warehouse
I rated him for returning them, and he then said that his man had
made a mistake, and that he found he had got more in stock than
he thought. Dismissing Mr. Blakeney, I will show
THE CHARACTER OF MR. MILES’S STATEMENT.
He swore that I sold him on the Bth June, 1874, C9|- dozen of
Habit’s Ist choice Josephine gloves, worth 545. 6d. per dozen !! (and
for which there was a trade combination to sell at that price) for oos.


per dozen and that I put in three pairs of spotted ones to make
them a job lot. Firstly, consider that to 831 pairs (!) of perfect
gloves three pairs of spotted ones were added to make them
a job lot! As the said gloves would be in boxes which held
3 dozens or 6 dozens, there would have been 23 boxes holding 3
dozen each or 12 boxes which held 6 dozen. Where would the 3
pairs of spotted ones be among so many, and who would it be done
to deceive ? Not Miles, who would know what he was buying ; not
the trade (who were in the combination), because how could they
know of the transaction except through Miles ? not Stevensons,
whose entering men have strict injunctions to examine all gloves-
and other combination articles before they are sent out, to see that
such combination is not violated, and who would soon have dis-
covered the existence of 831 pairs (! !) perfect, and 3 pairs spotted ! f
The fact is that Mr. Miles, in making that statement, overshot the-
mark. The 69| dozen sold to him at 30s. per dozen were a mixed
job lot and were sold at their full outside value. They were offered
to other customers at 305., who recollect refusing to buy them.
THE ABSURDITY OF THE ALLEGED TRANSACTION
is shown by the fact that, if I had wanted to sell UIOO worth of
gloves, I could have sold that amount or JPSOO worth to the whole-
sale trade at from 455. to 50s. per dozen, without the necessity of
violating the combination by selling at under the fixed price to the
retail trade (an act which I never did).
Considering that Ist choice Josephines were invoiced from Dent’s
at 38s. 3d. per dozen, and that mail freight, packing, and 11 per
cent, duty, made their cost when landed here 455., the unreasonable-
ness of the alleged sale is seen, especially when it is considered that
the difference between 30s. and 545. 6d. on 69§ dozen would be J?B4,
and would certainly have entailed the loss of my bonus, whereas I
received a bonus on the glove department for that half-year. If
Stevensons’ books were produced they would prove the truth and
exactness of all my statements, and they would show that Miles’s
statement could not be correct. Other evidence has likewise been
volunteered in the matter.
There are two other ways in which to view the matter. First, if
the transaction was wrong, Miles was particeps criminis, and yet
received the whole of the benefit; for Miles did not swear that he
offered me any inducement; and further, as the bonus on the glove
department only amounted to £25, where would be my gain ?
Second, what description of being could he be denominated who would
sell the gloves at 3s. 6d., when he could readily sell them at 4s. 6d.,
and then undersell all the drapers of Melbourne and suburbs. It
must be remembered again that the alleged transaction was not
a dernier ressort immediately before stocktaking, but occurred 22
days before. . .
It has been recorded in history that, when occasion required,
with the hour came the man. The hour did arrive with Stevensons,
through their inability to disprove my statements, and histoiy has


repeated itself. The hour came, and the man was wanted, very
much wanted, and he was there.
MOTIVES IN MAKING THE EXPOSE.
With reference to my motive in giving information to the Customs
authorities, I have been credited with doing it from a feeling of
malice, greed, or safety. With regard to the last named, Ido not
know how it applies, for it seems to me that I put myself in a
position the very reverse of safe when I have made enemies of men
who would not hesitate to swear away a man’s liberty or life ; and it
is only the mens conscia recti that enables me to defy them. I deny
that I was actuated by a motive of malice or of greed. I never
connived at, or approved of, the system when in Stevenson’s
employ; I had only circumstantial grounds for believing it was
carried on; and I had no absolute proof until after I had left and
saw the entries at the Custom House ; so that I was not in a position
to charge the firm with the offence, although I had a con-
viction that it was being done. When dismissed so suddenly by
the firm, I felt very much hurt and annoyed at the paltry charges
brought against me ; and, believing the true cause of my dismissal
to arise from the fact that the firm had learnt that I had discovered too
miuch, I adopted the only means in my power of asserting myself.
At the very time of my dismissal I contemplated throwing up the
situation, and was in negotiation for a business on my own account.
Their summary treatment of me interfered with my prospects, and
was calculated to do me great injury in the trade, for, as stated before,
no reference could overcome the stigma of sudden dismissal after
nearly six years highly satisfactory service. Under any circumstances,
I could not take a position in another house without exposing what
I believed to be the unfair advantages which Stevensons had over
the ordinary trader. With regard to the motive of gain I can honestly
say that I had no idea of it at the first; for when the subject was
-casually mentioned, I stated (as Messrs. Gordon and Guthrie can
testify) that I did not seek for money, but to clear my reputation,
which had been injured by Stevensons’ unjust treatment of me.
COMMUNICATION WITH THE CUSTOMS.
The manner of my introduction to the Customs authorities is of no
importance to the general public. Suffice it to say that when I
made my statement to Mr. Guthrie he immediately took steps to
ascertain its truth. Unfortunately, the firm was at first able to throw
dust in Mr. Guthrie’s eyes, and Mr. Stevenson’s emphatic and solemn
denial of the existence of any other set of invoices or copies than
the ones used to pass entries upon placed Mr. Guthrie upon the
horns of a dilemma. He admitted that while my word was as good
as Mr. Stevenson’s, yet he could not be expected to take my uncor-
roborated statement in the face of Mr. Stevenson’s positive denial.
I pressed him to ask Mr. Stevenson to show him the departmental
ledger with the entry of the case of gloves ex Thermopylce. He did
so, and informed me afterwards that the book was shown to him with
an entry in it of the same amount as the Customs invoice. I knew
that he could not have seen the departmental ledger, or that if he


had it had been cooked, for the Customs invoice contained goods for
two separate departments, viz., hosiery and gloves, and that, there-
fore, the amount debited to the glove department should not appear
the same as the Customs’ invoice total. I pressed Mr. Guthrie to-
ask Mr. Stevenson for the invoice which I had used to mark off the
goods by. He remarked, “ But Mr. Stevenson says that he has no-
other invoice.” I made this glove invoice a test -point, because,
having marked it off and initialled|it shortly before leaving Steven-
sons’, the particulars were fresh in my memory, and I had told Mr.
Guthrie at the first interview that I had marked off an invoice of
cffoves L.S. /Cx & S., ex Thermopylae, amounting to about £110;
<**>B4l.
and on his reference to the entry it was discovered to have been
passed at £GI Bs.
Failing to get satisfaction about the glove invoice, Mr. Guthrie
advised my examining some goods that were at the railway sheds.
I consented to do so, and saw some Aberdeen | hose, manufactured
by Hadden, of Aberdeen, and which I discovered to be undervalued.
The Customs invoice did not correspond with the invoice I had in
the department; the marginal numbers were not the same as those
on the goods ; nor were the marginal numbers Hadden’s numbers
for the goods. Some persons were called to value them, but their
valuation, although in excess of Stevensons’, did not confirm my
statement of their actual cost. The latter was derived from the
genuine priced invoice and Hadden’s list. I had also the buyer’s
(Mr. Henry) reports to the Melbourne house, containing a
record of the prices at which he had placed the order with Hadden.
Said reports were in the department when I left. The result of the
examination was not considered sufficiently satisfactory by Mr.
Guthrie, who hesitated about taking further action. I then con-
sulted a solicitor, and made a “ statutory declaration,” based upon
what had come under my observation when in the warehouse, and
had been confirmed since by seeing the Customs entries. It was
then that Mr. Stevenson was compelled to admit that he had another
set of invoices, and upon Mr. Guthrie asking for some they were
produced. They were given to Mr. Guthrie ostensibly as the ones
used in the departments to mark off the goods by, but they proved to
be simply duplicates of the undervalued Customs invoices, and were
subsequently repudiated by some of the managers at the Custom
house inquiry upon oath.
I pointed out to Mr. Guthrie as a significant fact that not one
hosiery invoice was produced out of about 3000 which I had initial-
led in the department. Continued pressure on the part of Mr.
Guthrie could not induce Mr. Stevenson to produce any, and at my
suggestion he asked for even one bearing my initials. At length
one°was produced, mirdbile dictu, with my initials, which I instantly
acknowledged, and said to Mr. Guthrie that it proved the truth of my
statement, and showed I was in the habit of initialling my invoices,
and putting the date on as well, when the goods were marked off.


Alter this Mr. Guthrie took action, and instituted the inquiry on
oath at the Custom house, at which a number ol Stevenson’s em-
ploye's were examined, as also Mr. Stevenson himself; and, although
some were very unwilling witnesses, Mr. Guthrie received sufficient
corroboration of my statements to enable him to place the facts
before the Honorable the Commissioner of Customs, who gave in-
structions for immediate and decisive action. Mr. Guthrie then
gave Mr. Stevenson until 10 o’clock the following morning to pro-
duce one of the recapitulation statements, which, it was admitted at
the Customs inquiry, showed the actual nett cost of the goods. Mr.
Stevenson tailed to produce the document, and Mr. Guthrie then
entered the warehouse for the purpose of searching for and seizing
uncustomed goods. When Mr. Guthrie entered the warehouse and
read the writ on the 7tli April, I believe that I am correct in stating
that Mr. Stevenson said, “You are taking this action on the statement
of Trowell, a discharged servant.” “On Trowell’s statements,” replied
Mr. Guthrie ; “ why your present employes have condemned you
more than he has.”
With the ejection of the Customs’ officers on the Bth April and
their re-entry on the same day, I have nothing to do. I was sworn
in on the 10th April as an assistant of the Collector of Customs, to
enable me to point out uncustomed goods, which I could identify
from the invoices in the possession of the Customs. I entered the
warehouse and pointed out the goods, which were seized and carried
to the Queen’s Warehouse. It was an unpleasant duty, but I was not
to be deterred from doing what the necessities of the case forced
upon me. The gloves seized were a portion of the case ex Ther-
mopylae, and at the time of seizure I noticed that the cost marks
which I liad put on had been erased and others substituted. I pointed
this out to the Customs officers at the time in the hearing of Mr. Blind.
When the goods arrived at the Queen’s Warehouse, the substituted
marks liad°been erased, except upon these boxes which had been
overlooked. The selling marks had been left on, and they showed an
.advance on the Customs invoice prices of
“OYER 75 PER CEtfT”
Although I was not allowed to come into contact with the experts
called °by the Customs, I have since learnt that their valuation
■of the gloves bore out the valuation as shoivn in the genuine
invoice. The invoice used by me in the department was in <£ Dent’s
clerk’s ” handwriting ; the goods were packed by “ Dent; ” and the
prices charged in that invoice were the prices paid by Stevensons,
without any deduction. Dent’s selling marks were on two of the
boxes, viz., a box of men’s real buckskin, marked to/-, representing
-625. ; and a box of buckskin tillburyed, marked ie/-, representing
70s. The prices on which duty was paid on these two lines were
respectively 525. 9d., and 595. Gd. It is not usual lor Dent’s to
leave their selling marks on their boxes, but it occassionaly occurs.
THE TRIAL.
The particulars of the recent trial in the Police Court of the


glove and flannel cases are too recent to require recapitulation. My
evidence was not shaken in the smallest iota.
A statement was made by Mr. Purves that I had added four inches
every way to the measurement of a case brought into court, which
statement was not correct, as the measurement of the case in court was
2ft. Bin x 2ft. Sin. x 2ft. sin.; and my estimate of the size of the case
which contained the gloves was 3ft. x 2ft. 9in. x 2ft. 6in. ; and it was
quite a coincidence that the second measurement was 4 inches larger
as well as th e first, for I only saw the mark 2ft. Sin. when I made the
calculation. But the size of the case is an immaterial point with me.
I know the value of its contents, which Stevensons| cannot disprove.
A great deal has been said about the
©
“RECAPITULATION STATEMENTS”
which Stevensons refuse to produce. I may here explain what they
are. They show the correct cost of the goods contained in any par-
ticular shipment, with the “ trade discounts.” The “ trade discounts,”
when there are any, are called over by Mr. Brind first, when he gives
out the invoices to the managers of the departments, and afterwards
by Mr. Hill, when the ship arrives. The recapitulation statement
agrees with the departmental invoices, and not with the Customs
invoices. The form ot the “ Recapitulation statement ”is under.
Take a supposititious ship, the
“ HALLMEI
HOSIERY.
163 (in diamond) 2120 —Men’s Brown Cotton £ hose ..
£41
6
2
2121— do. do.
44
5
9
2122 —Women’s White Cotton Hose
53
7
1
121 (in diamond)
490 —Fancy Wool Scarfs ...
£41
2
6
491 — do. do.
38
7
3
£79
9
9
5 percent. Trade Discount ...
3
19
6
- £75
10
3
181 (in diamond)
76 —Fancy i hose
£61
7
8
77—Fancy Hose
53
2
9
78— do.
76
1
5
£190
11
10
2i per cent. Trade Discount ...
4
15
4
£185
16
6
Packing charges
12
5
0
£412
10
9
-
5 per cent. Transit charges
—
20
12
6
Total,
£433
3
3
Thus the total amount charged to the hosiery department (excepting
duty) would be L 433 3s. 3d. Now 11 per cent, duty ought to be
paid upon L4OO ss. 9d., the net cost of the goods. So it can be easily
understood how the production of the recapitulation statements
would settle the question of fraud at once. The number
refers to the house the goods come from ; is I. and R. Morley


who allow no trade discount; is Harris, of Leicester, a manu-
facturer who allows 5 per cent, off fancy knitted hosiery ; and
is C. Noon, of Leicester, who allows 2J per cent, off fancy hose and
half-hose ; so that the recapitulation statements, which Mr. Stevenson
admitted to the Customs showed the true cost of the goods, ought to
correspond with the Customs invoices, but they do not.
Surprise has been manifested some people that the Customs
authorities did not wait after getting my information, and catch the
firm when the next shipment came in. That plan would have been
adopted hut for the following reasons : —A paragraph appeared in
The Australasian of March 11th, which circumstantially pointed to
the firm and myself. I was assured by one of Stevenson’s oldest
employes on the 13tli March that it referred to another firm, but his
subsequent conversations with me proved that the firm were on their
guard, and I knew it would be useless to wait for the next ship-
ment. All the shipments since the expose have been passed at
correct values, and duty paid upon the departmental invoices. It
was easy to distinguish the genuine priced invoices from the under-
valued ones, as I discovered that the latter had no case measurements
on them, which the departmental invoices always had.
It is a curious circumstance, that when Mr. Brind was under
examination at the Police Court, he should say that both the
Customs and departmental invoices were called memorandums, and
that Bell, the shipping clerk, should say that the Customs invoices
were called “ Price lists.” Such terms were never used while I was
in the establishment, and I think that it will he a novelty for the
other managers of departments to hear them so described.
I may state that I have not exposed more than was necessary
of Stevenson’s system of business, although they have not hesitated,
through their counsel, to endeavour to pry into my private affairs,
in a public manner. I could give particulars of the amount of their
trade from which significant inferences could be drawn, but do not
feel called upon to do so at present.
I must beg the reader to bear in mind that my reputation is as
dear to me and my family as Mix George Stevenson’s is to him and
his. I have done nothing to deserve the opprobrium which it is
endeavoured to thrust upon me, whilst Mr. Stevenson has.
I may conclude, by saying that if Mr. Stevenson thought chat I
should tamely submit to be injured and defamed by him without
endeavouring to assert my own rights as a man and citizen, he
much misunderstood my temper. I am not to be Cajoled by
bribes nor bullied by threats, like some people, and will therefore
dismiss the subject for the present with a repetition of the motto at
the head of this paper —
“ Let justice he done, though the heavens may fall.”
W. H. Williams, Printer, 68 Elizabeth street, Melbourne.
