

\ >^V M I8P9H I I \\ \ f*mmm-Xj
n -*
\ - A\ I \t k
\ / \\\| I 111 I 'm iomS^r 1 1JV
~^0^///// f ~ -''
ROBERT OVERTON


'
*•
%


m I *9




THE
SON OF A HUNDRED FATHERS


NEW 5/= BOOKS FOR BOYS & GIRLS.
All Beautifully Illustrated by Artists of the Day.
A Modern Puck. A Fairy Story. By Agnes Giberne.
The Sea Prince. A Fairy Story. By E. P. Larken.
The Son of a Hundred Fathers. By Robert Overton.
Under the White Ensign: or, For Queen and Empire.
By A. Lee Knight. Second Edition.
The Voyage of the “Avenger:” or, In the Days of
the Inquisition. By Henry St. John.
Cuthbert, Lord of Lowedale. By R. D. Chetwode.
Grantley Fenton : or, When the Century was Young. By
M. M. Blake. Second Edition.
A Jacobite Conspirator. By G. Norwayl
By the North Sea: or, The Protector’s Grand-daughter
By Mrs. Emma Marshall.
The Two Altheas. By Edith E. Horsman.
The Blues and the Brigands. By M. M. Blake.
The Bright Kernel of Life. By Isabel Suart Robson.
Three Children of Galilee. A Life of Christ for the
Young. By John Gordon. With more than 100
Illustrations.
By the Deep Sea. The Natural History of the Sea-shore.
By Edward Step. Second Edition.
The Every Day Book of Natural History. By J.
Cundall and Edward Step. Fourth Edition.
New Illustrated List, containing se^er^u^f Q r^ s s t ° f p °P ular
Books for Presentation, Free on Request.
London ; Jarrold dr Sons, 10 dr n, Warwick Lane , E.C.




\ V/' V
I 1 * sr-'fp-' OLSsk 1 \
8841
I’ll take those guns!” he cried.—/. 339'


The Son of a Hundred
Fathers
DARING DEEDS IN DANGEROUS DAYS
ROBERT OVERTON
AUTHOR OF “THE KING’S PARDON',” “LIGHTS OUT,
* “AFTER SCHOOL,” ETC.
U'ITH THIRTV-FOUR ILLUSTRATIONS BY I. B. GREENE
LONDON
JARROLD & SONS, 10 & n, WARWICK LANE, E.C.
[All Rights Reserved ]
1899




William Overton
WREXHAM.


,


PAGS
II
22
26
32
41
50
57
66
73
So
- s 7
96
100
108
- 114
120
127
133
- 141
146
- 152
163
A 7/6/003
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. eaglebeak’s baby - - - - II
11. THE BOY OF THE PROLOGUE AND THE SON OF A
HUNDRED FATHERS 22
111. AN UNKNOWN VOICE FROM FAR AWAY - - 26
IV. A RUNAWAY’S RETURN 32
V. THE MARK ON A COWARD’S CHEEK- - 4 1
VI. THE BRAND OF CAIN- 50
VII. AFTER THE DEED - - - - 57
vm. off 66
IX. IN LONDON TOWN - - - - 73
X. AT DEAD OF NIGHT - 8o
XI. ONE AGAINST THREE - - - - 87
XII. THE BLUE PETER - 96
XIII. ABOARD O’ THE “ LADYE LOVE” - - - 100
XIV. AN OMINOUS SIGNAL - - - 108
XV. WHO COULD HE BE? - - - 114
XVI. LIGHT IN THE DARK - - - 120
XVII. HOW DID YOU DO IT ? - - - - I2J
XVIII. THE COURT-MARTIAL - - - 133
XIX. IN THE STRAITS OF BAB-EL-MANDEB - - 141
XX. STEERING A SLAVER - - - 146
xxi. “keep your pecker up!” - - - 152
XXII. THE FINDING OF THE JURY - - - 163
xxiii. barnacle’s yarn .... x6B


CHAPTER
XXIV. ALL HANDS LOST -
XXV. THE SECRET OF PROFESSOR CARL HECKMANN - 180
XXVI. ON THE VOYAGE TO THE SECRET ISLAND - igi
XXVII. “ WHERE ARE WE ? ” . . . jgB
xxviii. job’s comforter - - . 203
XXIX. A CRY FROM THE SEA ! 2 08
XXX. SAVED FROM THE DEEP - - 2 11
XXXI, WALLACE GRAHAM - 215
XXXII. A STRANGE SAIL IN SIGHT - - - 2IQ
XXXIII. A STARTLING STORY - - - 222
XXXIV. THE SMOKE IN THE OFFING - - 228
XXXV. THE HAWK AND THE DOVE - - - 233
XXXVI. IN THE POWER OF A PIRATE - - 237
XXXVII. THE SCENT OF BLOOD - 244
XXXVIII. THE RED BUTTON - - . 249
XXXIX. THE DUEL - 253
XL. “EACH FOR HIMSELF, AND GOD FOR US ALL 259
XLI. A PLUCKY PARSON - 2 66
XLII. THE END OF JEREMY MURRICK - - 273
XLIII. ALMOST THERE - 278
XLIV. THERE ! - 285
XLV. ALONE ON THE BURNING ISLAND - - 290
XLVI. AN INTERRUPTED NARRATIVE - - 295
XLVII. ON BOARD H.M.S. “INDOMITABLE” - - 303
XLVIII. AT last! - 3 10
XLIX. “COMMITTED TO THE deep” - - . 3x6
L. AT BAY! - - - - . 3xg
LI. NO QUARTER! - - - 331
LII. THE PIRATES’ LAST STAND - - 338
LIII. LORD CARSTAIRS -
LIV. A LETTER FROM THE GRAVE - - 34g
LV. EPILOGUE - 353


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
“ ILL TAKE THOSE GUNS ! ” HE cried - Frontispiece.
THERE ON THE GREEN GRASS . . . LAY A LITTLE BABY - 14
“NOW GET UP,” I SAID, “AND TAKE YOUR REVENGE” - 44
HE PULLED ME TO MY FEET BY THE COLLAR OF MY COAT - 59
I WAS TRIPPED UP BY A ROPE WHICH A BATCH OF SAILORS
WERE HAULING INBOARD
I HELD IT UP TO THE GAZE OF THE THREE AT THE DOOR - 129
IN AN ABSOLUTE FRENZY I HIT OUT LEFT AND RIGHT - ! 57
PROFESSOR HECKMANN -
I SLIPPED OVERSIDE
WALLACE GRAHAM ’ FELL INTO MY ARMS
I WAS LOOKING AT HIM, I WAS HEARING HIS VOICE, FOR THE
LAST TIME
FLAME, SMOKE, BALL, AND SHELL SUDDENLY BELCHED FROM
BOTH SIDES OF THE “ SCHOONER ”
“l AM LORD CARSTAIRS ”
' 346




THE
Son of a Hundred Fathers
CHAPTER I.
PROLOGUE,
EAGLEBEAK'S BABY.
HE boys of Gleet Hall
Academy were in the
middle of afternoon
school.
As monitor of the draw-
ing class, Younge Fallow
—nicknamed Eaglebeak,
and sometimes even called
so by the under masters
as well as by all his schoolmates—had charge of the
chalks and pencils and other things, and finding he had
forgotten the professor’s black crayons, he left the
class-room to go to the big school-house to fetch them
from his monitor s locker there. In order to reach the
school-house he had to cross the play-ground.


It was a beautiful warm afternoon, and in the pleasant
June sunshine a magnificent butterfly —a cherry-eater
floated right above the high brick wall. Eaglebeak
watched it, as it flew and floated and hovered about the
wall in a tantalizing way. By-and-bye it came down into
the play-ground and spread its rich fluffy wings under his
very eyes, and made him take his cap in his hand and go
for it. He missed it, and then it seemed to laugh in his
face and fluttered off towards the iron entrance gates.
There is something magnetic about a butterfly no
doubt you have often noticed the phenomenon. That
cherry-eater just made Eaglebeak helpless : he had to
chase it, and when it flew outside the gates he followed.
Across the road outside the gates was a hedge, over the
hedge was the cricket-field, and beyond the cricket-field
were the meadows of a farmhouse, and beyond them was
the fringe of a little-frequented wood.
Well, the butterfly cleared the hedge in first-rate style,
and sailed across the cricket-field, Younge Fallow after it
in full chase. Then it got into the meadows, and he was
still after it. The harder it was to catch, the more
determined he was to catch it. The harder it was to
catch, the more it seemed worth catching. The longer the
chase it gave him, the bigger and brighter and more
beautiful it seemed to become.
The minutes slipped away, till a quarter of an hour
passed before he knew it. Still the butterfly was dodging
about the meadows. He sc? nearly caught it several times


that he was certain he would catch it the next time he got
close to it. Over the meadows, nearer and nearer the
wood, on went the cherry-eater and on went Eaglebeak.
He had now made up his mind. In the first place, he
\\ ould catch that butterfly or die. He would skip the
diawing lesson altogether; the professor was an easy-
going chap, and might be put off with an excuse. He
would get back—with that butterfly—in time to march
with the class into the big school-house to answer to his
name at roll-call. He stood a good chance, by this dodge,
of avoiding trouble and punishment altogether—anyway,
he would risk it. So when the butterfly reached the
fringe of the wood, Eaglebeak was there too, in “good
order,” and only a few yards behind.
Now was his chance. The cherry-eater seemed getting
tired first, for it was just lazily poising itself in the
sunshine not a yard from his hand. Just one sharp jerk of
his cap, and it would be caught at last! He made the
dash. Up soared the butterfly—up and away, never to be
seen by his eyes again. Eaglebeak’s foot caught in a root.
Down he fell “a cropper” on the edge of a bank, at the
bottom of which he finished his rolling with a bump. He
jumped up very hastily, because he had landed in the
middle of a nettle bed. He naturally gave a bit of a howl,
and this howl was answered by a very much weaker howl.*
The howl he heard was like a faint echo of the howl that
the stinging nettles encouraged him to give, and it seemed
to come from a cluster of wild flowers close at hand. Two


or three long, quick strides —and there on the green grass,
clutching with chubby fingers the bright flowers that
spangled it, and belabouring them with his tiny heels, lay
a little live baby !
Now Eaglebeak had a pet porcupine, which he kept in
his box in the hamper-shed, along with his white rats and
lay a little hahy. — p. 14.
There on the green grass
a few other pets, and as his startled vision fell upon the
“little stranger,” he felt the hairs of his head rising up like
the “ fretful ” animal’s quills. He declared afterwards that
nobody in the world ever felt just the same as he felt
as the baby left off crying and started cooing at him.
He knelt on the grass and determined to touch the baby
to make sure it was a real one —that eyes and eais were
not alike deceiving him. He knew he couldn’t be m a
dream, because there was nothing dreamy about those
stinging nettles.


As he leant over the youngster’s face and touched its
cheek with his finger, it clawed at him with its little fat
fist, and got hold of his hair. Then it wouldn’t let go, and
he felt certain it was laughing at him.
Eaglebeak remembered the stories he had heard or read
of deserted babies, and examined (but all in vain) the
child’s clothing, and all round the spot where it lay to see
if any writing or other clue had been left with it. For left
it must have been. It couldn’t have walked there, for it
was evidently too young to toddle. Perhaps it had only
been left there for a little while—whoever had left it might
be coming back for it, or might be somewhere near.
Acting on this last thought, he got up and walked all
round several times. No one was in sight, and there were
no houses or cottages at which he could enquire.
So back he came to the baby in worse perplexity than
ever.
What was he to do? He couldn’t leave the poor
helpless little mite there—somewhere and somehow he
must get it away. He started practising how to lift it up.
He got hold of it several times at the wrong end, and it
slipped through his fingers. But all the time it went on
cooing and laughing, as though enjoying the fun of poor
Eaglebeak’s agony and dismay.
At last the sound of a horse trotting along the bridle
path brought a gleam of hope. Eaglebeak looked up and
saw a gentleman coming along in the saddle.
It was his last chance, his last hope of mixing somebody


else up with the fright and perplexity of this deserted
baby. So again he left it, and rushed towards the
horseman. He shouted breathlessly :
“ Stop, sir ! Have you lost such a thing as a baby ? ”
Of course it was a stupid way of putting the case, but it
had long been considered that when Eaglebeak once
became excited—which was very often—he was not
responsible for either his words or his actions.
The gentleman thought evidently that he was only
being insulted. He just glanced indignantly at the
wild-looking boy who was yelling after him, and rode
calmly on, without even drawing rein—on out of
sight.
Eaglebeak and the baby were once more alone, face to
face.
At last he succeeded in getting a good grip of it, and
raised it gently from the ground. He covered it with the
mantle that formed a portion of its clothing, and tucked it
away under his coat. He took one last vain look around
to find any trace of a clue to the mystery of the baby
having been left in its bed of flowers, and then he headed
for the school.
In the middle of the first meadow he stopped, and
found that the little bundle under his coat had fallen
asleep. A funny sort of swelling feeling bubbled up in his
chest, and something wobbled about his heart that made
him kiss the little ’un. That woke it up, and it smiled
and chuckled at him, and then snuggled its little head


very close to him, and shut its little eyes again, and
resumed its sleep so peacefully.
When Eaglebeak reached the play-ground, the last files
of the boys from the different class-rooms had marched
into the big school to answer the roll-call, which happened
that afternoon to be called by the head master, Dr.
Groombridge himself. The doctor had just reached the
F’s when Fallow noiselessly pushed open the door and
slipped in. Covering up his bundle on his knees as well
as he could, he dropped into a seat on the end form,
farthest away from the pulpit where the doctor sat. He
hadn t been seated many seconds when his name was
called.
“ Fallow ? ”
“ Present, sir.”
His answer came from such a long way off from where
his proper seat was, that Dr. Groombridge looked up.
“ What are you doing down there ? ” he said sternly.
At that moment poor Eaglebeak felt the bundle
slipping, and made a movement to keep it steady.
“ And what are you fidgeting about like that for ? ” said
the doctor, very sternly indeed.
As you read what Eaglebeak blurted out before all the
school, you must bear in mind again that in moments of
excitement he was regarded as an irresponsible sort of
creature.
“What on earth are you fidgeting about like that for?”
was angrily repeated.


“Because, if you please, sir,” roared Eaglebeak, “I’ve
got a baby, and if you’ll let me keep it, I’ll sell all my
white rats and kill my porcupine ! ”
One of the strangest scenes followed that any school-
room in the world can ever have known. The baby-finder
got up, walked straight to the pulpit, told his story, and
showed the youngster. But it was noticed that he didn’t
offer to part wdth it, and that it made no move to leave his
arms. Even when the matron came and stretched out her
hands, it cried and looked back at Eaglebeak as she
carried it away.
A policeman was sent for, and he and Dr. Groombridge
and Eaglebeak all went to the spot where the last-named
had found his baby, and in the meantime every boy in the
school managed to have a look at the youngster itself.
The matron had washed and fed it, and it seemed to have
made itself quite at home. Nothing but the baby was
talked about that night, and the first thing in the morning
Eaglebeak rushed round to the matron’s room to know
how the little chap was. He brought back good news, but
in the middle of the day a rumour spread that it was to
be taken away to the workhouse.
The police had reported the case as being undoubtedly
one of wilful desertion—the child had been left to die
where Eaglebeak found it, and no trace could be found,
so far, of its parents or “friends.” So it was to be
taken to the workhouse.
Eaglebeak was awfully upset at the idea, and in reply to
some chaff, he said :


“You wouldn’t like it either if you’d found the little
beggar as I did, and if he’d laughed and chuckled at you
as he did at me when he got his arms round my neck.”
Then a sudden idea seemed to strike him, and he
cried :
“I’H tell you what, the kid shan’t go to the workhouse.
We'll keep him ourselves ! ”
“ Keep a baby ! ” cried a score of voices.
“Yes. Where’s Jorkinson ? A meeting must be called
at once.”
Jorkinson, the captain of the school, was found, and a
hasty meeting of the entire school called at once,
Jorkinson presiding. Eaglebeak expounded his tremen-
dous idea, which was nothing less stupendous than that the
school should bind itself to provide for the baby, first in
some private cottage in Gleet village, and perhaps
afterwards in some institution.
“We shall be the only school in the world,” he
exclaimed, “that has a baby of its own.”
For a few moments his hundred fellow pupils were
stunned with astonishment, and then they broke into an
enthusiastic cheer. A deputation was formed on the spot,
and, headed by Jorkinson and Eaglebeak, marched off to
have a special audience with Dr. Groombridge. At first
he seemed as surprised at the proposition as his boys had
been, but he promised the deputation an answer the next
day, and that the baby should not be sent away in the
meantime.


Then he despatched a messenger for Mr. Crope, the
Vicar, and they had a long confabulation in the study.
After morning school the next day, Dr. Groombridge
addressed the school before dispersal after roll-call. He
said ;
“ Boys, I have decided, in the event of nothing further
becoming known, to grant the strange request that you
have made to provide for the helpless child found by your
schoolfellow. For many reasons lam glad that you have
made the request; I am glad that you are all so anxious
to undertake this responsibility. I believe that it will do
you good to be responsible for this friendless, deserted,
helpless little one. I have found an honest woman in the
village who has consented to take charge of him till he is
old enough for other arrangements to be made. You will
have to start a fund, which must be properly administered,
and to which every boy who chooses to put down his
name must subscribe regularly. Mr. Crope has generously
handed me five guineas to start the fund, and I will myself
add five pounds. You must arrange a number of necessary
details among yourselves, and bring your plans to me for
my approval. As far as possible, this affair must be
carried out by yourselves.”
Everything worked splendidly. A big money-box,
on which was painted “For Our Baby,” was never long
empty, and a lot of grown-up people added their names to
the subscription list. Many of the boys started to cut
down their luxuries, in order to subscribe to the fund


periodically. The doctor referred to this sort of thine
when he said the responsibility would do good to those
who had undertaken it. It did do them good, and besides
that, the Boys of Cleet Hall Academy had the proud
satisfaction of reflecting that, alone of all the schools in the
universe, they had a baby of their own.


■ • <*Sj*
I v
| *' * ,
CHAPTER 11.
THE BOY OF THE PROLOGUE AND THE SON OF A
HUNDRED FATHERS.
AM —or should I say I was ?
—the baby boy of the pro-
logue.
I need not say that I have
no recollection of the in-
cidents narrated in that pro-
logue by another pen ; it is
now mine to take up this
“ strange, eventful history ”
from the point at which my
memory begins.
The twilight of that
memory’s dawn is crowded with many figures, all of a
similar type. They were the boys of Cleet Hall—the boys
(and their successors) who had saved me from the work-
house, and whose interest in me never flagged. I know now


that they drove almost mad the poor old woman who had
taken charge of me, by the frequency—and noisiness—
of their visits. They, more than she, taught me to walk
and talk. They directed the first conscious effort of my
reason by impressing upon me that as I was the “ Child
of the School,” and they were the school, therefore they
were my fathers—about a hundred of them.
“As his fathers,” was their insistent reply to all the
remonstrances of old Mrs. Murrick, “we are entitled to
see the kid whenever we like.”
They gave me the name I bore until I discovered my
true one. According to an accepted tradition of the
school, thirty-nine two-sided fights and three general
engagements came off before the knotty and much-
disputed question as to what my name should be was
decided. In all the general engagements and most of the
duels the fists of Eaglebeak participated. It was his
contention that I ought to be named “after” him, because
he found me, but to this it was objected that a name
identifying me with the whole school would be more
appropriate—to say nothing of the unfairness of sending
me into the world with such a cognomen as “ Younge
Fallow ” tied on to me.
“ Why,” said to Eaglebeak the boy with whom he had
last fought, “if we give him your name, when you are
hung who s to know that this poor innocent little kid
won’t be suspected of being the chap ? ”
The row ended in a compromise, and the compromise
took the form of “Younge Cleet.”


By-and-bye my numerous fathers constituted them-
selves also my preceptors—they took my education in
hand : by fits and starts, it is true, but with an astonishing
average of energy. Somehow or another they really
managed to knock a good deal into my head—perhaps
because I was as eager to learn as they—spasmodically—
were to teach.
Of course in a few years all the boys who were at the
big boarding-school at the time when Eaglebeak found
me, and the school adopted me, had left to go to college
or out into the great world—one by one, and in twos and
threes and half dozens, the number of my original fathers
had melted away. But the charge they had taken upon
themselves was taken over readily enough by their suc-
cessors, who adopted the same paternal airs and exercised
the same paternal authority.
One event of those early days looms large in my mental
vision as I look back—that event was the leaving of
Younge Fallow, whom I had come to regard as my
principal father. I certainly owed more to him than to
any one of my other fathers, much as I owed to them all.
The strange figure of this strange young gentleman stands
out in more clearly-defined outlines than the other figures
of the picture, and I have a distinct recollection of the
chokiness of his voice and the fishiness of his eyes as he
said good-bye to me and told me to keep my pecker up.
When I was about twelve my education was taken in
hand by good old Mr. Grope, who was surprised to find


that so solid a foundation had already been laid for him to
build upon. Presently he gave me the run of his library,
and I became an omnivorous reader. He, Dr. Groom-
bridge, and Sir Geoffrey Norman, were the three principal
people of the village of Gleet, which was a quiet, sunshiny,
typical Kentish hamlet. Sir Geoffrey had the reputation
of being a recluse of surly habits. He led a secluded life
on his magnificent estate beyond the little village itself,
every brick and timber of which belonged to him. He
received no company and paid no visits.
More than fourteen quiet years slipped unexcitingly
away. I was judged now to be fifteen years old, and was
certainly not so young as quite a large number of my
fathers! The events that altered the tenor of all my life,
and crammed so many of my after days with perils,
adventures, and escapes, came with a rush. They were
very close at hand.


CHAPTER 111.
AN UNKNOWN VOICE FROM FAR AWAY
HAD something on my
mind. It had been there
a long time, and for a
long time I had wanted
to unburden myself, but
I had hesitated between
Dr. Groombridge and Mr.
Grope as the recipient of
my confidence. At length
I decided upon laying my
thoughts bare first to the
Vicar, knowing well that I
could trust him to repre-
sent matters to Dr. Groom-
bridge better far than I
could present them. Con-
sidering what was the subject-matter of my reflections
and determination, I had a feeling that it would be in
better taste to approach the head master through the


Vicar, rather than to seek a special audience with the
former direct. Accordingly, I presented myself one cold
winter’s evening at the Vicarage, where the sweet-faced old
derg} man, the friend of every soul in his parish, received
me, in his warm, snug study, with his customary bright
smile and kindly handshake.
lounge, my boy, glad to see you. I’ve been
thinking about you lately, and now you ve come to see me.
Quite right, quite right. Sit down. What is it ? Any-
thing the matter? as he glanced at my somewhat
agitated face.
“Yes, sir,” I answered. “ I’ve something on my mind.”
“ Out with it, then, out with it.”
There was just a little more of the parish priest in his
expression as he beckoned me to draw my chair closer to
the fire. He gathered together some loosely-scattered
sheets of manuscript on the table, placed them on one side,
and turned his keen, kind old eyes full upon me.
“ I’m fifteen years old, sir,” I blurted out.
“ Ah ! ”
And I feel that I ought to be doing something for my-
self, sir. I hope I shall never forget—l know I shall never
forget—all that Dr. Groombridge, and the young gentle-
men of Gleet Hall and yourself, Mr. Grope—all that you
have done for me—all that I owe to you. I shall never
forget any of it. My heart burns with gratitude when I
think of it, and I always am thinking of it. But lam old
enough now to understand things, sir, and to realise that I


ought not to be an object of charity any longer. I can t.
I won’t, sir. My food seems to choke me when I have to
know that I have done nothing to earn it. God knows
that what I feel I don’t feel because I am ungrateful; but
Ido feel what I feel all the same. And I think I ought to
feel it, sir. I think that I ought to be ashamed of myself
if I didn’t. I’m big and I’m strong, and I’ve learnt a good
deal. Others have had to face the world not so well
equipped for the battle as I am, no thanks to myself for it.
Will you explain to Dr. Groombridge what I feel and what
I mean ? I know you understand, sir, and then he will
explain to —to —to my fathers.”
In spite of my agitation, I could not help smiling as I
used the old familiar expression, and the Vicar smiled with
me. I don’t know how he did it, but he made me under-
stand that he grasped and sympathised with the innermost
thoughts that were so stirring my heart, notwithstanding
the crude and clumsy form in which I had expressed them.
“We have been speaking lately—Dr. Groombridge and
I—about this very subject of your future, Younge. What
would you like to be ? ”
He asked the question abruptly, but I was quite ready
with my answer.
“ I want to go to sea, sir.
“ Every boy of fifteen does.”
“ But I mean it —I do, indeed.”
“ do you know of the sea ? ’
“ Nothing.”


“ You have seen it ? ”
“Never, sir. I have never been more than a few miles
away from this village in my life,’'
“Of course not—l was forgetting. Then will you tell
me, my boy, if you can—quite quietly, you know, and
sensibly —why you want to be a sailor ? ”
“I don’t know that I can, sir; I don’t think I can
explain simply what I feel so strongly. I lie awake of a
night and think of the sea in all its aspects of which I have
read. I think of it, and see it, when the winds blow and
the waves rise and roar; and I think of it, and see it again
1 D >
when only blue skies are clear above it, and when it lies
quite still and calm and peaceful in the dazzling sunshine.
It seems to me that the great, to me, unknown sea is draw-
ing me to it, whether I would or whether I would not. It
can scarcely be superstition, for you have always taught
me to despise that, but what is it, sir, that makes me
think perhaps I should say believe without thinking—
that the key of the secret of the mystery of my parentage,
my birth, is either to be found on the sea or in some far-
away part of the world to which its waters roll ? If not
if it has nothing to reveal to me, nothing to lead me to—
why does the sea keep on drawing me to it, as I tell you it
does, sir ? ”
In my earnestness I had risen from my seat and drawn
close to the Vicar’s side, and had even laid my hand lightly
upon his arm. I withdrew it as he spoke.
“Superstition I have taught you to despise, even as I


despise it myself; but I hold with Shakespeare—you know
the passage, Younge—that there are more things in heaven
and earth than we wot of in all our philosophies. Go on.”
“ I will go on, sir. I will tell you what I have feared to
tell any one lest I should be laughed at. Sometimes I
hear more than the voice of the sea itself calling to me. I
hear a human voice crying to me from across the waters —
crying to me from over the sea. I can see no face, discern
no form, but at night I hear the voice. I hear it, I hear it,
I hear it! And once or twice I have heard with the sound
of the voice the sound of the clanking of chains ! ”
I had not meant to pour out my heart like this, I had
only intended to urge my point that the good friends who
had looked after me so far, and provided for all my needs,
should now let me go into the world and fight for my own
hand, make my own way.
But I had no cause to regret having spoken as I had, no
cause to wish I had not laid bare my heart as I had done,
for my confidence was received with a fatherly tenderness
and priestly respect.
“ I have noticed, Younge,” said the Vicar very gently,
■“ that the bent of your mind is rather towards the mystical,
and it won’t do you any harm to remind you that the
world you are so anxious to enter into the struggle of
is a very practical sort of world, in which the mystic is apt
to get relegated to a back seat. I bear in mind also—and


AN UNKNO JVN VOICE FROM FAR A TVA V. 3 r
you had better do the same—that your life has in a certain
sense been a lonely one. You have belonged to the school
without being of the school, and with the village lads you
never would associate. Once or twice the idea of sending
'b
>ou au ay to an institution or to a school was revived, but
it did not come to anything. I think that the circum-
stances of your life have encouraged you, perhaps too
much, in a natural tendency towards the habit of intro-
spection. Don’t carry the habit too far—for that way lies
morbidity.
“That’s enough of the mysterious side of what you have
told me—now let’s turn to the practical. As I implied
just now, the doctor and I have felt lately that the time
was approaching, or had come, when the question of your
future ought to be considered and decided. I know that
he will think all the more highly of you, as I do, for having
taken the initiative yourself. The question of what is to
be done with you—and done for you—shall now be settled
almost immediately. So far as I am concerned, I have
nothing to say against your choice of a sea calling; but I
need hardly point out to you that it will be to
follow such advice as may be given to you, even though it
should be advice to do what may be contrary to your own
inclinations.”
He interrupted my warm-hearted thanks by a pressure
of the hand that I took to be a signal of dismissal. I left
the Vicarage with the happy conviction that the interview
had brought my cherished plans within a measurable dis-
tance of fulfilment.


, 0itk£ f -tt.'
CHAPTER IV
A RUNAWAY'S RE I URN.
HE early night had dar-
kened when I left the
house, which, with the
Church, was situated off a
lonely bye-road some dis-
tance from the little village.
This bye-road led directly
on to the high road on
which lay the nearest large
town of any importance —
Nesterton, some half-a-
dozen miles away.
As I left the Vicarage
grounds and stepped into
the roadway, I heard,
rapidly approaching me,
the sound of a horse’s gal-
loping hoofs, striking the hard road so sharply that the
echoes of the impact rang out crisp and clear in the
blackness of the moonless and starless night.


Countryman-like, I was wondering who he could be who
made such haste, when the noise of the clattering hoofs
suddenly ceased, to be followed instantly by a shrill cry of
pain.
Pelting down the road as fast as I could run, I almost
stumbled against the body of a fallen man, over whom
stood a trembling but otherwise motionless horse.
The thrown equestrian struggled into a sitting posture,
and tried to rise to his feet, but sank back again with
groans of agony.
. 1 knelt hy his side - bent my face close to his, and recog-
nised the head groom from the stables of Sir Geoffrey
Norman, perceiving also that the recognition was mutual.
“ Are you badly hurt ? ” I cried.
_ ave a look at the mare,” was the groom’s charac-
teristic response. “Is she hurt ? I can’t get up to see.”
I scrambled to my feet, and, as well as I could, over-
hauled the beautiful animal standing patiently by. With
the exception of'a few scratches on her near-side flank I
could detect nothing amiss with her.
Feel her knees— has she broken ’em ? ”
“ Xo ’” 1 answered ; “ they’re not even scratched."
I thought not,” said the injured groom, with a sigh of
re ief, succeeded by another groan of pain. "She caught
r fore-foot on a loose stone; I checked her as she
stumbled, and she fell on her side. My left leg got
oubled under her, and my ankle’s sprained, or something.
Any way, I can’t put foot in stirrup again to-night-and X
was riding on an errand of life or death.’’ c


“ Life or death ! ” I exclaimed.
“Yes. Sir Geoffrey has been taken mortal ill,” replied
the man, speaking even more rapidly than before, “ and I
was riding for all I knew to fetch the nearest doctor to him
from Nesterton. A lost minute may turn the scale against
him. Run, my boy—run your hardest, Master Gleet, back
to the Park—tell them to saddle the roan gelding and
pack off another messenger for Dr. Arncliffe at once, and
then let another man come here to help me. Stop, stop !
It’ll take you nigh on half-an-hour to get to the stables on
foot, run as you will. Do you think you could stick on to
the mare ? ”
“ I’ll try,” said I.
He took a rapid eye-measurement of the length of my
“ Tighten the girths two holes, then up with you—she’ll
stand as quiet as a lamb, and carry you like the wind.
You’re a good-plucked ’un, young Gleet. Steady, mare—
whoa, my girl! whoa ! ”
With unaccustomed fingers I adjusted the girths as
directed, got one foot in the stirrup, and bounded into the
saddle—fortunately not for the first time in my life,
though I had never bestridden such an animal as this
before.
“ Give her her head—don’t rein her in like that—grip
tight hold with your knees, and never loosen ’em—now off
with you. Remember, it’s a case of touch-and-go—for life
or death ! ”


I dashed off up the road, but
“ Hi! come back ; hi! hi! ”
The mare, it seemed to me, turned of her own accord at
the sound of the voice she knew so well, almost unseating
me as she did so. But I remembered the injunction I had
received to ride from the knee, and I stuck on.
“ What is it, Thompson ? ”
“ You’ll do—you’ve got the nerve. There’s a chance for
you to make your fortune to-night, if you send the doctor
in time. Ride straight on to Nesterton yourself, and tell
him Sir Geoffrey’s dying. The saving of half an hour may
mean saving his life. Give her her head ! ”
“ What about yourself?” was all I asked.
Never mind me,” was Thompson’s plucky reply. “ I
can crawl as far as the village somehow, even if I’m
obliged to do it on my hands and knees. Off with you ! ”
Not another word passed between us. I touched the
mare s flanks with my heels, and, shaking her head with an
indignant snort, she dashed ahead at a smart trot. Know-
ing that a gallop was easier work for a novice, I pushed
her from a trot into a canter, and from a canter into a
tearing gallop. I held on as best I could. The tall
hedges on either side looked in the darkness like two
thicker streaks of blackness as we raced along between
them.
Turning the sharp corner where the bye-road joined the
highway, I took the turning too sharply, and came a
cropper. But I kept my hold of the reins, and was only


dragged on my face a little way over some newly-broken
stones. I was soon in the saddle again, and holding on for
Nesterton at the same break-neck speed. I had to clear
my eyes every now and then, because something kept
running down my face.
The twinkling lights of the town soon shone ahead, and,
covering the intervening distance without any further mis-
hap to her rider, the mare, in a very short time afterwards,
was striking sparks of fire from the cobble stones of the
main street.
I pulled up in the glow of the red lamp outside the
doctor’s house, and threw myself off. The clamorous
ringing of the bell had not ceased when the door was
swung open by a man-servant in livery.
“Is Dr. Arncliffe in ? ” I asked breathlessly, as I
fastened the reins round the gatepost.
“Yes. Come this way.”
The man preceded me down the passage, and threw
open the door of the surgery. It had scarcely closed
behind me before the doctor entered.
“ Hulloa, my lad,” he said ; “ had a spill ? ”
“No, sir,” I answered—“at least, I did come off, but that
isn’t what’s the matter. You’re wanted at once at Norman
Royal, sir. Sir Geoffrey is thought to be on the point of
death. You’re to go at once, sir, please—every moment is
precious.”
Dr. Arncliffe acted very quickly, but without the
slightest flurry or any indication of hurry. The mare I


had ridden was ordered into his own stable, his carriage
1 o
ordered out, and a basin of warm water brought into the
surgery.
“ Wash your face and forehead thoroughly,” he said to
me, “ I’ll dress your cuts in the carriage.”
In ten minutes we were off. He made me sit by his
side, and with rapid fingers he bound up what he called
my wounds. Then he listened to the little I had to tell
him as to how it was that I had acted as the messenger
o
from Norman Royal.
Lying close to the hedge, a few yards from the spot
where I had left him, we came on poor Thompson, the
light of the driving lamps revealing him. He had tried to
crawl to the village on his hands and knees, as he had said
he would do, but the pain of his sprained or dislocated
ankle had overpowered and prevented him.
The doctor pulled the check-string, and himself helped
his man to lift the faithful-hearted fellow into the
carriage, where he used his own handkerchief as well as
mine as a temporary bandage round the injured limb,
cutting short the sufferer’s thanks by asking;
“What do you know of the nature of Sir Geoffrey’s
seizure ? ”
“ Only what the butler told me, sir. He said master had
fallen in a kind of a fit, and he thought he was dying.”
“ W hat time did this happen ? ”
“ Five minutes before I started to fetch you, sir—about
nine o’clock.”
Dr. Arncliffe looked at his watch.


“ Drive your hardest,” he called to his man on the box.
As we rattled through the village, I did not like to sug-
gest that it was there I should alight. I did not like to be
the cause of even a momentary delay.
Only the rumble of the wheels, the clatter of the hoofs,
and the occasional crack of the whip broke the silence as
we rolled on. The lodge gates were flung wide open at
our approach, and along the avenue that parted the far-
stretching park, we drove up to the main entrance of the
magnificent mansion.
The great door stood open, and a flood of light streamed
down the wide white stones that led up to the porchway.
Down these ran the butler, flinging open the carriage door
before the wheels had ceased revolving.
He followed close on the doctor’s heels as the latter
sprang out and ascended to the door, and I heard him say :
“ Thank God you’ve come, sir—and I hope you’re in
time. Sir Geoffrey is still alive.”
Thompson was driven round to his own rooms above the
stables, and, quietly and unperceived, I slipped away and
walked quickly to the village.
It was evident that Mrs. Murrick was sitting up for me
—the lamp that shed its rays from her little front sitting-
room window across the narrow pathway was almost the
only one now burning in all the straggling street.
This Mrs. Murrick was a singular, and, I used to
think, a very aggravating old dame. She was subject
to “moods” —occasionally moods of levity, but more


frequently moods of a lachrymose kind. In conversation
she was apt to begin her spoken reflections where her
thoughts left off instead of where they begun.
This hiatus was often embarrassing, for she made no
allowance whatever for the circumstance that her hearer
could have no knowledge of the unspoken thoughts that
had preceded her spoken thoughts. For instance, she
would make some such sudden remark as, “ You can’t
deny it, try as you will—they’re better biled ! ” and expect
the colloquy to be carried on from that point, without any
explanation on her part that for the previous ten minutes
her mind had been concentrated on potatoes, with special
reference to the respective advantages of steaming or
boiling them.
My bandaged physiognomy called for a brief recital of
the events of the evening. This over, I drew up to the
table and pitched into the piping hot supper she had kept
ready for me.
For some minutes the old lady was quite silent, then she
said jerkily :
“Well, after all, ’ares is ’ares.”
I knew that something was coming, but I also knew,
from experience, that I should not be able to hear it, and
“get it over,” any the more quickly by asking questions ;
so I said nothing, but went on with my supper.
“ Often have I beared you speak of ’em, and now I’ve
got one.”
“ Got what ? ”
The question was irresistible.


“A presumpimump.”
This was near enough for my accustomed ears. I knew
she meant presentiment.
“What has your presentiment to do with hares being
hares ? ”
“ My pre—thingamy—is about ’ares in connection along
of my scamp of a villain of a son Jerry. He made a clean
bolt of it in the days of your infanticide, leaving his poor
old mother for ten years without a word to say whether he
was alive or dead. The perleece was after him for a time,
but they give him up as a bad job. He was too artful for
’em, and he got clear away abroad. It was a poaching job
as he were chiefly wanted for. ’Ares was plentiful till he
ran off like a ’are—often as frequent as four a week.”
I had heard the story of the old widow’s scapegrace son
often enough. It was not a nice story by any means. I
held my tongue.
“ And now my presump—thing-o’-my-bob—is that we’re
a-going to have frequent poached ’ares again : occasionally
jugged, frequentially roasted, but always poached. For
Jerry have wrote to me at last that he’s coming home !”
She broke off with a short, sharp scream, I looked up
from the table, and saw that a shadow had fallen across
the room —a shadow that came from the red-curtained
recess of the window, as though someone were looking in
from outside.
Black and grim and ghastly, that shadow lay for long
athwart the pathway of my life.


' H v 1
CHAPTER V.
THE MARK OH A COIVARD'S CHEEK
i latch was lifted, a
blast of cold, shiver-
giving air rushed into
the room, and with it
—appropriate accom-
paniment—entered the
returned runaway.
For a moment Mrs.
Murrick stood irreso-
lute, as though bitter memories of old-time trouble,
suffering, and disgrace, brought upon her by this only son
of hers, were struggling with the maternal instinct that
prompted her to give him welcome. The latter triumphed
—she opened her arms, and would have folded him to her
poor old heart But he brutally avoided her embrace : he
drew himself away from her hungry kisses.
I m starving, mother. Give me something to eat
Hulloa ! ” was his rough salutation to myself. “ Hulloa,


young Charity ! still here, eh ? I hope his payments have
been kep’ up reg’ler, mother ? ”
With disgust, as well as with burning indignation, I
turned away from the sight of the leer upon his ugly,
swarthy face.
“You know my name,” I said with outward quietness ;
“if you wish to speak to me, address me by it.”
He broke into a harsh, coarse laugh.
“All right, Lord Charity —wait till I’ve settled down a
bit and taught you a thing or two. P’r’aps you and me’ll
be good friends by-and-bye.”
Beneath, so to speak, the jesting tone of his vulgar
retort, I detected the clear ring of a threat of bullying—
and I took his measure.
He was a man of about double my own age, and of a
trifle less than my own height—awkward, thickset, with a
red bull neck, a rather bloated face, and red-rimmed eyes.
He did not look like a sailor-man, somehow, though he
did look as if he had been a good deal at sea. The greasy
cap he had flung on the table was a peaked blue cloth
one, such as sailors wear ashore, and he wore a rough
blue jersey. The rest of his attire was of a nondescript
character.
With my usual “good-night” to Mrs. Murrick, and
without look or word for Jerry, I rose from the table and
went to bed, just as the returned but unrepentant prodigal
started what threatened to be a rambling account of his
ten years’ wanderings.


I felt absolutely certain—l knew at once, in fact —that a
crisis would very soon arrive in the relations of Jeremy
Murrick and myself; but I did not expect it quite so
soon.
For it came on the very next day.
I started to walk to Norman Royal to ascertain how Sir
Geoffrey Norman and Thompson were going on. Jerry
thrust his uninvited company upon me. As inoffensively
as I could, I told him I preferred to walk by myself.
There is no need to repeat the language of his jeering
reply. Suffice it to say that, amongst other terms of
abuse and insult, again he called me “ Charity.”
This time my blood literally tingled at the word.
Without even the warning that I ought to have given him
to prepare to defend himself, I struck him a blow with all
my strength between the eyes. He reeled and staggered,
and before he could recover his balance, I struck him
again. This time he measured his length, backwards,
upon the turf.
I threw off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeves.
“Now get up,” I said, “and take your revenge—if you
can. I’m a boy and you’re a man, but get up and I’ll face
you.”
I spoke bravely enough, but in my heart I had no doubt
as to what the issue of the expected fight must be.
Giving due weight to the fact that his evil life counted
many points against him, I could have no hope of beating
down his superiority of muscle and endurance. A stripling


of fifteen, even in good condition, couldn’t expect to hold
his own against a stiff-built man of thirty, accustomed to a
hard and laborious life.
Perhaps he would kill me—never mind, I would stand
up to him as long as I could, and whatever happened I
“ Now get up,’ I said, “ and take your revenge. — p. 43.
wouldn’t “give him best.” Kven if I got killed, or he
got killed, or we both got killed, he shouldn’t call me
“ Charity ” again.
That is how I felt as I said for the second time: “ Get
up, and take your revenge. I’m waiting for you.” But to
my amazement the coward declined the challenge.


“Yes,” he said, rising as he spoke, “ I’ll get up, and I’ll
take my revenge—but in my time, not in yours : and my
time isn’t now. You’ll know fast enough when my time
comes.” He put his hand to his face.
“ You see this ? ” he said, holding his fingers to a livid
wound on his cheek, where my knuckles had bruised him.
“ You put this mark here, and ’’—with a terrible oath
“you shall wipe it out—when I choose the time.”
So saying, without another word, but with a scowl that
was eloquent with unspoken meaning, he turned on his
heel and shambled away.
I rolled down my sleeves, put on my coat, and resumed
my solitary walk to Norman Royal, where I found that
Sir Geoffrey was still alive, and Thompson hopeful of
being able to use his sprained ankle again after a week’s
rest.
Several days passed, distinguished by nothing but the
realisation of Mrs. Murrick’s “presentiment” that hares
would again form a part of her household fare. Jerry was
out every night, but seldom out till night; and every
morning hares and other game had found their way into
the cupboard somehow. The further fact, after the lapse
of a few more days, that Jerry had plenty of silver in his
pocket pointed to the strong probability of his having
found a good market for such results of his poaching
expeditions as he did not bring home.
In the days of which lam writing, poaching was
regarded as a much more serious crime than, as a rule, it is


regarded as being now, and it was punished with a cor-
respondingly greater severity. Transportation across seas
was still often enough the fate of the offender who had the
ill luck to be sentenced by an unmerciful judge, probably
himself a preserver.
Such a judge, in both respects, was Sir Geoffrey
Norman. It was well lor the poachers brought before
him, as a Justice of the Peace, that his powers of punish-
ment were limited. Whenever he sat on the Bench at the
trial of such offenders—and he was never known to be
absent when a poaching case was on—either the maximum
term of imprisonment that the magistrates could inflict
was invariably awarded, or the prisoners were committed
for trial, in the hope that they would be sentenced
to a much longer term at the hands of a Judge of
Assize.
Now Sir Geoffrey being the only preserver of game in
the immediate vicinity—though shooting parties were
unknown on his estate —it was almost certain that they
were his preserves that Murrick was exploiting.
Who could wonder at his mother’s trembling anxiety,
for, if caught, what would be his fate with such a
prosecutor? Yet night after night this man who had
shirked a fair, stand-up fight with a boy faced a peril of
the gravity of which, one would have thought, nobody
could have had a better idea than himself.
How true it is that a coward is scarcely ever a coward in
all circumstances ; that he will shrink from one description


of danger and yet confront a greater danger of another
description, because, perhaps, it doesn’t seem so close.
I was now more than ever anxious to leave the village
and begin life on my own account, and I waited with
increasing impatience to hear from Mr. Crope. About ten
days after my interview with him he sent for me.
He had great news for me. Between them, Dr.
Arncliffe and Thompson had so exaggerated the value and
importance of the service I had been able to render by
riding to Nesterton in such hot haste to summon the
former, that Sir Geoffrey had expressed his intention of
rewarding me.
I kicked at the phrase.
“ 1 don,t want payment for the sort of thing I did that
night, sir,” I said hotly. “ I simply fetched the doctor to
a dying man, and the fact that the dying man was a rich
one and a baronet was an accident.”
“ But it is not for you, or for anyone, to forget that what
we call accidents are in the hands of an all-arranging
Providence,” said Mr. Crope—rather severely for so gentle
a man—“ and it is certainly not for you, from any feeling
of false pride, to refuse the aid of a gentleman with a
rent-roll of fifty thousand a year. I have spoken to Sir
Geoffrey about you, told him all about you, and you are to
go and see him. I may as well tell you what he is going
to do for you. He will give you a letter to a shipping
firm in London. That letter you will present in person,
and they will do everything else. They will see you


bound apprentice on a good ship, at Sir Geoffreys
expense, and also at his expense they will provide a
suitable and adequate outfit for you. I should say that in
little more than a week you may be at sea.”
My heart leaped within me. I felt that my eyes were
blazing, my face was beaming, with delight. Here was
my ambition gratified, here were my wishes all realised, at
one delightful swoop! I stammered out something, but I
didn’t know what. The Vicar hadn’t quite finished even
“ I need scarcely say that Dr. Groombridge is an
approving party to these arrangements. He, the young
gentlemen of the school, and another friend ” —what a
smile lit up the dear old face as he said “ and another
friend have made up a purse of twenty pounds for
you, Younge—a farewell present. Here it is—take it
now, and get ready for your journey to London
to-morrow.”
He placed a small but heavy purse in my hand—my
half reluctant hand.
I was ashamed then of the tears that choked my voice,
but 1 am not now.
“And now, my boy, God bless you! Remember Him
in all your ways—turn to Him in prayer in all your
difficulties —and may He direct your paths. Do and dare
the right, scorn and dread the wrong. Though you know
no father on earth, remember that you have been taught to
know your Father in heaven. God bless you ! ”


For a moment his old white hand touched the thick
mop of curls upon my head—and the touch was as the
touch of a falling blessing. Often and often in the dark
days that were to come I felt the gentle touch of that
blessing hand upon my head again, heard again that
softly-uttered “ God bless you, my boy ! ”
Aye, and God did bless me, through all and after all!


CHAPTER VI.
THE BRAND OF CAIN.
1R GEOFFREY had sent for
me, and for the first time in
my life I entered the great
mansion of Norman Royal.
He was in the dressing-
room adjoining his bedroom,
and he received me there,
sitting in a luxurious arm-
chair before a blazing fire,
costly wraps covering his
shoulders.
I had never seen him
before at close quarters, I
had not thought he was so
old as now I saw him to be, as I looked upon the hard,
cold, haughty face upon which the fire-light was flickering.
Had he aged suddenly that now the lines and wrinkles of
at least seventy years told their tale upon that proud face
so plainly ?


Neither by word nor gesture did he invite me to seat
myself—nor did he even greet me or acknowledge my
bow.
His valet stood by his chair, and seemed to know
exactly what to do without, so far as I could see. bein<r
‘ o
told. He handed me a letter, unsealed and open, addressed
to Messrs. Billiter and Oswald, Shipping Agents, Leaden-
hall Street, London.
“ Am I to read this, Sir Geoffrey ?” I asked.
“ You may read it,” was the answer, and I did so.
Its contents were exactly what the Vicar had prepared
me for.
For, I should think, several minutes I tried in vain to
frame my thanks in appropriate language, but I felt
overawed by the forbidding indifference of the baronet’s
manner, and the frigid dignity of the servant who stood at
his elbow.
Clumsily enough, I have no doubt, I got out at length
some sort of expression of the real gratitude I felt. But:
“You misunderstand,” said Sir Geoffrey in icy tones
scarcely looking at me. “You rendered me a service.
My doctor tells me that my life was saved by not more
than ten minutes—my groom informs me that at least an
hour would have been lost but for you—possibly a much
longer time, I pay you for what you did. Ido not allow
anyone to place me under an obligation.”
For one wild moment I felt like obeying my strong and
passionate impulse to fling the letter in the fire before his


eyes ; but calmer thoughts prevailed, and I pocketed it
instead.
With all the dignity I could muster: “You have done
me a kindness, sir,” I said, “but you have not done it
kindly:” and stalked out of the room and out of the
house, a sense of injury predominating in my mind rather
than any feeling of gratitude, now, for the great man’s
patronage.
“If I were Sir Geoffrey Norman, and he were poor I,” I
thought, “ I wouldn’t do him a kindness, great or small, as
though I were flinging a bone to a hungry dog.”
But presently, as I walked round to the stables to see
and thank Thompson, I suppose I recovered my com-
posure, for I remember that that letter in my breast
pocket made me feel sort of warm and comfortable about
the region of the heart. I regarded it as my passport to
fortune.
The loquacious groom and his even more loquacious
wife kept me talking to a late hour, the principal topic of
conversation naturally being my pending departure.
They had a son at sea, and I eagerly devoured some of
his yarns at second-hand.
When at last I left, a beautiful moon was shining, so I
made light of the fact that it was nearly midnight.
By way of a short cut I walked briskly across the great
park and scaled the wall instead of traversing the avenue
and passing out of the lodge gates. From the bye-road
into which I dropped I struck into some meadows, from


the farther side of which I ought to have taken a winding
path that led round one of Sir Geoffrey’s game preserves,
but to bolt through the preserve itself would save so
considerable a distance that after a little hesitation I
plunged into the thicket. Very little of the moonlight was
able to struggle into the many-treed enclosure, and I
should soon have been tempted to retrace my steps and
take to the path had I not known my way so well it
was by no means the first time I had cut through the
preseive to save the longer walk round it.
It happened in the thickest and darkest part of the
jungle, but close to a small clearing. To this day I
shudder to think of it—l shudder now as I write of it.
Let me tell it quickly, and have done with it.
Suddenly, without sign or sound of warning, I was
gripped by two vice-like hands from behind. An iron
band could scarcely have pinioned my elbows to my side
more firmly, more closely. The clutch was a ferocious
one, and it was a ferocious voice that exclaimed trium-
phantly ;
“Caught you at last! ”
The next moment my captor kicked my heels from
under me, and laid me flat upon my back. Then he bent
over me, and I felt his knuckles pressing into my windpipe
so fiercely that I could not speak.
I can t see much of you here, but you seem a young
un for this sort of work. Let’s have a look at you in the
clearing-.”
o


He dragged me towards the open space where the
moonlight was shining.
The instant his hand was taken from my throat, I cried
to him to desist and hear what I had to say. I knew well
enough that he mistook me for a poacher. Since Jerry’s
return a new man had been imported for the special
purpose of strengthening the force of the night keepers,
and with the special hope of capturing the particular
marauder whose recent depredations showed the craft and
cunning of a skilled hand at the game.
This man, whose voice and face—as I soon saw—were
unfamiliar to me, was the new keeper, flushed with the
pride of the belief that he had caught, almost red-handed,
the very thief who had baffled his fellow-keepers.
If he would only let me speak, let me explain, of course
I could soon convince him of his mistake. The letter in
my pocket would be sufficient, apart from the fact that I
had no implements of the poacher’s craft about me —in
fact, my identity alone would be sufficient.
But he would not let me—he gave me no chance to tell
him who I was ; no chance—till it was for ever too late —
all too late for ever !
I struggled to speak, struggled to rise, as he dragged me
along, and in the latter struggles I clutched a bare
low-hanging tree branch with both hands.
“Oh ! you’re a kicker, are you ? I’m used to that game,
and two can play at it. How’s that for an old perfes-
sional ? ” —and he kicked me on the head with his heavily-
booted foot.


I felt the branch give way from the stem—it was in my
hands. I flung myself on the brutal keeper.
Somehow—l cannot explain how, for I know not myself
my most vivid recollection of the brief struggle that
followed is its silence. In silence we fell to the snow-
covered earth together, and rolled together over the
blacken into the moonlit clearing. Neither shouted, neither
spoke. My teeth were set too tightly for any sound but
the sound of my hard breathing to pass them. That, with
the thud of his blows upon my face, was all I heard.
In the clearing each gained his feet. The keeper’s gun
was strapped across his shoulders from behind. I saw
him move one hand to sling it free. In that one moment
I raised high in the air the thick but supple branch I held,
and with a swinging lilt I brought it crash upon his
head.
He reeled, and shook the blood-drops from his forehead.
I flung aw'ay the branch, and fled.
I had not run far before I sank, utterly exhausted, on
the ground. The struggle had been too much for me. I
fainted.
W hen I recovered consciousness the peep-o’-day was
spreading in the eastern sky.
I felt dazed and sick and confused. Where was I ?
M hat had happened ?
As memory returned, a thought of terror possessed me.
That blow on the keeper’s head—why had he not followed
me • why allowed me to escape ? Had I stunned him ?


Had he, like me, but wounded, lain unconscious through
the freezing night? If so, I must help him—l must return
to him.
I sprang upright, and—staggering at first—made my
way towards the clearing.
I came upon him before I reached it. Between it and
where he lay—along the few yards he had moved from it
—blood-spots reddened the snow.
He lay with his face turned upward to the sky—his
white and waxy face. No blood was oozing now from the
wound upon his temple—it had frozen there.
With a cry that was half a scream I fell on my knees
beside him, and laid my hand upon his heart.
Dead !
I had never seen death before, but I knew that I saw it
now —death by my hand !
Was it as I felt that Cain felt as he looked upon the
body of the murdered Abel ? Cain, the first to bear the
branded brow!
What was it that seemed scorching my forehead,
burning into the flesh ?
I held up shivering hands to the widening dawn, and
held down my head to hide it, as I sobbed aloud :
“O God! O God! O God! Take away Thy hand
from my brow ! ”


i' ysjr
CHAPTER VII
AFTER THE'DEED.
TURNED with a scream—
for a masterful hand was
laid firmly on my shoulder ;
Jerry Murrick was leaning
over me, gazing into my
appalled and shrinking eyes
with a fathomless expression
in his own.
It did not occur to me to
ask myself or him how he
came to be there—l did not
even wonder at his presence.
I am almost certain that
he spoke first; lam almost
positive that I asked him
nothing, said not a word till he had spoken.
His voice sounded a long way off—or like a voice heard
m a dream-distinctly as it pierced my ears.


“ Murder !” he said—“ wilful murder ! What are you
waiting for—the policeman, the jury, the judge, and the
hangman ? ”
“ Don’t, don’t —Oh, don’t ! ” I cried.
“ It’s for you to don't. Don't be a fool; don't kneel
moaning there —you can’t bring him to life again with all
your shuddering and carrying-on. The man’s gone —and
why are you here ? Get up —and away with you.”
He pulled me to my feet by the collar of my coat, and
shook me roughly.
“There’s no blood on you—not a drop. You made a
neat job of it for such a young ’and,” he said admiringly.
“ How did you know that I . . . I . . . that I killed
him?” I gasped, a dull sense of bewildered wonderment
struggling into my numbed brain.
“Why, you gave yourself away by your own words: it’s
a lucky thing for you that it was me as heard ’em. You
was reg’ler raving. But it’s suicide as well as murder for
you to stand mumbling here. Come away with you, and
I’ll put you up to what to do. It’s a choice between
stretching your legs for yourself or having your neck
stretched for you by Jack Ketch ; and every moment you
lose you lose a chance.”
He grasped me tightly by the elbow to lead me away.
I stumbled forward with him a few paces —then I stopped
and tried to turn my head. The awful fascination of the
rigid form, the cold stark face, the staring eyes, of the man
I had slain would have drawn my trembling limbs again


\ i M •-A f * '1 '
■
i .lt ( ’ “ .
f 'wgL ' A < ” ‘ ' > iSlfej?
apr **
q
Al r ?2« ImJ
|j ' v
Sr^-*'; '\SL a/m
8832 "
He pulled me to my feet by the collar of my coat.—/. 58.




towards them. But with a torrent of savage oaths Jerry
prevented the movement. He placed himself behind me
and pushed me forward.
“ p ’ r aps you’d like to take it with you,” he sneered, “and
make an Egyptian mummy of it as a kind of a keepsake,
to be ’anded down in the fam’ly. It ’ud make a interesting
relic at a penny a peep, and be a reg’ler source of income,
and a ’ighly genteel sort of a fire-screen in the summer
time, propped up natcral against the mantelpiece in the
front parlour.”
I answered him nothing, for now I could not speak.
He led me out of the thicket, and skulked with me close
to the hedge-rows towards his mother’s cottage, which we
entered stealthily through the back door.
Mrs. Murrick was not up yet, and said Jerry, “we’ll cut
off without waking the old woman. We can leave our
cards on the chimbley-piecc instead of saying good-bye.”
I suppose I asked him what he meant—asked him what
he intended to do—for he went on ; “ It’s a good job for
you that I mean to do what Ido mean. I mean to take
this affair out of your hands, and manage it myself all
for you, to save your neck from the hangman, though you
did . . .”
He touched the still visible bruise on his cheek, and the
gesture was eloquent with meaning.
\ou ain t in a condition to act for yourself—you was
out on the spree last night, you know. So was I in a
manner of speaking, for the old woman carried on so when


you didn’t turn up that I started off to find you, and was
groping about all night. Mother told me the news before
I weighed anchor—you’ve got that letter from old Sir
Geoffrey to the shipping firm ? Good —hand it over. I
want to have a look at it.”
Mechanically I obeyed him, taking the letter from my
pocket and handing it to him ; he read it, and transferred
it to his own.
« That’s all right. And you’ve got that there purse of
twenty yeller boys ? Good again. Hand it over.
But I was gradually becoming a little more collected
my mental eyesight was slowly becoming a little clearer ,
my faculties were not now quite so numb. My will was
endeavouring to assert itself, and its first effort vas to
resent and throw off this fellow’s attempted domination of
my actions. I realised —feebly, it is true, but still with a
certain growing tenacity of apprehension —that if I allowed
him to control me now I might be in his power for ever.
“ Hand over the money,” he said again menacingly and
more gruffly yet.
I rose from the rickety sofa on which I had flung
myself.
“ Give me back that letter,” I demanded in a voice that
shook still, but was firmer than it had been.
We glared at each other. It was his demand against
mine, mine against his. Who yielded now might have to
yield all his life.
“ Give me the money.”


“ Hand me back my letter.”
I conquered but only for a few minutes. I was soon
to yield up to Jeremy Murrick the momentary victory I
gained.
Here s your letter, he said, ‘ and you may keep the
money. Have your own way. Now I’m going.”
“Where?” I asked, replacing the letter in my breast
pocket.
He halted on his way to the door and turned round as
he answered me.
“ To bring the policeman ! ”
I shivered, but pulled myself together.
“ Go,” I said, meeting the eagerly-anxious scrutiny of his
eyes—l think—unflinchingly. “I’d far better face this
thing out at once—at once and for all. I killed that poor
man—Oh! God help me, God forgive me. I know I
killed him, I own I killed him—but I did it in self-defence,
after all, and I didn’t mean to do it. I don’t believe they’ll
hang a boy for what he didn’t mean to do. Go and bring
the policeman! No—stop. I don’t want your inter-
ference. Stay where you are. I’ll go myself, and give
myself up.”
Why should that look of keen disappointment cloud
Jerry s evil face as he barred my impetuous movement
towards the door, against which he put his broad back ?
\ ounge, he implored with husky earnestness, “don’t
be a fool. The first step you take outside that door is
>our first step to the gallows. They will hang you, I tell


you. As for age, you look older than you are and who s
to say that you’re not a bit older than you’re supposed to
be ? All the weight of the great man at Norman Royal
will be against you, for remember it’s one of his keepers
you’ve murdered. The self-defence dodge won’t work, for
in stopping you, or struggling with you, or whatever hap-
pened of that sort —I don’t know, and don’t want to know,
what did happen—the man was engaged in a lawful act
and you wasn’t, even if you was only walking through the
preserve. As for ‘accident,’ a crack on a man’s temple
that does for him on the spot ain’t one. It’s all too black
against you. Bolt, and I’ll bolt with you, and stand by
you till you’re safe. Stay here, and I m bound to say the
word that’ll put the rope round your throttle. Where’s
the sense of giving yourself away ? With that letter in
your pocket, your fortune’s made. Wheres the sense of
chucking it away ? We can be in London before the day s
out, and aboard ship and away within a week. Your
hands are free—why put chains on them ? Don’t forget
I’m the only witness against you. Even if you’re sus-
pected, mine’s the only hanging evidence they can get
against you, and they can’t get my evidence if they can t
get me, and how are they going to get me if I’m safe away
with you beyond seas ? ”
As his quickly-moving lips uttered the words “ beyond
seas,” I heard the sound of another voice.
Ido not say that I seemed to hear it—for I heard it.
If it please you, attribute the phenomenon to the wildly


agitated state of my mind, coupled with the wording of
the appeal I was listening to ; accept, if it please you, the
hinted explanation that Mr. Crope had suggested for my
own consideration when I told him of the voice that called
to me sometimes in my dreams from over the sea. For
myself, I accept neither hypothesis, though I have no
other to offer.
For the first time in my waking moments, I heard at
that instant that voice calling wordlessly to me—and the
sound of the voice was followed by the sound of the clank-
ing of chains.


in min linn - 1
it ' 1 I
*** **■
CHAPTER VIII.
OFF l
WAVERED. Can it be
wondered at ?
Jerry perceived my hesi-
tation. He seized upon it.
And this time he drove
home an argument that hit
me hard.
“ Ain’t you going to
think of others as well
as yourself ? ” he asked.
“What about all them
fathers of yours up at the
school ? Ain’t you called the child of the school ? Are
you going to bring disgrace on them that brought you
up as well as ruin and strangling on yourself? What
about the doctor and the old Vicar ? Do you think they
won’t feel it, after all they’ve done for you ? If it comes to
that, what about my poor old mother, that’s tended you
from a babby ? Ain’t she a right to be thought of? It’ll


be the first hanging in the fam’ly ! Ain’t / a right* to be
took into account ? A nice thing it’ll be for me to look
back on, that it was my word as settled your hash for you
at your age. You’ve thought I was up against you ever
since I come back—maybe you’ve been mistook. Maybe
Ive thought kinder of you than you’ve supposed. Any-
way, here I am, offering to stand by you like a brother,
and pull you out of this awful hole you’ve fell into.”
I don’t think he would have succeeded in persuading me
to flee with him ; I feel certain that I should have obeyed
my own first strong impulse to give myself up and “face
it,” strong as some of his arguments against such a course
seemed to be: if from crafty words he had not proceeded
to a crafty act.
To face it is a grand way of meeting trouble or dan-
ger, boys. Often enough I wished afterwards that I had
so met my trouble and danger that day, instead of running
away from them.
He made one more attempt, “by word of mouth,”
further to move me. “ Will your stopping give life back to
the dead ? Is there anybody you’ll do any good to by not
making yourself scarce—and safe—before the hounds are
on your track ? They’re sure to get the scent somehow.
They’ll call at every house to find who was out last night.
Stopping to be tore to pieces by them is a cowardly thing
to all them I’ve mentioned, if it aint to yourself.”
I admit that his words were moving me, though still I
gave him no answer. But I repeat that I feel sure I should


have seen through the falsity of his representations, sus-
pected his personal professions, perceived the contradictori-
ness of his attitudes since the morning’s dreadful dawn,
and thrown his suggestions to the winds, had he not done
what he did.
He produced from one of his suspiciously capacious
pockets—each large enough to receive either a pheasant or
a hare—a metal flask, from which he removed the cap.
Then he held the flask to my lips.
“You’re trembling, boy—and no wonder. Here, drink
this, and steady yourself.”
If I could only “steady myself” I could soon come to a
decision—if I could only steady myself. That was exactly
how I felt. I took the vessel, and drank. Before I
realised the burning flavour of its contents, I had almost
drained it. Never before had spirits passed my lips —the
effects of this first draught on my already wildly disturbed
brain soon made themselves felt. My pulse beat furiously,
the blood ran hot in my veins, my brows began to throb.
Enough. It was in the mood thus begotten that I fell
in with all my tempter’s plans. It was in this mood that
I yielded up to him my initial victory over him.
Yes—l would seek safety in flight. Quick ! Let us be
off. Let us, with hot feet, put miles of land between our-
selves and that horrible, murdered, body in the copse—
and then leagues and leagues of sea.
In about ten minutes’ time we were out of the house.
But in one little point Jerry changed his mind.


“I think I’d better say good-bye to mother after all,” he
said. “ She’s lying a bit late this morning—she waited up
for you till near midnight. Hold on a minute and I’ll cut
upstairs to her, and it’ll avoid suspicion, may be, if you say
good-bye to her too.”
He ran up the narrow stairway and opened the door of
Mrs. Murrick’s bedroom. I heard the muffled sound of his
voice talking to her, and then her shriller tones as she
remarked :
“You can’t deny as a batter pudding baked under draws
the jooce ! ” The connecting link between this observation
and the good lady’s previous thoughts or dreams could
only be a matter of conjecture—the remark appeared to
be associated with the cooking of meat. Almost imme-
diately after her son rejoined me, Mrs. Murrick came
bundling downstairs, in tears and alarmingly scanty
apparel. Under her arm she carried a brown-paper parcel.
Small as it was, it contained all my worldly possessions
that were not on my body or in my pockets.
The hasty adieu was a tearful one on her part.
Whether she knew that her son had no purpose of return-
ing I did not know. Beyond stuffing a few things in h‘s
pockets, and changing his boots, he had made no prepara-
tions for a journey.
As we stepped on to the pavement and briskly down
the street, her voice came floating after us from the still
open door:
“ Socks i§ dried much quicker that way ! ”i


As we cleared the village, Jerry turned to me and said :
“ What about your school fathers, and Dr. Groombridge,
and the Vicar ? It’ll look bad for you to go without seeing
) >)
em.
But from the interviews he suggested I recoiled with
horror. No blood was on my hands, but there was blood
on my soul. The merry faces of the boys, the kindly
features of the doctor, the Vicar’s gentle smile—no, they
would be too much for me. Besides, though I could walk
straight so long as I walked fast, and could speak dis-
tinctly and hear clearly, I was conscious of a whirling in
my head and a fluttering at my heart of which it would be
impossible to conceal all the indications, and the indica-
tions would assuredly betray the nature of their origin.
“ No,” I said firmly, “ I won’t go either to the Hall or the
Vicarage —I can’t. I should betray myself.”
“ There’s something in that,” he agreed, looking closely
at my flushed face. “It would never do for them to
remember that you was in what the papers might call a
‘ strangely agitated frame o’ mind.’ And besides, they
might be for delaying you, and that would never do, either.
No—p’raps you’re right. Let’s push on.”
This we did in silence till we neared the high road, when
he harked back to the subject.
“ But you’d better be sure to write to ’em all, all fair and
shipshape, soon as we get to London.”
“Yes, I’ll write,” I replied shortly. “When shall we
reach London ?” I asked.


I should explain that the nearest station almost straight
ahead of us, on the recently-constructed railway, was dis-
tant about eight miles from Gleet, and about forty from
the great city. One stage-coach passed through the
village, both up and down, once a day, and along the road
we were now traversing.
“That depends,” Jerry replied to my question, “on how
we travel. If we go by this new-fangled steam locomotive
we shall get there this afternoon ; the coach would land us
there this evening; on foot, with a bit of a lift now and
again, we ought to fetch port some time to-night. I ain’t
got no fancy myself for the steam-horse at any time, and
in present circumstances I don’t much care even for the
coach—l’ve got my reasons for saying we’d better tramp
it”
His preference so exactly tallied with my own feelings
that I fell in at once with his proposal. Better far the
long and hard and lonely walk than the easier journey by
coach or train in company with others. We trudged on
for a mile or two without another word.
“ And what when we do get to London ?” I asked sud-
denly.
“Well, as for the time between when we arrive and to-
morrow morning, we shall natural put that in sleeping I
know where to doss. First thing after breakfast to-
morrow, off you goes with your letter to Leadenhall Street
—I know where that is too—and of course you do all you
can to hurry everything up, so that we can both be at sea


just as quick as possible. As you’re bolting to escape
hanging, and I’m bolting to escape being obliged to give
you away with my evidence, we’re bound up together now,
in a manner of speaking, and we both wants to hook it
sharp. First you speaks up for yourself, and shows your
letter—that’s right and natural enough—but soon as ever
that’s done you puts in a word for me—and let it be a
strong one, too, mind you—to the people as that letter is
wrote to. You gets a berth through Sir Geoffrey’s
influence, and then I gets one through your influence—sort
of working the thing round like. It’s a stooard’s berth
you’ve got to get for me. And, of course, till we do get
suited with a ship we lives free on your twenty pounds.”
Jerry Murrick was showing his hand already. The
village had gradually been getting too hot to hold him
almost ever since his return. This, then, was his real
immediate motive for throwing in his lot with mine—that
he might benefit by the influence which the old baronet’s
letter was undoubtedly calculated to give me, and plunder
my purse in the meantime.
Should I even now turn back ?
At the sound of trotting hoofs behind us we both faced
round.
Jerry clutched my arm.
“You’re done for !” he cried. “Here comes the police
patrol from Gleet, riding hard.”


v. . *' ■ / a; M [
I • w "" ' J
2le, ~ ' ** m\ -
CHAPTER IX
IN LONLON 7OWN.
ILDLY he looked up the
road and over the hedges
left and right, and ex-
claimed : “Can we bolt?
No ; he’d see us whichever
course we lay.”
“ Run, if you like,” I
said ; “ I shan’t. If I’m
wanted already, I may as
well be taken to-day as to-
morrow.”
Coming to a dead halt
and turning round, I
watched the approaching
patrol, whom I soon recog-
nised as an Irishman named
Barry O’Falvey, He was the only mounted constable
who patrolled our roads, and was a prime favourite with
all the village folk. I was glad that it was at his hands I


was about to be arrested, for I knew that I should suffer
from them no roughness, no unnecessary indignity.
Jerry stood cursing at my side as, rapidly, the officer
rode nearer.
Sure enough he drew rein as he came level. But
instead of dismounting, he only turned his red, good-
humoured face towards us ; and instead of the expected
words of dread, he exclaimed in cheery tones :
“Ah ! thin, the top of the morning to ye. Have ye
heard the news ? Shure and it’s great news intoirely, so it
is.”
“No, Barry, we’ve heard no news. What is it?” I
faltered.
“Sir Giffrey Norman is dead. He was took wid a fit
again last noight and died before he could hilp it. Shure
and he was a hard-hearted son of a flint, so he was, bedad
—list his ugly sowl! ”
He touched his spurs lightly on his horse’s flanks, and
bounded away up the frosty road.
“ Whew ! ” breathed Jerry, taking a hideous red handker-
chief from the inside of his cap and wiping his forehead
with it. “What a relief! I made sure it was all up with
you, but it’s plain enough that they haven’t even found the
body yet. It’s a rare bit o’ luck that the old Squire
slipped his cable last night—the excitement at Norman
Royal may give us an extra hour or two in hand.”
As for me, in the intensity of my relief I realised, as I
had'not before, the full horror of arrest on such a charge


as was hanging over my head. In the rush of feeling I
experienced as O’Falvey disappeared round a curve of the
road, my half-formed resolution to turn back and “face it”
after all was swamped and drowned. No—l had started
and I would keep on. With the coming of the patrol I
had felt a stifling at my throat as though a noose were
round my neck ; with his going, I could breathe more
freely again.
On we walked till about mid-day, when we halted at a
wayside inn, and ate and drank, resuming our journey
after a rest of little more than an hour. As we sat in the
inn we heard the tootling of a horn, and saw the London
coach bowl past, with plenty of vacant seats. But as yet
no feeling of fatigue had overtaken me, while I felt less
inclined for company than ever, so I made no move to stop
the vehicle. But by-and-bye a waggoner gave us a lift,
and when we found that he was going right through
London into Whitechapel, Jerry made a bargain with him
in virtue of which we kept our seats till the wap-p-on
entering London by way of the Borough, had crossed the
bridge, below which glimmered the lights of many ships
out of the yellow fog that hung low upon the water, and
had reached the neighbourhood of the Minories.
Here we alighted, and bade the friendly waggoner
good-night.
Jerry did not hesitate in his movements. He evidently
knew where he was, for he threaded his way easily
through a maze of streets that it would have puzzled me


to find again—mean and dark and dirty streets: I
following close at his heels.
He brought to at last outside a dingy-looking coffee-
shop, The door was closed and the shutters were up, but
a dim light inside a dirty globe still burnt above the
former, and by its uncertain illumination I made out that
the shutters looked greasy and the whole place disrepu-
table, so much so that I remonstrated.
“You don’t propose that we should pass the night here,
do you ? ”
“Yes, I do—and this is where we are going to ‘pass the
night.’ I reckon it’ll save a lot of trouble if you keep your
mouth shut and your purse open. This place is kep’ by an
old pal of mine—Jabe Slook’s one o’ the right sort, he is ;
he’s a man after my own ’eart—and if there’s a empty
bunk in his rooms I know he’ll let me have it.”
By this time he was banging lustily at the door, from
within which came the answering sound of shuffling feet,
the turning of a lock and the dropping of a bar. A
few moments afterwards, shielding with his left hand a
guttering candle held in his right, stood revealed a
rascally-looking old man, whom I knew by Jerry Murrick’s
greeting to be the Jabe Slook of whom he had spoken so
highly
I could quite understand that he was a man after Jerry’s
own heart. He looked it—which is perhaps saying
enough.
“ But yer up for a night or two —both of yer ? Easy ;


I ve only got one other lodger just now in the ’ole ’ouse.
It’s all right, Jerry, I suppose?” added Slook, with a
meaning glance in my direction.
“ Right as the Bank,” answered my companion:
“ shiners galore.”
“ Come in, then.”
He conducted us through the shop into a miserable little
room behind, and inquired whether we wanted anything to
eat.
To eat, no \ but you can put out a bottle of the old
stuff, Jabe.”
As for me, had I been starving I don’t think I could
have eaten anything in such a place.
Slook turned to a cupboard behind him, from which he
took a sealed black bottle, and put it on the table, still
keeping his hand on it, however.
“ Cash down,” he said laconically.
“ Pay up,” Jerry commanded me.
“ How much ? ” I asked with disgust
o
A dollar for me, sonnie,” answered Slook, “and a
dollar for the revenue. Yer wouldn’t think of cheatin’
our sweet young Queen of’er legal lawful five bob a bottle,
would yer, now?—and ’er only just on the throne, paw
dear thing, with all the expenses of the corrynation to
pay! ”
I flung a half-sovereign on the table. The fellow picked
it up greedily and transferred it to his pocket, proceeding
then to uncork the bottle. As he did so, such a pungent


and disagreeable odour assailed my unaccustomed nostrils
that I felt sick.
“If we’re to stop here to-night," I said, “show me my
room at once, please. I’ll go to bed—now.”
“ I was just settin’ a glass for yer,” said Slook ; “ ain’t
we good enough company for yer R’yal ’lghness ? ”
“ Let him have his own way, Jabe ; let him have his own
way. The fact is, he’s under a bit of a cloud, and I’m
standing by to see him through. We’ve come a long way,
and the youngster’s tired—let him go to roost when he
likes.”
“As he likes—just as he likes, then. Of course I shall
make a small extry charge for a extry long night’s snooze,
but as the young gent’s got the rhino ’tain’t likely that 11
make no difference to ’im. ’Ere, my sleepy young buck,
take this ’ere candle and step it straight up the stairs ;
you’ll see three bedrooms all next to each other on the
first floor—take whichever one of ’em as yer fancies. Say
yer prayers and don’t snore. If you’d like me to take care
o’ yer money and any wallybles as yer may ’ave about yer,
say the word and I’ll lock ’em up all as safe as the Bank
of Hingerland in the crockery cupboard in this ’ere very
room.”
“Leave the boy alone, Jabe,” growled Jerry, in a much
less amiable voice than he had hitherto spoken to his
“pal” in ; “leave the boy alone, and let him go.”
I had already taken the proffered candle, and without
any word of good-night I left the room and ascended the
staircase.


Entering the middle one of the three rooms, I looked
about for water, a basin, a towel, that I might wash from
my hands and face the travel-stains of the long day.
Finding no signs of what I sought, I tried the room on the
right—without any more success; and the third I found
similarly destitute.
So weary w'as I in body, so sore in mind and conscience,
so sick of heart, that I was tempted to throw myself as I
was on one of the dirty beds, but against this inclination
m - cleaner self rebelled, and I resolved to go downstairs
and demand the accommodation I was prepared to pay
for.
On the landing, a gust of wind blowing through a
broken window put my candle out, so I descended in
darkness as well as in silence.
The door of the room behind the shop was a little ajar
—I had noticed before that its broken lock prevented it
from being properly closed. I was about to push it wider
open and enter, but came to a sudden full stop—for the
two men within were talking of me—speaking words that
I had a right—more than a right— to hear; for they were
words that threatened, coupled with an unmistakable
leference to myself, both robbery and violence. I stopped
to hear them.


CHAPTER X
AT DEAD OF NIGHT.
HAT’S how the land lies,
Jabe —the youngster’s got
a letter that’ll send him to
sea, brass-bound, and with
an officer’s rig-out ; and
he’s got nigh on twenty
pounds in his pocket. Now
you understand why I’m
sticking to him so close. I
want a ship as bad as he
does, and I reckon he’s got
to get me one when he
gets one for himself, and
he’ll have to part free with
my share of his shiners to
fit me out comfortable,
or I shall collar the lot,
peaceable or violent, as the case may be, as I said just
now, and find a ship for myself.”


“ Quite right, Jerry, quite right,” said old Slook appro-
vingly. “London’s a dangerous place for a lad to go
about in with all that money. Yer ought to be able to
work it all right—but it’s a pity he ain’t got more: a great
pity. ’Owever, yer must do the best yer can. I’ve got a
youngster in tow myself,” he continued thoughtfully ; “ but
I’m afraid there ain’t anythink ’angin’ to the job. I don’t
know, though,” he added more brightly; “yer might be
able to ’elp me. We cert’nly might be able to do a stroke
of business together. Pass the bottle, Jerry, and I’ll tell
yer all about it.”
I heard him pouring more liquor into his tumbler, and
then some of its contents go gurgling down his throat.
“Maybe yer remember Barmey, the long-shoreman ?
Ah—l thought yer would. Well, a week ago Barmey
comes to me and he says, ‘ Jabe, there’s a young toff a
reg’ler ’awntin’ the docks for a ship,’ he says, ‘and I’m
thinkin’ as there’s a quid or two to be made out of ’im.’
Ow so?’says I. ‘ls he a runned-away ? ’ ‘Yus,’ says
Barmey, ‘lies a runned-away right enough, but I’d bet he’s
more than a ordinary sick-of-’ome runned-away.’ ‘ Done
somethink ?’ I asks, and Barmey nods ’is ’ead. ‘ Runned
away with a till, maybe,’ I remarks : ‘ got any left ? ’
‘No,’, says Barmey, ‘he’d blewed all ’is money before I
took notice of’im, but he’s got a reg’ler show-case in the
way o gold rings and a gold repeater and a couple o’ gold
chains.’ ‘Bring ’im ’ere, Barmey,’ says I ’earty, when I
’ears this ; ‘we’ve done business together before all square


and honest, and p’raps ’ere’s another job for us.’ ‘ Not on
the old lay,’ replies Barmey emphatic, ‘ he’s too fly. He
says, when he give me a peep o’ them show-case things,
“ Get me a ship, and they’re yours,” he says ; “ I want to get
out o’ the country.” It’s my opinion as he’s got some more
swag stowed away somewhere, but he s afraid to sell the
things and afraid equal to put ’em up the spout. Now, if
you was to let me bring ’im ’ere, Jabe,’ says Barmey, ‘we
could keep a eye on ’im, and between me at the docks and
you through some o’ your customers, we ought to be able
to find a ship as ’ll take ’im—any old ’ulks would do—
and then we earns that show-case o’ joolery all honest
and above-board. And we know where to plant them
there things, Jabe.’ ‘We do, Barmey,’ I says, ‘right
enough. Bring ’im.’ So Barmey brings ’im, and he’s ’ere
now—he’s that there other lodger as I told yer I’d got in
the ’ouse, Jerry. Now, why not you and me ave a deal,
Jerry, instead o’ me and Barmey? While you’re a-getting
a ship for yerself, why not find some old coffin for this ere
runned-away young villain, and take Barmey s share o the
joolery ? ”
“What’s it worth —to us ? ”
“Near a hundred, if we can get rid of it private, on the
quiet.”
With a vigorous bang on the table from his side of it,
Jerry exclaimed quickly :
“ What is he like—how old is he ? ”
« He might be seventeen, he might be heighteen —not
more.”


Jabe, the trick’s done ! Let him have them rings and
chains and the watch all ready for us in the morning, and
in exchange for ’em I’ll give him the letter to Billiter and
Oswald. All hes got to do is to say as his name is
1 ounge Gleet , and prodooce his letter—they’ll do the rest,
outfit and all.”
1 ‘ You 11 sneak the bit o’ writin’ to-nioLt ? ”
O
“Yes—while he’s asleep.”
I knew, of course, that by “ he ” he meant myself.
“ And ’is money—'is nearly tw r enty pounds, Jerry ? ”
That smy own business—l don’t w r ant no partner in
that. All I say is that I see my way clear to have my
half o’ that joolery to-morrow morning to sell abroad,
besides enough ready brass to get a ship for myself by
tipping a head stooard to take me as under stooard.
\ou\e got the old means, Jabe, I suppose, for keeping the
b°> quiet here till the jobs done, and I’ve got aw r ay ? I
don t expect I shall want longer than to-morrow, now r that
I’ve as good as got something to work with.”
“ All right—there’s a drop of the old physic left. You’re
a genius, Jerry—that’s what yer are.”
“ Then you’re with me, Jabe ? ”
A-course I am ; and I must say as it’s as neat a little
bit o business as hever I ’ad a ’and in—and it’s so safe :
no nasty bloodshed, nor nothink o’ that kind. I’m proud
on yer, Jerry but drink fair, drink fair, whatever yer do :
that makes yer two glasses a-’ead o’ me—pass the bottle.”
In huskier tones, as they got through with their bottle,


the pair proceeded to discuss and arrange a few details of
their conspiracy, and then Jerry proposed that the “runned-
away ” who was to impersonate me on the morrow should
be brought downstairs and informed of the matter in hand.
“I'll fetch ’im at once,” agreed the villainous old Jabe ;
“ he’s sleepin’ on the second floor with his door bolted—
but I’ll kick till I wake ’im, and bring ’im down.”
I hid farther back in the shadow of the passage as he
came shambling out of the sitting-room, and unsteadily
mounted the creaking stairs. He carried no light, or I
must have been discovered.
From the first floor I heard him ascend to the second,
and then followed the sound of his toes on the panels.
“ Wake up ! wake up ! ’Ere’s money bid for you.”
A sleepy voice demanded explanation, and a brief
colloquy ensued of which I could only pick up a few dis-
connected words.
Then I heard the door of the bedroom open, and a voice
from within say clearly :
“ Look here, Slook, I’ll come down, but I’ll give you fair
warning first in case of treachery.”
“ Treachery, Mr. ’Unter ! ”
“Yes —treachery. Don’t you make any mistake. I
know where I am, and I’ve found out what you are—and
I guess your friend is of the same kidney. So I’m bring-
ing my barker with me, and it’s loaded. If it’s necessary,
I shall put a hole in you, or disturb your friend’s interior
arrangements without any further warning. So you’d far
better act on the square with me, as I’ve told you before.”


I could not help thinking that the young desperado very
likely owed his personal immunity so far in this den of
thieves and kidnappers to the bullying attitude he had
evidently adopted.
“Now I’m ready,” I heard him say; “you go first, and
I’ll follow.”
In this order the pair came downstairs and joined Jerry
Murrick in the sitting-room. I caught a glance of Hunter
from my dark corner of concealment as he entered—the
light from within fell on his prematurely old-looking face,
and tall, spare form.
I crept noiselessly closer as the door partially closed-to,
and listened to the low-toned but excited conversation
that now passed between the three.
Jerry wanted to see for himself the articles one-half of
which was to be the reward of his treacherous villainy, for
Hunter had at once fallen in with his proposal; but their
owner would not consent.
“No,’ he said, “one of you has seen them, and that’s
enough. They’re locked up in my room, and you’re two
to one I shan t bring them down. Just go through the
wording of that letter to Billiter and Oswald again, will
you ? ”
Almost word for word Jerry repeated the phraseology of
the dead baronet’s letter.
That s all very well—in fact, it couldn’t be clearer—
but suppose there arises a question of my identity—you
both know the meaning of that word, because it’s a good
deal used in the police courts—where should I be then ?”


“That there question can’t arise,” replied Jerry eagerly.
“The old swell died last night, and Jabe here undertakes
to keep the real Younge Cleet quiet till your ship sails —
don’t you, Jabe ? ”
“ Yus, I do,” responded Slook.
Hunter gave vent to a delighted chuckle.
“ The old one dead and the young one kept dark till
I’m clear away! Good good good the bargain’s
struck. I'll hand over the jewelry the day I sail.”
“No, that won’t do,” cried Jabe and Jerry together.
They wanted it handed over against the handing over of
the letter. A heated argument that promised more than
once to end in a quarrel was closed at last by an agree-
ment that a fair half of the payment for the letter should
be handed over to Jerry and Jabe in the morning at the
moment of the handing over of my introduction to the
shipping agents, and the other half immediately after
Hunter had had a satisfactory interview with the firm.
Slook and Murrick were to accompany him to the office
and wait outside for him.
“ A drink on the bargain now everything’s settled,” cried
Jerry, “even if you have to open another bottle, Jabe.”
Another bottle was opened, and I could follow the
operations as all three drank.
“I’ll pay you when I come down with the letter, Jabe,”
promised Jerry. “The youngster must be asleep by this
time. I’m going upstairs to take it.”


T^r.. (m~>C\
CHAPTER XI
ONE AGAINST THREE.
WAS in neither mood nor
condition for further fight-
ing. The terrible experi-
ence of the previous night,
with all that had followed
it—the long journey of that
long day —had made my
spirit faint and my body
weary, and I longed for
the oblivion of sleep as I
had never longed for it
before.
But unless I was pre-
pared, with lamb - like
docility, to submit to theft
and wrong, a fight was
inevitable —a fight, too, in
which I should certainly be one against two, and probably
one against three. So I braced myself up, and as my


indignation at the vile treachery of Jerry Murrick burnt
higher and fiercer I felt my pluck stiffening.
My plan was soon formed—it was the only plan that
promised the slightest chance of escape from the three
leagued against me.
I must make a dash for the front door—l remembered
distinctly that Slook had neither re-locked nor re-bolted it,
but only re-barred it, after letting us in. If I could gain
that door, and fling down that single bar, I would take
good care that, once in the street, not one of the three
should catch me. The only way to the door was through
the shop, the only way to the shop was through the
sitting-room, where old Slook and young Hunter would
undoubtedly join forces against me : and the row would
almost certainly bring Murrick downstairs again in time to
take part in the fray.
So be it.
Out from the room came Jerry, carrying a naked dip
between his fingers.
I waited till he reached the landing, and was fumbling
about with the handles of the bedroom doors—and then I
made my plunge for liberty.
Cautiously, slowly, noiselessly, I crept to the door ajar—
then with a rush I dashed into the room, seizing a light
chair with both hands as Jabe and Hunter sprang to their
feet.
With a sweep of the chair I flung candle and candlestick
to the floor, extinguishing the flame.


I thus purposely secured what I considered would be
one considerable advantage—the fight would now have to
be a fight in the dark, at all events till Jerry joined in.
My blood was up.
I felt that my two antagonists, together, were closing up
to me, and again I swung my chair around me. As I
heard the welcome sound of two heads knocking together
with a crack, I turned the handle of the door that
separated the sitting-room from the shop, and into the
latter I plunged.
Scurrying feet were after me.
I fell—and two bodies tumbled over me.
Jerry came bounding down the stairs to join in the
fight at such a rate that it was not to be wondered at that
his light went out.
He tripped in the darkness over the three of us ; we
struggled to get up, and as he fell we all fell again, in a
heap.
Sometimes up and sometimes down—crockery smashing
and tables overturning oaths and imprecations as fast
and furious as the blows all round of which they were the
running accompaniment—dust and sawdust rising and
filling the stifled air !
In one respect I could not help scoring a point in the
brief struggle—whoever he was I hit I couldn’t make a
mistake; he was bound to be one of the three —whereas
the three hit themselves quite as often as they hit me. I
am certain that at one point the head of young Hunter,


held firmly by both Jerry Murrick and Jabe Slook, was
banned with murderous violence a number of times on the
floor in the belief that it was my head ; and that at
another point, when three of us were rolling in the saw-
dust, Hunter derived great gratification from kicking
violently the stomach of one or other of his friends under
the mistaken impression that it was my stomach.
In the midst of the riot and uproar, Hunter’s pistol went
off—doubtless accidentally.
I didn’t know if anybody else was shot —but I knew
I wasn’t ; and in the momentary lull that followed the
report I sprang forward for the front door. I reached
it, and my hand was on the bar to let it drop. I
remember —it is strange how certain trivial incidents of
great moments are afterwards recollected, while much of
greater import is either unheeded at the time or forgotten
subsequently—l remember how cold the bar felt to my
feverish touch.
But I remember nothing more of that fight in the dark
of one against three.
When I came to myself, I was lying in bed in one of
the three rooms on the first floor—l gradually recollected
it as the last bedroom I had entered —when? The pre-
vious night, I thought—the night of that fight downstairs,
when I tried to escape from those who sought to rob and
maltreat me.
Had I tried all in vain ?


As thus I thought, I flung the blankets from me, and
sat up.
My clothes were still all on me. I made eager search
in my pockets, only to find that purse and letter had both
gone.
Then I had been robbed.
I sprang out of bed, and my sensations soon convinced
me that I had been maltreated as well. My head swam
and my knees gave way under me. The back of my head
was painfully sore, and a finger-touch betrayed a wound
there as from some blunt instrument.
I did not believe I had been drugged, for I soon found
that I was able to think quite clearly, and my first dizziness
was rapidly wearing off.
I would go downstairs, and if my antagonists were still
there I would continue the fight—now for the restoration
of the property I had previously fought to retain
possession of.
I sprang to the door. It was locked from outside.
Then I would kick the panels through—fortunately, not
even my boots had been removed : they were still on my
feet.
The woodwork was yielding to my impetuous onslaught
when I heard the sounds of hasty footsteps on the stairs
and the rasping tones of old Jabe Slook’s voice:
“ Now, then, there, yer bloody-minded young villain !
Stop that row, or I’ll call in the perleece.”
“ Call them! ’ I shouted back—but my voice sounded


rather weak and squeaky. “ Call them —or I will. I’ve
been robbed and assaulted, and I'll have it out of some of
you.”
Brave words ! But I was soon to sing a different tune.
“ Open the door, or I’ll kick it in.
“ I am a-hopenin’ of it—to kick you hout.”
I seized him by the throat the instant he flung the door
open ; but, old man though he was, I was no match for
him, now.
He threw me from him with ease. I reeled back, and
fell heavily against the bed-post, the concussion starting
afresh the bleeding of my wounded head.
“Now listen to me quiet, and it’ll be all the better for
yer. I don’t want to be ’ard on yer, and I’ll ’elp yer if I
can. In fack, if yer be-’ave peaceable, I’ll save yer.”
“ Save me ? What from ? ”
“The ’angman ! ” replied Slook pleasantly. “Its all
come hout—so the less yer say about anythink what
may ’ave ’appened to yer ’ere the better. But first of
all ...”
He stepped outside on to the landing, and picked up a
jug of steaming coffee.
“ , . . drink this. It’ll pull yer round.”
I raised the vessel to my lips, and drained it.
“ Eat anythink ? ”
I was hungry. Do you know—l hope you don’t and
never will—that starvation over-rides all sorts of emotions
—pride, anger, indignation, and perhaps every other human
passion ?


“Yes,” I said sullenly.
I did not know then, but I did soon afterwards, that it
was days since any food had passed my lips.
Piled high with bread and butter, he placed a plate
before me, and I ate greedily.
“Now, then,” I cried, as at length I pushed the emptied
plate from me, “stand aside. I’ve been robbed in this
thieves’ den of yours of more than nineteen pounds, and a
letter worth much more—and I’m going to fetch in the
police. Stand aside!”
But Jabe planted himself defiantly in front of the door.
“ When yer ’ear what I’ve got to tell yer—when yer
know the news that’s in my pocket—yer won’t want to say
anythink about what may ’ave ’appened ’ere in my ’ouse
four days ago.”
“ Four days ago ! ”
“ Yus. Yer’ve laid unsensible in that there bed o’ mine
for four days at two bob a day.”
“Where’s the man who brought me here, and planned
the outrage that you and Hunter helped him to carry out ?
You see I know everything—it isn’t half a tale I’m going
to carry to the police-station.”
“ Mr. Jerry Murrick, esquire, got a berth aboard ship the
day after yer met with a accident in my shop by ’ittin’
yerself on the back of the ’ead with a poker, and he sailed
orf with the tide. As for the other gent—the young
gent—’is name was Younge Cleet, and he’d got a intro-
duction to a big shipping firm as undertook to spend any


amount o’ money on ’im to send ’im to sea like a reg’lar
R’yal ’lghness in somethink under a week.”
Furious words poured hot and fast from my lips as,
forgetting my weakness, again I sought to lay hands on
the rascal who barred my exit. But he had an all-
powerful weapon in reserve.
“ Stand back, yer young murderer ! Stand back and
read that. Then go to the perleece if yer dare. Read
that, and then dare do anythink but walk out o’ my ’ouse
with yer tongue tied.”
He held out a news-sheet towards me, and I snatched it
from his hand, my eyes falling straight on a paragraph
headed :
“Murder of a Gamekeeper in Kent!”
The paragraph was very brief, but terribly to the point.
Every word seemed to stab me. It narrated the bare fact
of the finding of the murdered body of Matthew Hayle,
a gamekeeper in the employ of the late Sir Geoffrey
Norman, Baronet, of Norman Royal. It proceeded to state
that a pocket handkerchief, marked with the initials
“ Y.C.,” had been picked up in the trampled snow near
where the dead man lay, and that in consequence of the
clue thus obtained the London police were looking out for
a youth named Younge Gleet, who had left for the capital
the morning after the terrible deed, in company with one
Jeremy Murrick, a notorious poacher belonging to the
same village as the suspect.


That was all. The paper fell from my shaking fingers.
“ Get hout,” snarled Jabez Slook. “ The best thing yer
can do is to ’ide in the docks till it’s dusk ; look hout for a
boat that’s been flyin’ the Blue Peter, and smuggle yerself
aboard ’er as a stowaway. Will yer go? I ain’t blockin’
the doorway now.”
I answered him never a word. I looked about me, and
saw that my cap was lying on the floor. I picked it up
and put it on.
Then I walked out of the room, down the stairs, and
through the shop into the street.


. '^im^h^t
CHAPTER XII.
THE BLUE PETER.
HAD no difficulty in finding
my way into the docks, for
the masts of scores of ships
euided me.
From wharf to wharf I
wandered, from quay to quay.
I noticed that quite a
number of the vessels were
flying a similar ensign, and I
asked a rough - looking
labourer what the flag meant.
“ Why, man alive, that’s
the ‘ Blue Peter,’ and it
means that the vessels flying
it are about to sail.”
« Do you know the name of that fine-looking ship lying
between those two smaller ones?” I asked, pointing to a
craft the beautiful, clipperlike lines of whose run had
attracted even my unaccustomed eyes.


“ Yes ; she’s the schooner Ladye Loved
“ When does she sail—do you know ? ”
Late this afternoon ; can t you see she’s flying the
Blue Peter’ like the others ?”
“ Thank you.”
It seemed to me that the Ladye Love was better situated
for the purpose I had in mind than most of the other
vessels that were to sail with the next tide, for she was
berthed in a less conspicuous position, and there did not
seem to be so many people on her deck.
Behind some huge bales of goods I hid myself where I
could watch her, and, watching her, watch for my chance
of stealing unobserved on board her.
As thus I crouched, hidden, I commanded a view of the
beautiful ship on my right, and, with a little effort, of one
of the dock-gates on my left.
Presently I saw a young man pass through the latter
and come swaggering along the quay-side towards my
hiding place. He was in complete naval uniform—in
full fig “ brass-bound,” as sailor-men say. The brass
buttons against his blue serge were dazzling; the lace
around his cap and sleeves glittered gaily.
Not the least idea of his identity entered my mind until
he approached so closely that I was able to see, at the
same glance, his face and the name of his ship emblazoned
on his cap, as was, at that time, the fashion amongst middies
and junior officers.
The face was the face of Hunter, and the name of the
ship the Ladye Love !
G


I stifled the cry that rose to my lips. Before I acted I
must think.
He stopped—quite close to me —and looked about him,
as though uncertain where lay the vessel he was presum-
ably looking for.
I do not know where they sprang from, for I did not
see them come. I think they, too, must have been lurking
in some adjacent hiding place.
I mean the two policemen who appeared suddenly from
somewhere and confronted him —the two officers who
stopped him as he would have moved forward again.
“Your name is Younge Gleet?” asked one of them.
“Yes,” lied Hunter boldly.
“ Then I arrest you for the wilful murder of one Matthew
Hayle /”
1 heard and saw it all, but so quickly was it done, so
quickly was the prisoner marched away, that it seemed to
me I was the only witness.
What was I to do ?
For a long time I tried in vain to think and reason
calmly and clearly —in the meantime I had the sense to
remain where I was.
Presently the current of my thoughts ran thus : Hunter
would soon be able to prove that he had been wrongly
arrested, disagreeable as the consequences to himself might
be of the revelation of his real name, which he probably
would have to make. That was no affair of mine—he was


in no danger of suffering in my stead for my crime. He
had been apprenticed to the Ladye Love. Perhaps the
officers of the ship had never seen him —I knew nothing
of how such things were managed. He had had no baggage
with him—it must either have been sent on board already
or was to follow before she sailed. If I were received on
the Ladye Love without my identity being challenged, my
claim to the outfit would of course be unquestionable.
But the police ? Would they not have communicated
with the captain ?
Almost certainly yes. But perhaps they had not had
time— possibly they had had no necessity.
If I failed in the bold hazard I was about to venture, all
was indeed up for me. Revealing myself aboard the ship,
I should either be received without suspicion in the
character in which I should present myself—that of one
of her bound apprentices—or be detained and handed over
to justice.
That very night I should either be at sea or in prison.
Did ever human destiny hang on so frail a thread ?
I crept from my hiding place, brushed my clothes, pulled
myself together, and made my way to the schooner.
Ascending the gangway I stepped on to her white deck,
and came face to face with a stern-visaged officer of
commanding appearance.
Touching my cap ;
Come aboard, sir,” I said. “My name is Younsre
Gleet.”


> A\
3 -? ,.- ' X -; I '*^1^
I mi/ ' mm
L 1 ————-—.—
CHAPTER XIII.
ABOARD O’
“LADYE LOVED
HILE it lasted, the suspense
was awful —but it did not
last long. Had the scrutiny
of the officer’s cold, keen gaze
continued only a moment
longer, however, I think I
should have given way
under it.
It seemed to me that his
hard eyes saw more than my
pale, unwashed face and
generally dishevelled appear-
ance—they seemed to pierce
in to me and to lay bare to
his knowledge the troubled
thoughts that were surging through my mind
The joy of the relief that his first words brought to me
is as indescribable as it is unforgetable.
“ You’ve reported yourself late and in a slovenly, lubberly


condition,” he said deliberately. “You look more fit for
the fo’c’sle than amidships. I am told you were to have
come aboard yesterday.”
“ I beg your pardon, sir, and I’m very sorry.”
I had the sense to attempt no sort of explanation, to say
nothing more. I resented neither his manner nor his
words, for, gruff as both were, it was evident enough that
my identity was not to be challenged, and that the police
news from Gleet had not reached the ship—the few papers
published in those days did not circulate as the many
published now do. My bold dash was to be successful.
“\ouve begun badly, young shaver,” the captain went
on contemptuously. “ Where are your traps ? ”
“ A’rn’t they on board, sir ? ” was the only safe reply I
could make.
“ Don’t dare to question me, sir,” was the angry retort,
so sharply given that it made me jump ; “go and report
yourself to Mr. Duncan instantly.”
“Very good, sir”—and the dreaded interview came to
an abrupt termination, for I did not lose a moment in
quitting the presence of the savage skipper.
I had of course no more idea of who Mr. Duncan was
than where I should find him, but no thought of asking the
captain entered my mind. Instead, I ascertained from the
first sailor I met —out of his sight—that Duncan was the
name of the first mate, and that he was at that moment in
his cabin.
There I found him —and found in him one of the


kindest-hearted men I had ever —or have ever—met in my
life. lam afraid that such men were then very scarce in
the service. He put me at my ease at once.
“ Your traps came aboard yesterday,” he said pleasantly,
“and Captain Bredenberg expected you with them. You
met him, you know, at the owners’, when you signed
articles, but they sent for him last evening to take com-
mand of another of their ships in a case of sudden
emergency, so we’re to sail with a new skipper, who only
came aboard this morning.”
How had accident favoured me ! How would it have
fared with me but for this unexpected change of skippers ?
“ His name’s Bennions,” went on Duncan. “ I had to
report your absence to him, and he was very much annoyed.
The sooner you try to get into his good graces the better
it’ll be for you. Go to the steward—ask him to show you
the apprentices’ quarters —give yourself a good sluice and
get into your working suit, then come on deck and bear a
hand in whatever you’re told to do. We warp into the
stream with the turn of the tide.”
I thanked the friendly mate heartily, and hied me to the
steward. On that functionary introducing me to the
“ middies’ ” quarters, I found that the huge sea-chest
labelled “ Younge Cleet,” contained an outfit good enough
for a prince. Sir Geoffrey had practically given Messrs.
Billiter and Oswald free hands in the matter of expense,
and they had not spared his pocket. Everything was of
the best, and nothing had been omitted. Even a case


containing complete sets of every kind of nautical instru-
ment —many of which it would take me months to learn
the use of—was included.
But before all these new belongings of mine were
revealed to view I had to undergo a fright, for the steward
asked me for the key of the chest.
It was doubtless in Hunter’s pocket—it certainly wasn’t
where the steward imagined it to be, for he thought it was
in mine.
But he only took my confusion as an admission that I
had lost it.
“Just like all you young sparks till you get licked into
shape,” he remarked, and proceeded without further com-
ment to prize the big box open for me.
The incident acted as a warning to me that it was
necessary to be on my guard against similar little pit-falls.
I followed up my much-needed wash with a smart and
refreshing rub-down, donned my working slops, and
tumbled up on deck.
Here, “with a perseverance worthy of a better cause,” I
got persistently in everybody’s way in my laudable but
misdirected endeavours to make myself useful. I fell over
different things a good deal —they seemed to have been
put in their respective places on purpose to be fallen over.
Some of the sailors swore at me with considerable vigour
—but I went on helping them till they threatened to
complain to the captain.
Everything, and everybody, appeared to me to be in a


state of such helpless confusion that I could not realise
the ship was about to put to sea.
'As I was gazing about for a chance to lend a hand
where my help would be more appreciated, I was tripped
up by a rope which a batch of sailors were hauling
inboard, and a shout of laughter greeted [my gymnastic
I was tripped up by a rope which a batch of sailors were hauling inboard.—/. 104.
performance as I smacked the sloppy deck with the small
of my back and rolled into the starb’d scuppers.
“ Here, youngster,” cried Mr. Duncan as I regained my
feet, “ I think you’d better have a job all to yourself —just
come here and swab out the chart-house.”
I worked away at this job with a will, but before I had


finished it I felt that the schooner—as though in conscious
obedience to some hoarsely shouted orders —was moving
from her berth into the basin.
Presently she crawled along to the dock-gates, and when
these were opened towards the flood of the tide she passed
through them into the stream, and made her cautious way
down the river for Gravesend, which we passed during the
night.
A fair wind soon brought us to the Nore, and she was
headed for the Foreland.
Beneath a blue sky we bowled along over bluer waters, a
white wake astern of her, a cascade of sparkling foam
running from her dripping bows.
My heart bounded within me —I was at sea!
After the setting of the watches, everybody seemed to
shake comfortably down into his place. For a day or two
(the old story) my particular place was over a basin, but I
had completely recovered, and was rapidly finding my sea
legs, before the Land’s End was out of sight.
Respecting ship, captain, officers, and crew, I suppose a
few words will be expected.
The Ladye Love, then, was a ship of which everyone who
served on her, from the old man to the cabin boy, was
openly and honestly proud. Although she had broken the
record on several passages, her construction was such that
neither safety nor comfort was unfairly sacrificed for the
sake of speed.


“ I’d crack sail on to her in a breeze that I’d lower sail to
on any other craft I’ve ever been shipmates with,” I once
heard Captain Bennions exclaim enthusiastically, “She
handles like a top.”
Her present destination was the Hooghly—her first port
of call was to be at the Cape of Good Hope. She carried
a miscellaneous cargo, and it was generally understood
that her actual course from her first port of call to her
ultimate port of discharge would depend upon what
freight replaced at the Cape the portion of her present
cargo to be there unloaded.
“ It’ll be a long twelve-months before we fetch the
London river again, anyhow,” was an opinion that I several
times heard expressed.
Touching Captain David J. Bennions, I soon formed a
better opinion of him than my first encounter with him
had inspired me with. That he was a disciplinarian up to
the point of being a martinet was undeniable —that he had
“a bit of a temper” was equally indisputable; but, this
being said, there was really nothing worse to be added.
His strict notions of discipline were —probably rightly—
attributed to the fact that he had served for several years
as one of the officers of a sloop-of-war belonging to the
small fleet of the Honourable East India Company. But
though his rule was a strict one it was not habitually a
harsh or unjust rule, and even his occasional severity was
thought little of in the general admiration evoked by his
magnificent seamanship.


The men had a comical way of communicating to each
other the state of the barometer as regarded his temper.
“ What’s the old man’s name this morning?” one would
ask. “ Bennions ” —and the enquirer would know that it
was “set fair,” But if the indication were “stormy—look
out for squalls,” the answer would be ;
“ His name’s Bunnions —tread on his toes and you’ll
know it! ”
Of Mr. Avers Duncan I have already spoken—suffice it
to say that the more I saw and knew of him the more
thoroughly I esteemed, respected, and liked him.
Our “ second ” and “ third ” —Ambrose and Watkins—
were men who did their duty quietly and well, and con-
veyed the impression, to any student of character, that
they would do it conscientiously in face of any circum-
stances.
Three “ young gentlemen ” (ashore) were my mates in
the middies’ mess. After a number of friendly contests all
round, the four of us got on famously together —perhaps
because our trials of strength had proved that we were
all so nearly matched that the question of individual
superiority was not worth further experiment.
The crew, “ all told,” numbered nearly forty. Broadly
speaking, they were for the most part good representatives
of the best type of their class. We carried no skulkers —
the old man would have been “Bunnions” to a skulker all
the time.


CHAPTER XIV
AN OMINOUS SIGNAL.
HOUGH hour by hour
i put an ever - widening
I distance between my
I physical self and the
' scene of the tragedy in
the game preserve at
” Gleet, memory seemed
to chain me still to the
place of horror.
Conscience knows nothing of radius —in my own case,
on the high seas off the western coast of Africa, it held
relentlessly before the eyes of my soul, as in a mirror, that
murdered body lying in the snow at the peep of day—
weeks ago.
I sought relief in hard work and hard study, but it was
not until I had, so to speak—and I say it reverently—
“faced it out” with God that a measure of the relief I
sought was granted to me.
Was I truly and heartily—bitterly —penitent for the


outburst of passion that had betrayed me into blood -
guiltiness ?
God knew I was.
Was it my earnest desire to make the all-inadequate
atonement of a good and steady and unselfish life, and so
to retrieve, in the little measure in which it could ever be
possible, my terrible fall in that life’s beginning?
Without any hypocrisy, God knew that it was.
Would He accept my repentance and give me His help?
He had said He would.
Was it His will that I should do now as well as I could
and as cheerfully as I could the duty that lay to hand, and
leave the rest to Him \\ ho, guiding all the worlds, would
surely direct my ways ? I thought it was, for such was the
spirit of the teaching I had received.
The longer I was at sea the better I liked the life, the
more strongly was I persuaded that I had made no mistake
in my choice of a vocation. Eager to learn, and quick to
pick up the rudiments of the knowledge I was so ambitious
of acquiring, I soon became a favourite with Mr. Duncan,
and even, I was surprised to feel justified in hoping, with
the captain. I was gradually released from a portion of
the drudgery that boys are generally put to on their first
voyage, and devoted every practicable moment to the
study of “ the whole art ” of navigation. As we drew
nearer to our port of call I grew increasingly anxious
as to what might happen there. Had my movements
been traced up to my boarding of the Ladye Love? If


so, had the news about me been sent abroad —had there
been time for it to reach the Cape ? In a word, should
I be arrested on the ship’s arrival? Was my promising
career to be ruined after all ? My early thoughts of giving
myself up seldom recurred to me now, and when they did
it was with constantly decreasing earnestness. I had too
much at stake—l was bound now (such were still my
feelings) to hold to the course I had started on.
We had covered about two-thirds of the distance
between the lonely Island of St. Helena and the Cape
when I was treated to my first experience of a storm
at sea. It was a rough one—the experience as well as
the storm.
Hitherto the weather had been what a sailor would call
fair, and the change was an abrupt one.
All hands were tumbled up in the middle watch to
shorten sail, but before her top gear could be eased the
strength-gathering hurricane struck her, and the sound
of the cracking of her upper works as they carried away
was heard above the shriek of the gale. Forks of flame
reached down from the black sky and played about her
as though in wanton devilment, and appalling peals of
thunder boomed in savage salute.
The storm lasted almost until daybreak, and then it
sullenly died away.
Three times had she been blown nearly on her beam
ends, but on each occasion she had righted herself like the
beauty she was.


With the dawn a large barque was made out astern of
us, sailing only a few points off our own course, just as
Captain Bennions, who had never left the deck a moment
during the squall, was about to go below.
Glass to eye :
" She appears to have ridden out the storm, Duncan,
without losing a stick—she’s under full sail,” he said.
“ Yes, sir,”
“ And that means that while we’re repairing damages
she’ll overhaul and pass us—she’s bringing what’s left of
the wind with her.”
It was evident that the mate shared the skipper’s morti-
fication, but nothing could alter the fact that the barque
was coming up with us hand over hand. Much had to be
done before the schooner was in trim again.
In about half an hour she was abeam of us to starboard.
An indistinct hail reached us from her deck, but she was
too far off for the trumpeted words to be intelligible.
“ She’s signalling, sir,” said Duncan.
Up ran the first signal from the stranger.
' o
“ What schooner’s that ? ”
Schooner Ladye Love , of London, for Capetown.
\\ hat barque’s that? ” went up our answering bunting.
Bennions stamped his foot.
“ Barque Arab Sheik , Captain Bredenberg.”
“ I thought so, Duncan—l could have sworn I knew the
cut of her jib. We’re both bound for the same port, and
with another of the firm s own ships that fellow Bredenbero-
- b


will lick me on my first trip since we were both ordered to
shift our commands. He wasn’t to sail till the next day,
but he must have sneaked out on the last of the tide we
left on.”
I was standing aft near the two officers, helping with the
flags, and within hearing of their conversation. I was also
near enough to a couple of the hands to hear one mutter
to the other :
“ The old man’s name will be Bunnions for a week.”
“ It’s bad, sir,” agreed Duncan, “ very bad : but it can’t
be helped. There goes another signal: * shall we stand
by ? ’ ”
“ Tell him ‘ no —we’re not in need of assistance.’ ”
Up went the ordered signal.
The barque was now well ahead of us, and we thought
the signalling w r as over. But it wasn t for up flew a last
o o
communication from the Avcib Sheik.
“ What on earth does he want now ? ” cried Captain
Bennions testily. “ What’s that he’s signalling, Duncan—
I can't make it out; can you ?
No, sir, I can’t.”
“ Where’s that youngster ? ”
« Here, sir,” I answered, and stepped briskly to his side,
for I knew that by “ that youngster ”he meant myself. I
was graduating in the easy mysteries of flag signalling,
and was standing by, code-book in hand, by the skippers
own orders.
He pointed to the still flying signal.


“ What does that read ? ” he asked sharply.
I turned rapidly over the pages till my startled eyes
made out the unmistakable interpretation.
The signal read :
“ Is Vounge Gleet on board ? ”


CHAPTER XV
WHO COULD HE BE ?
HERE was no help for it.
Whatever revelation I
might have to make in
answering the inevitable
questions that would fol-
low the announcement, I
was bound to give the
reading of the signal.
But again I had a
lucky escape. Just as I had braced myself up, and was
opening my mouth to give reply to the portentous enquiry,
the signal was hastily hauled down, and “ good bye
hoisted in its place as the barque rushed ahead.
Captain Bennions —no, Bunnions !—dismissed the inci-
dent with a hasty “confound their tomfoolery!” “And
confound the Arab Sheik ! And confound Bredenberg !
he added —and went below.
But not to rest, for he was on deck again within half an
hour. He hurried on the repairs with such feverish haste


that the schooner was in trim again fully two hours sooner
than had been expected. The wind had been freshening
all the time, and now he cracked on every stitch. She
literally leaped forward on her course under her white
cloud of canvas.
All day he carried on. At nightfall Duncan asked him
—deferentially, and as though he knew what the answer
would be—whether he should ease her of some of her
top-s’ls ?
“No, sir,” was the sharp reply. “You will ease her of
nothing.”
The old man meant overhauling the Arab Sheik if
human means could do it—and everybody on board knew
it, and joined in the spirit of the thing heart and soul.
We sighted her next morning, showed her our heels in
the afternoon, and flattered ourselves we’d done the trick.
But we hadn’t, for she picked us up in the night, dawn
showing the two ships on a level.
From that point it was almost a neck-and-neck race till
the course had been covered, save for about the last
hundred knots. Then came a slant of wind of which the
schooner was able to take greater advantage than the
barque, and we romped the Ladye Love into Capetown a
fair winner; and the old man’s name was Bennions again.
I knew by the expression of his face that he now looked
forward wflth pleasure to a meeting with the commander of
the vanquished Arab Sheik.
I didn’t I


If Captain Bredenberg once clapped eyes on me, hearing
my name and recollecting, as of course he would, the
appearance of the impostor Hunter —well, I couldn’t tell
exactly what would happen, but something would.
And that last ominous signal that had fluttered from the
mast-head of the barque—the signal that had been
hurriedly hauled down before it could be responded to —
I had that to worry about also. But I was rapidly acquir-
ing that careless habitude of thought so characteristic of
the true sailor, and I at last awaited the development of
events with a sort of reckless equanimity.
An hour or two after our own arrival the masts of the
barque were made out, but she only fetched port after
Captain Bennions had left his ship to keep a social engage-
ment ashore.
Not having a penny in my pockets, and not caring to
divulge the fact to them, I evaded the company of my
fellow apprentices when they prepared to land, and fol-
lowed their example in solitary dignity later.
As may be imagined, I did not have a particularly lively
time ashore, but I thoroughly enjoyed my quiet look round
and the unfamiliar sights that surprised me at every turn.
Early next morning the skipper went off to pay a visit
to Bredenberg aboard the barque.
“Well,” I thought desperately as I watched him start,
“ whatever’s going to happen, it’s close at hand now.”
It was, for he returned from the Arab Sheik in less than
an hour’s time.


I happened to be standing near the head of the gangway
as he mounted it, and I touched my cap to him as he
reached the deck.
“Ah, Gleet, my lad,” he said pleasantly, “Captain
Bredenberg has been speaking about you. I want to see
you—come below, will you ? ”
“Aye, aye, sir”—and in an indescribable frame of mind
I followed him to his cabin, where I stood bareheaded
before him, as, drawing a heavy desk close to his hand and
unlocking it, he pushed a chair up to the table with his
foot and seated himself.
“Captain Bredenberg tells me that when it was under-
stood you would be sailing with him instead of with me,
the agents in Leadenhall Street thought themselves justi-
fied, in view of the letter you brought them from your
patron Sir Geoffrey Norman, in arranging that he should
allow you a reasonable sum for personal expenses and
pocket money. In the hurry of the change of commands,
Billiter and Oswald—you know they are the agents for our
owners—forgot to say anything to me about this, but of
course I’m quite prepared to adopt Bredenberg’s responsi-
bility in the matter. He suggested that, provided I had
no fault to find with you, I should hand you five pounds to
go on with ; so—as I have no fault to find with you . . .”
“ Thank you, sir.”
“ . . , here you are.”
And he took five sovereigns from the desk before him,
and put them into my hand !


I suppose I thanked him—somehow—and I was about
to leave the cabin. But he stopped me.
“ I haven’t done yet,” he said. “ Captain Bredenberg
wants to see you —so go aboard the barque at once. It
strikes me he wants to give you a wigging, or at least some
very plain sort of advice. You don’t seem to have im-
pressed him favourably, Cleet,” he went on, with, I
thought, a curious expression on his face as he eyed me.
With exceeding candour he continued :
o
“He said that you struck him as one of the most
sinister-looking young scoundrels he’d ever had to lick into
shape—and I think you only met him once. You didn’t
meet him more than once, did you ? ”
If my equivocating answer were tantamount to a lie—l
am afraid it was, unless I am to descend to the hair-
splitting logic of a casuist—l can only plead the extenua-
ting circumstances.
“ I have not met Captain Bredenberg twice, sir.”
“Well, you’ll soon be able to tell what he thinks of you
after a second look at you, for he’s in the habit of speaking
or showing his mind pretty plainly. By-the-bye, that last
signal from the barque the other day —he spoke of it: you
had the code-book—did you make it out ? ”
“Yes, sir,” I replied honestly. “It was an enquiry
whether I was aboard. Did Captain Bredenberg tell you,
sir, why he hoisted such a strange message ? ”
“He never hoisted it at all. He came on deck while it
was flying, and ordered it to be hauled down as soon as


he knew what it read, and that no officer had authorised it.
It appears that one of the Sheik s hands —who must have
been wonderfully anxious about you —persuaded the sig-
nalman to hoist the message for his own satisfaction,
without authority. This friend of yours, whoever he may
be, had been blinded by the lightning during the storm of
the night before, and I suppose it was in pity for him that
his mate ran the risk of showing his signal.”
A friend of mine on board the Arab Sheik —and blinded
by lightning ? What mystery was this ? Who could he
be ?
“ You’d better see this poor fellow when you go to see
Captain Bredenberg,” went on Bennions in a kinder tone;
“in fact, I promised Captain Bredenberg to tell you to.
The man can’t come to you, and had asked that somebody
might take you to him.”
The foolish question was irresistible.
“ Who is he, Captain Bennions ? ”
“ How should I know ? My friend spoke of him as a
fo’c’sle hand, and said his name was Stornoway.”


CHAPTER XVI.
LIGHT IN THE DARK.
DON’T want to clog the
wheels of my narrative by
too many attempts to des-
cribe my feelings at different
stages of its progress, or to
analyse my motives very
closely. As to the latter,
we often deceive ourselves
as to the real reasons under
stress of which we act, and
as regards the former it will
probably be easier for you
to enter into them than it would be for me to picture
them for you.
Briefly, then, I made up my mind as I quitted the
cabin that I must go through with the two interviews
aboard the barque. So I smartened myself up, and was
on the point of stepping down the gangway when Mr.
Duncan, issuing from the chart-house, said carelessly:


“Where are you going, Gleet ?
“Aboard of the Arab Sheik, sir.”
“ So am I.”
His company secured me a respite so far as my
interview with Captain Bredenberg was concerned, for it
was he whom the mate wanted to see. Of course I gave
place to him, and while he descended to the cabin I made
my ;vay to the fo’c’sle, and enquired for the mysterious
Stornoway.
“Aye, aye,” said the man I addressed, “this way. Be
you the ’prentice from the Ladye Love as he’s wanting to
see so bad—name o’ Gleet?”
“ Yes.”
He took me into the fo’c’sle, and opened the door of a
small, dark pen of a cabin with a single bunk in it.
“ Hi, Stornoway, here’s your mate come aboard,” he
cried, and left us, leaving the door open behind him. In
the murky light that through it found its way into the
cabin I saw, with just sufficient clearness, the face of the
man w'ho lay in the bunk, his eyes swathed with bandages
—with just sufficient clearness to identify the coarse
features of Jeremy Murrick !
I repressed the cry that rose to my lips—and Jerry
spoke first.
“Hunter,” he cried in a hoarse whisper, “is that you,
Hunter ? ”
He repeated the question before I answered it, for I was
trying madly to remember the tone of Hunter’s voice that


I might imitate it. I brought to mind that it was pitched
in a somewhat higher key than my own, which I raised
and said:
“Yes, Jerry.”
But though I raised its pitch I was careful to muffle its
articulation, that it might not betray me.
“ Pull my chest out and sit close to me. That’s right.
So you carried the dodge through all right ? ”
“ Yes.”
“And I caught the Sheik up just in time at Gravesend,
where she lost a tide.”
So Slook’s statement that he sailed some days before
was a lie, I reflected.
“We was fearfully drunk, Hunter, both of us, when we
told each other what we’d done. We put ourselves in
each other’s power. We’re bound to play into each other’s
hands now—ain’t we, Hunter?”
“ Bound to.”
“Yes, bound to. That’s why I want to tell you that
the old jeweller you robbed—your old master, who you
bolted from with all that swag —is a passenger on this
very ship. He’s come out to Capetown to start a branch
business. I’ve ’card him talk of how neat you done him
many a time, and he’s moving ’eaven and earth to lay you
by the heels. I’ve only got to say the word and you’re
booked for Botany Bay as a lifer—as a lifer, mind you.
I’ve only got to say the word—l’ve only got to say the
word, Hunter.”


“But you won’t say it, Jerry? ”
“Not if you pay my price. No, no, Hunter —I didn’t
mean to put it like that—l mean not if you stand by me.
If you stand by me I swear I’ll stand by you. I only
want money, Hunter—all you’ve got left: I’ve melted
every stiver. You know I helped you to sell all that loot
that Slook didn’t know anything about, and you can’t have
got rid of all the brass. I must cut my lucky from this
ship as soon as ever I get a bit of light back into my
confounded eyes, or even before if she’s going to stop long.
I must , I tell you—l must, I must, I must. I shipped as
fo’c’sle stooerd in the name of Stornoway, because there’s
nothing like being extry careful ; but there’s them on
board that knows my right name. Before more comes out
than’s come out already I must go up country and get
lost. But I can’t go without money—and go I must.”
At any cost I must keep the ball rolling, so I asked
him :
“ Why ? ”
For answer he bade me put my hand beneath him and
draw from the blankets what I should find there.
“ Read the third column on the inside sheet,” he said as
I pulled out a newspaper. “ Did you shut that door ? ”
“ Yes,” I told him, and opened out the broad-sheet. I
noticed as I did so that it bore a date later by one day
than the date of the sailing of the Ladye Love.
The third column of the inner page was headed ;


“THE GLEET MURDER.
“Opening of the Inquest on the Body of the
Murdered Gamekeeper last week.”
After a somewhat lengthy recapitulation of the known
circumstances of the crime, the report proceeded to detail
the evidence of Dr. Arncliffe, of Nesterton, who had been
sent for to view the body.
“ The witness, having been duly sworn, deposed that on
examining the corpse he found tinder the left arm-pit the
zvound of a knife or dagger thrust, so deep that it had
penetrated the heart, causing practically instantaneous death.
Although there were indications consistent with the theory
that the deceased had been engaged in a severe struggle at
the time of the infliction of the fatal stab, or immediately
prior thereto, the wound he had described zvas without the
slightest possible doubt not only the sufficient but the sole
cause of death.
“ The Coroner: Have we not heard, doctor, of a wound
or a bruise upon the head of the deceased ?
“ Witness replied that there was an abrasion of the skin
on the forehead, near the temple. It might have been
caused by a blow from a stick or a cudgel—but hozvever
caused it was of no importance—that was to say from the
medical point of view as a factor in the enquiry as to how
the man came by his end.


“ Coroner: Then it had nothing to do with the cause of
death ?
“ Witness: Nothing whatever.
(Our Report zvill be continued).’
Then not by my hand had the deed been done, after all:
no murderer, no homicide was I, after all!
Oh, the joy after the long pain ! What else beside that
joy could my heart contain at present?—what else till
there was room for something else ?
There was Light in the Dark !
With a suddenly formed plan in my head as a startling
thought took possession of it:
“Jerry,” I said earnestly, “I understand. We’ll form a
plan. But I daren’t stop a moment longer with you now
without leave—l’ll go and get leave from my ship for an
hour, and come back to you. And I’ll see what money
I’ve got.”
“Bring it with you—bring it all with you or I’ll say the
word. And give me that paper—you don’t leave this
cabin alive with that paper on you.”
He stretched both hands out blindly, and I thrust the
sheets into them. Then I tore open the door and rushed
aft. Without even knocking I burst open the captain’s
cabin.
Here, enjoying their cigars, sat Captain Bredenberg (as
I knew he must be) and Avers Duncan ; and with them
was a young clergyman.


Duncan sprang to his feet, the flush of anger on his
usually good-humoured face. “Younge Gleet,” he cried,
giving me both my names in his furious indignation, “ how
dare you enter a private cabin like that? ”
“Younge Gleet?” exclaimed the elder of his two
companions —“this isn’t Younge Gleet!”
“ What do you mean, Bredenberg ? ”
Before either of them could say another word, I put my
oar in.
If I tried for a year I couldn’t remember the words I
used—l cannot even remember what admissions I may
have made—but at length I so impressed the three to
whom I spoke that they came for’rud with me. On
reaching the fo’c’sle they removed the boots from their
feet, and in silence followed me in.
I opened the door of Jerry’s cabin, and they stood, all
three witnesses close together, just outside it
I turned the handle as though I had locked the door,
but I left it —open —in the hand of one of the three
without.
I moved close up to the head of the bunk, and sat again
on the chest close beside it, and resumed my talk with its
unsuspecting occupant.
I felt the quivering of my own voice as I asked him
earnestly:
“Jerry, tell me. How did you do it?"


N
CHAPTER XVII
HOW DID YOU DO IT?
OT till I had repeated the
question did he answer it,
though when he did he
spoke freely enough. It is
strange —a criminal’s readi-
ness to speak of his crime
to criminal ears : and into
such ears Murrick the
murderer certainly thought
he was pouring his horrible
| tale over again now.
He made another mis-
take—he thought he had
only one listener.
“ How did you do it, Jerry ?”
“ How did I do it ? As I told you I done it—was you
too drunk to understand ? I was out poaching, as I was
every night, only that night I was paying partickler atten-
tion to that partickler preserve. I was hiding close by the


spot where the keeper pounced on young Cleet—l heard
the row, and during their last struggle in the clearing I
was ’most afraid they’ll roll over me.
« I told you before—l see Master Younge hit him and
make off. The keeper seemed sort of dazed like for a
minute, and I thought he was going to fall. Like a fool,
I chose that very moment to make a bolt for it, for it
seemed like as though he couldn t take another step
without spotting me or my tracks. As I broke cover he
started rushing off after the boy—and he ran right into
me. His blood was up—l knew he’d been told to keep a
partickler wideawake look-out after me. He stuck to me
like a leech. Tools and game was all in my pockets—l
knew well enough what ’ud become of me if I couldn t
shake him off. And suppose I had shook him off—he’d
have knowed where to find me, and he could have sworn
to me anywhere. I had to do it. I d got the knife with
me, and I drove it in.”
“ Where where is the knife now ? Did you leave it
behind you ? ”
“ What, stickin’ in his heart ? No fear. I drawed it out,
and wiped it on his own clothes underneath, and stuck it
in my pocket. Would you like to see it, Hunter ? Would
you ? ”
“ Yes,” I faltered. “ Where is it ? ”
“Jn that chest you’re sitting on. Here’s the keys under
my head.”
I took them, and opened the box.


wfjt
i jHS _ M§ ■' *■■ ’ Bt
\ bjb*^
’ f * ' *V-*1?®
“ Down at the bottom.”
I dived my hand deep, and brought up a long, thin, cruel
looking knife.
“ Got it ? ”
“ Yes.”
I held it up to the gaze ot the three at the door.—/. 129,
Let me feel it ? ”
He ran his hands along the sharp blade.
“ That’s it. I used to use it to give the finishing touch
to big game. Put it back, and lock the chest again.”
I put it back, but before I did so I held it up to the gaze


of the three at the door—the half-opened door now. Had
Jerry long been blinded, he would have felt that those
silent three were there.
“After I’d done it, I follered Gleet’s tracks in the
snow, and come on him. Something had come over
me, Hunter —I don’t mind confessing of it to you. I’d
turned chicken-hearted. He —you know —seemed to be
follering me about. I was pretty well primed before I
started, but I’d got plenty with me, and what I poured
into me then got into my head till I couldn’t find my way
out. When I come-to a bit, I found I’d tripped up quite
close to —near it: and the sky was getting lightish. Then
up comes young Gleet, but he didn’t see me. He walks up
to — it —and he kneels over it, and gives tongue.
“You know the rest, Hunter—you must remember the
rest ? ”
“Yes,” I said, “I know the rest —I remember all the
rest.”
“Hasn’t your voice changed a bit?” exclaimed Jerry
uneasily. “It seemed to me just then . . . ”
But I managed to stifle the sudden flash of suspicion
that seemed to have startled him, and he went on
feverishly :
“The paper says ‘the report to be continued,’ and by
this time —something more may have come out: never
mind exactly what. Blind or seeing, I hook it from this
ship before she sails —I’ve got the start, anyhow, and if I
can only get safe up-country the hounds ’ll have to have


{rood noses that run me down. Now then, Hunter, how
o
much money are you good for ? ”
“ Wait a minute—you must have known that all this was
bound to come out: I mean the statement in the paper.”
“Of course 1 did, and didn’t I act according? Didn’t I
make good use of that soft youngster Gleet ? I owed him
a grudge, and haven’t I paid it out ? I kept in hiding for
a bit on his money, and got out of the country as quick as
I could by paying for my berth with all I had left of it.
Now I’m stranded, I tell you—how much have you got
to float me off again ? ”
“ I’ve five pounds in my pocket.”
“Five pounds won’t do for me—you can raise fifty.
And raise ’em you must and shall, or I’ll say the word—l
will, by ! You know what I mean. I swear I will,
if I swing for it. I don’t believe old Goldsmith has left
the ship yet, and even if he has, he’s easy enough to be
found —I know he hadn’t taken his traps ashore a couple of
hours ago, for I asked. They fetched a doctor to me last
night, and he says I may be able to use my eyes a little in
a day or two. I ain’t going to be blind for long. But I’m
not going to wait for the money even a day or two—l’m
not going to give you a chance of slipping off while I’m
lying here without any eyes to watch you with. You've
got ’most all the day before you, and those two blazing
rings we couldn’t pass off, and I don’t know what besides.
I’ll give you till this time to-morrow —if you don’t come to
me then with the fifty, I’ll pass the word.”


“And suppose I pass the word for you?”
“You daren’t do it —what would your word be worth,
with Goldsmith to swear to you as the thief you are? And
who could arrest me here yet, without warrant or informa-
tion ? Don’t try that game on me—the cock won’t fight.
Say that again—say them words again that you spit out
just now, and I’ll have a hundred out of you instead of
fifty.”
“ Fifty pounds by this time to-morrow, you say.”
“Yes—and not a moment later or a penny less.”
“ I’ll see what I can do,” I said. “ I may be able to do a
good deal by this time to-morrow.”
“ You’ve got to.”
The strain upon me had already been almost more than
I could bear—a little more, a little longer, and my over-
wrought feelings must have betrayed me.
I got out of the stifling cabin on to the open deck, the
captain of the Sheik , my own officer, and the clergyman,
noiselessly preceding me.


/ f Ha 1
f / M H V
CHAPTER XVIII
[THE COURT-MARTIAL.
PIE Court-Martial —that is
what I cannot help calling
the meeting that evening
in the state cabin of the
good ship Ladye Love.
Present : Captains David
J. Bennions and Andreas
Bredenberg; the Reverend
Archibald Lane, outward-
bound Missionary to the
Fijian Islanders; Chief-
mate Mr. Avers Duncan ;
First - Class Apprentice
Younge Cleet.
The four seniors sat at
the head of the table, I at
the foot, for, as the news-
papers have it, “ the prisoner was allowed to be seated ”
during the proceedings.


Those proceedings, from the Court-Martial point of
view, were decidedly irregular, for the first thing the
President (I mean Captain Bennions) did was to order me
to “ make a clean breast of it, and tell him what the
mischief all this mystery meant.”
Compressing my long narrative into as few words as I
could, I told the Court practically everything. Save for
a stray question here and there, I was uninterrupted during
the whole course of my speech—the longest by far that I
had ever made. When I had finished, my four auditors
knew, to all intents and purposes, almost as much of me
and of my history as you do ; for, in the main, what I told
them was what I have told you.
A pause of what seemed to me considerable duration
followed my concluding words, during which pause I was
quite aware of the fact that the Court were “ taking stock ”
of me.
The President broke the pause by a most unjudicial
pronouncement.
“The chief point to be borne in mind,” he declared with
impressive emphasis, “ is this —that whoever got murdered,
or whoever has got to get hung, my ship must not be
delayed ! ”
“ Hear, hear,” roared Bredenberg, with a slap of his fist
on the table —“hear, hear! Nor mine ! ”
“ Nor yours, Bredenberg —quite so,” agreed Bennions
amiably. “If we can do anything in the cause of Justice
without delaying our ships, we’re willing to do it. Nothing
could be fairer than that, Bredenberg.”


“Nothing, Bennions.
“ Very well, then, how does the land lie ? ”
“To begin with, I don’t like the mystery about this
youngster here,” ventured Bredenberg. “ I’m fogged.
Scuttle me if I can see how the land does lie.”
He turned to the young clergyman.
“ I can see clearer through ’baccy smoke than anything.
Would you mind my putting a pipe on, reverend
governor ? ”
“ Not at all—not at all, captain,” answered Mr. Lane.
Both Bredenberg and Bennions hereupon lit up. The
smoke did not appear to have the effect of clearing the
former’s puzzled mind, however, for he proceeded, with the
air of a preternaturally acute lawyer, to propound the
following startling theory :
“ The real Hunter may not be this here young chap,
but this here young chap may be the real Hunter! If
Hunter’s such a clever rascal, there’s no saying who he
may be! ”
He had spoken quite truly —he was fogged.
“ What I say in the first place is that what we want is
evidence of identification. Eh, Bennions ? ”
“How can I be anybody but myself?” I demanded
with some indignation. “ That I am not Hunter I can
easily prove—call in Mr. Goldsmith.”
“ Good,” said Captain Bennions, “ That ought to satisfy
you, Bredenberg. We have heard that Goldsmith was
Hunter’s employer—if there’s anything in your suspicion,


which I consider absurd myself, the truth will come out
the moment he claps eyes on this lad of mine. You’ve no
objection, of course ? ”
“ Certainly not.”
“Is he still aboard the barque?” enquired Duncan.
“ I believe so. He said he should most likely sleep
aboard to-night.”
“ Then let’s send a message asking him to join us for
a few minutes ” —and the President rang the bell, and
dispatched his mandamus.
“You see,” observed Bredenberg after the departure of
the messenger, “ things seem to be so mixed up that I
can’t make out who may be who. But if my passenger
owns up that he doesn’t know this young shaver, I’ll own
up that he can’t be Hunter and must be Cleet. What I
meant to say just now was really this here —that as
Hunter palmed himself off successfully on me as some-
body else, we can’t be too careful that that little game isn’t
played a second time.”
“ I think your brain’s in a bit of a tangle,” observed
Bennions.
“ I’m sure it is,” was the honest old salt’s candid reply.
“ Haven’t I said as much ? ”
A tap at the cabin door—a “ come in ” from the chair —
and a benevolent-looking elderly gentleman wearing gold
spectacles entered, to be greeted by Captain Bredenberg
as the expected Mr. Goldsmith, and as such introduced by
him to the rest of the company, myself excepted.


“ Let’s see, sir,” said Bennions, with a wave of his hand
in my direction, “ is any introduction to you of this young
gentleman necessary?”
The gold spectacles were turned full upon me—l had
risen when the visitor entered and remained standing, now
bowing.
With a benevolent smile on his clean-shaven face, Mr.
Goldsmith returned my salutation with a few common-
place words.
“ Sailing with you, sir, I suppose—sailing with you,” he
said pleasantly to the skipper of the Ladye Love. “ W ell,
sir,” he continued with an old-fashioned, stately courtesy
that sat well upon him, “ I congratulate him on his oppor-
tunities in serving on such a ship and under such a captain
as the ship and captain claiming the honours in a race
with the renowned Arab Sheik.”
The delighted Bennions looked in his gratification as
though his name never would and never could be Bunnions
again—while his rival looked glum, as though he altogether
failed to appreciate the courtesy of this reference to a
recent incident.
Mr. Goldsmith remained chatting for a few minutes
with the greatest urbanity. Informed that a little later
there might possibly be some information to communicate
to him relative to a subject in which his interests were
concerned, he took this as a hint, and almost immediately
afterwards his departure, his natural enquiry touching the
subject-matter of the information which might be in store


for him having been met by the statement that it was
involved in a larger matter at present under private
discussion.
After his departure that discussion took a directly
personal turn, hor the level-headed Avers Duncan quietly
got his hand on the wheel, and brought the Court to
concentrate its deliberations on these two points:
“ What is to be done as regards Younge Cleet? ”
“ \\ hat is to be done as regards the man Murrick? ”
With his first thought still uppermost:
“ My ship must not be delayed,” said the President.
“ or mine,” echoed an equally determined voice.
“ Gentlemen,” I proposed, “ shall I leave the cabin ? ’
“No,” said my captain.
“ Why should you ? ” said Bredenberg.
Duncan said nothing.
Then Mr. Lane spoke, almost for the first time —and I
was struck with the sweetness and clearness of his voice,
albeit it was smooth and full and round. He suggested
that perhaps it would be more considerate on their part
towards myself and my natural feelings to allow me to act
on the suggestion I had made, and to absent myself while
the discussion was carried to some definite conclusion.
“ Thank you, sir,” I said gratefully ; and, none forbidding
me, I rose and left the cabin.
“ I don t care what they decide; I don’t care what they
do or what they don’t do ” —these were my thoughts as I
tramped the deck in solitary meditation, waiting for the


summons to go below again to hear the conclusion arrived
at by the “Court-Martial” —“I don’t care —I don’t care
what happens now, for the weight’s off my mind. The
burden that I’thought I should have to bear all my life has
been rolled off my shoulders —I have the death of no
fellow-creature to be answerable for now.”
But presently I found myself hoping that I shouldn’t
have to go back to England in the middle of my first
voyage, either to stand my trial, or as a witness against
the real murderer. I wanted to travel on to the glowing
Indies. I wanted to behold the glories of the gorgeous
East, I wanted to see the world.
Ah, yes; but what about clearing my character at home,
where I had been publicly associated with Murrick s crime ?
What about . . .”
“ Pass the word for Cleet,” I heard—and the next minute
I was in the cabin again.
Its suggestion of the scene of a Court-Martial seemed to
me to be stronger than ever, though the first utterance of
Captain Bennions ought to have been sufficient to dispel
the illusion.
“We have decided how to act, and what to do. In the
first place, my ship must not be delayed.”
“ Nor mine.”
“ Nor Captain Bredenberg’s. In the second place, we’ve
got to act on the square with Justice, and with all parties
concerned. We’ve hit on a way of combining the require-
ments of both points, so to speak Our plan will prevent


the delay of our ships, meet fairly the claims of Justice,
and be agreeable all round.”
The last phrase was rather a come-down from some of
the speaker’s accompanying utterances. In fact, it sounded
a little ludicrous.
“ He doesn’t speak like a strict disciplinarian,” I thought,
“ now that his interests in making a quick voyage are
touched.”
“ I 11 also say that we’re going to act as we have decided
to act because we don’t see how we can act in any other
way. It is evident that the authorities here have received
no instructions from the authorities at home regarding
either you, Gleet, or this man Murrick. If we were to
give them any information about either of you, the
muddle-headed fools, with their red tape might want, in
the absence of orders from home, to go through a lot of
formalities that would delay my ship.”
“ And mine.”
“ And Captain Bredenberg’s. This, then, is our decision.”


CHAPTER XIX.
TV THE STRAITS OF BAB-EL-MANDEB.
I statement that you
have made to us, and
the confession that was
overheard from the lips
of the man Murrick this
morning, will be en-
tered in detail in the
logs both of Captain
Bredenberg and myself.
The first statement you will have to sign yourself in both
books ; the second—the confession—will be witnessed by
Captain Bredenberg, the Reverend Mr. Lane, a fully-
ordained clergyman of the Church of England, and Mr.
Duncan : likewise in both logs. I clear the day after
to-morrow for the Mauritius, the Seychelles, and Calcutta.
From the Hooghly I shall try to pick up a freight home.
You will retain your rating on the schooner and sail with
her—on the condition that you engage to hold yourself at


my disposal as to handing you over to face any form of
enquiry. In the event of further us up
as to your being ‘ wanted,’ it may be my duty—if I can
do so without delaying the schooner—to hand you over
before we reach England again. I shan’t go out of my
way to do anything of the sort, but it’s only fair to prepare
you for the contingency I’ve mentioned.”
“So is your condition fair, sir; and I pledge myself to
abide by it.”
“ All right, then —that settles you. As to Murrick,
Captain Bredenberg is sailing for New Zealand direct, and
from there home round the Horn. He will see to it that
the fellow has no chance to desert the barque, or leave her
under any pretext. Captain Bredenberg will hold himself
responsible for him—he’ll keep him snug for the police.
You and Murrick will meet again.”
“ Do you think I’d better see him again before we sail,
captain ? ”
“ No, I think not—what do you say, Bredenberg ? ”
“ Better keep out of his way, Cleet, my boy,” advised
the master of the Arab Sheik.
“ There’s one thing we’re forgetting,” observed Duncan ;
“ and a thing of some importance, too.”
“ What’s that ? ”
“Murrick’s threat to pass the word to Mr. Goldsmith.
It’s possible that if Cleet fails to keep the engagement for
to-morrow he’ll want to keep his threat! ”
“ What if he does ? ”


“A good deal, Captain Bredenberg. As a result of an
interview with Mr. Goldsmith he’d be bound to find out
that his fatal confession was not made to Hunter but to
Younge Cleet himself—and that’s a trump card that’s far
better kept up our sleeve.”
“You’re right —by Jove, Duncan, you’re right. He
shan’t meet Goldsmith—that I’ll guarantee.”
I sat up almost all the night writing a long letter to Mr.
Crope, for himself and Dr. Groombridge. For I coidd write
to them now. I told them all.
The next day was a busy one. A little cargo had still
to be discharged, and more to be taken aboard—but night
found her almost ready for sea, and early in the morning,
with a spanking wind to fill her sails, she cleared from
Capetown for Mauritius.
From Port Louis (Mauritius) we made for the Hooghly,
calling at several islands on the way. After discharging
cargo at Calcutta, we tried to pick up a homeward freight,
but the markets were against us and we failed. Thereupon
the skipper decided to run to Ceylon, where he was pretty
sure of finding a load. Being offered a good rate for the
carriage of a cargo of gold dust, ebony, scents, incense and
cinnamon to Ophir, he closed at once. It was generally
understood that if he failed to contract a charter-party in
the neighbourhood of the Red Sea for a freight home, he
would return to the Thames River in ballast. So there
was a “homeward bound” sort of feeling amongst all of us
as sail was hoisted for the run from Ceylon to Ophir.


We might well be in high spirits, for the weather re-
mained glorious, we had no sickness aboard, and fortune
had so favoured the ship’s business that the hands were
allowed several unusual little concessions of the kind they
most appreciated.
I had “ kept my pecker up ” gaily. I never heard that
phrase—it never crossed my mind—without its bringing
with it a thought of Eaglebeak, who had used it in his
farewell words to me years ago. I had grown prodigiously
during the voyage, but my girth had widened with the
increase of my height, and I was in no danger of out-
stripping my strength. I could lay aloft now with the
nimblest, knew how to handle the schooner in ordinary
weather, could take a reckoning, and was forging well
ahead in my study of navigation.
I had little thought at one time that I should ever stand
so well with the captain as now I knew I did.
The Ladye Love entered the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb
just thirty-one days out from Colombo, and “ all well ”
with the exception of the fact that she had run short of
water. The sou’-west monsoon was bowling her so steadily
and swiftly along that but for this want of water Captain
Bennions would certainly not have brought her up as he
did.
“We’ll haul her to the wind, Mr. Duncan.”
The mate hurried forward with his orders. Carried out
almost as quickly as they were uttered, the smartly-
handled schooner came to the wind in a twinkling.


“ Cleet,” said the skipper, “ lower the long boat, take four
of the hands with you, and row ashore to the wells for
water.”
“ Aye, aye, sir.”
He added a few words as to the situation of the wells,
and then left me to carry out his orders.
Soon enough afterwards, with myself in the stern sheets
the long boat was being pulled rapidly towards the beach
on the Arabian side of the Straits, near which beach were
the wells from which the needed supply of water was to
be drawn.
The prospect of an unexpected hour on shore just suited
me after so many days on board, and I laughed and
chatted gaily as we surged through the water and drew
closer to the low-lying shore.


CHAPTER XX
STEERING A SLAVER.
UNNING her in head on, I
ordered the four sailors to
proceed to one of the nearest
wells, while I remained for
the present in charge of the
boat.
In about a quarter of an
hour the men returned, re-
porting that the wells in the
immediate vicinity appeared
to be all choked with sand.
I directed them to search a
little further inland, and away
they went again.
A few minutes after they
had disappeared from my
sight, turning my eyes seaward I saw another boat, built
of bamboo and pointed at both ends, pulling in to the
shore.


Farther away in the offing was the Abyssinian dhow
from which the boat had evidently been dispatched. The
Ladye Love w T as quite out of sight round a bend of the land.
Nothing w r as in view but the stretching sands on one
hand and the dhow and its boat on the other.
The latter w'as making for the beach “ hand over hand
and ran up alongside my own ship’s boat soon after I had
observed it. A man sprang from it and stepped briskly to
my side.
Pointing with many gestures to the dhow in the dis-
tance, the Arab sailor—as his appearance proclaimed him
to be—explained in broken English that on board her w'as
an Englishman whom they had picked up in an open boat
at sea. He w T as injured, and could not be brought ashore.
He appeared to be dying, and spoke things they could not
understand. Would the English officer—that was what
the Arab called me—come to him ?
My answer w r as prompt. A countryman injured and
dying? Yes—of course I would go to him. Let the
dhow r be sailed closer in, I said, so that if my men returned
before myself, I could shout or motion to them. If this
were done, I would go aboard at once.
In quick obedience to the Arab’s excited gestures, the
dhow’s big sail was set, and she flew across the waves to
within a few lengths of the beach. Then I stepped into
the bamboo boat, and in a very few minutes stood on
the deck of the larger craft.
“ Below,” hurriedly whispered the Arab who had
brought me aboard ; “ below r , below'—he is below.”


As I descended he followed close at my heels, shouting
as he did so an order which to me was quite unintelligible.
But that the men on deck understood it was instantly
obvious, for the hatchway was covered over in a flash.
Quick feet trampled the deck overhead; motions and
sounds that I did understand followed in close attendance
upon the words I did not.
The dhow’s head was turned to sea, every stitch of her
canvas was spread to the wind—she was off and away !
Quickly and furiously I turned to my treacherous
companion, who was now grinning triumphantly.
“ The dhow’s under sail! ” I cried—“ what does it mean ? ”
—and attempted to spring again on deck.
Too late. Strong arms seized me and held me back,
and as I continued to struggle, a bright steel blade was
held threateningly to my heart.
At last, almost exhausted, I sank back. Then the
reason of my capture was explained to me. Moussa, the
Arab who had accosted me so politely on the beach, was
owner of the dhow. With a mixed crew of about twenty
desperadoes, the boat was on her first voyage to Jeddah in
quest of slaves for the Turkish market. A couple of days
before, the captain, the only man on board who knew the
navigation of the Straits, had died. How were they to get
to Jeddah without him? How could they complete the
voyage without a man on board who possessed the
necessary knowledge ?
In this dilemma they spied the long boat of the Ladye


Love making for the shore. When my companions left
me for the second time, they seized the chance—and me.
“ Now then,” asked Moussa, “ which will you do ? Sail
the dhow for me, take us to Jeddah, be one of us,
or . .
“ Or what ? ”
“ Die,” said Moussa grimly.
Now I didn’t want to do either. I certainly didn’t want
to die, and I didn’t want to dirty my hands with the slave
trade. I thought of its cruelties, its horrors, its abomina-
tions—l had heard enough about them, short as had been
my time at sea.
I grew hot with indignation at the clever trick which
had been played upon me, and at the suggestion that I
should cast in my lot with this gang of kidnappers and
murderers. What would be thought of me on board my
own ship? What could be thought of me but that I had
wilfully deserted her?—deserted her with that enquiry still
to face at home!
“ I won’t navigate the craft,” I cried. “ Sail her yoursell
—to Davy Jones’s locker,” I added in a lower voice.
This time it was a pistol that was held to me.
“Will you sail her? We have compass and charts, but
understand them not, and the rocks and reefs are many.
Join us, and share our gains, or die. Will you sail her ? ”
I looked at the dhow owner’s fierce face and at the
bright muzzle of the pistol. At the moment that I
decided upon my verbal answer, I made up my mind that


I would either wreck the slaver or betray her—sail her to
market with a cargo of human beings I would not, come
what might. But:
“Yes,” I replied only, sullenly; “ I'll sail her.”
With this I walked on deck. The dhow was now well
at sea, and the sudden night of the latitude was falling. I
could see nothing of the Ladye Love , and judged
(correctly) that an opposite course from hers had been
steered. I trimmed the one enormous lateen sail with
which the dhow was rigged, a little changed her course,
and then laid myself down for the night. Sailor-like, I
almost instantly forgot all my troubles in a sound sleep.
The next day I ascertained her exact position, pricked
out her course for Jeddah, and headed her to it.
But my secret resolution had taken a definite shape—
and a terrible one. I argued to myself that these slavers
were the pests of humanity, the scourge of their native
seas; that by the laws of civilization their lives were
forfeited by the very fact that they were slavers. They
ought to be swept from every ocean. As for this
particular slaver, into the command of which I had been so
unwillingly forced, it was in my power to do for her, at all
events. And I would do for her.
We were approaching the Zukir Reef—marked plainly
enough on the chart I was studying. Rather than be the
cat’s-paw of the ruffianly Moussa and his cut-throat crew—
I had taken the measure of all of them—l would run the
dhow on the rocks and wreck her, taking for what it was


worth the very small chance of saving my own life.
Better to die than live the dishonoured accomplice of these
black scoundrels.
The discoloured, greenish water that covered the reef
was already distinguishable from the bright blue waves
that surrounded it. A point or two aff the course she was
laying, and in less than half an hour the accursed dhow
would be a helpless wreck on the Zukir Reef.
While my blood was still up, I headed her straight for
the death-trap.
Nearer and nearer she bounded.
A few minutes now, and the crash must come. My own
fingers were on the tiller, and I kept her steady—straight
for her doom !


CHAPTER XXI.
“KEEP YOUR PECKER UP I"
UT my hand was suddenly
and sharply dashed away.
Moussa stood there by my
side, one hand on the
tiller, the other pointing
ahead.
“ Dog,” he hissed, “ dog
of a Christian, I know what
you would have done. I
have watched you.”
Thus thwarted and
warned at one and the
same time, I gave up my wild and reckless idea of
wrecking the boat, but only to ponder over other ideas for
effecting her ruin by other means. What I would have
liked best would have been to have effected my own
escape and to have left the dhow to get along as best she
could without me, but this was hopeless. Jeddah was


close at hand now; there was nothing for it but to run her
in.
What joy to my eyes would have been the sight of a
British man-o’-war!
At Jeddah, Moussa had no difficulty in securing his
living cargo. My heart was sick within me as the
wretched, hopeless, helpless slaves were brought on board,
even children amongst them; but so far as possible I
concealed my feelings, and even succeeded in ingratiating
myself more or less into the slave-dealer’s confidence
—all of course with an object. I had picked up at
Jeddah some rumours of an English gunboat being on the
look-out. If only I could run the dhow within range of
her guns, Moussa and his crew would be taken red-handed,
as it were, with the slaves actually on board.
By the time the dhow was ready to sail for Suakim,
where the slaves were to be sold, I had so interested
myself in all the proceedings that Moussa seemed to have
lost his remaining misgivings, save that he still took such
precautions as absolutely prevented me from running away
with the slightest hope of escaping re-capture.
When the craft put again to sea I resumed my old place
with apparent light-heartedness.
Five days out from Jeddah a sail was sighted. Little
was thought of it till it became evident that the stranger
was bearing down on the dhow. Moussa became more
and more uneasy, and wanted to put his vessel before the
wind and run for it; but, with my heart trembling with


hope, I pleaded that to alter her course now would be to
reveal her character at once, and that then “we ” would
certainly have to face a danger that we might avoid
altogether by keeping innocently on our way.
Closer and closer the stranger approached, watched by
both of us—by all of us, save the poor slaves imprisoned
below—with straining eyes.
Simultaneously Moussa and I gave vent to a startled
exclamation.
He shrieked :
“ The English Colours ! ”
At the moment that I shouted
“ A Gunboat! ”
“ Fly the French flag ! ” screamed Moussa.
Diving into the cabin below, I reappeared with the
French flag in my hand and the Arab flag in my pocket—
a few seconds afterwards up ran the former to the dhow’s
mast-head.
But the ruse was without avail, for a shot was fired from
the gunboat across our bows as a signal for us to
heave-to.
I was mad with delight, for we were almost within
range.
But already, amidst the wildest confusion and excite-
ment, the slavers were putting their vessel about. On the
wind they would soon be able to show the man-o’-war a
clean pair of heels—they would still be safe from pursuit,
capture, and punishment. I knew this too —I knew it but
too well.


If the dhow could only be brought for a minute within
range! The Englishmen would know that slaves might
be below, and would not fire at her hull, but only at her
upper works to cripple her, and “ save the slaves alive.”
What I did I did indeed quickly.
Seizing an axe in my right hand, stronger in my passion
and tumultuous excitement than it had ever been before, I
sprang into the dhow’s frail rigging. Tearing down the
French colours, I replaced them with the red and green of
the Arab flag in my pocket, showing the slaver in her
“ real colours.” Then, with flashing, lightning-like strokes
I crashed my axe here and there, and here again, amongst
the halyards. Down fell yard and sail amongst the
amazed slavers.
Bang! Whizz ! went a bullet past my face. Whizz!
Bang ! went another. Bang ! Bang ! Whizz! Whizz ! as a
third and a fourth pellet of lead hurtled up through the
air, and struck the mast to which I was clinging.
Old Moussa was blazing away at me from the deck as
fast as he could fire.
His fifth shot struck me, inflicting a stinging flesh
wound on the left hand.
I don’t know whether I fell down, jumped down, or slid
down—but I do know that I was standing on the deck in
about a second afterwards.
The whole crew made a rush at me.
But the axe that had already done such good service
was in my right hand still—and it wasn’t going to be my


fault if it didn’t serve a better purpose yet by enabling me
to rid the world of some of these yelling ruffians before
they overpowered me.
I’d got to die—but I wasn’t going to be the first to lose
the number of his mess.
In an absolute frenzy I hit out left and right, and so
closely was I hemmed in that every blow seemed to crack
somebody’s rascally skull. It was lucky for me that
firearms were scarce amongst the murderous rabble.
I soon found that I had to hit behind me as well as
before and to either side—and when I found them dodging
to my rear I thought it was all up with me.
But it wasn’t, for the dhow was now within easy range
from the gunboat, and a big shot came plump amidships
and brought down our single mast. It did more, for it
carried Moussa’s head off his shoulders, and knocked over
three of his men into the bargain. The shot was fair, for
now I perceived that some of the Arabs had launched the
dhow’s boat, and were making away.
A ringing cheer—a cheer that could only come from the
lusty lungs of British tars—followed the shot as soon as
ever its effect in disabling the dhow could be seen. The
cheer seemed to come from close quarters, and a hasty
look towards the man-o’-war shewed me that two of
her boats, each full of armed men, were pulling from her
for us as fast as brawny arms could pull them. The
dhow carried a small brass piece forward, and this was
discharged in the direction of the approaching boats. The


IT ff &J£W
■fes* ; jKm f% I f
JStr jflBT sJ^SM
' SUb* iji^MI^K;,
Iw '
|HH^ X ' - 4, j|8k. r f \ -
*'J
-w TflBSw’- ■ *£' -j
s * I. r jP v-^l
8S29
In an absolute frenzy I hit out left and right.— p. 156.




shot splashed harmlessly into the water. But two of the
men who had served the gun turned savagely on me,
pistols in hand, and were on the point of firing at me.
Just in time I gripped the dead but still bleeding body of
Moussa from the planks and held it in front of me as they
pulled trigger, Their bullets found a target —but in his
body, not mine.
“Have you struck, or do you want any more?” an
English voice rang out.
A tall, lanky officer was standing up in the stern-sheets
of the leading boat, a gleaming epaulet on his shoulder.
Some of his men were waiting the word to fire a volley
of small shot into the dhow as they approached her.
Almost every remaining Arab sprang over the dhow’s side
and plunged ahead to pick up with her boat. But—
Boom !
Another cannon shot from the man-o’-war, and the boat
they were making for was knocked into splinters. Another
stentorian cheer —and this time I joined in it with all my
might.
“ Ready—pre-sent! ”
The sharp order of the naval officer who had just hailed
us reached my ears almost as distinctly as it must have
reached the ears to which it was addressed. He evidently
wasn’t going to hail us again.
“ Don’t fire, sir,” I roared. “ It’s all over. I’m an
English boy—decoyed on board—l’ve fought the lot of
’em. Don’t fire, sir ! ”


“ What’s that ? ” came the answering shout of the
lieutenant. “An Englishman aboard there—fighting the
I ff
crew !
“ Yes, sir”—and I showed myself in full view, leaning as
far as I could stretch over the gunwale.
“ Lower arms—give way, men.”
Then again to me, in louder tones :
“ Bully for you, my lad —keep your pecker up ! ”
A couple of minutes—and the boat dashed alongside
and her crew boarded. A minute afterwards the crew of
the second boat joined their mates on the deck of the
captured slaver. The combined parties were in charge of
no fewer than six officers, but the tall lieutenant who had
spoken me before boarding was evidently the senior, for
none gave orders but himself.
Some of the drowning Arabs were now trying to regain
the dhow—others elected to sink where they were.
With his eyes—large and flashing eyes they were —upon
the former :
“ Lend a hand to help those fellows aboard—iro-n them
and lower them under guard into your boat:” ordered the
first lieutenant —and :
“Aye, aye, sir,” responded the junior officer to whom he
spoke.
“ Off with those hatches ! ”
The bluejackets were prompt enough in obeying the
order, and the frightened slaves were brought up into the
light of day. Not all of them were black —some of them,


chiefly amongst the women, girls, and children, had fairer
skins than had their captors.
Singly and in batches they fell to their knees on the
bloody deck before their deliverers—not in expression of
gratitude but in appeal for mercy, for they had been told
that a fate far worse than slavery awaited them if once
they fell into the power of the English.
I saw one poor old fellow—an African negro—crawl to
the lanky lieutenant and clasp him, with trembling hands,
by the leg. He raised his streaming eyes to the strong,
firm, kindly white face above him in mute but piteous
supplication.
The big officer did a strange thing. I saw him. I
heard him. He patted the poor old nigger’s thick crop of
matted wool, and bade him :
“ Keep your pecker up, old man ! ”
The next minute he was “ the officer” again—but for a
few moments, with his kindly gesture and its accom-
panying kindly—albeit, in the circumstances, extraordinary
—injunction, the expression of his face had changed—and
in those fleeting moments I had recognized him.
Absolute order was restored with true man-o’-war
celerity. It was found necessary to send the ex-slaves—
they were slaves no longer now—below again : down they
went. Our few prisoners were safe in the boat of the
junior lieutenant alongside. Four of them were in a
parlous state—they had axe wounds on the head. The
deck of the dhow had been swabbed and cleared of


wreckage and the bodies of her dead. Tow-lines had been
dropped from her bows—all was in readiness for the return
of the boats to the man-o’-war with their prize.
For the first time the jubilant commander ot the
bluejackets turned to me and faced me.
He looked at me long and steadily.
“ I'll hear your story presently,” he said. “What is your
name ? ”
“ Younge Cleet, sir.”
His excited exclamation provoked a question from a
subordinate officer close to us.
“ Do you know the lad ? ”
“ Know him ! Do I know him ? Why, confound it, sir,
I’m one of his principal fathers ! ”


CHAPTER XXII
7 HE FINDING OF THE JURY.
S a matter of fact, my recog-
nition of Eaglebeak—l beg
his pardon, Lieutenant Fal-
low, R.N.—had not been
much in front of his recog-
nition of myself. But it
was not until an hour or
two after we had all reached
the gunboat—Her Britannic
Majesty’s ship of war Celerity
—that his duties permitted
him to take me into his
own cabin for the lone
talk which we were perhaps
equally anxious to have
with each other.
Naturally enough in the circumstances of the case, I had
to do the major share of the talking—for the story I had
to tell was a longer one by far than was his story as he


told it. In fact, beyond the general statement that he had
entered the navy soon after he left Cleet Hall and was
keeping his pecker up, he had little to say about himself;
or rather, he would say but little. I had to find out for
myself that already his dare-devil deeds of reckless
bravery, his acts of unselfish chivalry, in the course of his
service in the suppression of the slave trade and in sundry
punitive expeditions on the West Coast of Africa, were
becoming the boast of the fo’c’sle and the talk of the mess.
His brother officers loved him and laughed at him—as
he had been loved and laughed at at school: loved for
his qualities, laughed at for his eccentricities. His men
worshipped him—even his peculiarities were accounted by
them to his credit. All this I had an early opportunity of
finding out about him, and much more.
He took me over the cardinal points of my long yarn a
second time before he told me that he had known some-
thing of the earlier part of the history for a considerable
period, and for a shorter period had known what even
I had not learnt yet —the result of the inquest on the
murdered gamekeeper, the “ finding of the jury.”
“ What was it, sir ? ” I asked breathlessly.
“A verdict of wilful murder against Jeremy Murrick.
“The circumstances that were brought to light to lead
up to this verdict were briefly these: the most incrimi-
nating of the foot-prints in the snow were found to
correspond with boots belonging to him, which he left
behind at his mother’s. These foot-prints were particularly


plain and many on the scene of the death-struggle—at the
spot where the body was found. Further, it was proved
by the evidence of his own mother—poor old woman !
that the fellow had just the sort of knife that the doctor
said would fit the wound, and that he was in the habit of
carrying it. In the third place, it was not only proved that
he was out of doors on the night of the murder, but that
he was in the neighbourhood of the preserve where the
crime was committed.
“ You were a fool to bolt, Younge—almost as great a fool
as Murrick was not to kick his boot-marks out of shape,
only criminals are guilty of just some such insanity in nine
cases out of ten. You were worse than a fool—you were a
coward: though, by Jove! you’re not one now—l’m
proud of you for to-day’s work; shake hands !—but
instead of slipping cable with Murrick you should have
stayed behind and kept your pecker up. Did I say
anything to you about keeping your pecker up when I
came to bid you good-bye?”
“You certainly did,” I managed—somehow—to answer
as solemnly as I had been asked.
“ I thought so—and you should always do it.”
“ Mr. Fallow, what do you think will be the upshot of it
all when I get back to England—how will it all end for
me and for Murrick?”
“You’ll have to tell your tale in the witness-box if you
arrive about the same time, and Murrick will be hanged.
Now let’s talk about how you’re to get back to your ship.
You say she’s at Ophir?”


“ She may have left there by now, sir, I’m afraid,” I said
sadly.
“ That’s bad. I know that our orders for dealing with
the rescued slaves and the prisoners we have on board—we
have more than your little lot, Younge—will make it
impossible for us to take you into Ophir with this ship.
But I’ll go and ask Captain Cameron what can be done”
and he abruptly left the cabin.
He returned, after a long interval, to tell me that the
commander of the Celerity , in recognition of my blank and
blank blank conduct (modesty constrains me to suppress
the adjectives), had agreed to strain the letter of his
cruising orders so far as to shape her course immediately
for the Red Sea entrance to the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb,
whence, either in Moussa’s captured dhow re-rigged or in
one of the man-o’-war’s boats, I should be taken into
Ophir by a crew of bluejackets.
The thanks which I poured into the unwilling ears of
Lieutenant Younge Fallow I was able to repeat personally
to his chief, for the former was the bearer of a compli-
mentary order for me to report myself to the latter
immediately.
After an uneventful run we made the entrance of the
Straits in calm and fine weather. The gunboat’s cutter
was launched and manned, and I took my seat in the
stern-sheets beside the smart young middy who was to be
in charge of her till her return from Ophir.
I said gcod-bye to Eagleteak just befere I went


overside—in fact, he paid me the compliment of walking
across the deck with me.
“ I shall go to Gleet Hall when I fetch the old country,”
I said. “ Have you any message for Dr. Groombridge and
the young gentlemen, sir?”
“Yes,” answered Eaglebeak. “Tell them all to keep
their pecker up ! ”


—✓
CHAPTER XXIII
BARNACLE'S YARN
was a fair run to Ophir,
with almost a soldier’s
wind—so sail was hoisted
and we held a course for
some hours without tack-
ing-. As we skimmed
buoyantly along,the middy
directed my attention to
the grizzled old salt he
had told off to the fore-
sheets.
“You see that old chap
there chawing his quid ?
his name’s Barnacle.”
“ I see him.”
“ Well, then, you see the
biggest liar in the ship.
That man is the finest liar in the navy. I will go further —
that old man is the most brilliant, the most dazzling, liar
in this or any other universe! ”


The middy looked admiringly at the unconscious subject
of his remarks, and continued :
“ He makes out that he fought under Nelson, and won
the battle of Trafalgar.”
“ Won Trafalgar ? ”
“ Well, he claims that at all events it was won through
him. Like to hear his yarn ? ”
“ Very much,” I said.
“Stand by those fore-sheets, Jackson. Come astern,
Barnacle.”
“Aye, aye, sir”—and the veteran joined us.
“ I want you to tell us that yarn of yours about your
old days with Nelson —about Trafalgar, you know.
“Aye, aye, sir—/ know. ’Taint likely I should go
forgettin’ what I done for Nelson the night before we won
that buster agin the French. This is how’t happened,
young gennelmen.
“ I was a-sarvin’ on the old Wictory , and just afore my
watch turned in for first snooze that night, Lord Nelson he
sent for me to go to him on the quarter-deck. Now
though me and Nelson was old shipmates and very
familiar like, of course I always scraped a leg and hauled
off my ’at as soon as my feet touched the quarter-deck,
because, d’ve see? if I hadn’t, Lord Nelson he’d ha’ keel-
hauled even a old chum like me. As I did the usual on
this here occasion, Nelson says :
Barny, I want you to go on a secret cruise to-night to
help me damage the French to-morrow.’


‘“What’s your idea ? ’ I asks, easy but respectful.
‘“I wants to find out their exact strength,’ replies the
Hadmiral. ‘You take the cutter, pull round the Bay,
keep your weather heye open, and come back and report.
Pipe up the cutter’s crew! Call for wolunteers! There
ain’t a man in the Fleet I can trust this job to but you,’ he
says.
“ ‘ This ’ere’s dangerous work, ’Oratio.’
“‘lt is.’
“‘I don’t mind risking my life for Hingerland, ’Ome, and
a increased pension ; but I feels, ’Oratio, as I ain’t got no
right to risk the lives of other men, what would naterally
expeck a share if any special reward’s give by the King for
this here noble deed. I'll go by myself.'
“ Now, as is well beknowed, Nelson could only cry out of
one heye, the other heye being bunged up by a injury.
But at these ’ere noble words o’ mine he wep’ from his one
sound heye copious. I heered the drops a-splashin’ on to
the deck.
“‘So be it, ’eart of Hoax,’ he cries. ‘Go. If you falls
a wictim to the ’ated Frenchmen, what the skimjams do it
matter ? ’ he says.
“ ‘ Farewell, ’Oratio,’ I makes reply. ‘ Gi’ me one quid
o’ baccy afore we parts.’
“With a friendly hoath Lord Nelson kicked me off the
quarter-deck.
“ I launched the cutter, and started—alone all by myself
—to row round the French fleet.


“ After a hour or two I got to the enemies’ wessels. With
muffled oars I rows in and out, makin’ sich notes in the
darkness as I could. Just as I was near thinkin’ ot
returnin’ to the Wictory , I makes out to lar-b’d the lines
of a fust-class line-o’-battle ship as I hadn’t obsarved
before. I must see summat o’ what guns she carried.
Firm, though cautious, I pulls towards ’er.
“ I’d got safe enough close to ’er, when a sudden com-
motion on board told me as I were discovered.
“ I stops rowin’, ins with the oars, and sits down in the
starn o’ my boat to await ewents.
“The French cap’en ’ailed me, speakin’ Hingerlish like
a native.
“ 1 What boat’s that ? ’ he shouts.
“ ‘Cutter o’ the Wictory , Hadmiral Nelson’s flag-ship.
“ ‘ Who’s aboard ? ’
“ ‘ Me.’
“ ‘ Surrender, or I’ll open fire on yer. Surrender ! ”
“ ‘ Never! ’ I shouts.
“ Then I takes off my trousers, lashes ’em round the
blade of a oar, and elewates the lot proud and ’aughty.
“ ‘ Fire on this flag,’ I ’oilers, ‘ if yer dare ! ’
“ The French cap’en turns to somebody on board the
wesscl, and he say 3 in a lower woice, though I heer’d him
plain :
“ ‘ Bring up the lamp off my cabin table, and let’s have a
look at this fellow.’
“ Somebody brings up the lamp, as were unusual power-
ful. It reg’ler lit up the Bay!


“ The Frenchies sunveyed me, and I sunveyed the
Frenchies, still a-keepin’ up my flag.
“They opens a port and runs out a gun. I didn’t turn a
'air, though well I knowed what cannon balls could do.
“ ‘ Haul down that flag ! ’ roars the French cap’en.
“ ‘ Not at haul ! ’ I roars back.
“ ‘ Load ! ’
“ I hears ’em a-loadin’ the cannon, and a woice askin
“ ‘ ’Ave yer got the range ?—Fire ! ’
“ They ’ad got the range, young gennelmen, for the ball
scraped me on the lar-b’d jaw so clean that I didn’t ’ave no
need to shave for a week. The shock made me feel queer,
but dooty was dooty, and I warn’t goin’ to give in to no
French line-o’-battle ship without a effort. I keeps up my
oar triumphant, and waves my trousers defiant. Then
they fires again. This time I copped it on the starb’d
jaw-tackle—shaved clean as a whistle, and my teeth
a-shakin’ in their gums, it ’it me that ’ard, gennelmen
though sideways.
“ Things was too warm. They’d got the range too close.
I felt as I’d done enough. And what would ’Oratio do
without me next day ?
“ ‘ Look out for this ’ere flag to-morrow, and be darned
to yer! ’ I yells as I lowers the oar and slips it into the
rol’ock.
“ And with them noble words a-echoin’ on the bright
sneeze—which I meant for to say the night breeze —I
rowed away for all I was worth. Before they could load


again I was out o’ range, and before daybreak I was safe
again aboard the Wictorv.
o
“That’s the true yarn of ’ow Hadmiral Nelson got the
particklers o’ the French fleet what put ’im up to ’ow to
lick ’em next day—as true as it is that that there schooner
across our bows, sir, is a-clearin’ out of Hofer.”


" ''* Ate. ; B&aX
CHAPTER XXIV.
ALL HANDS LOST.
ADYE LOVE ahoy ! ” I
hailed frantically, leaping
to my feet as I recognised
the well-known lines of
my own ship.
The middy steered
adroitly alongside the
moving schooner, gather-
ing way every moment.
“ Ladye Love ahoy ! On deck there ! —Mr. Duncan, sir,
ahoy ! ” —as I caught sight of the first mate.
I heard his exclamation as my hail reached his ears and
he saw from whom it proceeded. A moment later a rope-
ladder came whizzing overside. With a shouted good-bye
to my companions in the boat of the man-o’-war, I leaped
from her bows and gripped the dangling ladder just in the
nick of time, and speedily made good my ascent to the
deck of the schooner, just as Captain Bennions stepped
upon it from the companion stairs.


“Come aboard, sir,” I said with the customary salute.
The old man’s name was Bunnions for the next few
minutes, but as soon as I got a chance of giving him an
idea of the tale I had to tell he calmed down and took me
below, where I narrated in full my recent adventures.
“ What did you think of me, sir,” I asked as I finished,
“when the men returned without me on the day I was
kidnapped ? ”
He reached and opened his log-book, and pointed grimly
to an entry against my name—“ Deserted the ship.”
She was running from Ophir to Algoa Bay in ballast,
and rode so light that she neither steered so well nor sailed
so close to the wind. In fact, in the course of our long run
down the eastern coast of Africa we had some rather trying
experiences and a few narrow squeaks, but we fetched
Algoa Bay without any serious mishaps.
Here we picked up a cargo for the London river. Load-
ing in record time, we hoisted sail without an hour’s delay
and put to sea—“ Homeward Bound ” at last: a fact
which seemed to put new life into the good ship herself,
for now she sailed, if possible, better than ever.
We made the Channel with a spanking breeze astern of
us, but we lost the wind in the Downs, and had to crawl
up the Thames into dock through a dense November
fog.
A clerk from Billiter and Oswald was amongst the first
to board us.
He had sad news to tell of the Arab Sheik —news which


had for me the keenest personal interest. The barque had
foundered in the South Pacific—“ All hands lost! ”
With one of those lost hands had sunk the only chance
of the public conviction of the murderer of Matthew
Hayle, for it was known that the name of “Stornoway”
had still been borne on the ship’s books when she sailed
from New Zealand, never to reach port again.
The morning after the arrival of the Ladye Love , I
reported myself to the police. I cannot say that I
“ surrendered ” myself, for I simply stated my name, its
connection with the Cleet murder almost a year ago, and
asked whether I was still “ wanted.” If I may still employ
police phraseology, I was not “ placed under arrest,” I was
only “ detained ” while the incidents of the affair were
looked up, and a visit made to my captain.
Fortunately for my convenience, my position was simpli-
fied by the fact that no warrant had ever been actually
issued against me, and after a delay of only a few hours I
was suffered to depart in peace, the inspector merely
asking me to state where my movements were likely to
take me during the next few days. He made a note of
my reply that it was my purpose to journey to Cleet as
soon as I had obtained permission to leave my ship.
That permission was granted of course readily enough.
“ Cleet,” said Mr. Duncan, as I bade him good-bye, “it
is a pity that Murrick has got drowned instead of coming
home to be tried and hung, but I’ve suggested to Captain
Bennions—in your interest —that we send an account of


his confession, as overheard by credible witnesses, to the
papers, together with a brief report of the circumstances
in which it was made. The letter has been already drawn
out, and it will go up to the Times office to-day. Its
publication will be more than a set-off, you know, against
what appeared in the papers about you when you were
under suspicion, because it will attract much more notice.
The captain’s declaration in the Times , added to all that
came out at the inquest and the finding of the jury, will
put you where some fellow said Caesar’s wife was—or ought
to be, I forget which—and I forget the French, but it
means beyond reproach. You can hold your head as high
as anybody—nobody will be able to heave any stones at
you.”
I thanked him warmly, and took my leave.
But I deferred my departure from London —not passing
the night this time at the gentle Jabe Slook’s !—till after
the Times had come out next morning, when I had the
gratification of reading not only the crisp, seaman-like
statement of Captain Bennions, but some learned corn"
ments by the editor on the strange facts it laid bare.
It was a happy journey to—what I was going to call—
my native village.
Dear old Mr. Crope received me tenderly, Dr. Groom-
bridge cordially, and my many fathers, old and new,
uproariously. There were still amongst them a few—a
very few—who could boast that they remembered Eagle-
beak, and his name was still a great tradition in the school.


Over and over again I had to tell the story of my meeting
with him, and I received an extraordinary number of
extraordinary messages to deliver to him in the event of
my knocking across him again.
Poor old Mrs. Murrick was lying in the little churchyard
—she had not long survived the guilty flight of her
miserable son, and the discovery of its cause.
I was told that her last words were:
“So it’s a far better way to rinse ’em in cold water
first! ”
I paid my respects to Dr. Arncliffe at Nesterton, and
did not forget to call on my old friend Thompson, the
groom. I found him at his old quarters, but the glory
of Norman Royal itself had departed.
Save for a few care-taking servants, the Mansion was
empty, and the great Park began to show signs of neglect.
“Ain’t you heard?” asked Thompson. “Old Sir
Geoffrey died intoxicated—l mean intesticated—that ain’t
quite the word, either ; but I know it begins with a ‘ in.’
It’s in-something.”
“Intestate,” I suggested.
“ That’s it: intestate—and the lawyers is at loggerheads
about all his property somehow. There’s only a few on us
kep’ on to save things from going to wrack and ruin.”
My visit to the peaceful little village had lasted barely a
fortnight when it was interrupted, and terminated, by an
altogether unexpected letter from Mr. Duncan, whose
handwriting I recognised on the cover before I broke the
seal.


I hadn’t expected a summons back to the ship so soon
as this.
“She sails in four days,” wrote the mate. “You are not
to be allowed to rejoin the schooner, but you had better
come back to London at once. There is bad news for
you.”


i A
jHK'jfe Jr *v
CHAPTER XXV
THE SECRET OF PROFESSOR CARL BECKMANN.
ELAYING only to pay my fare-
well respects at the Vicarage
and the College, I hastened to
return to London. Travelling
this time by train, I was aboard
the Lady Love a few hours after
leaving the village.
The skipper was ashore, but
the first mate was aboard, and
received me very kindly
though very gravely.
“What’s this bad news you
have for me, sir?” I blurted out,
as I shook his offered hand.
“ And why am I not to be allowed to rejoin the schooner ?
I’m apprenticed for three years, and have only served one.”
« I know that, my lad,” answered Duncan ; “ and I con-
sider you’re being shamefully treated —in fact, swindled.
If I could stop ashore I’d help you to fight it out, whatever


the fight might cost —but I can’t. Here’s the whole story-
in a nutshell. The business of our owners has changed
hands—everything—the whole concern—has fallen into
the clutches of a foxey skinflint named Grierson. This
Grierson is going to be his own manager, and has already
taken the agency out of the hands of Billiter and Oswald.
Poking his ugly nose into all the books and accounts, and
overhauling our log, he soon stumbled on the fact that
although you are Younge Gleet, you’re not the chap the
old firm signed articles with as Younge Gleet. He takes
advantage of this fact—this paltry quibble—to turn you
out in order to put in, in your place, a new youngster
whose people are paying a new premium. In fact, he’s
taking on several lads—we shall sail with more apprentices
than I’ve ever known a ship of our size to carry—all to
grab the premiums. He’s got the benefit of the premium
that was paid with you—he sees his chance to shirk a two-
years’ obligation, and he takes it.”
As usual, the mate had spoken so plainly that there was
no possibility of misunderstanding him. I had only one
question to ask.
“Where’s this pirate’s office, Mr. Duncan ?”
He divined my intention at once.
“Thirteen, Fenchurch Street. But it’s too late to see
him to-day—go to-morrow: of course you can sleep
aboard. You won’t do any good, Gleet, but go and see
him by all means; and don’t put a clapper on your tongue.
In fact—though I’m afraid I’m wrong to advise you to do


so”—continued Mr. Duncan hesitatingly and in a lower
voice—“if you get anything like a fair chance I should
certainly recommend you to punch his head—l should
certainly punch his head, Cleet.”
“ I will, sir,” I promised readily.
“Of course you could go to law about this job, and the
big-wigs might put you level with him somehow after a
time. But the nastiest point is, though nobody but a
scamp would take advantage of it in the circumstances—
and of course we had to make a clean breast of them to
this Grierson—that you are not the youngster who signed
on with the old firm.”
I waived his half-hearted suggestion aside.
“ How can I go to law when I haven’t a single whole
yellow boy in the world ? ”
“If Sir Geoffrey had been alive,” pondered Mr. Duncan,
“ the lubber wouldn’t have tried to sail so close to the wind
as this dirty trick takes him.”
The same thought had already occurred to me, with the
further reflection that there didn’t seem to be any one in
the dead baronet’s place to whom I could appeal—unless
I threw myself on the generosity of Mr. Grope and Dr.
Groombridge.
Early the next morning I hied me to Fenchurch Street.
The offices of the wealthy Grierson bore a poverty-
stricken appearance—the clerks to a man —or boy—had a
seedy, out-at-elbows look about them.
Every line of the hard, cold face of the new owner of the


Ladye Love and her sister ships corroborated the sinister
character the first mate had given him.
I came to the point without any beating about the bush,
but I knew that I had a hopeless case to fight before I
opened my lips.
He listened without interruption to the little I had to
say—little but to the purpose.
He washed his hands of me with a surly :
“You have been serving on my schooner under false
pretences, and you won’t be allowed to rejoin her. Your
place is filled. Go away.”
“ A heavy premium was paid for the apprenticeship of
Younge Gleet. I am Younge Gleet, and I claim my
rights,” I persisted.
“You haven’t got any. Was it you—-was it yourself—
who signed the articles ? ”
“No—but you know all about that, and . . .”
“ If it weren’t for the costs I’d prosecute you for obtain-
ing valuable consideration under false pretences. I’ve
nothing to do with your name being what you say it is—
you admit you’re not the person. We apprentice persons,
not names. Go away.”
“You’re worse than a thief,” I remarked quietly; “and I
will now do myself the pleasure of giving you a little crack
over the head.”
Mr. Grierson rose from his seat very hastily as I
approached him for the purpose indicated, and laid his
hand upon the door-knob of an adjoining room. As he


did so, I perceived that the door had not been clasped
during our interview. He threw it open and spoke to
some one on the other side of it.
“ Professor Heckmann, I am threatened with personal
violence. Will you step this way and see the assault com-
mitted, so that I may have a credible and independent
witness in my action for damages ? ”
“You’ll get some damages without the trouble of bring-
ing an action for them,” I promised him, as I doubled my
fist.
Mr. Grierson’s flattering invitation, so far as the “ step-
ping this way” was concerned, was accepted by the most
striking-looking individual I had ever seen.
Tall, thin, hale, and wiry—perhaps sixty years of
age, possibly more, for his long hair was quite white,
and his piercing, black, restless eyes gleamed beneath
white-fringed, overhanging brows; a man about whose
personality there was something instantly magnetic—
who conveyed to me the quick conviction that he was a
man of profound thought and resolute action—a man to
lead, to command : a man for others to follow and obey
all this, and much more, was Professor Carl Heckmann.
His name was undeniably German, but that he himself
could claim English nationality I correctly judged the
moment that I heard, for the first time, the sound of his
calm, cool, well-modulated voice.
“Young man,” he said to me quietly, “don’t make a fool
of yourself. Put your fist in your pocket, and keep it
there.”


; f
I 'Jk ' ' ■Bhh .i.
S. / M I \ i I- I - viKR%4
c & & 9 i . i mr - -
min I tim \
; % : .- .* ai \ Vga
* - I lilPiy T ipA <_ _. A Vi
wl
He turned to Grierson.
“ Mr. Grierson, as you asked me to take a seat in that
inner room, and left me there, it is not my fault that I
Professor Heckmann.— p. IS4.
overheard your conversation with this inflammable young
mariner. If I consider it necessary to see you again I’ll
come back.”


Then again to me :
“If you want to sail in the Ladye Love , you shall do so.
I want to talk with you. Come outside with me.”
The next moment we were passing through the office
where the seedy-looking clerks were burying their noses
in their ledgers. Gaining the landing, the professor took
me quietly down the stairs into the street. He piloted me
adroitly through the teeming thoroughfares till we reached
the “ Jamaica,” off Cornhill —at that time a popular and
well-frequented coffee-house, the resort of brokers and
merchants of high standing. Here he selected a snug
corner, sat beside me, and ordered refreshments. These
placed before us, he opened fire.
I could not help noticing the restless play of his fingers
the whole time, whether he spoke or whether he listened.
It seemed impossible for him to keep them still.
The questions he put to me were all what are called
“ leading” ones. My replies to them informed him of my
upbringing, education, tastes, and abilities.
“ Now, sir,” said I, when I thought I had told him suffi-
cient, “ I should like to ask you a question. What did you
mean when you said that if I liked to sail in my old ship I
could do so—in spite of what you heard pass between me
and her new owner ? ”
“ I meant what I said. Listen to me as intelligently as
you have spoken to me.”
“ I am a scientist. I am called a professor—l call
myself a student, and my study is Man. Years ago, after


long groping in the dark for light on the mystery of man’s
origin and destiny, the diversity of race and language in
the different branches of the human family, and similar
fascinating but baffling problems, I became convinced that
only in practical experiment could be found the key to
fuller knowledge.
“ I was in Australia—the leader of a small scientific
expedition into the interior. Five hundred miles farther
inland than ever the foot of a white man had then pene-
trated—l speak of more than twenty years ago —I found
amongst a tribe of the lowest class aborigines a young
woman absolutely deaf and absolutely dumb. She was
excellently well fitted for the purpose I had in view—she
never had spoken, never had heard, and the intelligence of
her tribe didn’t rise to any systematic method of commu-
nication by signs—mere animal-like gestures were all they
were capable of thinking of in that direction. The girl
was called Üba.
“ She wouldn’t come willingly, and it wasn’t possible to
argue with, or explain to, her; so I brought her away by
force, and lodged her in Melbourne for six months. At
the end of that time I succeeded in finding the man I
wanted—a deaf mute who was serving a life sentence for
a peculiarly horrible and cold-blooded murder. I knew
him only as 305 J.
“ Like Üba, 305 J had never had either speech or hear-
ing, but he —unlike Üba—was quick at sign-reading and
communicating. I explained my scheme to him, and he
fell in with it at once.


“ I aided him to effect his escape—in fact, I effected it
for him.
“ With a small but picked crew I had had a little fast-
sailing sloop in readiness for weeks beforehand, and I
hurried Üba and 305 J on board, and set sail westward for
the Pacific Ocean.
“ The exact course I lay there is no need to tell you now
—or yet; but I found the island I wanted—as far from the
track of ships as from any other land, prolific in the
means for sustaining animal life, and cut off from all the
world.
“On this island I landed stores of every kind, beasts
and birds in pairs, and my two subjects, 305 J and Üba
man and wife : a new Adam and a new Eve in a new
Paradise.
“On one point I am glad to be certain—so low in the
mental scale was the black girl’s brain that her consort
would never be able to teach her to talk with the hands—
to say nothing of the fact that he did not know a word of
her language nor she of his.
“ All having gone well, they are on the island now, with,
I hope, a numerous family.
“ What will their children be like in physique , in their
ideas of a Deity—above all, will they speak? If so, to
what known language will their speech have any traceable
affinity ?
“All this was twenty years ago—l meant to visit the
island—of which I have my own careful chart, and to


which I know the way—long before this, but other subjects
interested and other experiments absorbed me : and per-
haps, after all, it is as well I did not go before, for the
results of my scheme are likely to be all the more complete
for the lapse of time.
“I am going now. My business in the office where you
met me was to engage a passage in the Ladye Love to
Hobart Town, Van Diemen’s Land—l can as easily take
two passages. At Hobart Town I hope to pick up a
yacht, or some other suitable small vessel, which I shall
sail to the secret island.
“My means are ample—much more than ample. I
shall be my own navigator, and my own captain, as well as
my own shipowner; but I want an officer, a secretary, a
companion—a guest, if you like.
“ I judge men quickly—in spite of your youth, you’ll do.
Will you come ? ”
A thought that had been in my mind almost ever since
my strange companion begun his strange story forced itself
into definite shape.
“ Was this man mad ? ”
I looked at him closely, intently.
No : he was not mad, whatever he was.
As to the morality of the awful “ experiment ” he had
spoken of so calmly—almost proudly—it was obvious that
he was incapable of experiencing any qualms of con-
science : to him there was nothing revolting, nothing sinful,
nothing wrong, about it. He looked a man who would


jeopardize, or sacrifice, anything and anybody, himself cer-
tainly included, in what was to him the sacred cause of
science.
“ What a voyage ! ” he murmured, as to himself. “ Had
ever voyage a purpose so full of possibilities, so strange, or
half so fascinating ! ”
His enthusiasm was contagious—l felt my blood ting-
ling. Why shouldn’t I accept his ofifer ? To join him now
was more like going to the rescue of the marooned couple
than bearing a hand in their banishment.
Turning his flashing black eyes full upon me, he repeated
his question.
“ Will you come with me ? ”
And I answered him :
“ Yes.”


CHAPTER XXVI.
ON THE VOYAGE TO THE SECRET ISLAND .
HO!”
The usual excitement
followed as the look-out
of the Ladye Love hailed
the deck with the wel-
come shout Eager eyes
were directed ahead of
the schooner’s plunging
bows to a hazy and
broken line which we knew must be the still distant coast
of Tasmania.
“ Land has been sighted, sir,” reported the officer of the
watch to the skipper below ; and up he tumbled, glass in
hand.
Our long passage was almost over. Professor Heckmann
at once began his preparations for going ashore, and
before we entered port his multitudinous traps were all
ready for disembarkation.
He lost no time in procuring, for himself and me, the


best available quarters in the settlement, to which he
arranged for the immediate transfer of all his belongings.
Paying a courteous farewell to captain and officers, and
handing over a liberal bounty for distribution amongst the
crew, he left the ship, and I with him, although I deferred
my own farewells to my old shipmates.
The professor allowed no grass to grow under his feet,
and luck favoured him. By a rare stroke of good fortune,
the yacht of a wealthy Australian was in port and for
sale—a cutter-rigged cruiser, a craft as trim and taut as
ever put to sea. La Belle , as she was called, did not belie
her name.
After only some ten minutes’ bargaining, he bought her
as she floated.
“And now, Cleet,” he said, “go round and pick up a
crew.”
“ Easier said than done,” I remarked. “ How many
hands do you propose to ship ? ”
“ A good cook, a good steward, a sharp cabin boy, and
eight smart sailors.”
“ I’ll do my best, sir, but we shan’t pick that lot up
here for the asking. Where am I to say we’re bound
for?”
“ Engage them for a yachting cruise of three months or
longer—to go wherever they’re ordered, at my pleasure.”
One thing was in my favour—l had a free hand as
regards terms. If I couldn’t get a good man for what I
offered, I was to pay him what he wanted. On the first


day of my search I engaged an African black as cook
without any difficulty, and sent him aboard at once,
according to my instructions. I also picked up a pre-
cocious imp of a cabin boy who had missed his ship a
week before.
On the second day I secured as steward a gentlemanly
sort of scamp whom I found acting as barman in a
drinking saloon.
At the end of a week my further success was limited to
the acquisition of a couple of sturdy sailormen. At this I
stopped.
“ I can’t get another hand, professor, for love or money,”
I reported.
“ I’ll get them myself,” was all he said.
Late that night three handy-looking fellows came
aboard the yacht, and “laid low” till three ships had
cleared from Hobart Town the next day.
1 hose three ships sailed with each one man short of her
complement—Professor Heckmann had decoyed one hand
from each vessel.
I remonstrated in plain terms.
“ W here a scientific experiment is concerned, I have no
conscience whatever,” he said calmly. “ I could not think
of allowing any ordinary considerations to influence me to
the detriment of a scientific experiment. We wanted men,
and I ve got three—that is the only point worth thinking
about”
“ Where are we going to get the others ? ” I asked.


“We can’t get them ; so I’m going to sail without them.
Everything’s ready, and we’re all aboard. I shall write
a couple of letters, and ” —with a glance at his watch—
“ make sail in exactly an hour’s time.”
The instructions he gave me proved that he knew
perfectly well what he was about. Having seen that they
were properly executed —it was a new and queer sensation
for me to feel that now I was experiencing the privileges
and responsibilities of an officer—l hurried to the wharf
where lay the Ladye Love , to say good-bye to my many
friends on board.
Captain Bennions was cordial, and tipped me his flipper
with a very kindly air.
“ I’m sure I hope I shall have the pleasure of meeting
you again, captain,” I said sincerely: “ where do you sail
for, sir ? ”
“ That I don’t know till I get a cargo,” he replied.
Mr. Avers Duncan saw me to the gangway.
“ I don’t know what you’re up to, Younge, with that
rummy old stick you’ve signed articles with,” were his
parting words (I had been put on my honour not to speak
at present of the real object of our cruise to the secret
island), “ but wherever you’re going, and whatever your
little game is, I wish you luck.”
Professor Heckmann came on deck as La Belle got
under way, and took command.
His eyes glistened—and so did mine—as the yacht
began to show us what she could do in a sea way. Her


owner set a sou’-easterly course, from which fact I assumed
that he meant to round the South Isle of New Zealand.
He remained above for an hour. Then, with a keen
glance at the horizon and up to the yacht’s bellying
top-s’ls:
“ She’ll hold to this till sunset,” he said quietly. “ How’s
her head ? ”
The man at the wheel gave the points he was steering.
“Steady so—that’s your course”—and down he went to
his cabin.
It was already abundantly clear to me that, wherever he
acquired it—this, by-the-bye, I never learned—he pos-
sessed a good deal more than merely a theoretical
knowledge of things nautical. He came above again
before the sudden nightfall of the tropics came down
upon us.
“ Arrange for the watches to-night how you like, Cleet—
we’ll set them properly to-morrow. I’ll take charge of the
deck till the morning.”
o
A glorious dawn followed fair night. Shortly after
breakfast he ordered me to muster all hands. When he
issued from his cabin for the inspection he had to face
some emphatically-mouthed grumbling.
“ The yacht’s under-manned, sir,” remonstrated the
spokesman, a powerful, respectable-looking sailor, bearing
the appropriate name of William Seaward. He was one
of my recruits, and carried irreproachable papers. He
had last served as bo -sun of one of the largest ships then
afloat.


“The yacht’s under-manned, sir. Five men against the
eight we was told she would carry ain’t fair—nor it ain’t
safe.”
“It can’t be helped now. I shall pay the five I have
shipped the wages of the eight I hoped to ship.”
This was a sure way of dealing with the malcontents.
“Very good, sir,” said the mollified Seaward at once.
“ Wery good, indeed, perfessor, ’ joined in his mates.
“ Is this man William Seaward, of whom you spoke to
me?”
“ Yes,” I answered.
“ Then see, my man, you will take the rating of an
officer, and will be responsible, with Mr. Cleet here, for the
carrying-out of my orders. We’ve got a pleasant cruise
before us, and I hope I shan’t hear complaints from
anybody. Let all satisfy me, and I’ll take care to satisfy
all. Now, then, we’ll set the watches, and settle down,”
As the days passed on, it really looked as though we
were all in for “a pleasant cruise.” The weather was fine,
the wind held fair, rations were quite unusually good, and
quite unusually ample, and the grog allowances satisfied
everybody.
Rounding the South Isle, she lay a course nor’-east, and
held on it.
1 found Seaward a capital fellow to get on with, and a
magnificent sailor. In fact, everybody on board seemed
to have shaken down comfortably into his place.
We had been at sea about a fortnight when I ventured


vo vagi: to the secret island. 197
to ask the professor how his calculations were coming
out.
“We shall reach the island in about a month, according
to my reckoning—but I can’t be sure to a week or so,
either way,” he answered with unusual indefiniteness.


K% m VI 'Br. ' k **£
S* %. » r "®r
m m
CHAPTER XXVII
“ WHERE ARE WEE’
FF East Cape, North Island,
he altered her course to a
point or two more directly
eastward. Two days after-
wards, we passed through
our first interruption to the
*'pleasure” of the cruise.
An electrical storm of
quite exceptional violence
burst upon us. Only in the
very nick of time did Sea-
ward—who in this sudden
emergency, in virtue of his
long and tried experience,
assumed an uncontrolled and unchallenged command—
succeed in getting her stripped. Had he not done so, she
would undoubtedly have foundered under the pressure oi
her weight of canvas.
Even as it was, before her mains’l could be sheeted


home, a fiery, massive meteor hurtled through the
sulphurous-smelling air, and plunged into the boiling sea
so close to the yacht’s stern that we all thought she had
been struck and was done for. A panic-begotten rush aft
was instantly stopped by Seaward.
“ Back to your places, you chicken-hearted lubbers ! ” he
roared, with imprecations decidedly not fit for ears polite,
but undeniably efficacious in their way. “Are you sailor-
men or sodgers? For’rud with you, all, or I’ll brain some
of you ! ”
With such terrific violence had the meteor struck the
water, that from the seething cauldron of the latter great
waves burst upon the boat and swept her deck clear of
everything movable.
Through this flood of water, Seaward, drenched to the
skin of his whole body, made his way aft in rushes, and
announced that she was untouched.
Undermanned as we were, every moment that the storm
lasted was a moment of imminent peril, but our escape
from the meteor and the blazing lightning that preceded
its descent seemed to put heart into our little crew; and
even when it was found that she had sprung a leak they
got to work at the pumps with a cheerful “ Aye, aye, sir! ”
as the word was given. Heckmann himself bore a hand
with them, and cook, steward, and cabin boy were all
three pressed into the service of saving the ship—a service
of deadly danger, chiefly now from the continuance of the
forked and vivid lightning, to which no one exposed


himself more freely than did the owner of La Belle
himself.
The yacht rode out the storm right gallantly, but the
electrical disturbance of the atmosphere was followed for
days by sudden, strong, and baffling winds, which seemed
to blow alternately from all the points of the compass,
and against many of which it was impossible to make
headway.
When these in their turn ceased to trouble us, and a fair
breeze blew in our favour from the south, we were
perplexed by the professor’s frequent changes in her
course. He always took his own reckonings, and acted
solely on his own responsibility as to the course to be
steered.
These changes came at length so quickly one after
another that Seaward grew not only puzzled, but a little
anxious.
“Wherever the old man’s trying to make for, Mr. Cleet”
—we had lately taken to calling him the “old man,” which
is always ship-ese for “the captain”—“it’s my opinion as
he’s got out of his reckoning, and the sooner he’s spoke to
about it the better,” he remarked to me just after the
yacht had been almost put about for the second time in
twenty-four hours.
“ This isn’t the first time he’s navigated a boat,” I
replied evasively.
“ I didn’t say it was, but that ain’t no proper reply
to my remark,” was the blunt rejoinder of my mate.


“However well he may have sailed other craft—and I’ll
even go so far as to say however well he handled this here
present yacht at first—l puts it that he’s making a mess of
it now. It’s my opinion as he’s got a lot o’ theory and a
fairish bit o’ practice—but howsumever that may be, I says
he’s lost his bearings somehow, and until he finds ’em
again, he’s in a fog. Them’s my opinions, Cleet—least-
ways, I suppose I ought to say Mr. Cleet—and if they
ain’t your opinions too, you ain’t the sailor as I’ve took
you to be: and that’s all about it.”
They were my opinions also, and had been for several
days, and when Seaward went on again to lay it down :
“ I says emphatic that it’s time he was spoke to about it
—are you going to do it, or shall I? ”
I responded almost immediately:
“ We’ll do it together.”
Down we went together without further parley.
We found the professor immersed in the study of a large
chart, spread out, in company with some others, on the
table before him.
I perceived at a glance, as doubtless did my companion,
that the chart I have specially alluded to was one that
had been specially prepared, by hand only. It was not an
ordinary ship’s chart.
I was spokesman. I addressed our chief respectfully,
plainly, and fully; and he listened courteously and
attentively.
“You have only anticipated my intention by a few


minutes,” he said. “ I was about to call you both into
consultation —now you’ve called yourselves in. You are
quite right. We’ve been borne so far out of our course by
stress of weather that I’ve lost my true bearings, chiefly
because I’ve been sometimes unable to take proper
observations —and there can be no doubt but that the
electrical storm in which we nearly foundered has deranged
the compass.”
“ That’s true, sir,” said Seaward, with a glance at me, for
we had discussed this point the day before.
“Well, sir,” he continued, “to have things out plump
and plain, if I was to say to you, ‘ Where are we ? ’ . . .”
“I should answer, ‘/ don’t know,'” replied Professor
Carl Heckmann.


[ i F ' . '4 ' a Mrjbs
y.: ‘‘r " iMBy. - '\
IBS
CHAPTER XXVIII
FOB'S COMFORTER.
IT down,” he continued : and
Seaward obeyed. Consider-
ing myself included in the
invitation, I followed his ex-
ample.
“ Seaward,” said the pro-
fessor slowly, “ I think the
time has come when I should
take you into my confidence
as to the real object of this
cruise and the actual destina-
tion I intend to reach, in
spite of this little check, I am not afraid of your being
false to the trust I shall put in you, for you are an
honest fellow; but it may be as well to remark that I am
not afraid, either, of any consequences to myself following
on any betrayal of that trust, for in rendering myself liable
to what are called the penalties of the law in certain stages
of the execution of the experiment I am going to tell you


about, I took such precautions that nothing could now be
proved against me.”
With this preamble, he calmly told the staggered and
bewildered sailor what he had told me in the “Jamaica.”
Seaward leaped to his feet and shook his clenched fist in
the professor’s face.
“It’s horrible,” he cried; “that’s what it is—horrible!
I’ll have no hand in the beastly business. Sail your ship
yourself, without no help from me—sail her to perdition,
which is where you’re bound for yourself. If I’d knowed
o’ this game before, I’d sooner have shipped on a pirate or
a slaver than ha’ put my foot on the deck o’ this blasted
yacht. And why wasn't I told ? ”
Here he turned furiously on me.
“ Why wasn't I told ?” he repeated savagely. “ Yon
engaged me—why didn’t yon tell me ? That is,” he added
relentingly, “if you knowed. Maybe you knowed nothing
o’ this here infernal experimentin’ business ?”
“ I did know, Seaward,” I answered quietly, “ I knew
all that you have just heard. But hold on while I talk to
you for a spell. As to the beginning of the business
twenty years ago, I’ve nothing to say against what you
have said. But the point is that we’ve nothing to do with
the beginning of the business, but only the end of it If
this wretched couple are on the island still, we’re going to
their help, to their rescue—for I for one will have no hand
in keeping them where they are if they want to come
away. And again, they may have a family with them,


and if so the only chance of their wretched progeny ever
being brought within the pale of Christianity and civiliza-
tion is in this yacht reaching the island in safety. These
were the considerations that induced me to accept service
in this boat, with one or two other considerations which
I’ll talk to you about by-and-bye : and they’re the con-
siderations that will show you, on very little reflection,
that it’s your duty to stand by the yacht now and help to
sail her safely to this hidden spot she’s bound for.”
I had spoken to him aside, and in a slightly lowered
voice, although, as a matter of fact, I was indifferent as to
whether Heckmann heard me or not. He himself said
nothing—doubtless he perceived that Seaward was strongly
affected by my remarks.
We continued in earnest conversation for several
minutes, and then Seaward advanced to the expectant
professor.
“ Sir,” he said, with an air of unconscious dignity that sat
well upon his rugged form, “you have treated me fair, you
have treated me generous. You’re a deep man, and a
learned man, and a great man, while I’m only a plain,
uneddicated sailor. But I tell you to your face that there’s
Him above as ’ll call you to account for this work o’ yours.
No good ’ll come of it, either to you, or this ship, or any-
body aboard her—unless so be as we’re to be the means of
doing right by them as you done wrong by. As for you
yourself, I say again as you’ll be called to account.”
“ What for ? ”


There was no trace of any emotion of any kind on
Professor Heckmann’s face as he put the question.
“For playing the Devil’s tricks on poor afflicted creeters
o’ God A’mighty,” said William Seaward. “Now, sir,” he
went on in a different voice, “ show me that chart, and
mark me your island. I know these seas better than any
man sailing ’em, and I’ll bear my hand along o’ you and
Mr. Gleet here in working the yacht where you want to
take her—but when we gets there, understand me that I
give no pledge as to what I shall do or what I shan’t do —
that’s straight and plump and plain.”
“ I have given no pledge, either, as to the upshot of this
voyage,” said I ; “ nor do I give one now,”
For more than an hour we remained in close consulta-
tion, and in the end arrived at a common opinion as to our
present probable whereabouts and the course to lay.
Unless we were all three mistaken, we were much nearer
the island than the chief had supposed.
“There’s nothing more for us to discuss, then, at
present ?” he said, with a slight movement which I took to
be intended as a signal for our dismissal.
“Nothing more to jaw much about, maybe,” responded
Seaward drily ; “ but there’s cert’n’ly summat to be took
into account as ain’t been took into account in this here
present confabulation.”
“What’s that ?” cried Heckmann and I together.
“Just this. Unless we’re mistook as to where we are
—and I don’t think we are mistook—-we’re approaching
danger o’ no ordinary kind.”


“ What do you mean ? ”
“What I say. Professor, we’re nearing danger o’ no
ordinary kind—p’raps o’ no mortal kind, though I ain’t
sooperstishus. What I don’t know I owns up to not
knowing—what Ido know I’ll speak to. And I know this
—that in the exact latitoode as we reckon we’re fetching
there’s been more ships lost the last two or three years
than in all the rest of the Pacific put together —lost with
all hands, mark ye : foundered with never a plank seen
above water ever again.”
“ How ? Why ? What do you mean, again ? Lost
from what cause ? ” I questioned him rapidly.
“Nobody can’t answer the question. It’s a easy one to
ask but noways possible to answer,” was the dogged reply.
“ I said I’d speak to what I knowed, and I’ve spoke to it.
I could think of the names of maybe a dozen ships as have
last been spoke here or hereabouts, and never heer’d on
again, with fair weather all the time. That’s part of the
mys’try—these here losses all seem to be in fair weather,
as fur as can be calculated. One o’ the last o’ them lost
ships was the barque Arab S/ieik, blowed a long way out
of her course. She was spoke in these seas, and never
heer’d on no more till she was posted at Lloyd’s.
“ I’m going above to do my dooty, and I’ll do it with a
good heart, but all the cheerfuller if we gets safe over the
next three days or so. This comes o’ finding out where
we are.”


' j
f. : i
CHAPTER XXIX.
A CR V FROM THE SEA !
Y could I not laugh at
old Seaward’s “superstitious
croakings ” as our chief did
—and “laugh them away”
as he did ?
Had not all I had since
learnt, all I had since experi-
enced, served to straighten
that “ bending of my mind
towards the mystical ” of
which the dear old Vicar of
Cleet had spoken to me in
words of such kindly warning
long months ago ?
Perhaps not.
I tried in vain to shake off the effect that the bo’sun’s
words had had upon me—an effect that it annoyed me
they should have had at all, and that it angered me should


cling to me all the day, and re-assert itself as I tumbled
up to take over the middle watch that night.
“ It’s very dark, Seaward,” I remarked as I took his
place.
“ Might cut it with a knife,” agreed he. “ But the wind’s
holding—and all’s well. You’ll call me sharp if I’m
wanted ? ”
“ Aye, aye ” —and below he went.
It was a dark night. No moon shone down upon the
black waters—no star peeped out from the blacker curtain
of the sky.
Somehow, the unusual darkness of the night seemed to
bring with it to my senses an unwonted feeling of loneli-
ness, which grew and grew upon me until the impression
almost shaped itself in my mind that the yacht was a
solitary craft in an ocean deserted by every ship but herself,
and I deserted by all others on board her.
Not a sound broke upon the silence save the plunging
of her bows in the waters, the swish of the spray as it fell
from them, the swirl of the waves in her wake.
In loneliness, in darkness, in silence, passed the first halt
of my dreary watch.
Had I fallen asleep—asleep on duty!—that once more I
heard the voice, the cry, that haunted the dreams of nights
long passed away ?
A voice, a cry—was it the voice of mortal man or the
cry of a lost soul ?—rang sharp and loud and clear over all
the ship.


A voice from the darkness—a cry from the sea! And
quick upon the sound —with the sound —I heard the
clanking of a chain.
Was the cry for me ?


I a '
■ -J %
s
H
CHAPTER XXX.
SAVED FROM THE DEEP.
HE steersman heard it too.
It startled him, too, out of
his self-possession, and his
hands momentarily drop-
ped from the helm.
The yacht fell off the
wind, and as she yawed I
saw by the light of a lan-
tern I had hastily snatched
up a sight I have never
forgotten, never shall for-
get —the sight of a white
face and two white beating
hands in the water—the
face and hands of a man
who again cried —who cried
to me —for help, as for a
moment my straining eyes were fixed upon him.
At that moment the man at the wheel brought her up


into the wind again—the next, with a shouted order to the
deck to put the yacht about—l slipped overside.
If the cry of that wild voice had been to me, I had
answered it!
Before I reached the drifting form I was swimming for,
I heard the loud cry raised on deck :
“Man overboard!”—then the orders to let go the fore-
sheets and haul the main-s’l in. I heard the flapping of
the former and the creaking of the boom.
I shouted loudly as at length I overtook the drowning
man and seized him, and I judged from the answering hail
that reached my eager ears that the yacht was heading for
the direction of my voice.
It could not have been long, but it seemed long, before—
shouting still —I made out indistinctly in the blackness a
moving shape of white—the canvas of La Belle , whose
clean cut bows almost ran us down. I managed to grasp
her chains with one hand as she plunged, and with the
other to support the dead weight of the man I had
succeeded in robbing the sea of.
Everybody on board crowded round us as we were
hauled up, but Heckmann quickly asserted his authority.
The men of the watch were sent to their stations, the boat
was again put about, the rescued stranger, still unconscious,
was carried below. Seaward resumed charge, and I —after
a few hurried words of explanation—got out of my wet
clothes into my warm bunk.
Soon after the ship was astir next morning, I was


l ' ,1 ,MIH -rf r'i«K -* ~~-
summoned into the old man’s cabin and called upon to
repeat in detail the incidents of the night adventure.
“ The man must have leaped or fallen from the yacht, or
course,” said Heckmann.
“ I ain’t prepared to take nothing for granted,” put in
Seaward. “ We’re in a funny part of the ocean, where
I slipped overside. —*>. 212.
funny things have been happenin’—as I spoke to yester-
day.”
“ Nonsense—the fellow was a stowaway, and as we’ve
touched nowhere he must have smuggled himself on
board at Hobart Town.”
“ How could he have laid low, and never been discovered
all this time ? ”


“ By the help of somebody else on board the yacht, who
probably helped him to stow himself away in the first
instance. Steward! ”
The ex-barman—he was in the cabin—turned with a
startled and frightened expression on his furtive face.
I perceived that the chief noticed the look.
“ Yes, sir.”
“ Go and bring this man here.”
After about five minutes the sound of feet outside the
cabin door was followed by a knock upon it.
“ Come in ” —and there entered, alone—the unknown
man.
Was he forty, was he fifty, was he sixty ?
None could have said —there was something about him
suggestive of each age, but I came myself to the quick
conclusion that the whiteness of his hair, the deep lines on
his pale, set face, were premature. Whoever he was, this
man had suffered.
He was garbed in an ordinary Colonial suit, but from
each wrist dangled the rivetted fetters of a broken chain
I had felt them as I seized him.
hrom one face to the other wandered his eyes —grey,
sad, weary-looking eyes—then they fell. He folded his
hands—the links clinked against each other as he moved
them —in front of him, but not his arms ; and waited
as though to be questioned.
An extraordinary idea occurred to me that I had seen
this man before.
Where ?


' N
CHAPTER XXXI
WALLACE GRAHAM.
O\V, then, who are you ? ”
“ Sir,” answered the
stowaway, speaking in a
low, grave, sad, but beauti-
fully modulated voice, “ I
am prepared to tell you
the whole truth about my-
sell so far as you may
desire to know it. I have
resolved to do so, and to
throw myself on your con-
sideration, your generosity
—your mercy, if there be
any mercy in this world.
But”—with a glance towards Seaward and myself—“ may
I speak to you only ? ”
“No—l will not see you alone.”
A slight bow —the bow of one accustomed to submission
o
—acknowledged the brusque remark.


“ First, what is your name ? ”
“ When I answer that it is Wallace Graham, I give you a
name that is not mine by birth, but the name that I
adopted years ago, and the name under which I was falsely
accused also many years ago—of the crime of forgery,
and under which I was wrongfully convicted and cruelly
sentenced.”
“ Sentenced ! Accused, convicted, and sentenced ! Then
what . . . . ”
“Wallace Graham” slightly raised his half-gyved hands
as, in anticipation of the conclusion of the sentence, he
answered in the same quiet, subdued tones :
“ I am an escaped convict ! ”
The piercing eyes under Heckmann’s heavy brows looked
at him long and steadily. Then :
“Go on. How came you aboard my yacht ? ”
“ I believed that with my liberty I could reward any who
would help me to escape, for one man lives—and he a
wealthy man—who has never ceased to believe me
innocent, and an appeal to him from me for money would
be granted from a heavy purse with a light heart. I was
listened to by those I sounded, and I was helped to break
away from my gang, though I had to run before these
remaining chains could be more than broken. Round the
wrists he raised them as he spoke—“ they are rivetted.
I got into Hobart Town undetected, concealing these links
as well as I could up the sleeves of my coat, the night
before you sailed =and I stowed myselt away amongst
your ballast.”


You had an accomplice among my crew, and he’s been
tanding by you all the time, and supplying you with
necessaries—this must be so, or you would have been
discovered, or compelled to show yourself, long before.
Probably this accomplice was mixed up also with the plans
for your escape. He’s on board this boat—what is his
name ? ”
A surprising response was made to this question—made
with a dignity, and with a touch of reproachful indigna-
tion, that no mock gentleman could have counterfeited.
“You are a gentleman, sir—you will not press your
question.”
Heckmann touched the bell on the table before him—
and the steward answered the rincr.
b
“Hubbard, you brought this man on board, and have
been supplying him from my stores.”
Hubbard gazed despairingly into the faces of all of us
in turn.
“ Yes, sir.”
There \\ as no help for it, and probably he knew enough
of his master by this time to feel convinced that in owning
up he was playing the best card in his hand.
“Stop where you are—l may want to ask you a few
questions.”
“ Yes, sir.
“ Am 1 to continue, sir ? ” asked Wallace Graham.
“ Yes.”
“There is not much more to tell you, sir. Last night


my overwrought feelings drove me mad—a convict doesn’t
lose his sensibilities when he loses his liberty —God isn’t
good enough for that! ”
Oh, the sudden intensity of bitterness in this strange
man’s voice!
“ I was mad. I made my way on deck —I don’t know
how—and flung myself into the sea : though even as I did
so my weaker self prevailed, and I cried for help. . . .
You will allow me, sir, to speak a few words to this young
officer of yours, who saved my worthless—my finished life
at the risk of his own opening life. Young gentleman
Here a sudden spasm of emotion —I can call it nothing
else —overcame him : an emotion for which, I am certain,
no one present was in the least prepared.
He could not speak.
A wave of his own agitation seemed to reach me, and to
touch my heart. I stepped forward and offered him my
hand.
He seized it, and held it lingeringly and closely between
his own two hands.
Then he stooped, and touched it lightly with his lips.
As he released it, again he surprised us. His knees seemed
to give way beneath him —he sank on them to the floor.
His chains clicked once more as he convulsively clutched
his fingers together —thrusting the fingers of one hand
between those of the other —and held them up imploringly
towards the calm, undisturbed face of Professor Hcckmann.


r ~ £
CHAPTER XXXII.
A STRANGE SAIL IN SIGHT.
H, sir, don’t send me back—
for God’s sake don’t send
me back to hell! Pity me.
Put me ashore where you
like —throw me over to the
sharks rather than give me
up. Or let me do again
what I tried to do last
night. My courage shan’t
betray me a second time.
Let me kill myself, and end
it all—all, all, all, life and
memory and hope alike—
rather than give me up.
“ I had sworn that I would never again, that I would
nevermore, bend my knees to God or man —see me now r ,
here at your feet—broken, broken, broken ! ” —and tears
streamed down his face.
I turned away. Seaward glared upwards—but I saw


him draw his cuff across his eyes. Even Hubbard
fidgeted about uneasily.
But Heckmann remained absolutely unmoved —to all
appearance. Nothing ever seemed able to move him that
had not some direct concern with science. In his ordinary
tones he asked a question on a practical point—asked it as
though he had been speculating about it.
“ How is it you haven’t managed between you to saw or
file away those broken chains ? ”
The steward Hubbard replied ; he was playing that best
card of his for all it was worth.
. “I did try it on, professor, sir—you’ll see the marks if
you look—but once the sound was heard, and a secjnd
time we were nearly copped —and I daren’t try it on any
more for long enough, but I meant having another go at
’em.”
The chief took no notice of this explanation or of him
—he had heard, and that was enough. But he slowly
addressed Graham.
“ I shall try an experiment on you —not a particularly
interesting one to me but a very interesting one to you. I
shall be particularly glad if you won’t be emotional when
I tell you that the first part of it will make you a free man
on board my boat, and the last part of it a free man, so
far as I am concerned, at whatever place I decide to end
this cruise at. It is only a little experiment as to the
reality of human sincerity and human gratitude. Gleet ? ”
“ Aye, aye, sir.”


“ Take this man on deck, and have those things filed off
immediately. The noise they make is rather irritating to
me.”
At this moment a sailor hurriedly came below.
Heckmann glanced up at him as, touching his cap, the
man said, more excitedly than there seemed to be any
occasion for :
“A sail has just hove in sight abeam of us, sir, and the
wind’s fell to a dead calm.”


i '' i
CHAPTER XXXIII
A STARTLING STORY.
were becalmed. The
wind—the variable wind
of the region and the
season had died com-
pletely away ; the sails
hung drooping and useless.
But the sail in the dis-
tance was moving , w r as
approaching in our direc-
tion.
“ A ship that sails with-
out no wind ! ” exclaimed
Seaward.
“Ain’t a mortal, nat’ral
ship,” added another voice
in a murmur, and from a
further and almost general muttering I gathered—some-
what to my surprise—that the ex-bo’sun had infected the
hands with something of his own superstitious misgivings
of which he must have been talking to them.


Heckmann received the same impression, for, bringing
the glass from his eye, he turned and scoffed at his little
crew sternly—almost angrily.
“ That ship ain’t bringing a wind with her, because there
ain’t no wind for her to bring,” said one of the hands who
had been recruited by the chief himself, and who had
turned out a bit of a sea-lawyer. “ But she’s under way all
the same. Have you anything to say against that, sir?”
“ No.”
“Can you explain the fee-nomimum, sir?” asked the
sea-lawyer, with a triumphant sidelong glance at his
companions.
“ \ es. She’s provided with auxiliary steam power, and
she’s using it. I can make out the smoke from her
funnel.”
This was indeed a new light on the subject—an ocean-
going vessel propelled by steam was a strange thing in
those days. The men—Seaward and their spokesman
particularly—looked foolish.
“And as for ships having been lost in these seas
lately . . .”
“Sir,” said Wallace Graham, stepping forward, “I am
afraid I can tell you something on that matter. May I
speak to you without . . .”
Heckmann understood him. Beckoning to Seaward and
myself to follow, he led him aside out of the hearing of the
curious seamen.
“ Well ? ”


“ There have been some mysterious disappearances of
vessels, sir ; and—strange as it will appear to you—there
is hardly a convict in Van Diemen’s Land or Australia
who is not to some degree in the secret.”
“ The convicts ! ”
“Yes. Briefly, the story is this: I have myself tried to
have it put properly before the authorities, but, so far as I
know, without avail. A few years ago, some time-expired
men hit on a desperate scheme. They shipped themselves
on board a small brig, trading between Port Jackson and
the Pacific and South Sea Islands. They headed a
mutiny, murdered the captain, officers, and the loyal
members of the crew, and seized the ship, which they used
for piratical enterprizes—at first on a small scale. But
immunity emboldened them, and they managed somehow
to arm the brig formidably. Gradually they were joined
by the scum of the earth. They seized on an island and
turned it into a stronghold and refitting station. They
actually boast that they purchased their last —new —ship
in the open market in the guise of wealthy merchants.”
“And you —how do you know these things? True or
false, how do you know of these things?”
“ I know them because the emissaries of these outlaws
visit the stations—they get at the gangs, they get at the
ticket-of-leave-men on the farms up-country. They offer
to incur any cost and almost any risk to aid any to escape
who will engage to join them. It is largely by these
means they recruit their losses. Where their island is I


don’t know —what their exact plan of operations is I don’t
know : but I do know that what I have told you is true,
for I have myself received their offers. And there can be
no doubt about the connection between their existence and
the loss of ships in fair weather with all hands.”
The chief eyed closely the volunteer of this startling
information—and I came to the conclusion that he believed
him.
“ It doesn’t follow that because there are pirates some-
where there are pirates on board yonder stranger,” he said.
“Seaward, lam going below. Watch her movements
narrowly, and anything worth reporting report to me
instantly.”
“ Aye, aye, sir.”
“ Cleet, come below with me.”
“Aye, aye, sir.”
“ I will beg another moment with you.”
Wallace Graham was speaking again.
“If that ship is what she may be—which is certainly at
present the barest assumption, but you cannot misunder-
stand my meaning—and if you decide to offer any
resistance, post me where you will and in front of any
possible odds, and your experiment in the way of testing
human sincerity and human gratitude,’ will be advanced a
stage further.”
This was said resolutely but quietly—said without the
slightest trace, the least suspicion, of boast or brag. It
was answered curtly, and quite as quietly.


“ 1 have already ordered your hands to be freed of their
ornaments.”
Immediately after I had seen that the orders to which
he referred were about to be executed I joined him in his
cabin.
“Whatever comes of this present alarm, for which there
are at present no grounds,” he said, “after what we’ve
heard we’ll be on the alert and prepared. You know that
my stores include plenty of arms and abundance of
ammunition.”
“Which we’ve got now altogether, including yourself, sir,
ten men to use.”
“ And a cabin boy.”
“And a boy—ten men and a cabin boy.”
“Quite so. In seeing that all the arms are got ready,
and in passing the word that ii I am attacked I shall fight
if there is the ghost of a chance of doing any good by
fighting, you will do so in such a way as to let it be known
that I am preparing for a very improbable contingency,
not a probable one.”
“ Very good, sir.”
He proceeded to discuss with me, in the coolest and
most business-like manner, the characters of the members
of our little crew, “all told,” with the view of determining
their relative and respective reliability in case of need.
We were interrupted by the entrance of Seaward, who
looked and spoke like a different man.
I understood why. What he had heard about auxiliary


steam-power had offered a rational and natural explana-
tion of a circumstance he had vaguely attributed to a
supernatural cause, and he had accepted the explanation.
Sailor-like, he would infinitely rather dare any danger,
however great, with which nothing supernatural could be
associated than a danger, however small or even however
fanciful, about which there was, or seemed to be, anything
“ uncanny.”
“ The ship’s been holding her course towards us, sir,” he
said cheerfully, “till about five minutes ago, when some-
thing seemed for to happen. From what I can make out
with the glass, her hawkshilihairy steam-power have bust
sir. And there’s signs of a breeze.”


CHAPTER XXXIV.
THE SMOKE IN THE OFFING.
HETHER he was right or
wrong in his conjecture as
to what had happened to her,
the stranger was certainly no
longer under way. She had,
however, perceptibly lessened
the distance between us, and
we made out signs of some
sort of commotion on her
decks. We could further see
that she was fully rigged for
her class—her steam-power
was strictly auxiliary only.
“What do you reckon her
tonnage?” I asked Seaward.
“Not less than a thousand,” he answered —which was
just what I had put her at myself. “Gleet,” he continued,
“ I don’t like the look of her. What’s those covered things


fore and aft look like? Guns—guns, my lad. If that
brig’s a honest trader, what do she want to carry guns for?
If she’s got two she’s got more, ready to poke their ugly
noses out when she unmasks her port-holes. Here comes
the wind —but it’ll fill her sails as well as ours.”
The faint far-away ripple that Seaward had been the
first to descry had been moving up, and swelling as it
moved. The wind came with it, and with the breath of
the welcome breeze La Belle became again a thing of life.
Her canvas stretched, shrouds and halyards tautened. As
if she too would escape from the strange brig, she sailed
away like a witch.
Unlike the yacht, the larger vessel had been unprepared
for the sudden wind—she had apparently been relying on
her engines, for her sails were unset.
But not for long, for as we watched she shook them out
—an ominous spread of towering white.
Quickly she gathered way —what course would she
steer ?
There could be no mistake about it—she was laying in
our own course.
The race reminded me of the pursuit of a dove by a
hawk—what would happen when the time came for the
final swoop ?
Heckmann remained on deck, but for fully an hour said
never a w r ord. Then :
“We’ve held our own.”
“Just —so far,” I answered.


“We can hold our own all the time in this wind,” said
Seaward, “and if it falls we can gain on her in a lighter
one. But if the wind freshens she can pick us up.”
Another hour passed during which the breeze did
freshen.
Seaward was right: at the end of a third hour we had
lost a good deal more than our start.
But “ this wind won’t last,” I said ; “ and when it drops
off we shall make up what we’ve lost. Why not signal
her ? ”
This suggestion was acted upon, but no answering
bunting was shown by the brig: a discomposing fact
which we all read in the same light.
“Never knowed a honest ship as wouldn’t shew her
colours,” muttered Seaward,
The wind not only fell again slightly, but slightly
changed its direction. Both circumstances were in our
favour, and as nightfall approached yacht and brig occupied
the same relative positions as when the chase began—if
chase it were.
“We will show no lights to-night, Cleet, and we’ll
change her course as soon as the darkness has settled
down.”
“ Aye, aye, sir.”
“Maybe we shall have shook her off by the morning,”
remarked Seaw r ard; “but if we haven’t, Davy Jones’s
locker will have to find room for a few more. That’s what
/ think of her.”


“ I want to say a few words to everybody on board,”
said the chief; “ call them all aft.”
“ Ten men and a cabin boy ” were soon grouped on the
little poop.
“We all seem to think the same thing about this strange
brig,” observed Professor Heckmann calmly, “but some of
us have been told what the rest of you haven’t heard. It
is said . .
And here he repeated briefly what Wallace Graham had
communicated to him, without any reference as to how it
was that Wallace Graham came to know.
“Our only chance of doing ourselves any good by
ficrhtincr is in the case of an attack on us by boats. But
b b
arms and ammunition will be laid out for everybody, and
if we use them at all let everybody use them as well as he
can.”
“ Spoke fair,” admitted our sea-lawyer ; and “ Cart’n’ly ”
chimed in a chorus of voices.
« There ain’t nothink like the ’ope of ’avin’ a fight to put
’eart into a man,” said a voice that had undeniably first
lisped within the area of the sound of Bow Bells.
When morning dawned we were alone upon all the
waste of waters within the range of eye and glass—we had
dodged the brig.
But neither through all that day nor during the night
that followed did we attempt to resume what we believed
to be our proper course. By the next morning, however,
still nothing having been sighted, we had shaken off much


of our alarm, and we put the yacht about to her old
bearings.
For twenty-four more hours the wind held good—then
again it died away.
All day and all night we lay motionless: the yacht
“ As idle as a painted ship,
Upon a painted ocean.”
When next the sun flooded heaven and sea with the
gorgeous glare of tropic noon, “ten men and a cabin boy”
saw in the offing a snake-like column of black smoke
against the white sky.


CHAPTER XXXV.
THE HAWK AHD THE DOVE .
HOUGH the hawk had
i lost sight of his quarry
I for a time, he had not
I abandoned the chase;
' he was trimming his
163 wings now for the final
” swoop. Soon the poor
dove must feel the
piercing and rending of his cruel talons.
It was hopeless. Not a breath of wind stirred the placid
surface of the sea —not a far-away ripple, not a far-away
cloud on any point of the wide horizon that closed us in,
to bring one ray of hope of a second escape.
The very beauty of the day the brightness of the
warm air, the splendour of the gleaming water, the glory of
the sun-lit sky—seemed to me to be mocking at us, mock-
ing at our helplessness.
For the snake-like column ot smoke was coming nearer
and nearer.


A brig—with steam-power—of a thousand tons against
a wind-deserted sailing yacht of scarcely two hundred !
A crew of scores against ten men and a cabin boy !
The chief stood close to my elbow.
“ Will you give your orders, sir ? ”
Every soul on board was within the sound ot his voice
as he replied.
There are three courses open to us. We can launch
our one boat, provision her, row away, and leave the yacht
to her fate. There’s the boat—there ” (flinging them on
the deck) “are the keys to all the stores. Any who like
to do so may lower the boat, help themselves to anything
on board—and go. I shall stand by the ship, come what
will.”
No true British sailor could listen to words like these
unmoved. They were cheered to the echo—the very small
cabin boy crowing louder than anybody.
“ If that’s your resolution, Professor Heckmann,” I said,
as the noise subsided, “ I shall remain with you. I signed
articles with you, and I’ll take my chance with you.”
“ And so will I,” said Wallace Graham.
“ Put down my name as well,” said William Seaward.
The hands cheered again—the treble of the very small
cabin boy again soaring above the bass of the others—but
all the same the chiefs first proposition was discussed, to
be abandoned because of the obvious dangers involved in
its execution.
“ A open boat in mid-ocean —water drunk, grub eat —


madness, starvation, death by torture and by inches ” —so
the sea-lawyer summed up its prospects. “No—better
take our luck with the old man than that. I reckon the
pirits—if so be as they are pints, and I don’t doubt it—
don’t want us, but what we’ve got; which is to say what
the old man’s got. It’s small fry they’re after, after all—
but that’s their look-out. My point is that they can’t have
any extry advantage in slewing us, so why for should they
slew us ?—always pervided as we don’t make no show of
slewing them. Mr. Cleet, tell the perfessor as we elecks to
stand by him and the yacht noble.”
But the professor had heard for himself.
“Part of what you have said, Jawkinson,” he remarked,
“brings me to the second course we can pursue. It is
open to us to do a little by way of revenge beforehand for
our own deaths immediately afterwards.”
“You mean we can make things certain by committing
suicide—that’s what that comes to,” asserted Jawkinson.
“ Quite so.”
“ I’m agin it I’m as on for a fight with a chance at the
end of it as anybody, but you might as well fight a battery
with a shuttlecock as fight this toy agin yon brig.”
“ Hear, hear.”
“ Hear, hear,” squeaked the cabin boy after the other
voices, all by himself.
Seaward shook his head.
“No use, sir.”
“ I know that save on the bare chance of boats


attempting to board us with a wind springing up. In that
case . .
“There won’t be no such case. There won’t be no boats
boarding us—the brig will lay alongside—and there won’t
be no wind springing up to-day. Get on with your third
idea.”
“ Our third course is to do nothing.”
For the most conclusive of all possible reasons—there
was nothing to be done.


i—. . __
CHAPTER XXXVI
IN THE TOWER OF A PIRATE.
N the last mile or two of her
progress towards us, I don’t
think one of us took his
eyes from her for a single
second.
Nearer and nearer—closer
and closer: slowly—as though
she knew there was no need
to hurry—but surely : her
sails all neatly stowed away,
but with the smoke from her
funnel increasing in volume—
nearer, closer, slowly, surely, up drew the brig.
Within hailing distance she slowed down almost abreast
of us. Her swell ruffled the calm bosom of the sea, and as
it caught us the yacht shook gently with the motion, just
as the stranger ran up the Black Flag—his only answer to
our shouted challenge.


“The dove is trembling now,” was my thought as I felt
the slight heave of her hull.
There was no longer any lingering doubt—or hope: we
were in the power of pirates.
As Seaward had prognosticated, the pirate brig, beauti-
fully and delicately steered, with just enough way on her
for the manoeuvre, came alongside of us, beam to beam.
At just about biscuit-throw, she had opened her starb’d
ports. A gun grinned in each.
The hawk must have been proud of his claws, to show
them thus needlessly.
The brass cannons fore and aft had been uncovered, and
the brig’s deck between them swarmed with men.
It was easy to detect their captain—a well set-up, well-
dressed, well-looking man of middle age, with carefully-
trimmed beard and moustaches—anything but the typical
pirate-chief of fiction and melodrama. He stood with his
left hand laid lightly on his hips—each occasional gesture
with his other hand was an order, instantly obeyed.
Yards distant, I saw the blaze of diamonds on his
fingers.
He gazed curiously down upon the yacht’s smooth white
deck. Quite a friendly smile—it seemed to me—played
about his lips : yet was it somehow a smile that was sug-
gestive of infinite cruelty.
It was scarcely necessary, but—at another wave of his
bejewelled right hand—the grappling irons made us fast.
Some twenty rascally-looking fellows, on some of whom


the convict stamp was conspicuous, leaped and scrambled
from their higher deck to ours.
The fingers of some of us twitched, our arms tightened,
to avenge the consummation of this outrage ; but—the
word to “ do nothing ” had been passed.
In more dignified manner the pirate captain himself
boarded us. A gangway was run down, and some of his
scoundrels at our end of it steadied it as he descended,
more of his men swarming at his heels.
He greeted Heckmann with a courtly bow and stepped
up to him. His air and manner reminded me strongly ot
the demeanour of Her Majesty’s officers on board the
Celerity.
He spoke in beautiful English—he did not look unlike
an Englishman, yet that he was not a fellow countryman
was shown by a not unpleasant peculiarity of accent which
I was not linguist enough to trace to its source.
It startled all of us that he should address our chief by
name.
“ Professor von Heckmann, I presume.”
“ I am Carl Heckmann.”
‘ Perhaps you will permit me to take it for granted that
no explanation of this visit is necessary ; and an apology
would be equally out of place. If you will be good enough
to let me hear you order that no sort of resistance is to be
offered to any one of my crew, I will pass the word that
there is not to be the least violence on our side.”
“ We have already agreed among ourselves that it would
be worse than useless to raise a hand against you.”


“That assurance I will accept as sufficient.”
He turned to one of his own men at his elbow.
“ Present my compliments to Mr. Bayne ” —he was really
playing the aristocratic Naval officer to perfection—“and
request him to be good enough to step aboard the prize,”
“Aye, aye, sir.”
“Mr. Bayne”—as the officer he had summoned joined
him—“you will search the yacht without molesting any
one on board. Whatever you may find of any value—no
doubt on such a well-found boat there will be some pretty
knick-knacks that will serve to decorate my cabin or your
own—you will of course transfer to the brig. You will
then follow our usual procedure.”
“Very good, Captain Da Costa.”
“And now, my dear Professor Heckmann,” went on Da
Costa, as we had just heard him called, “you will conduct
me to your cabin, where you and I will settle the real
business that I’ve come to see you about.”
He spoke as one who was making a complimentary
call, and desired to take advantage of the opportunity to
settle some little outstanding account.
“Well, I’m bloused!” I heard the staggered Seaw r ard
mutter. I was almost as bewildered as he was.
The professor made a sign to both of us, and we fol-
lowed him dowm in the wake of Da Costa, wffio calmly
drew up to the cabin table.
“ Shall I take a chair ? Thank you. The presence of
these-—officers of yours ?—is not necessary, but it is not


positively objectionable: of course provided they are
unarmed ? ”
“ They are not unarmed,”
“ And yourself? ”
Without a word Heckmann drew two pistols—l knew
them to be both loaded—from his pockets and laid them
on the table. Seaward and I followed suit.
“Ha ! But I think
And he touched the bell—Bayne answered the ring in
person. At a nod from his chief he took possession of the
six weapons.
“ Is everything going on satisfactorily, Bayne ?”
“ Quite, sir.”
“Then remain with me, please. And now, my dear
Professor Heckmann, to come to the point. It must be
obvious to you that in taking so much trouble to pursue
you—l really feared at one time that you had eluded us,
as you certainly would have done but for my steam power
—I had something more important in view than the mere
value of your craft and whatever was likely to be found on
board her. My real object can—fortunately—be very
briefly stated. It was, and is, your cheque—or any draft
on the Australian agents of your bankers payable at sight
—for twenty-five thousand pounds.”
For once the scientist was startled into an exclamation
of astonishment.
“ My draft for twenty-five thousand pounds ! ” he cried.
“ For twenty-five thousand,” answered Da Costa. “ You


are a wealthy man—a very wealthy man ; but the sum I
have named is about the maximum amount that your
signature holds good for in Melbourne to-day, without
reference to London or the deposition of further securities.
When you were in Australia years ago your banking
account was the largest in the Colony, where you have
almost as much property as ever. The Melbourne agents
—shall I name them ?—who look after your financial
interests are also the agents for your London bankers—
shall I name them ?—and it may gratify you to be assured
that they will not hesitate to honour your demand for
twenty-five thousand. Surely what I have said is sufficient
to convince you that I know what lam talking about. I
caused the most careful enquiries to be made about you
by my own agents.”
“ Your agents ! ”
“Yes —both in Hobart Town, short as your stay there
was, and in Melbourne. You see, my dear sir—you won’t
object to my smoking a cigar, will you ?—I conduct my
business, on the whole a very large one, on purely modern
principles: I even avail myself of the aid of modern
science, a circumstance which really ought to interest you
—for instance, I have rendered myself largely independent
of the wind by the use of steam. Long before you can do
anything to stop payment, your draft will have been pre-
sented —through a reputable channel —and cashed for my
benefit. Pen, ink, and paper are, I see, before you : write
the document as from Hobart Town, and make it payable


to the order of Luclen Da Costa. I will see to the
stamping of it myself. Hand it me within five minutes
and I will leave your ship within ten.”
“ And if I refuse ?—as I shall refuse—as I do refuse . . .”
“In that case, I shall—will you oblige me by striking a
light ?—slit the throat of everybody on board this yacht
and then sink her.”


CHAPTER XXXVII
THE SCENT OF BLOOD.
OW true was the story of
Wallace Graham that these
seas were roamed by a horde
of pirates with an organiza-
tion never heard of, never
dreamed of, before—pirates
with a steam brig, a hiding
place of their own, and with
such ramifications of their
system ashore that they
could negotiate drafts and
bills like honest merchants !
The option before our luckless chief was twenty-five
thousand pounds or death by violence within ten minutes.
There was no possible loop-hole of escape.
“The judgment on him ’as begun,” whispered Seaward
to me.
“ I perceive that you withdraw your refusal,” said
Da Costa, with a smile—but what a smile it was!—as


his victim stretched out his hand for the writing
materials.
“ Yes.”
He wrote rapidly for two or three minutes, and Da
Costa picked up the manuscript before the ink was dry
upon it. He scrutinized it closely, approved it, and placed
it within a pocket-book which he drew from his breast —all
in the most business-like and matter-of-fact manner.
Some whispered words passed between him and his
lieutenant Bayne, and then ;
“Well, Professor Heckmann, if you will pay me the
compliment of escorting me to the gangway, we can
regard our business as satisfactorily settled, and I’ll go
aboard my own ship again.”
His smile changed to a snarl as the other, keeping his
seat, declined to move—till a pistol was pointed at his
head.
“ See me to your deck, sir, or . . .”
Heckmann, myself, Seaward, Bayne, Da Costa —this was
the order in which we went above.
As my feet touched the planking, a cry of amazement
and sudden rage broke from my startled lips, for within
my reach—as vile-looking as any of the other vile
miscreants from the brig, who now, their quick work of
spoliation over, were lounging about our deck waiting
further orders—stood Jeremy Murrick and Hunter!
However closely we might have been watched, no one
could have detected from which side, theirs or mine, the


first movement was made—they rushed for me at the same
second of time at which I rushed for them.
I got a grip on both of them—l think by the throat:
but I was almost blinded by the fury that had seized me
at the sight of them—l thought I had learned how to keep
to windward of my passion, but I had deceived myself:
bitter as my lesson had been I hadn’t learned it thoroughly
even yet. One of them tripped me up, and we all three
fell heavily to the deck. But I kept my hold, and, unable
to rise, we fought as we were, until rough feet kicked us
apart and rough hands dragged us into a standing position.
“ Blood ! ” said Da Costa, pointing to the deck where we
had been struggling; “ that’s against the bargain on both
sides, and those who broke it will have to pay the price.”
I said nothing, nor did I pay any heed to the excited
utterances of Murrick and Hunter.
“Oh, an old quarrel, is it?” said their captain; “well,
what a fortunate opportunity for fighting it out and
settling it. As a matter of right, you ought all three to
walk the plank for breaking the bargain, which no one is
allowed to do with impunity but myself. But I’ll combine
leniency with a sudden desire for a little entertainment,
which you three will have to supply. I shall start you to
kill each other. I should like to see a little sword-play,
but it isn’t likely that one of you knows how to fence. So
—hand me two of those pistols, Bayne, and see that
they’re loaded—we’ll fall back on powder and ball.”
He took the weapons from Bayne.


“How long have we to spare? A half-hour? That 11
do nicely.”
He forced one pistol into my hand, and put the other
into Hunter’s.
“You two are more of an age —I’ll give you the
beginning of the programme. You’ll draw lots for first
fire, and if the one who wins the draw doesn’t drop his
man first time you’ll go on blazing at each other in turn
till one or the other gets a hole in him. Chalk the deck,
my lads—six paces forward of the mast for our man, six
paces aft for this dandy yachtsman. If our fellow wins, of
course there’s an end of the duel—-if the other wins he’ll
have to fight our second man in the same way—there are
three of them in the quarrel, and if they must fight I’ll
teach them to fight properly,”
Howls of delight greeted the announcement of this
ghastly programme.
But with the howls of one side mingled the indignant
remonstrances of the other, Murrick and Hunter them-
selves joining vigorously in the latter.
“ It’s murder!” cried Seaward, and the cry was taken up
by all our little handful.
It is curious—to me inexplicable—how trivialities in the
midst of momentous happenings fix themselves on the
mind : even at that fateful crisis I noticed that our cabin
boy cried “ Murder ! ” last—and loudest.
Heckmann stepped close to Da Costa.
“You have wreaked your will on me and mine,” he


began; “if you have one lingering spark of human
feeling , .
\\ hat more he would have said was never spoken, for at
that moment my shipmates made a mad and hopeless
rush to surround me.
The scene that followed can scarcely be called a struggle
—there were too many on one side for that. It was all
over in a very few minutes. Heckmann was flung down the
companion stairs and locked in his own cabin Seaward
was knocked down, stunned—several of the others were
roped up. More fiends from the brig had leaped on board
to join in the brief fray and in the fun of the duel. The
deck of poor La Belle was packed—and in all the seething,
blaspheming, yelling crowd I could not see now the face of
one single friend.
The scent of blood was in the nostrils of them all, and
they clamoured for the fight to begin.
As alone I stood in the midst of them and gazed
around me :
“ Has Hell broken loose?”
I thought.


t -i
en
;■_■# $ ■ -Jf ' •* > ~-
n.atf. -—■> JK
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
THE RED BUTTON.
BREATHLESS silence
followed the uproar and
hubbub, as the preliminaries
were proceeded with.
“ First to draw lots. Rip
off some white buttons and
a black or red one, some of
you ; and the first to pick
out the coloured one will
have to stand first fire,”
ordered Da Costa.
In his hand he held a
small canvas bag, into which a few buttons were quickly
thrown.
“Five white and one scarlet,” he announced. Turning
to me :
“ First dip for the stranger. Shut your eyes and shove
in your hand.”
“ Hold hard, captain,” exclaimed a voice in the rear,


from which a man pushed and forced himself to Da Costa’s
side. He was Wallace Graham, whose face showed he
had taken an active part in the recent scuffle. “ Hold
hard, sir. Fair play’s a jewel, all the world over ; and
there’s no fair play in one fighting two. Let me join in,
and it’s a square thing—two against two. I’ll exchange
shots with this man, and then hand the barkers to the
other pair.”
“Bedad and that’s shpoken fair, so it is,” exclaimed a
voice in a rich Irish brogue. “ Shure if this illigant
spalpeen ” —argued the speaker, pointing to me—“is killed
intoirely in the first jewl, he can’t foight the other
omadhaun at all at all—and how’s that fair to him?”
The idea of another combatant taking part, thus insuring
a double duel, was hailed with acclamation. My protests,
alike to Da Costa and to my champion, were drowned and
all unheeded—even while I was yet speaking the former
held out the bag to the latter, who dipped in his hand and
drew out —a white button.
“And why shouldn’t that settle it intoirely?” demanded
the Irish voice. “As the gintleman hasn’t drawn the rid
bit of bone, let him have first foire, bedad.”
“No, no,” objected others. “Let’s keep the fun up”—
and the bag was offered to Hunter, whose hand trembled
violently as he inserted it.
What would not he—and Murrick too —have given to
have backed out of this horrible business ?—which was as
impossible for them as for me.


Fumbling around with his fingers as though in the hope
that the sense of touch might aid in differentiating white
from red, he at length withdrew and opened his palm,
showing—another white button.
A second time Wallace Graham inserted his hand, firm
and steady as a rock.
A second time he withdrew a white.
A second time Hunter dipped.
Out came the red !
Graham had won first fire.
“ Are the lines chalked ? ” asked Da Costa. “ Good.
Now then ” —to me—“give me that pistol.”
“I won’t,” I cried. “This man”—and I laid my hand
on Graham’s shoulder —“ shan’t take my place. Why
should he get shot for me ? ”
“ Keep quiet,” said Graham. “ Give me a chance of
doing for you what you did for me. Didn’t you save my
life ? ”
I was hustled aside, and the pistol taken from me by
force and handed to him—though there was abundant
choice of other pistols.
Graham toed the chalk-mark six paces aft the mast:
Hunter was dragged to the other mark.
He could scarcely stand at all—upright he could not
stand. His legs shook under him, his hands shivered, his
face was ghastly white, his eyes were closed.
“ The first shot will be fired at my word ‘ three.’ Clear
away there, and leave a free line. One! Two ! . . .”


Da Costa checked himself. A sudden idea had occurred
to his mind, conceived in the spirit of sheer mad devilry
that possessed it.
“ There’ll be at least one dead man in a few minutes,”
he exclaimed. “ How fortunate that we carry a chaplain !
We’ll have him out to read the funeral service. You there
on deck”—men were hanging over the gunwale of the
brig, watching—“ fetch him out, and put the book in his
hands.”
The demoniac laughter that greeted this ordered
“addition to the programme” will haunt my ears to my
dying day.
Dragged by the elbows, pushed from behind—but still
with a look of dignity on his own pale face, looking all the
paler by the contrast of the coarse, inflamed countenances
of his conductors, one of whom carried in mockery a white
surplice over his arm—to the brig’s main shrouds was
brought—the Reverend Archibald Lane, whom I had last
seen on board the ill-fated Arab Sheik.


CHAPTER XXXIX
THE DUEL.
E actual scene before his
eyes was one that told
sufficient of its own story.
In the Name of the
Master Whom he served,
in quick, clear, loud, com-
manding tones he called
on all concerned to stay
their hand. But already
Da Costa was giving the signal for the second time
o o o
“ Fire at the word. One ! Two ! . . ”
Again he checked himself as he was about to utter the
final word. This time the interruption was owing to
Hunter. At the caution “ Fire at the word,” his body had
swayed like a branch in the wind. At the “ One ! Two ! ”
he fell forward on his face.
With an oath Da Costa moved up to him, and kicked
him over. He had swooned—swooned with fear.
I shudder to remember, as I shuddered to hear, the


words that passed the lips of Lucien Da Costa as he did
what I saw him do. Of a surety, as really and as truly as
any of olden time of whom we read, was this man
possessed of the Devil to whom he had sold himself.
With his own hands he raised the unconscious form and
pulled it to the yacht’s low bulwark amidship.
“To the sharks with you, you coward—coward !”
With a quick, strong heave, he flung the helpless Hunter
overboard.
The splash was followed—the interval of silence was
probably shorter than it seemed —by one awful scream : a
prolonged and suddenly ceasing scream that I hear again
as I write of it. It was Hunter’s death shriek, uttered
either as, consciousness having returned, he sunk for the
last time or as the jaws of a shark snapped on him.
“Take that raving priest below again,” shouted Da
Costa —“the next man must die without the benefit of
clergy.”
Bayne here whispered something in his ear, to which he
replied aloud :
“ All right—the show will be over in a few minutes now,
and we’ll ring the curtain down. Get into place, you two,
and don’t waste time.”
I found myself facing Murrick, who stood where Hunter
had stood —and fallen.
I had been thrust to the spot —I had not walked there,
for my mind had been made up all along that, come what
might, my finger should not pull trigger save to fire into


I * r \ X ' \\
' -J / I p SSSg t I V^A 1 - \ \\
M r / tf 1 \ \ -. ■••-'3J
* 'v. ! I • yp Km t _ •
' \ ■
\ I l-f fl i ■■-.. >\ \ \\
sL..,',. -
-;
“ Wallace Graham ” fell into my arms.—/. 258.


♦
<


the air. I had tried to say so, but my voice had been
drowned.
Whether it fell to my lot to fire first, or—surviving
Murrick’s fire—to take second chance, no guilty part
would I take in the day’s mad devilry.
The bag was held to me. I might as well give myself
the chance of drawing a white button, for, if Murrick drew
the red one, when I discharged my pistol in the air
Murrick perchance might follow suit—though it wasn’t
likely: so in went my hand, and out came a white. It
wasn’t much whiter than Hunter’s face had been—or than
Murrick’s was, as he drew out the fatal red.
It was my fire first.
“ Ready on the word! One ! Two ! Three! ”
I pointed the muzzle higher than the yacht’s mast-head,
and emptied the pistol harmlessly in the sunlight-quivering
air.
In the jeers and hoots that assailed me, the man whose
life had practically been in my hands but a few moments
before joined gleefully, as soon as his amazement allowed
him.
“Jeremy Murrick,” I cried, “one murder is on your soul
already. Are you going to commit another?”
For answer, he raised his pistol—with a steady hand
now—and covered my heart.
I tried to close my eyes, but—strange as it must seem—
I could not. The gleam of the levelled barrel, the fierce,
savage light on the murderous face of him who held it,
fascinated them. r


Again Da Costa’s voice.
“ One! Two !—Three ! ”
A tiny flash—a loud report: but between the bullet and
my heart—between murderer and victim—rushed a
saviour. Bleeding from mouth and breast, “Wallace
Graham ” fell into my arms.


A * f
/ v r t X,
CHAPTER XL.
“ EACH FOR HIMSELF, AND GOD FOR US ALL.”
HAD seen death before—
and I feared that the man
who, as Murrick the mur-
derer pulled trigger, had
planted his body in front of
mine to receive the shot,
had received with it his
death-wound.
His poor face twitched
with the agony of his
wound, his poor eyes looked
piteously into mine.
I lowered him tenderly
to the deck, and wiped the
oozing blood from his shiver-
ing lips, and tried in vain to staunch the crimson tide that
poured from his breast
\\ as Da Costa satisfied with his Devil’s work ? Had he
had enough of his infernal Sport with Death ?


Yes : for now he was crying loudly :
“ All aboard—all hands aboard the brig ! ” and his men
were swarming up her sides from the yacht.
One of them should never reach her deck and leave me
aboard La Belle alive. Jeremy Murrick was closer to the
gallows on the yacht than on the nameless brig—and on
the yacht he should stay.
But I had no time to lose. The hissing of the pirate’s
steam, and the voice of one of her officers roaring out his
orders, warned me that she was about to cast loose and
get under way.
I pressed Graham’s hands—it might be for me to fold
them when I got back to his side—and darted for the
gangway.
Murrick’s foot was actually on it as I struck him down
—backwards on to our own deck. As I knelt and pinned
him to it, his few remaining fellow-scoundrels still on the
yacht rushed up the gangway, for Da Costa was ordering
it to be hauled inboard. The last man had barely reached
the brig’s deck when up it rattled. The grappling irons
had already been cast loose—and they followed the gang-
way.
Murrick for a few moments twisted his neck out of the
clutch of my hands, but I stifled his terror-stricken scream
by pressing my fingers on his lips.
The yacht was rising and falling in the swell of the
larger vessel—the brig was off and away.
Seaward came up to bear a hand with my prisoner, I


suppose I relaxed my grip for a moment, for the latter rose
to his feet with a bound, and made as though he would
jump overboard to swim after his ship. Seaward felled
him again with one terrific blow, and in falling he struck
his head on an iron stanchion—and lay stretched out quite
unconscious.
“When you want him,” said Seaward, “there he is, and
there you’ll find him. If you don’t kill the swab I shall,
for death to a pirate is seamen’s law all the world over. If
you’ll go and look after the last man he’s murdered, I II
get things shipshape.”
Our imprisoned chief was promptly released and
informed of what had taken place. While Seaward went
through the boat putting her in trim again, Heckmann
with his own hands assisted me to carry Graham below,
where —on the luxurious sofa in his own cabin —he
examined his wound. With much of the adroitness of a
trained surgeon, he probed for the bullet. With some
difficulty, and I fear at the cost of considerable pain to the
subject of the search before he fainted, he located it—and
shook his head.
“ Won’t you extract the bullet ? ” I whispered. “ Can
you ? ”
“ It would be useless—he’d die of hemorrhage.”
o
“ How long will he last ? ”
“ I don’t know.”
“Shall I move him into my own bunk, sir?”
“ No, that would probably start the bleeding afresh. He


may lie here, and die quietly where he is. Please go and
bring Seaward down with you—l have orders for you
both.”
On gaining the deck I found that the sun was rapidly
sinking below the horizon—l had not thought that night
was so close at hand. All was quiet and orderly, and the
men whose duty it was to do so were preparing to show
the usual side and riding lanterns, and to light up below.
Not a breath of wind stirred the air—she still lay on the
water like a 100-.
o
Seaward informed me that Murrick appeared slowly to
be recovering consciousness, and was safe under guard in
the fo’c’sle, and then descended with me to receive our new
orders.
They were brief. The chief informed us that for the
present he abandoned the object with which he had set
sail. With the first puff of wind, La Belle was to be put
back and steered for Melbourne. There was just a chance
—a chance dependent on wind and weather—that we
might fetch the port in time to stop payment of his draft ;
if not, he would sacrifice everything else for the time being
in order to put the authorities on the track of the pirates
at the earliest possible moment.
“ Don’t forget one thing, sir, in describing her,” put in
Seaward ; “she’s likely got as many dodges and as many
rigs as she has names—which is for to say as how she
changes both whenever it suits her purpose. With your
pardon, sir, it’s long odds that if ever you see that craft
again you won’t be able to identificate her.”


“ Could you ? ”
“ That depends—but I’d cart’nly know her again quicker
than you would.”
«I can swear to her captain, at all events, under any
disguise: and I hope to have the chance of doing so.
“ I hope you will have the chance, too, sir,” I said doubt-
fully.
“This man you have made prisoner, Cleet —he at least
is in our power. Fetch him down, Seaward, and 111 ques-
tion him. What’s that hubbub on deck about ?”
As he spoke, flying feet were heard on the companion-
stairs, and Murrick himself dashed, panting, into the cabin
two or three of the sailors tumbling in after him in hot
pursuit.
“ The swab’s bolted from the fo’c’sle,” explained one of
them—“roaring mad. We’ll have to iron him.”
“To the pumps, to the pumps !” yelled Murrick at the
top of his voice. “To the pumps ! To the pumps ! The
yacht’s going to sink. To the pumps ! Da Costa scuttled
her before he left—he always does, for drownded men tell
no tales. She’s sinking, she’s sinking—to the pumps, to
the pumps, to the pumps ! ”
With one quick look into each other’s eyes, Seaward
and I bolted from the cabin and down into her hold.
The pirates had scuttled her!
Unperceived in our excitement, she had already sunk
deeply, and the water in her hold was rising, rising, rising.
Murrick had raised the alarm as soon as ever he had
fully recovered his had he done so in time ?


All that men could do we did. We gave battle to the
danger that threatened us, and fought till we could fight
no more—fought till the last ray of hope died down into
the darkness of despair in the pluckiest heart aboard the
doomed little ship.
The pumps had been maliciously choked, and were
almost useless, but our arms worked at them till they
dropped helplessly to our sides. The waters gained and
gained and gained—the yacht sunk lower and lower and
lower.
Jawkinson, who had nothing to say now, was almost
drowned in a plucky effort to plug the leak-holes just after
their discovery.
No one took any notice of Jeremy Murrick—he could
wait his turn now. As a matter of fact, he worked as
frantically—and as vainly—as the rest of us.
Seaward, I said at last, “ it’s no good. She'll settle
down now in half-an-hour.”
“Less,” he answered. “The judgment on him is falling
fast.”
“ See to the water and some stores. I’ll get the boat
ready for launching.”
“ Aye, aye.”
Ihe only boat we carried was swung astern. A horrible
discovery chilled my heart as I overhauled her.
The pirates had stove her in.
Our little crew must have been kept on deck while some
pf them scuttled the yacht below, and taken down while


some of them knocked out the bottom boards of our boat
above.
Seaward said never a word as I told him, but went and
looked for himself.
Then together we told Heckmann.
“ How long will it take to repair the boat ? ” he asked.
“ Before the boat could be made to float the yacht will
be fathoms under water: she’s beginning to settle now, and
won’t last a quarter of an hour.”
“ Tell the men.”
We told them, and Heckmann himself added :
“ My advice is that you try to patch up the boat, but I
command you no longer. Let each take his own chance
It’s a case now of every man for himself.”
“ And God for us all,” said Seaward.
“ I didn’t say so.”
“ But I do, sir. We’ve done all that mortal men could
do, and now I say—as I’ve a right and a call to say—God
help us ! ”
“ Which is to say that there is no help for us.”
“ No, it isn’t—and I’m sorry for to be going down with a
man as says it is.—What’s that ? ”
A strange look leaped into his weather-beaten face. He
craned his head forward as one intently listening, and held
up his right hand warningly, as one who would stifle the
faintest murmur of a sound.
“What’s that? By the God I’ve just called on, it’s the
swish of oars ! ”


CHAPTER XL I.
A PLUCKY PARSON.
WFUL to me seemed Heck-
mann’s question such a
question at such a time !
“ Has your God sent an
angel to us in a rowing-
boat ? ”
“ Hark —there it is again !
Perhaps He has !” answered
Seaward.
This time we ah heard it
—the sound of the dipping
of approaching oars, their
dull thud in the ro’locks.
“ Show a light,” I ordered
hoarsely.
If help—help of any kind
—were indeed coming, it was a race between it and death—
a race so close now that its issue might almost be said to
hang upon a moment lost or gained.


“ Boat ahoy ! Boat ahoy ! Boat a—hoy ! ”
We strained our ears to catch an answering hail.
None reached them, but—the rowing had ceased.
I snatched the now lighted flare from the hands of the
sailor who held it, and raised it aloft.
Just within the limit of its fiery glare we made out
distinctly a ship’s boat, and indistinctly the figure of a
solitary oarsman seated on her middle thwart.
“ Boat ahoy, ahoy, ahoy ! Boat a—hoy ! ”
Still came no answering hail, but—as the flare died
down we saw the two blades dip again, and heard again
their swish through the water and the creaking of the
ro’locks.
By the time the boat reached alongside, the deck of the
s.nking yacht was ablaze with flares and lanterns —and in
the lurid light I saw that the white face of the rower was
the face of Archibald Lane, the missionary.
One glance at him was sufficient to make it clear why
our hails had not been answered, or why the answers had
failed to reach us—his strength was exhausted. Perspira-
tion rolled in great drops from his bare head ; his panting
chest was heaving spasmodically ; froth and blood were
on his lips ; the oars fell from his powerless hands to the
bottom of the boat.
He had reached us, and now could do no more : he was
helpless even to speechlessness.
But what booted it to seek to question him ? The yacht
was going down—there was room in the boat for us all—
and the boat was alongside. That was enough.


Seaward sprang into her, and held her fast with a
hitcher.
Water, oars, and such provisions as there was time to
bring up, were handed rapidly down to him.
Heckmann himself helped me to bring poor Wallace
Graham, still alive, up from the cabin to the deck, whence
we gently lowered him into the boat, wrapped in a blanket.
Our hasty preparations completed, the first of all the
rest of us to scramble down was Jeremy Murrick.
But angry protests rose in loud and menacing voices.
“Overboard with that swab!” “We don’t take him
with us—not much we don’t!” “Chuck him out! —he’ll
bring bad luck to us ; ” these were amongst the exclama-
tions.
Jawkinson and our black cook sprang after him into the
boat, and had actually laid hands on him to heave him
overside when he made a successful appeal to Heckmann
himself.
“ Save me, sir!” he cried. “Save me—and I’ll tell you
all I know about the pirates. I know their island, and all
their ways—and I’ll tell you everything—all I know, if
only you’ll let me take my chance with you in the
boat.”
“ Hands off that man—and let no one else touch him—
he is to stay where he is.”
Sullenly, and with muttered grumblings, obedience was
yielded to these commands (from a commander who had
said he had ceased to command), although I thought at


first it would not be. I believe it would have been refused
but for the chiefs after remark :
“There will be time to deal with him after we have
heard what he has to tell us.”
I took the tiiler-lines, and Heckmann sat close to me,
with us in the stern-sheets being the still panting
clergyman. Opposite him Wallace Graham was stretched.
Additional oars had been pitched into the boat, and I
double-banked the rowers, whose brawny arms soon swept
her clear of the foundering yacht. At a safe distance they
eased up without any orders—the moon was struggling
through the clouds, and it would be possible to watch our
poor ship go do.vn.
There was a strange fascination in the brief sight.
We saw her hull shudder and her mast shake. Then for
a moment her beautiful bows rose high in the air, to plunge
the next violently beneath the water —and all was over.
For a while the men rowed on, then inshipped their
oars.
Mr. Lane could speak now, and all listened to the brief
story he had to tell. In repeating it, I may as well add
a few details which he subsequently communicated to
me.
As I had surmised, the Arab Sheik had been one of the
victims of the nameless pirate-brig. Da Costa had struck
with Captain Bredenberg the same bargain as he made
with the owner of La Belle —“ no violence on either side.”
Then, after rifling the barque, he had scuttled her as he


scuttled the yacht. But he had picked some half-a-
dozen of her crew to add to his own—Murrick one of
them, and amongst his new shipmates the latter had found
Hunter, who had joined at Melbourne. Probably the
absence of a prosecutor had stood him in good stead in
getting out of the hands of the police in London, and
escaping another charge when he had satisfied them of his
non-identity with the suspect they then “ wanted ” for the
Gleet murder —but no doubt he had seized the first chance
of getting abroad.
Murrick and Hunter thus meeting, it was easy to under-
stand that the ruse by means of which I had extracted the
former’s confession at Capetown was soon made clear.
“ The exact motives that actuated Da Costa in carrying
me by force on to his ship are not easy of conjecture,” said
Mr. Lane—“ he is no longer a man but a fiend, and it is
not possible to judge him from a human standpoint. He
may have had a design of using me for his own awful ends
in some way, or he may have been moved simply by a
spirit of insane devilry —I cannot say. . . .”
When he came to speak of his own brave and daring
deed in coming single-handed to our rescue, he was briefer
still, nor did he ever willingly refer to it afterwards.
He gave us to understand that it was the custom of the
pirates to celebrate the loot of a ship by a general debauch,
and after steaming away from La Belle there was a wilder
orgie even than usual. Contrary to his habit, Da Costa
himself indulged to excess, and allowed his officers to do


the same, the consequence being that all sense of discipline
was temporarily lost, and even the ordinary precautions of
navigation were neglected.
In the general confusion an idea occurred to the soul-
sickened priest.
“Could I not cut a boat adrift and escape in her? I
knew that your own boat would have been made useless,
but you might still be afloat —I might be in time. I was
in God’s hands—surely He would help me. Under cover
of the first shades of darkness I made the attempt The
watch—if watch they can be called—were lying on the
deck helplessly drunk. I hardly know how I launched the
boat —I had watched the operation several times, and
supplemented my slight knowledge of how to do it
properly by doing it improperly with a keen axe : where I
could not untackle I cut away. Clumsily as I did it, it
was done —the boat fell into the water, and I fell into the
boat. . . .
“No wind having sprung up since we left you, and a
straight course having been steered from you, I knew in
what direction to row, and after a time—a long time it
seemed to me, for I am not strong and soon found myself
getting exhausted —the twinkling of a light guided me to
you. Then the light disappeared, and I lost sight of you,
but rowed on. I heard your hails, and tried to answer
them. . . . God did help me, for I arrived in time.
And now I have faith to feel assured that He will help us
all. He is as near to us, we are as near to Him, in this


open boat at sea as though we were in church or home on
shore.”
“ Reverend guv’ner,” said William Seaward slowly, “ I
ain’t got nothing to say against your words, but words is
nothing alongside of acts, and I reckon you’ll never chuck
a finer sermon off your chest than you’ve preached
to-night in a -doing what you did—coming single-’anded to
our ’elp, and shutting for us all the door o’ Davy Jones’s
locker.”


CHAPTER XLII.
THE END OF JEREMY MURRICK.
O far the brave young clergy-
man had not recognised me,
but when, looking him in the
face, I asked him :
“ Don’t you remember me,
sir?”—he identified me at
once, and enquired, almost
with eagerness, how I had
fared since his ship and mine
parted company at Cape-
town. My replies were in-
terrupted by Jawkinson, who
addressed the stern-sheets in
a firm but respectful voice.
“ Me and my mates ’as somethink to say, and therefore
I says it. We’re still ready to obey orders and to do our
dooty, but there’s a dooty as did ought to be paid to us as
well as by us—and we claims it.”


“ Speak plainly, my man,” said Heckmann.
« Plain it is, sir. Well, then, there’s a cuss of a pirit
aboard this boat as you said was to be allowed on board
this boat so’s to give information and answer questions on
board this boat. But before he ’as a drop o’ water or a
bite o’ grub aboard this boat, we says, Ask him them
questions. That’s what we mean and that’s what we
says —ask him them questions now , sir, please.”
Murrick was cowering in the bows. He sullenly obeyed
the order to come aft, and sullenly answered the questions
put to him, keeping his eyes averted all the time from
the covered body of his victim. Much of the information
he was able to give was corroborated by Mr. Lane, who
had also spent several days on the island which the pirates
had made their lair.
His examination over, he slunk forward again.
Save for a hurried meal in the morning, we had not
broken our fast all day. Stores were broached for a first
meal on the drifting boat. The men’s portion was passed
to Jawkinson for distribution. He gave fairly to each his
share—save Murrick ; passed the filled pannikin of weak
grog to every one —save Murrick.
Wallace still lived. He seemed easier, and free from
pain now —and at intervals appeared to be conscious.
When I tried to make him a more comfortable pillow by
folding my pea jacket under his head, he pressed my
hand, and made a slight gesture of remonstrance.
Word was passed that those who would might sleep —-


the chief, Seaward, and myself would be responsible for
keeping a watch. Mr. Lane would fain have taken his
turn, but this of course we refused to allow.
“Before we snooze, sir,” said Jawkinson again, in his
sea-lawyer style, “ we wants to know, and therefore I put
the question, Have you done askin’ questions of the
swab what was allowed on this here boat in order to be
asked questions of? ”
I have finished with him,” replied Heckmann curtly.
“We ain’t. But very good—very good indeed, sir.”
We divided the night into three short watches. Seaward
took the first, and roused me at its close.
“ Anything to report ?”
“ Nothing.”
I uncovered the white face of Wallace Graham—he
appeared to be sleeping.
Slowly and wearily the time dragged on. Seaward had
timed his watch by the professor’s chronometer, handed to
him for the purpose, and by him handed on to me. I
must have consulted it half-a-dozen times before its
crawling hands told me that my watch, too, was up.
_ 1 touched Heckmann on the shoulder, and he roused
himself instantly.
Nothing to report, sir," I said, handing him the time-
keeper. “ Your watch will be a short one, for the sun will
be up in an hour and a half.”
Once in my sleep I thought I heard a noise, and drowsily
half-rose.


Was Graham worse ? No—for I heard his breathing.
I must have been mistaken —everything was quiet.
But when the brilliant dawn-light of the rising sun
touched my closed eyelids and I woke to the life of
another day, Jeremy Murrick was not in the boat !
“Seaward,” I cried, “you said that nothing happened
in your watch ? ”
“ Nothing did happen in my watch.”
“ And nothing in mine.”
“ Something may have happened in mine,’ said Heck-
mann calmly. “ Any thing may have happened in mine,
for I fell asleep.”
What do you know of this, Jawkinson ?”
“ He’s gome,” was the dogged reply. “ Jonah’s took his
’ook.”
“ Hubbard ? ”
“ He’s gone, sir;
“ Gone to de debble,” said the cook
“ He’s gone,” said the rest of the men, one after the
other.
“ He’s gone, sir,” squealed the cabin-boy.
“ It’s no good, Gleet,” urged Seaward, deprecating any
cross-examination. “It’s no use —they re all in it, and you 11
get nothing out o’ none of ’em. It’s perfectly clear what
they have done, and what they meant to do all along since
the old man would let the gone un find a seat amongst em
.—they gagged him and chucked him overside to the fishes
in the night : and if they hadn’t done it last night theyd


ha’ done it another. I didn’t have no hand in it, and I’m
glad now that I didn’t have no hand in it, but if I’m asked
honest what I think I say as I ain’t sorry that the job’s
over. Right or wrong, it’s not against the law of the sea
—though I don’t want to talk like Jawkinson —for honest
sailormen to refuse to share limited stores in a open boat
with a pirate, especial a pirate who took his part in
boarding and stripping and scuttling their own ship.”
Gagged and thrown overboard in the night—perhaps
thrown from the sleep of an hour into the sleep that
knows no waking! Sent by violent hands to his last
dreadful account with the load of his own unrepented sins
of violence and bloodshed heavy on his head—flung into
the greedy arms of death with no one by to pity him, or
to falter a prayer for his unwarned, unready, unshriven
soul!
So passed at last Jeremy Murrick from out of my life
for ever, as now he disappears from the chronicles of this
my story.


f \l
yfl ;■ 1 ~ I
£B9e -> •■ CSfcri?^ -■ *_i"-^l
CHAPTER XLIII
ALMOST THERE.
ALLACE GRAHAM
still lived. Professor Heck-
mann, with Mr. Lane close
at his side, had bared
again his wounded breast,
and was bending over it in
close and minute examina-
tion. There was a faint
gleam of hope, I thought,
in his eyes and in his voice
as he turned to me and
whispered :
“He has lasted longer
than I thought possible.
I'll risk the experiment
now, and try to extract the
ball—as he’s survived so long it’s only probable, and no
longer certain, that he’ll die under my hands.”
Amongst his cherished scientific instruments of all kinds


he had been careful to save from the yacht his surgical
case and medicine chest. He opened the former as he
spoke, and took out what he wanted.
Wallace fainted, but did not die, under the operation,
which was successfully accomplished, and the wound newly
dressed.
“ He may live for days now, or even longer,” said the
operator as he rose from his kneeling position.
Water and biscuits—the former very sparingly—were
served out, and then the hands were set to work to
rig up something in the shape of a mast and sail. A
spare oar served for the former and some sheeting that I
had snatched up with the blanket for Graham came in
usefully for the latter.
“ What course are we to lay ? ” I asked as the im-
provised sail was spread to the gentle breeze that had
sprung up at dawn.
“We’ll take an observation at noon,” answered Heck-
mann ; “ till then—keep her before the wind.”
“ We’d better overhaul our stores,” I suggested.
We made out that our water, on allowance, would
last us a week, and several days longer if eked out
with rum. Our food supply might be made to last us
about ten days. Two bottles of wine, and some pre-
served solid delicacies, such as, at that time, would not
have been found on any trading ship, I set aside from
the bulk of our provisions—l had bethought me of
carrying these off from the yacht at the last moment,


on the bare chance that Wallace Graham might live to
need them—or lest he should need them to live.
So far, he had lived to need them, and he certainly did
need them to live—not a drop or morsel of them entered
any lips but his.
We made out that to get back into the track of ships it
mattered little or nothing what point we steered for —one
direction was as likely as another to bring us within reach
of rescue. So we kept the boat before the freshening
Sou’-Westerly.
There were three of us who knew better than the rest
that it would probably be many days before we could
hope to sight a passing sail—Heckmann, Seaward, and
myself having satisfied ourselves that we could not now
be far from the original destination for which we had
started : the isolated spot of earth in a shipless sea which
the professor had chosen, or found, a score of years ago,
for the purposes of his dreadful “experiment.” I knew
that his own first hope was of catching a view of his
island, not of a ship.
Soon after sundown Mr. Lane suggested that we should
all join in a few words of prayer. Heckmann readily
acquiesced, and bared his head as the clergyman raised
his voice in a brief thanksgiving and petition, though the
gesture struck me as being inspired by no higher motive
or feeling than courtesy.
The night passed uneventfully away, but excitement
came with the dawn, for a tiny island lay straight across


our bows —a vision of green palms and scarlet foliage
above a yellow beach, all glittering in the quivering
light ; a blaze of beauty and of colour, a living picture
framed with the sea’s bright blue.
We were near enough to be able to observe the con-
formation of the shore, and I turned to the chief with a
look of eager enquiry. His eyes were flashing, and a
spot of colour had mounted to each cheek ; but he shook
his head.
The next moment, however, he stretched his right hand
several points to the south of the islet, and said in a low
voice:
“ Not here, but there —not more than forty miles away.
Unless I am grievously mistaken, this is my landmark.”
Then in louder tones he cried:
“ Run her in head on.”
“’Ware savages!” cried Jawkinson cautiously.
“ There are none. Run her in.”
But the cry of “’ware savages” was taken up, and the
boat rowed completely round the circuit of the land (a
keen look-out being kept for any sign of inhabitants)
before she was beached.
I lifted Graham in my arms and carried him up beyond
the shingle, and laid him in the shadow of a towering
palm.
From any one point to another the islet was barely of
the measurement of a mile ; it was soon explored from
end to end. Birds, hoarse of voice but brilliant in


plumage, seemed its only sentient inhabitants. Luscious
fruits grew in abundance, and a streamlet of cold, sweet,
delicious water gurgled down the side of a flower-spangled
hill which sloped from the centre to the western extremity.
We ate ; we drank ; we were refreshed —the cooling juices
which I squeezed into the mouth of Wallace Graham
soothed his feverishness while they allayed his thirst. I
began to have hope that the hand of death might be
removed from him after all.
Heckmann’s identification of the isle was a “sure and
certain ” one.
“ I landed here, and thought to make the place the
home of my two subjects. But I decided that it might
not be large enough in the years to come, and I sailed
away there ” —pointing in the direction he had indicated
before. “We can fetch the island the island I hit
upon—without a single change of course. This wind
won’t serve us —the boat would beat too far to leeward
—but with the oars banked we can reach it to-night.
Get the men together, and let us start.”
I thought it necessary to calm his enthusiasm. He had
left two “subjects” behind him —but what might be the
number of the family on the island now, and what sort of
a reception might they give us? Landing from a well-
fitted yacht, and well-armed, would have been a very
different thing from arriving in an open boat, and prac-
tically without arms —for the pirates had left us almost
weaponless, and we only boasted one useless, one


doubtful, and one irreproachable pistol between the whole
of us.
I urged that the circumstances called for the exercise of
the utmost caution in approaching the island. Seaward
backed me up —he went further than I, for he opposed
the projected visit altogether. But the force of the chiefs
rejoinder to this opposition he was compelled to admit.
“ Granted that we face a problematical danger in pro-
ceeding to our original destination in present circumstances,
we are in much greater danger if we don’t go. Our food
will soon give out: on the island there will be an abund-
ance. Against the chance of our falling in with a ship
before starvation has killed the last survivor, there is the
quite equal chance of our not so falling in with a ship—on
the island we could all live for the term of our natural
lives.”
“ Which ain’t such a out-o’-the-way pleasing prospect,”
commented Seaward.
“Granted. If you prefer to stay behind, do so.”
“ Where ? ”
“ Here—eating fruit till you die of cholera, for how are
you going to get anything else? But if you like to take
another calculation into consideration, here it is. As we
are, you know how long the boat would be likely to sur-
vive the first change of weather from fair to foul—at the
island I am going to take her to we can make her more
seaworthy for months as well as provision her properly
for weeks—whatever may have happened, the tools and


implements of all kinds that I left behind me can’t have
run away, and the place must be swarming with game
and other live stock. Refitted and re-victualled, when we
leave the island we shall have ten times, a hundred times,
the chance that we have drifting about now.”
“ I say that, considering how we’re all placed, the others
have a right to be took into account. If they’re agreeable
to go, I’ve got nothing more to say against going.”
“ Call them,” said Heckmann sharply.
In a few concisely worded sentences he went over the
main points of his remarks to Seaward and myself.
“Tell ’em about the unnateral savidges as may be
a-waiting to receive us,” insisted the former.
“ Seaward wants me to warn you that the island may
be peopled with some strange inhabitants who may quite
conceivably offer some form of violence. Mr. Gleet has
suggested that we approach with caution —as of course we
will do.”
The decision in favour of the chiefs own determination
was immediate and unanimous. The sun was now blazing
fiercely —we were to wait where we were till it sunk below
the horizon, and row leisurely through the cooler night for
the larger island —all being well, to land on it next day.


CHAPTER XLIV.
THERE!
OON after sundown we re-
embarked. The men were
in high spirits at the imme-
diate prospect before them—
a sailor never looks much
further—and the rowers bent
their strong backs with a will,
and joined in the jokes and
laughter of the others. Pres-
ently the cook struck up a
nigger ditty, and the chorus
was taken up delightedly and
roared out boisterously. No one seemed disposed to take
his spell of sleep. • For Graham’s sake I would have
quieted the merriment, but with a reassuring smile he
whispered me not to interfere.
The rowers rested every hour, turn and turn about.
The night grew dark —very dark—but the sea remained
comparatively smooth.


Hour after hour passed away.
“ You’ve kep’ her course, you think ? ” asked Seaward.
“ Aye, aye,” I answered. “ I had the stars to steer by
when we got under way, and I’ve not lost my bearings
since.”
“ What’s the time ? ”
“ Time for another shift—pass the word. One more
shift, and we ought to ease up till daylight.”
He passed the word. As the hands changed thwarts,
one of them cried excitedly :
“ Light ahead ! What’s that light in the sky yonder,
sir ?”
A dull red flare shone in the black distance—how far off
it was impossible to estimate.
“It’s a ship on fire,” exclaimed Jawkinson. “Row,
hearties, row! ”
“ Easy, all ! ” ordered I. “ Lay on your oars.”
The thought had struck me that the light might be
meteoric ; but it wasn’t, for still it burned without move-
ment.
“ It’s a ship aflame,” said Jawkinson again.
“ No, it isn’t,” declared Seaward. “ There’s too much
fire in the sky and not enough on the water line for
that.”
I turned to Heckmann.
“ Whatever that light is, sir, according to my reckoning
it’s burning on your island, ten miles away.”
“ If it is on land at all, it is on the island,” he agreed;


“for no land lies within hundreds of miles of it excepting
the strip we have been rowing from.”
“Then it must be a beacon signal from the island,” I
hazarded.
“ If so be as it is, them poor afflicted critters o’ yours,
sir,” said Seaward to the chief, “ must know how to build
up a spanking big bonfire.”
“Lay on, my lads,” I cried—“ lay on:” and again the
boat forged ahead.
I had never known Heckmann to betray such agitation
as now he manifested as with every sweep of four rapidly
plied oars we lessened the distance length by length
between ourselves and the far-away illumination. Presently
he buried his head in his hands.
And I thought then, and have believed ever since, that
when he did so the knowledge had come to him that came
to us all by-and-bye—that a conviction of the truth had
flashed upon his mind —that he knew the cause of the
light that now we saw a little nearer, and which shone a
little more brightly, and filled a larger space in the
darkness.
Again I eased up the boat.
“ Can you make anything more of it, Seaward ?
No only that it don’t seem so steady : seems to have
a sort of a shake in it now.”
I kept my eyes fixed ahead, and observed the phe-
nomenon of which he spoke. As I uncovered the lantern
I had temporarily doused, I saw that the professor had


lifted his head from his hands, and was also taking stock
of the unsteadier flare of the fire.
His face had paled, and there was a look I should find
it difficult to describe in his gleaming black eyes.
“ Row, all ” —and once more we proceeded, but more
slowly, till another mile or two had been covered.
Suddenly exclamations of alarm, dismay, and affright
broke out from all over the boat. Drops were falling
on our hands and faces, falling fast and thick
liquid drops —drops of rain, but rain that stung and
scorched.
With threatening visage and clenched fist, Seaward
turned on the pale and silent scientist, as he had turned
once before.
“ A curse on you and your island too! he cried.
“ We’re in a rain of fire. It’s the fire that burnt up them
wicked places in the Bible, and it s falling on us all because
of you. We’d better ha’ drowneded where we was than to
be drifting alive into perdition like this. I told you you dbe
called to judgment by Him you don’t believe in and the
judgment’s come. It begun with the loss o your fine
yacht, and it’ll end in flames and torment—and we’ve all
rfot to share in ’em. A curse on you and your De\ils
o
Experiment! ”
It was no time and no place in which to answer the
excited enquiries—in which I heard Mr. Lane’s voice
joining—as to what Seaward meant by this tirade—as to
what the professor had done to draw upon himself the


vengeance of a fate in which we were all involved. The
fire-drops were pattering upon us faster and hotter.
“ Hold her, bow oars,” I shouted. “ Round with her,
strokes. Back water, bows ! ”
As rapidly as strong arms could pull her the boat
travelled back out of the scalding shower. But it seemed
to pursue us —at first the drops fell as fast as before, and
when, gradually escaping from the zone of the downpour,
we found that no more were falling upon us, the rowers
were panting at their oars.


i| JHKl ' ' j-j
■S?' ■
CHAPTER XLV.
ALONE ON THE BURNING ISLAND.
T the dawn we pulled close
in to the shore.
The island was on Fire !
From three conical-
shaped hills from tops
and sides issued white
smoke and red flame.
Streams of fire—of liquid
lava rolled down upon
the table-lands beneath.
High above the green
verdure and rich - hued
foliage of which we had heard —feet above the fair
face of this new Garden of Eden —were piled heaps of
scoriae, heaps of ashes and cinders; irregularly-shaped
stones, belched from the burning craters.
Almost in silence we rowed round the desolated
spot.
All that had been beautiful on it, all that had been living


on it—all forms of vegetable existence, animal existence,
it may be human existence—were buried out of sight for
ever. Here no blade of grass would ever grow again nor
flower bloom—no living thing would ever again here
creep, or run, or fly, or breathe. The heel of Death had
crushed, not bruised, the head of Life.
And when the red mouths were closed which had
vomited the hot destruction of which this wilderness of
cold ashes told the story—what would happen then ?
As these ashes had covered all the island’s teeming life,
so would they in their turn be covered by the waters of the
sea. In slow but ceaseless action, the waves would fret
away the shrinking earth till all that remained of it would
lie deep below their surface.
It was easy to understand now our experiences of the
previous night—the light of the volcanic fires had been
visible miles away, and the clouds which had broken over
our heads had been heated by passing directly above the
flaming hill-tops.
I did not care to look at Heckmann—l do not think that
I would, if I could, have stifled the feelings of pity for him
that were rising in my heart.
This, then, was the end of his costly pains, his long years
of waiting. He had re-travelled half the world, dared
danger and faced disaster, to find all his hopes of attaining
the knowledge in quest of which he had sacrificed so much
buried with the bones of his “ subjects his victims, if
you will, for such in truth had they been.


He had stretched out his hand to eat of the fruit of the
forbidden tree —and only ashes filled his mouth.
So sinned our first parents : and the door of their Para-
dise, shut in punishment behind their cowering forms, was
closed to all their fallen race for evermore.
All that we may know let all try to learn : let no man
seek to bar the gate of unforbidden knowledge or block
the road that leads to it, for God left that gate open and
built no toll-houses on that road. But woe is his portion
who vainly seeks to climb, or trample down, the barrier
that Omniscient Wisdom in Omniscient Benevolence
has set to human ken. The limits of the fertile fields of
knowledge where all are free to roam are wide apart, the
fields so broad that vast tracks remain untrodden and
unsought: but the limits are laid down, and woe is his lot
who would trespass beyond them.
With his eyes fixed on the scene of devastation
“So this is the end ! ” murmured the baffled scientist
bitterly.
He caught the look on my face, and interjected a sharp :
“ Well ? ”
“ This is Nature’s protest against an unnatural experi
ment, sir,” I said firmly.
From some of the now silent bo’-sun’s excited obser-
vations of a few hours before, Mr. Lane had learnt the
truth.
“Say rather,” he put in, “that it is God’s frustration of
an impious one,”


“In what has happened,” said Heckmann, “there is
nothing either unnatural or supernatural—you both speak
as though there were. That this island was volcanic I did
not suspect —had I made a deeper study of geology I
should probably have known it. I thought it out of the
true volcanic range—and I believe it is, but if so it is only
an interesting case of, so to speak, independent, or eccentric,
volcanic energy. To speak of ‘ Nature’s protest,’” he con-
tinued contemptuously, “is as absurd as to talk of ‘ God’s
frustration.’ The phenomenon has nothing whatever to do
with either poetry or theology—it is purely a matter that
concerns geology. I should judge that these fires have
been burning for some years, and that they may continue
burning for as many more ; but on both points I shall be
better able to form an opinion after I have made my
observations. lam going ashore.”
“ No, sir,” I urged, “ don’t do that ” —and when his inten-
tion was known every one—down to the cabin boy—joined
in my protest. “ How many steps could you take on that
island,” I demanded, “without being in danger of stepping
literally into your grave ? ”
“None,” he replied. “But that is no reason why I
should not attempt the investigation I avi going to
attempt.”
V\ e were now off the beach on the southern side, where
the craters seemed to be extinct—but if so, how long had
their fires been extinguished ? Or had the flow of the lava
only been diverted ?


He pointed to a headland some sixty cables’ length
down the coast.
“ Behind that point,” he said, “is a hidden cove into
which I think I can find my way from memory, and where,
to all appearance, the boat will be safe. Out oars, there
row slowly, and I’ll steer myself.”
A few words had already passed between Mr. Lane,
Seaward, and myself, and now, touching each of them
lightly as I spoke, I said :
“If you will land, Professor Heckmann, we’ll land with
you.”
But to this nothing would persuade him to agree. He
even put it that his own peril would be increased, not
lessened, by the company of others. He minimised the
danger to which he was exposing himself.
“ I shall make no attempt to penetrate to the other side
—that’s where the danger is. It was on this side that we
built a hut and store-house. I shall ascertain whether it
is feasible to excavate for any traces of them—make a few
mental notes—and come back. From the cove”—by this
time we were entering it—“you will be able to watch me
all the while.”
He would go, and he would go alone : and alone he
went.
Grasping the boat’s hitcher as one holds an alpenstock,
he stepped overside on to the cinders and ashes that lay
thick on the ground to the water’s edge. They were cold
and hard, and he stepped resolutely forward.’


*
CHAPTER XLVI.
AN INTERRUPTED NARRATIVE.
E held on his way, we watch-
ing him, and presently I left
the boat and began to follow
him, far behind. Sometimes
he hesitated, and seemed to
extricate his feet from the
scoriae with difficulty. He
moved more cautiously, and
probed the uneven way with
his iron-pointed boat-hook.
Once or twice I noticed that
he found it hard to withdraw
it. I found, too, that the ashes on which I was treading,
though they bore me still, crumbled beneath my feet.
I ascended a mound of stones and pumice, and halted
there, with my face inland.
As far as my eyes could reach in any direction, nothing
met their gaze but the monotonous spread of cinders, ashes,
stones, hurled-up rocks—rocks in a sea of dead lava.


Two of the three crater-crowned hills had been thrown
up, as nearly as I could judge, almost in the centre of the
island : the third was considerably closer to the southern
shore. To this nearest height Heckmann was now pushing
on as fast as the difficulties of the way permitted him.
Just as he reached it, I was made aware of a sudden
change in the wind by the fact that the white smoke from
near the summits and from the sides of the craters on their
northern face came crawling round, hiding him for a time
from my view. Presently the volume of smoke lifted and
grew thinner as the increasing wind dispersed it ; and I
saw him again, half-way up the crater. He was bending
down as though making an examination of the deposit.
I felt almost choked, for the fumes of sulphur from the
smoke had reached my nostrils ; but I raised my voice and
shouted to him as loudly as I could, for although, as I
have said, the volcanoes appeared to be inactive on this
side of the island, it seemed to me that he was approach-
ing a position of imminent peril.
With the breeze almost in my teeth I had not thought
my shouted hail would have reached so far, but he heard
it, and rose upright, and faced round.
At the same moment of time, I was conscious of an
extraordinary change in the atmosphere: not a breath
stirred it, yet the air seemed charged with something
heavy. In just such states of the atmosphere—frequently,
more particularly in the tropics, immediately preceding
some violent convulsion of the elements—you can, at sea


on one ship almost hear a pin fall on the deck of another a
mile away.
I distinctly heard Seaward and Jawkinson talking on
the boat.
“ Something’s coming,” said the former. “ Sure
enough,” agreed the latter—“the wind didn’t drop dead
like that for nothing” : proving that they too felt the dis-
turbing influence with which the air was charged. Almost
as distinctly I heard the voice of Heckmann replying to
me. It seemed that to vision as well as to hearing the
true sense or proportions of distance had become lost, for
I saw him as clearly as though we had been standing close
together: I seemed to be looking into his very eyes.
But I was looking at him, I was hearing his voice, for
the last time.
A blackness came between us—was it smoke that rose
or cloud that fell ?—an irregular shape of blackness about
the uneven fringes of which played zig-zag forks of
lightning.
Was the earth reeling that I felt the solid ground shake
beneath the ashes on which I stood ?
With a noise that sounded in my ears like the crack of
doom, as the lightning-begirt black shroud whirled high
above its head, the solid side of the hill split open ; sul-
phurous fumes of smoke belched from the fissure, laden
with a choking, blinding plague of minute particles of
matter.
\\ ith a roar that subsided to a hiss, the imprisoned lava


burst from the chasm-riven crater. It poured in an
avalanche of living fire down the hillside, now a seething
bubbling cauldron.
Where was Heckmann ? Who was there to help him ?
. . . to pull him from the fiery tomb into which he had
walked ? . . .
I remember that as I ran I was covered from head to
foot with a fine, almost impalpable powder, a dust that
closed the pores of my skin wherever it touched it. I
remember that dust and fumes and smoke were choking
me. I remember that the ground grew hot and hotter and
hotter beneath my feet, until the flesh of my soles was
burning. I remember that my feet sank into what they
trod on, and that something hotter than live coals was
eating into my ankles. I remember that something hard
and heavy hurtled through the air and struck me on the
head.
But I remember nothing more until
[Wallace Graham, who was physically unable to keep us
company, pluckily tried to do so, falling helpless to the
earth after a few paces, in his endeavour to take part in the
rescue of Younge Gleet, who had himself made so despe-
rately brave an attempt to rescue Professor Heckmann
from his hopeless fate. By the help of Almighty God, we
saved Younge Gleet alive, and carried him to the boat,
senseless and in a terrible condition. No attempt was
made to recover the body of Professor Heckmann, which


—j ~ • >
,•'■ ■ - ■ JPV, - f£ *Sl-5* ♦ '- :: * - |r <Jgsjy8i^^^^fe«8
.— HI m< ~i" —- - m
. -/' J!pi
y*' '•"
.5*1
'ilf * '-. • ;>'’■ •■^l|
■ jBwP** bs “ ss '.-‘
*>•■ -t ... s V
.
I - ■/^'| : - kry'*>-£
8895
I was looking at him, I was hearing his voice, for the last time.—/. 297,




was nowhere visible. His awful end must have been so
sudden as to have left no time for pain—no moment of
consciousness.
We embarked and put off at once, intending to make
for the smaller island we had explored the day before.
But a storm arose and drove us far out to sea. Several
times during the next few days we were nearly swamped.
Our oars were carried away. Two of the hands were
washed overboard. Discipline was lost. What little
remained of our water was bilged and undrinkable. Raw
rum maddened those who drank it. In a state of frenzy
the black knifed one of his mates, himself dying soon after-
wards in delirium. Wallace Graham devoted himself to
Younge Gleet, who had never recovered consciousness, and
now looked more likely to die than himself. We are
unable to state how many days we drifted before—at last
in mortal extremity—we were picked up by Her Majesty’s
frigate Indomitable , at the hands of whose captain, officers,
and crew we received treatment to which, under God, with
every one of our companions in misfortune, we owe our
lives.
Archibald Clement Lane,
Signed - Clerk in Holy Orders.
William Gull Seaward, Mariner.]
. . . I saw dimly, bending over me, the face of a man
of towering height. Gold lace and gold buttons gleamed
—dazzlingly, to my blurred vision—upon his coat of blue,


302 THE SON OF A HUNDRED FATHERS.
and a shining epaulette was on each broad shoulder. The
eyes in the strong face were very kind and tender eyes,
and the firm voice that was exhorting me to keep my
pecker up was a very kind and tender voice.


■
CHAPTER XLVII
ON BOARD
H.M.S.
“INDOMITABLE
HAT a long way back in my
brief life-history did the sound
of that strong, soft voice carry
me—a voice strong with the
strength of manhood, soft as
with the gentleness of woman-
hood : the voice that had
spoken to me before my baby
ears could understand or my
baby lips make answer. Back
to the days when I heard
that voice in the schoolhouse
and play-ground it took me ;
and for the present it must
have left me there, or how
else could I have addressed the decorated captain of Her
Majesty’s ship Indomitable as I did address him ?
“ Eaglebeak !” I exclaimed—l thought I was shouting,
but I was too feeble for anything louder than a whisper—


3 04 THE SON OF A HUNDRED FATHERS.
“ Eaglebeak ! What’s up, Eaglebeak ? Where am I ?
What has . .
“ Shut up! You mustn’t talk till the doctor has over-
hauled you. I’ll have him down to you in a jiffey. Lie
quite still. Don’t excite yourself, and don’t wag your
tongue, I tell you ” —as I was about to speak again. “ But
keep your pecker up.”
For a minute or two he left me by myself; when he
returned he brought with him a fat, fussy, red-faced little
man whose appearance instantly suggested to me the idea
of a turkeycock in the pride of his prime.
The turkeycock—l soon found that this was Dr. Strutt’s
popular nick-name on board—took me in hand at once.
His “overhauling” of me was rapid but by no means
careless.
“ Well?”
“ He’ll do, Captain Fallow, he’ll do. Feed him up, sir,
feed him up—gradually, cautiously, but feed him up.
Slops to-day, slops and solids to-morrow, solids the day
after; then feed him high, sir, feed him high.”
‘ May I talk, doctor ? ”
“ Certainly.”
I looked enquiringly at Captain “ Eaglebeak,” who at
once withdrew his injunction of silence.
“Fire away, my lad. First, I suppose, you want to
know where you are and how you came here ? ”
“Where are the others?” I enquired. “Is Wallace
Graham alive? How are Mr. Lane and William
Seaward ? ”


“All three alive, Younge, and all three aboard, with all
the other survivors of your boat’s crew.”
All that there was to tell me (save for one startling"
' o
communication) was soon told—what there was for me to
tell was told later on.
\\ hen can I see them—Graham—Mr. Lane—and
Seaward ? ” I asked.
“To-morrow,” said the surgeon; “that is, if Graham’s
well enough.”
“ Is he still in danger, then, sir ? ”
“He s weak. He’d been starved, of course, like the rest
of you, but I’m told that he starved himself of what he
might have had, and now it’s telling on him badly. So far,
I’ve confined him strictly to his bunk—to-morrow will be
his first day up.”
“ one more question—how long have I been lying here
unconscious ? ”
Partly unconscious—quite unconscious at times,” cor-
rected the doctor.
“You have been aboard my ship three days,” said
Captain Fallow.
Dr, Strutt paid me an early visit next morning, but
would not allow me to get up and dress till later in the
day. I found myself very wobbly on the pins, and the
operation of getting into my clothes—now about two sizes
too large for me—proved a slow and rather difficult one.
I had been allotted a small cabin to myself, and was not
allowed to leave it that day. The young clergyman,


Graham, and Seaward were escorted to the door by a
marine.
They looked weak and pale, Graham particularly so—
but, for the matter of that, no doubt I looked weak and
pale also.
The next two days, however, witnessed this difference in
our respective conditions —Lane, Seaward, and I improved,
so to speak, by leaps and bounds : Wallace Graham did
not improve at all.
During my promenades of the decks I saw frequently,
sometimes in the company of the officers of the frigate and
sometimes by himself, a striking-looking man whose
position on board I could not make out. It was scarcely
likely that a Queen’s ship on special service would be
carrying a passenger, but as he wore no uniform—though
he bore himself with the air of a man accustomed to wear
one who could he be but a passenger? Once or twice I
heard him speak, and detected in his voice a ring of
authority in keeping with his general bearing and manner,
which were those of a man used to command and unused
to disobedience.
On the third day I received an invitation, or a
summons, to the captain’s cabin. Seated with the com-
mander of the frigate I found this distinguished-looking
stranger.
“ Well, Younge, my lad, getting quite strong again, eh ?
Sit you down : ” was the former’s genial greeting as the
door closed behind me.


“Thank you, sir,” I replied. “Yes, I’m picking up
splendidly.”
“You’re quite fit for a long talk, and to hear some
rather exciting news ? ”
“ Fit for anything, sir.
“Scarcely that yet, though you soon will be. You’re
keeping your pecker up well. But let’s get under way.
\ou know that the frigate is on special service, but you
don’t know on what special service ? ”
“ That is so, captain.”
“I’m going to tell you. You’ll be interested to know
that it has the closest possible connection with some old
friends of yours.”
“Some old friends of mine, sir ? ”
“ Well, it would be more correct to call them recent
ones. To come to the point at once, my mission in these
seas is to find, and capture or blow into smithereens, the
pirate Da Costa and his horde of outlaws—and I’m going
to do it. Now I want —if you’ll excuse the word—to
cross-examine you, in the presence of this gentleman, on
the subject of the information which you and two of your
companions . .
\ ou mean Air. Lane and Seaward, sir?”
\es on the subject of the information which you and
the) have given me about the gang from your personal
experiences with them ; and perhaps in the course of our
talk I may hear something more from you than I have
heard yet.”


My heart seemed to leap within me at what I had just
heard. The Indomitable— and under the command of such
a man—on the track of the nameless brig and her name-
lessly vile captain and crew! This was good news indeed.
It was to be the hawk’s turn now to be chased and
swooped upon.
I eagerly expressed the delight I should feel if anything
I could say would be of any avail.
“ But, sir,” I ventured to add, with a slight glance at the
captain’s stern-faced companion, “as you have told me to
speak in the presence of this gentleman, may I be so bold
as to ask who this gentleman is ? ”
“ For certain reasons which I need not go into, the
authorities, partly in view of certain contingencies which
may arise, and partly because of other considerations,
thought it well that a representative of the civil power
should accompany this expedition in an official capacity.
This gentleman was selected for special reasons —Sir
George Brock, Governor of the Penal Settlement of
Tasmania.”
I remembered Wallace Graham’s statement that he had
tried to bring his knowledge to the ken and heed of the
authorities —it looked as though he had been more
successful than he had thought.
I bowed respectfully, and Sir George acknowledged my
salute —distantly but quite courteously.
Then together they took me over all the ground
occupied by my experiences of the pirates. By-and-bye,


at my suggestion, Mr. Lane and Seaward were sent
for.
“ Seaward knows at least all that I know, and Mr. Lane
knows more than either of us,” I said, “ for he has been on
both their ship and their island.”
“ I think we have already heard from him all that he can
tell us,” said Captain Fallow; but my suggestion was
acted upon, and the consultation, if such it can be called,
was continued between five instead of three consultants.
It was about to close when a most unfortunate idea
occurred to Sir George Brock.
Pointing to Seaward :
“ The vague and hazy knowledge—amounting to little
more than suspicion, in fact—possessed beforehand by this
man, Captain Fallow,” he said, “we have heard was
subsequently confirmed and amplified by a stowaway on
board the yacht on which he was serving. Where is this
stowaway ? Was he rescued with the rest of you, when
the frigate picked up your boat, Mr. Cleet ? ”
"He was, Sir George,” I faltered. I felt what was
coming.
Then he is on board now. How did he know what he
knew? I want to get to the bottom of this—will you be
good enough to have him brought below to us at once,
Captain Fallow ? ”
In another minute poor Wallace Graham stood in the
cabin face to face with the Governor of the Penal Settle-
ment from which he had made his escape.


CHAPTER XLVIII
AT LAST!
E recognition of each by
the other was instant and
positive: the short white
hair that had grown on
the convict’s lip and chin
and wasted cheeks being
an all ineffectual disguise.
The readiness of the
mutual identification was
proof enough that they
had not previously seen
each other on board —had
they so met before they
must have recognised each
other then as they did
now.
Graham’s pale cheek
turned ashen in its pallor. His limbs trembled under the
slight weight of his frail body—his shaking hands reached


blindly out in front of him as though they groped for
something to seize and hold on by. I thought he was
about to fall. But—probably by an effort the intensity of
which none could have gauged—he suddenly recovered
himself.
White he was still, but his legs no longer trembled, his
hands no longer shook. He folded them across his breast,
drew himself to his full height, threw back his head, looked
the Governor straight in the face with eyes that didn’t
flinch, though the defiance in them appeared to me to be
the defiance of despair—and waited.
We all waited. All felt that something was coming—
we waited for it in absolute silence—a silence soon broken
by the hard voice of Sir George Brock.
“You are Wallace Graham.”
“ I am known as Wallace Graham.”
“Convict number”—he thought for a moment —“3,913.”
Graham slightly bowed his head in assent.
“You were convicted in London in 182— on a charge of
forgery, and sentenced to transportation over seas for life.”
“ I was.”
We were soon to know what occasion the Governor had
had for posting himself up in all the details of 3,913’s
case.
“ Between two and three months ago you effected your
escape from . . .”
“Sir, why go over these details like this? I am
Wallace Graham—escaped convict number 3,913 —dying.


Let what I have admitted suffice. I thought to die a free
man—now I shall die in bondage and in chains. There
are cells and chains on board this ship—cells, chains, and
an escaped convict. What are you waiting for, Sir George
Brock ? ”
“ For you to keep silence, sir,” was the sharp retort.
“You have a friend—now Lord Carstairs, and a member
of the Cabinet—who always protested his faith in your
innocence, and who never ceased in his endeavours to
hunt up evidence to prove it. That much I know inde-
pendently of the facts I am about to disclose to you.
Those facts, in brief, are as follows. Twelve months ago
he succeeded at last in getting such fresh evidence as
enabled him to obtain—virtually to demand—what he had
persistently applied for before in vain—the re-opening and
re-consideration of your case, with the result that it was
clearly demonstrated that a grave miscarriage of justice
had occurred in your conviction. In accordance with the
usual procedure in such exceptional cases, Her Majesty
was advised to the exercise of her prerogative of pardon.
Prior to the date of your escape—for which you are
certain, in the circumstances, not to be dealt with—that
prerogative had been exerted, though the document known
as the Queen’s Pardon, with orders to me immediately and
unconditionally to release you, did not reach my hands till
six weeks ago. The document you can claim at Hobart
Town—my orders I execute here and now. Wallace
Graham, you are free.”


And Sir George Brock—l liked him all the better for it
—held out his hand in congratulation.
“Look out,” cried Captain Fallow in quick warning—
“ look out, the man’s fainting—he’s dying ! ”
They were my arms that caught him as he fell, my ears,
bent low down to his quivering lips, that heard his ecstatic
whispers.
“The Queen’s Pardon—free, free, a free man—innocent
—proved, proved, proved innocent in face of all the world.
Thank God, thank God, thank God ! At last, at last! ”
As I laid him gently down a spasm shook his body.
He thrust one hand into his breast, and with the other he
clutched at his throat as though he were stifling.
The shadows that darkened his face as he reeled into my
arms on the deck of La Belle , the shot in his bosom that
had been aimed at mine—the shadows that for a time we
had chased away—were gathering fast around his head
again now—the shadows of the black wings of the Angel
o o
of Death.
“ Quick, quick !” I cried. “ For God’s sake, where is the
doctor? ”
He entered the cabin as I spoke, and took my place
by the side of the dying man.
The violence of the sudden shock—the shock of the joy
that had come “ at last ” —had re-opened the old wound—
the wound that he had received for me. It was meet that
he should die where he did die—in my arms. I thank
God that he died where he did die—in my arms. There


was nothing that could be done to save him—there was no
hope.
After a r time we were left alone together, but a few
minutes before the end came I sent for Mr. Lane, who
held one of the poor shivering hands in his as he knelt
and offered up the prayers of the Church for the parting
soul. I held the other close-pressed between my own.
“Graham,” I asked in an earnest whisper, “have you no
wishes that I can carry out for you—no messages that I
can take for you? Is there no one who loves you to
whom I can bear your last words? Have you no friends?
Who are you, Graham ? ”
His lips moved. More from their movement than from
the murmuring sound that came from between them I
understood what he was trying to say.
“Go to Lord Carstairs. /am
His lips ceased to move. His right hand slipped from
the touch of the praying priest. I opened my arms,
and his head fell upon my heart.
“ Unto God's gracious mercy and protection we commit
thee. The Lord bless thee and keep thee. The Lord make
His Face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee. The
Lord lift up His Countenance upon thee , and give thee peace,
both now and evermore .”
I wiped the thickening damp from his temples. His
glazing eyes opened, and he looked at me.
“ We humbly commend the soul of this Thy servant, our
dear brother, into Thy Hands, as into the Hands of a


faithful Creator and most merciful Saviour; most humbly
beseeching Thee that it may be precious in Thy sight.”
A candle flickers as it burns out —a light spread over
Wallace Graham’s face, and a smile played about his lips,
as with his last breath he repeated—but surely with a
double meaning now:
“Free! Free at last!”


Bp-_ . isrSr
CHAPTER XLIX
“ COMMITTED TO THE DEEP.”
BURIAL at sea !
I have read many des-
criptions of this most
impressive of all cere-
monies, but never one that
—to my thinking con-
veyed the sense, the
feeling, inspired by the
ceremony itself. What
pens so much more elo-
quent have failed to do
my pen may well be ex-
cused from attempting at
any length.
The body of poor
Wallace Graham was committed to the deep the next day.
The function was characterised by every mark of respect
that it was in the power of the commander of the frigate to
render. The ship’s chaplain, fully robed, was assisted in


the profoundly moving service by Mr, Lane. Captain
Fallow was surrounded by a group of his officers—blue-
jackets and marines were drawn up in silent ranks.
At the awe-inspiring words, “ We therefore commit his
body to the deep,” the Union Jack was lifted from the
shrouded form, which the next moment sunk from sight
for ever—the blue waves of the Pacific covered all that
was mortal of ... of whom ?
Who zvas this man ?
“Go to Lord Carstairs,” he had said. With almost his
dying breath he had added :
“lam . . .”
And then—save for that last joyous cry of “ Free—Free
at last! ” —he had spoken nevermore.
“Whoever he was, he died for me ;he died for me I
thought with a dry sob, as, leaning overside, I watched the
breaking of the bubbles that had risen in the calm water
after that dull, dreadful splash as the weighted body
cleaved it.
And he had died for me—the wound that opened the
fountains of his life on the deck of La Belle had killed him
after all.
Captain Fallow touched me on the shoulder. I wish I
had written that “ Eaglebeak ’’—dear old Eaglebeak—had
laid his hand upon me, for there was nothing of the
hauteur of the naval officer in his voice and manner as he
spoke to me, but only the unaffected sympathy of a friend,
an elder brother—a “father.” Of course he knew all.


The ceremony was over, the decks had resumed their
wonted appearance—but I had remained gazing down into
the water still.
“ Poor fellow ! ” said Eaglebeak. “ The best years of his
life spent in cruel and unmerited punishment—punishment
for an uncommitted crime—and then to die in the first
flush of the happiness of his legal release—poor fellow !
Whoever he was, Younge, he was a brave man and a
gentleman, and as such I have tried to honour his memory
o 1
in the manner of his burial from my ship to-day.”


— -- n - >
CHAPTER L.
AT BAY!
anything could have
chased away from my mind
the gloom of my thoughts,
the contemplation of the
swift happenings that were
now close at hand would
have done it. For Eagle-
beak proceeded to explain
that he hoped, and expected,,
to sight the pirates’ strong-
hold at sun-up of the next
day.
“ I’m disappointed to be driven to the conclusion,” he
said, “that their brig has given me the slip—by this time
she’s probably made Hobart Town in disguise, or some other
port where the presentation of that draft for twenty-five
thousand pounds at Hobart can be safely arranged for with
Da Costa’s confederates—the ramifications of his business.


are unprecedented in all the long history of his hideous
trade. I wish I could have smashed the whole band up at
one go, but if I’m right in my conjecture that we shan’t
find the brig in the neighbourhood of the island, I shall
make short work of the latter, and then lay out to catch
the brig on her return. If those on the island surrender,
of course I’m bound to accept their submission, but if they
show fight my instructions permit me to blow every stick
they’ve set up about their ears. Similarly with their
steamer —if she strikes, I must take her in tow as a prize,
but if she doesn’t strike at the first demand I smash at her
till she sinks.”
“ We’re in for some warm work,” I remarked —and I
think my eyes were glistening.
“ You’re not a combatant,” said Eaglebeak quickly.
“ I may be,” I thought hopefully, but I didn’t say any-
thing.
“And even if you were,” he went on, “you’re not in
fighting trim yet by a long way.”
I had my own ideas about this too, but I still remained
silent.
Shortly afterwards, I came on a ludicrous spectacle that
went to show that I was not the only non-combatant who
was eager for a chance of joining in the coming fray. In
a quiet part of the fo’c’sle deck I surprised the very small
cabin boy of our lost yacht in the act of going through the
cutlass exercise all by himself. Armed with a weapon that
his little hands had scarcely strength to hold, he was


manfully doing his best to cut down imaginary pirates by
the score.
My old blood warms and tingles in my veins as I fight
that old battle over again—the battle of the next day ; for,
as events turned out, the affray proved little short of
attaining the dignity of a battle.
Soon after the peep-o’-day the whole frigate was astir.
The look-out’s stentorian roar as he hailed the deck with
“ Land ahead ! ”
seemed to rouse the ship. In a moment I was myself so
wide-awake that I heard the repetition of the officer of the
watch :
“ Land ahead ! ”
Down he hurried to report to the captain.
“ Land ahead, sir—about six knots across her bows : ”
I heard him say as I scampered past the half-opened
cabin door to gain the deck.
The loom of the land lay clear against the yet misty
horizon forward. The sun was mounting apace, and every
moment the arc of light was deepening and broadening
and spreading.
Turning my eyes, I saw the tall form of the captain
ascending to the quarter-deck, and I walked amidship from
the bows.
“Rouse Mr. Lane,” he ordered. “Present him with my
compliments, and request him to be good enough to join
me instantly.”


I knew the question that awaited the young missionary
as he complied with this invitation.
“ Do you identify that island ahead of us, sir ? ”
Mr. Lane took the captain’s proffered glass and raised it
to his eye.
Lowering and returning it :
“ Yes, sir,” he replied, “ I do. It is the place to which I
was carried by Da Costa.”
Under the shortened canvas she had carried through the
night the Indomitable was steadily approaching the land
with a fair wind dead aft of her. Sail was now taken off
her, the leads were heaved and ordered to be kept going.
All hands were piped aft, and Captain Fallow delivered a
very brief but very stirring address, preparing them for the
work that might be before them. In the extreme rear of
the solid mass of sturdy fighting men I discerned the small
form of the ex-cabin boy. He had fallen in on his own
account, as a separate contingent, and listened with an
intelligent but somewhat critical attention.
A hasty breakfast was served, and then :
“ Beat to quarters ! ”
The cabin boy stationed himself at the biggest gun, and
kicked violently when a laughing, brawny bluejacket
picked him up in his arms and carried him away.
She cast anchor in a good bottom at a distance of about
half-a-mile from the shore.
Riding at moorings midway between the man-o’-war
and the beach floated a grey-painted battered-looking old


schooner. Her masts appeared to have been shot away
almost by the board, her hull seemed to have had some
nasty knocks, and she had a slight list to larboard. Her
starboard beam was almost broadside with our own as the
frigate swung to her cables.
It was now bright daylight, but no sound or sight of life
was to be heard or seen either on board the hulk or on the
island ; albeit, for all the stillness, all the sleepiness,
hundreds of hidden eyes might be watching us.
A pier, with a small landing stage, ran out from the
beach for about a hundred yards, and two huts stood on
the summit of some rising ground inland to the right.
Between them was a buntingless flagstaff.
“ Where are the other buildings of which you have told
us, Mr. Lane ? ”
“ They are out of sight, Captain Fallow, at this point,
behind the palms on that ridge-way. But look, sir—is that
not smoke just rising into sight above the tree-tops ?”
As he spoke a thin blue vapour spread into view.
Fallow turned to his first lieutenant, close to his elbow.
“If that’s a sign that they’re cooking breakfast, Mr. De
Courcy, I’m afraid we must interrupt their preparations.
We’ll begin by burning a little powder for their benefit
without the shot.”
“Very good, sir ” —and the lieutenant gave the word for
the discharge of one of the eighteen-pounder cannon.
Far and wide rolled the echo of the roar in the sunny
morning air.


Probably the summons had been waited for—it was
promptly obeyed. A man rushed from one of the huts to
the flagstaff, and ran up—the white flag upon which no
civilized warrior fires : the flag that is at the same time a
pledge and a security ; the flag that offers the one and
demands the other.
As its folds blew out to the breeze, some forty or fifty
men — a motley band—emerged cautiously from the shelter
of the palm-grove in an irregular line, in the centre of
which, and at both flanks, a little in advance of the others,
marched a man waving a white sheet at the end of a pole.
“So that’s their game —I thought so, De Courcy,” said
the chief in a disappointed tone. “ Surrender at sight,
without parley or question. It seems to me they expected
us. Well, their choice is between dying fighting or like
dogs at the ends of halters—if they prefer the halters they
must have ’em.’’
He took a speaking-trumpet into his hands and put it to
his lips. With the wind blowing shoreward as it was, his
full-volumed voice would have carried double the distance.
“ You on shore there ! ”
“ Aye, aye, sir ? ”
They must have shouted together, we heard their answer
so distinctly.
“ March to the water’s edge.”
The irregular line advanced, the flag bearers waving
their banners energetically.
“If I find that you answer one question falsely, or


commit a single act of treachery, I’ll take the law into my
own hands, and hang from my yard-arm every mother’s
son of you that I don’t shoot. Are you all there ? ”
There’s not another soul on the island.”
Do you unconditionally surrender —all of you ?”
All, sir—unconditionally.”
De Courcy, we must have been expected.”
That’s scarcely to be wondered at, sir, considering that
Da Costa seems to have eyes and ears and tongues in so
many ports.”
“ That’s true. —You on the beach there again ! ”
“ Aye, aye, sir ? ”
You have arms.’
Yes, sir.”
“ Collect them all, and bring them to where you stand.”
About half of the submissive pirates disappeared, return-
ing with a miscellaneous collection of small arms of every
sort and size.
“ Throw those things into the sea.”
o
Splash followed splash as the arm-bearers obeyed.
“ That’s the whole lot, sir,” was the information volun-
teered. “ There ain’t a barker or a sticker left among the
lot of us.”
“ Mr. De Courcy, you will open the starboard ports and
train the guns on to that group on the beach.”
“ Very good, sir;
Every precaution against treachery that it was in his
power to take, Captain Fallow seemed to have taken. It


now only remained for him to send boats ashore to bring
the prisoners on board.
“Stand by there,” he shouted—“l’m landing men.
Guns are trained on you, and if you move they’ll open
fire.”
Three boats, each manned with its full complement of
fully-armed men, left the side of the man-o’-war in charge
of Mr. De Courcy. After an almost inevitable interval of
but a few minutes, they were followed by three-other boats,
similarly manned, in charge of the third lieutenant.
Those who started first had no idea of allowing those
who started last to overtake them, while those who started
last meant —as usual—to make a race of it for first place
at the finish.
Divining this intention, the rowers of the three former
boats “ lumped it on,” and crossed the bows of the old
schooner which lay midway between the frigate and the
shore before the others had covered more than about half
the distance.
Thus three of our boats were on one side of the
schooner, and three on the other.
This was the sort of opportunity that had been waited
Flame, smoke, ball, and shell suddenly belched from
both sides of the “ schooner.” Bewildering shouts, cries of
mad rage, screams of agony filled the air—the rattle of
small shot answered them.
Before the vapour had cleared, “ boom, boom, boom ’


: Vj \ ' \W ***•
■ - .. • ; _ j!
I - ! 1 ' JH« *
|& i <f/ j fi X\\ -. ... j
Mg/
% S. 'i r - * - *m*lw
I
J j5. , f L- *m 7 jtt »
,l ;
--- r^jH8>'
-*<«:-*. -- :
Flame, smoke, ball, and shell suddenly belched from both sides of the “schooner. —326.




again, and the sound of the crashing and tearing of planks.
The frigate shook and reeled—struck by the shot of three
heavy pieces of ordnance. One ball fell on deck, with a
shock that threw me off my feet. As I struggled to rise,
my fingers touched something warm and wet —it was the
body of the poor little, plucky little cabin boy, pulped into
shapelessness.
There are moments when the bravest and best disci-
plined men in the world are liable to irresistible, uncon-
trollable panic—of a surety this unthinkable surprise might
almost have excused such a panic now on board the
Indomitable. If it did, it was but for the space of seconds
rather than of minutes ; if the sense of discipline were lost,
it may be said to have been but a momentary loss ; if the
men did get out of hand for one minute, they were under
the thumb of their officers again the next. Probably the
latter were the first to realise that the enemy were in full,
not divided, force ; that the “schooner,” disguised beyond
suspicion, was the late steam-brig—her funnel demolished,
her screw detached, but with her deadly underworks all
unimpaired.
To realise the peril was to face it. The pirates were
making their last stand—they were going to get the best
price for their lives that they could sell them at.
Clear as a clarion in its ringing tones rang out the voice
o o «_>
of the captain. The panic was arrested—every man stood
firm at his post again : waiting, with passionate impatience,
for the word to retaliate.


Before that word was given, it was seen that of our six
boats only three were now floating. Struggling forms
were in the bloody water —clinging hands were clutching
fragments of shattered wreckage. Not one of the
treacherous horde on the beach was in sight.
“ Save all you can—lay for the frigate out of the line of
fire.”
A shout from De Courcy’s boat was the answer.
“Now, my lads . . .”
Before the word of command could be given, the pirates
(they had been longer in loading this time) got off another
broadside. At so short a range it could scarcely fail to do
execution. One shot hit the main-mast about four feet
from the deck, and the splinters flew in all directions.
Three dripping, palpitating forms were carried below to
the cockpit.
But it was our turn now.
“ Fire !”


1 > I
CHAPTER LI
E man-o’-war trembled
with the shock of her
own mighty broadside.
Again, again, and yet
again, with all the regu-
larity of a formal salute,
her guns thundered out
their vengeance,
NO QUARTER !
A thick, noisome-
smelling vapour hung over the sea. Its outer fringe
mingled with the smoke of our guns, and enveloped the
ship in a choking fog.
Standing just under the quarter-deck, I heard Fallow’s
voice, though his form was hidden.
“They don’t reply, Seymour—we’ve silenced their fire
already. It’s strange this smoke doesn’t lift. It’s some-
thing more than the smoke of our powder—or theirs.”
“ I’ve been thinking the same, sir,” said the second
lieutenant.


A hail from the water under her starboard quarter was
succeeded by the quick report :
“ Two of the boats alongside, sir.
Two ! Six boats had left her —two returned : a fourth
boat had shared the fate of her three sisters who were
smashed to pieces or foundered under the enemy’s first
fire.
Dead and wounded men were lifted inboard—the hale
of the crews followed, De Courcy hurrying to the captain’s
side.
His news explained the mystery of the still-hanging
smoke. In imitation of a well-known device of Chinese
warfare, the material from which the fumes arose had been
purposely ignited on the “schooner,” and under cover of
the vapour her hands were escaping from her to the
shore.
“ I was just able to make them out, sir, before the smoke
covered them. One long-boat led the way, and a raft
followed. I’m afraid they’ve reached the shore by this
time.”
“ We’ll try a shot or two, any way ” —and at a hastily
calculated range shell and ball again hurtled through the
smoke-heavy air.
Then came a pause, during which was brought up the
surgeon’s list of casualties, and the captain called all his
senior combatant officers together for a hasty council of
war.
The situation was plain enough. There could 4 be no


doubt but that the crew of the pirate-ship, having struck,
and struck hard, the cowardly blow of which they had
anticipated the chance, had been withdrawn to strengthen
the main body on the island. An engagement on shore,
in which we were more than likely to be out-numbered, for
the frigate’s total complement of fighting men could not
now exceed about two hundred and fifty, was inevitable.
When would the landing be made? Would it be
immediate, or deferred till dark ?
The air was gradually clearing—all was anxiety to see
what sort of practice our gunners had made.
They had done right well —every shot must have told,
for their target was now a wreck indeed. Even the shots
that had been fired shoreward almost at random had not
all been wasted, for a few minutes later we saw that eight
bodies were lying on the beach —eloquently motionless.
The council of war was brief. Immediately it was over,
the frigate was hauled a little farther off shore, and fire
re-opened on the now silent wreck. She sunk in twenty
minutes.
This effectual precaution having been taken against the
possibility of any further treachery so far as she was
concerned, the polite attentions of Captain Fallow were
confined to the shore. The range was tested by a trial
shot at the two huts —their timbers were sent flying, and
down toppled the flagstaff.
Then for half an hour the site of the settlement —as
nearly as it could be indicated by Mr. Lane—was shelled


without intermission. At the end of that time the fusillade
ceased, for a sheet of flame shot up into the sunshine —
it had succeeded in its object—the buildings were on
fire.
Three ringing, stentorian cheers were three times re-
peated as this was seen to be the case.
“ I missed the poor dead little cabin boy’s extra
“ Hurray ! ” at the end.
Our cheering was so loud that surely the pirates must
have heard it.
But where were they ?
We had seen no sign of them : not a shot had they
fired.
“ What’s the next move ? ” I said to Seaward. “ Will
boats make for the shore now a second time? If they do
—whenever they do :—I say, Seaward, feel in my right-
hand pocket.”
“ Good,” he remarked, as his fingers touched the handle
of the pistol I had secreted. “ Take a dip into my left-
hand pocket, Gleet.”
“ Good,” I repeated, as I felt the pistol he had hidden.
“Just run your claws down my right trousers’-leg, will
you ? ”
I thought I was going to score a point, but as he com-
plied with my request and became alive to the fact that I
had stowed away a cutlass ;
“ Scratch my left leg, mate : ” he besought me.
He had similarly secreted a similar weapon. Whenever


the boats went, we didn’t mean to be left behind no, not
if we swam for it.
But the boats were not going to start yet. Although I
knew that he must be burning with eagerness to get to
close quarters, the impetuous captain of the Indomitable
had to hold himself in while his guns operated in different,
and more distant, parts of the island. On the principle
that the invisible enemy must be somewhere, he shelled
everywhere.
“ This here’s a mighty lot o’ splosh without nothing to
see for it,” I heard one brawny gunner remark to another,
mopping his head.
“ You wait a bit, mate ; there’ll be plenty to see
presently.”
The very next shot from the gun they were serving—l
watched the firing of it—ended the shelling and precipitated
the landing.
The missile exploded somewhere about the middle of
the island.
A huge column of fire leaped heavenward. A roar
seemed to shake the very sky. It rocked the solid planks
beneath our feet. Then all was smoke. Wherever the
pirates had stowed or were carrying their powder, that
last shot had fired it.
The moment had come. Now was the time to fall on
them bodily.
Eaglebeak’s eyes simply blazed as he shouted his quick
orders.


The respective crews had all been told off beforehand,
and everything made ready. The boats had been
launched, and lay alongside.
With beautiful precision and regularity they were
manned and got away. With the open connivance of
sympathetic bluejackets, and perhaps with the secret
connivance of their officers, one of them carried Seaward
and another myself.
Later on, I found that Jawkinson and a fourth one of
our fellows had also smuggled themselves ashore to have a
hand in the fun.
That “ fun ” was fast and furious.
The landing was directed by Captain Fallow in person.
He paraded his entire force to the right (from the ship) of
the fallen flagstaff, exposing the palm-topped ridge-way—
which offered splendid cover for sharpshooters, or even for
a concentrated body of men—to the fire of the frigate’s
guns, in case they should be wanted to cover his operations.
In addition to the watch, he had left just sufficient hands
to serve three of them.
“ Officers! ”
Each saluting with drawn sword as he reached his chiefs
side, the few officers grouped round him, and received his
final instructions.
The advance was made in open order, and in three
detachments, separated from each other by a distance so
calculated as to spread our line to about five hundred
yards, and to allow of a certain degree of independent


action, but at the same time to render easy a rapid massing
of the whole force.
The captain led the centre company, De Courcy the
company on his right, Seymour that on his left flank.
Seaward and I—who had shown care not to make our-
selves conspicuous—took our places close in rear of the
centre company. We had freed our cutlasses from our
respective trousers!
Just as the line was about to advance, we—with
Jaukinson and Jawkinson’s mate—were ordered to retire :
ordered, regretfully but firmly, by Captain Fallow himself.
But I saw a chance. Sir George Brock, who had landed
in company with the captain, was on the point of returning
to the ship. I appealed to him—half in despair, half in
hope. After a few words aside with Fallow;
The ciicumstances are peculiar—quite exceptional in
my experience,” he said slowly. “In them, I feel justified
in calling upon you in the Queen’s name to render assist-
ance in the operations about to take place.”
I thanked him delightedly—the other three “pressed
men ” gave a whoop of joy.
“ Line will advance—Quick march ! ”
As the long line surged steadily forward, every man
knew that when we came in touch with the enemy the
meeting was to be on both sides a case of “ No Quarter.”


CHAPTER LI I.
THE PIRATES LAST STAND.
A COSTA’S one attempt to
make a stand-up fight of it was
abortive ; and alter that it was
all nothing but—slaughter.
The stand was attempted
hard by the scene of the ex-
plosion of his entire reserve of
powder.
The spot was well chosen.
As we approached it, the nature
of the ground compelled our
three companies to lessen the
distance between each company,
and each company to abandon
its “open order” for a closer formation. We had to make
our slow way through a prickly undergrowth of vegetation.
From the shelter of a copse ahead of us a body of men
suddenly appeared, dragging two heavy cannons mounted
on wheels. At the moment that these were unlimbered, a


rattling fire of musketry was opened on each of our flanks.
Every bush seemed to shelter a marksman.
With a wave of his sword first to right and then to left:
“Clear that jungle!” was Fallow’s order to De Courcy
and Seymour: and as they wheeled their respective
commands to either hand :
“ I’ll take those guns ! ” he cried. “ Come on, my lads—
keep your peckers up ! ”
With cheers and shouts his gallant fellows followed him
(Seaward and I mixed up with them), firing as they ran in
reply to the storm of small shot that assailed them.
Twice before the guns were reached they belched out
their discharge.
But those who fired those two discharges never served
any guns again.
Cutting them down to left and right, Eaglebeak was
amongst them full twenty yards ahead of the foremost of
his followers, who came up with a rush, before which
resistance was useless. I saw Da Costa himself and
Bayne fall upon him together. He ran the latter through
the body, and pulled trigger on the former. But so did I
at the same moment, and I don t know whether it was his
shot or mine that rid the world of the biggest scoundrel
that ever lived upon it.
We stayed till there was nobody left to kill. Some had
got away, though not nearly so many as were lying on the
ground.
But behind us the fighting was still going on, so back


we dashed. It ceased with our return —it was only a
stampede and a series of military executions then.
For the next hour firing was heard all over the island.
It gradually died away. The frigate was signalled, and
she hoisted an order for assembly on the beach, and fired a
gun of re-call.
The tiiumphant avengers had so scattered themselves
that thay returned and fell in by dozens, half dozens, twos
and threes, and even singly, instead of by squads and
companies.
A grim significance attached itself to the fact that not a
o o
single prisoner was brought in.
“ Call the roll.”
There were a good many absentees from that parade—
how many of them would never answer to their names
again ?
There is no need for me to describe the rest of the day’s
work in detail.
Search parties and burial parties marched all over the
island, and by nightfall our wounded were safe on board
and our dead laid out for interment. Amongst the latter
was poor Jawkinson, who was brought down to the beach
wounded, but died before he could be taken off. True to
his weakness to the last, he died talking.
The bodies of the dead pirates were buried hastily where
and as they were found—their wounded, very few in
number, were carried to a temporary hospital which had
been erected in the shade of the palm-trees on the
ridge-way.


Strict orders had been issued that quarter was now to
be given to all the outlaws found without arms, or who
laid their arms down—but only some twenty prisoners
were brought in.
From these it was learnt that the frigate had only
arrived just in time. Da Costa had had warning of her
coming and her mission, and had she been a couple of
days later she would have found the island deserted. The
steamer really had been damaged by stress of weather, but
so far from being in the condition in which she had been
“faked” to appear, she was rapidly being got ready for
sea. Presumably in the desperate hope that the fact
might be remembered in his favour, one of the prisoners
who appeared to hold—or rather to have held—a position
of some authority volunteered information as to the where-
abouts of the stores of treasure secreted in the island.
With full military and naval honours our gallant dead
were laid to rest on the morning of the next day, the
remainder of which was occupied in the transfer of loot to
the man-o’-war.
Seaward and I joined one of the foraging parties, which
had the good fortune to fall in with the last batch of the
enemy. They numbered thirteen to our nine—(the latter
including our two selves, who had no right to be so
counted in), but threw down their weapons and held up
their hands just as we were about to tickle them with a
volley. We marched them back with us to join their
fellow claimants for the hangman’s hemp.


On the afternoon of the third day, her work being done
and her repairs finished, the Indomitable weighed anchor
and sailed for Port Jackson,' where she handed over her
prisoners to the civil authorities.
This may be the right place for me to say that some
time afterwards the whole working of Da Costa’s organiza-
tion was laid bare, and many of his principal confederates
on shore were laid by the heels. What chiefly contributed
to this eminently desirable consummation was the presen-
tation for payment of Professor Heckmanu’s draft for
twenty-five thousand pounds by Da Costa’s agents, to
whom it had been brought by the captain of a ship
which he had spoken at sea, and on board of which he had
sent a packet of letters for carriage. The arrest of the
pirate’s agents led to their confession and the arrest ol
others.
Mr. Lane, Seaward, and I took lodgings ashore together
till such time as the plans we had respectively formed
could be carried out. In those plans Captain Younge
Fallow, R.N., so actively interested himself that the
interval was short, Mr. Lane was offered and accepted a
free passage on board a trading sloop to the Fiji Islands,
there to take up the work from which such startling
adventures had kept him so long.
Seaward and myself were found berths—l with the
rating of fourth mate—aboard the Amazon , full-rigged
clipper ship, bound home round the each of us


being paid off on her arrival at Liverpool. From
Liverpool I lost no time in making my way to London.
“ Go to Lord Car stairs ” I had been bidden.
I ascertained the address of his town house, and
enquired there for him—to be treated with scant courtesy
by his supercilious flunkeys, whose condescension did not
ao further than the communication of the circumstance
that their lord was “hout hof town—might return hin ha
week.”
“Tell your master that I have called and will call
again,” I said sharply. “My name is Younge Gleet.”
“ Ho, hindeed.”
I decided to spend the week at the little Kentish village,
and fetched Gleet in the dusk of the evening of the same
day.
I asked for a room at the “Norman Arms:” and the
landlord of the inn did not recognise me.
“A seafaring gennelman, I see,” he remarked. “Ob,
yes; you can have a bedroom, but you can’t use the
sitting room. It’s took.”
He pointed mysteriously to the closed door of the room
we were passing as he led the way to the staircase.
“ The sitting room is took,” he repeated ; “ took to-day
—and he’s in there now.”
His manner provoked the question :
“ Who is ? ”
In awe-stricken tones the landlord replied :
“ Lord Carstairs


CHAPTER LI 11
1 ORD CARSTAIRS.
E sought to restrain my hand
as I knocked at the door:
but
“Come in,” said a clear
voice from the other side
instantly : and I entered, to
find myself in the presence of
a distinguished-looking man
of perhaps a year or two
more than fifty.
Lord Carstairs, who played
no unimportant part in con-
trolling the destinies of the Empire, and who was known to
be honoured with the personal friendship of his august
Sovereign, had about him —as I soon discovered—nothing
of the arrogance of my old patron Sir Geoffrey Norman,
nothing of the haughtiness of his own servants. A man
of lofty ambitions, steadfast will, and indomitable purpose,
he united with mental attributes of the highest order a


charm of manner and a grace of speech that were all
his own.
He was seated at the little round table in the middle of
the room, a mass of papers before him. As he raised his
eyes from the document he was perusing to the door I was
closing behind me, it dawned upon me that I ought not to
have intruded upon him unannounced ; I ought to have
solicited an interview instead of, practically, forcing one
upon him. I was somewhat taken aback by these
reflections, but :
“ I believe I have the honour of speaking to Lord
Carstairs ? ” I said.
“ I am Lord Carstairs,”
I found myself wondering now what the great earl could
be doing at Cleet, but without trying to find an answer to
my own enquiring thoughts I hastened to explain why I
had invaded his privacy so unceremoniously, beginning
with :
“ I trust you will pardon this intrusion, my lord, when
you have allowed me to tell you why I have been so
anxious to see your lordship. I was told that I should
find you in this room. My name is Younge Cleet, sir.”
To my surprise, this modest announcement had an
extraordinary effect upon the earl : to my astonishment,
he rose and motioned me to a seat: to my amazement,
he shook hands with me cordially.
“ I know more than your name,” he explained ; “ I know
the history of your life.”


“ From whom, my lord ? ” I asked bluntly.
“ I have heard of you from my very dear old friend the
Vicar of this parish,” he replied.
“ I am Lord Carstairs. ’ — p. 345,
“ I am afraid Mr. Grope must have spoken of me far
more favourably than I deserve.”
“ What makes you think so ? ”
“ Your lordship’s kindness. But may I get under way


with my story, sir ? I have first something to tell you, my
lord, and then something to ask you.”
He looked at me curiously.
“Tell me what you will; when you have finished I
have something to tell you.”
With a very brief introduction, and in as few words as I
could limit my narrative to, I told my story of the man
who had saved my life at the risk, and at the ultimate
cost, of his own. My hearer listened to me with an
emotion he was at no pains to conceal.
“ Lord Carstairs, with his dying breath Wallace Graham
bade me come to you, and I associate his injunction to do
so with my own question to him as to whether he had any
last wishes to express. It seemed to me that he spoke as
though you, if any one, would know the nature of those
last wishes, if he had any. For my own part, your lord-
ship will do me the justice to understand that my deep
anxiety to know who was this wronged and suffering man
who shed his blood for me has its only origin in my
gratitude and my love. Who was he, my lord ? ”
In place of answering my question, the Earl of Carstairs
questioned me.
“ Did you love him ? ”
“ I think that is a strange question to ask me, sir, after
what I have said,” I replied rather warmly.
But when the question was gravely repeated
“ Did you love him ? ”
I replied simply;


34« THE SON OF A HUNDRED FATHERS.
“ I loved him, my lord.”
“And he loved you ? ”
“ He died for me.”
“Before you sleep to-night, go on your knees and thank
God that you loved each other. Don’t ask me what I
mean—l am going to tell you. I have heard what you
had to say to me—now listen to w r hat I have to tell you —
it will more than answer every question which it can be in
your mind to put to me. Will you promise me that as
you listen you will try to keep your feelings under
control ? ”
“Yes, my lord,” I promised wonderingly.


‘ m-t . fll
gp . | /* y < ;^J
CHAPTER LIV
A LETTER FROM THE GRAVE.
ALLACE GRAHAM was
my chosen playmate at
Eton, my chum at Oxford
—my closest friend in the
days that followed school
and college.
“He was heir to an
ancient title, to great
wealth, to a rich estate.
He was the only son of
Sir Geoffrey Norman, of
Norman Royal.”
I sprang excitedly to my
feet. By a look, Lord
Carstairs reminded me of
my promise, and I resumed
my seat. I remembered that as a child I used to hear
something of an exiled son of the old baronet, but all the


village believed that he had died abroad, and he had long
ceased to be spoken of.
“ He fell in love with an actress —as good and as pure as
she was lovely, which is saying much, for her beauty was
matchless. / would have sacrificed for her all that he
sacrificed, and still have regarded myself as Fortune’s
heavy debtor. But Osyth Neville gave to him what she
refused to me —the treasure of her heart, for which, like
him, I would have accounted the whole world well lost.”
Why was the great Earl of Carstairs opening for me
thus the sacred hiding places of his memory?
“Every insult that a perverted judgment could suggest
to a false pride was heaped by old Geoffrey upon young
Geoffrey when he heard of the engagement. He dared
his son to marry without his consent —he dared him to
marry any woman but the one he had chosen for him. In
cool defiance of his father’s hot defiance, my bosom friend
took Osyth Neville unto him to wife. Then —husband
and wife—they entered once the door of the old baronet’s
house. It was a duty they owed him thus to present
themselves before him, and they did that duty. This time
he exceeded his previous violence—for he insulted his
daughter-in-law. He spurned them from his roof.
“ As he left the home in which he had been born, young
Geoffrey swore that his foot should never enter it again
till the day might come when he should re-enter it as
master, not as guest. He swore that till that time came
he would not even bear his father’s name. Assuming that


of Wallace Graham, he returned to London, and obtained
a situation as cashier in a commercial house of repute.
Not even his employers knew who he was. While thus
earning his bread, he was accused of embezzlement and
forgery. Have you any wish to know the particulars of
this charge—the charge upon which he stood his trial ? ”
“ I have not,” I replied. “He was innocent: that is
enough.”
“He was innocent: that is enough,” repeated Lord
Carstairs. “ But if you have any thought that the day
may come when you would like to know more—when you
would like to know all that there is to know on this most
painful point in my story —ask me now, not then. If the
details of the accusation against him—as of his trial and
conviction—are dispensed with now, let them be dispensed
with for ever.”
“ Let them be dispensed with now and for ever, my
lord,” I said.
“I am glad that that is your wish. An innocent man,
he was sentenced and transported.”
Lord Carstairs paused.
“And up to the day of his death I know the rest —I
know, Lord Carstairs, as he knew, what he owed to you.”
“Your knowledge, and his, of my share in proving his
innocence and obtaining the warrant for his absolutely
unconditional release you have already referred to,” said
his lordship hastily. “Let us get back to the period of
his condemnation. The agony of that time was made all


the more bitter to him by the fact that when he was torn
from the arms of his beautiful wife she was expecting in
the course of a few months to be a mother.
“After the trial I did my utmost to find her, but she had
disappeared. No trace of her was ever found until—
to-day.”
“ To-day! ”
“ L ntil to-day. Have you heard nothing of to-day’s
sensation here ? ”
“No—nothing. I had only just arrived when
“ I remember. I too only arrived in Cleet to-day, but
hours before yourself. For months I have been expecting
poor Geoffrey Norman to return, and I had taken it upon
myself to give certain orders touching his estate—my visit
was in connection with those orders. As a matter of
fact I hold an old authority to act for him in certain
contingencies, and I deemed its validity revived by his
pardon.
“As I approached the Park through what I am told is
known as Thrush Thicket . .
My heart beat fast at the words. This was the spot
where I was found.
“ I came upon a scene of excitement and commotion.
Some of the men engaged, by my instructions, in clearing
away the dense undergrowth, which had grown to such a
height as to obstruct an ancient view of the Hall—it seems
that the wood has for many years been allowed to grow
quite wild, for the old baronet claimed it as his property,


and the villagers have feared to trespass—had made a
strange and terrible discovery. They had chanced upon
an old quarry-pit—unworked for perhaps a hundred years.
A fallen tree had partially blocked the opening of this
dene-hole, and vegetation had completely covered the rest
of it. On cutting this away they saw that the cavity it
had hidden was a dark and deep one. A lantern and
ropes were procured, and two of the men descended.
Soon after they touched bottom they sent up a shout—a
cry of horror.
“ They had found human remains.
“ I joined the men. I assisted in all that was done.
The poor bones were reverently brought up. All that
death and her unconsecrated grave had left of poor Osyth
Norman lie to-night within the portals of the great house
from which, living, she was turned away.”
He placed a closed gold locket on the table.
“ was on her breast. Her face is on one side,
and Geoffrey’s is on the other . . . How old are
you ? ”
I heard as in a dream, and answered as in a dream.
“ I am seventeen.”
“ Then seventeen years ago she came here with her babe
in her arms to make a last appeal to the stony heart of her
husband’s father.”
He was putting some faded, yellow slips of paper,
covered with pencilled writing, into my hands, but I
scarcely realised that he was doing so
o


“Tell me, tell me!” I cried. “I cannot read—tell me,
tell me! ”
“ I have given you a letter from the dead. When she
recovered consciousness in the grave into which she fell,
she wrote the last tragic chapter of her life : you hold it in
your hands. Broken in health, a return to her old career
was impossible. She was starving ... To avoid
curious eyes she was trying to make her way into Norman
Royal by an unfrequented path. Leaving her little one on
the ground she sought to find a way though the thicket —
she was about to return to her child when the earth
swallowed her . , .”
Through the rain of the tears that were pouring from
my eyes, I saw that he was opening the locket. Face
down, that my own fingers might turn it, he placed it
nearer to my hand.
“ Then he bent his head and kissed me on the cheek,
saying as he did so :
“For your mother’s sake— Slß YOUNGE.”


KpSL w
CHAPTER LV.
EPILOGUE.
AM an old man now.
But an older is a frequent
visitor at Norman Royal.
I call him Eaglebeak—but
when I write to him I
address him as Admiral
Fallow, V.C.
The memory of dear old
Mr. Crope has lived long
after him—he sleeps in the
little green churchyard,
and Dr. Groombridge lies
near him.
Twenty years ago a
missionary returned to
England invalided from
far Fiji, where he had
laboured as heroically in his Master’s cause amongst the
heathen as ever saint or martyr laboured. He wanted to


go back, but the doctors wouldn’t let him—and somebody
gave him the living of Cleet. Long may he hold it, old as
he is.
Before he went aloft, William Seaward attained a better
position in the world than he had ever aspired to —he
commanded a small schooner of his own.
My relations with the boys of Cleet Hall Academy have
not ceased —they have changed. How can I help taking
a fatherly interest in the school that once took so fatherly
an interest in me ?
I look upon all the youngsters there as my boys, so that
in a sense I, who was once regarded as
“The Son of a Hundred Fathers,”
now regard myself as
“THE FATHER OF A HUNDRED SONS.”
THE END.
Jarrold and Sons, Printers, Norwich, Yarmouth, and London .


Selections from jarrotos’ Hero Soolis.
BLACK BEAUTY.
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A HORSE.
120 Entirely New Illustrations. 4to, Cloth Elegant,
5/- (Postage \\d )
“ Had the Society
for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals
published this, we
should say it had
published its best
work.”— Review.
“ It would be diffi-
cult to conceive one
more admirably suit-
ed to its purpose.”
Nonconformist.
“ The story is sim-
ply told and cleverly
put together, and
while it may be read
with pleasure and
profit by educated
people, it is an excel-
lent book to put into
the hands of stable-
boys, or any who
have to do with
horses.”
Essex Standard.
“As a book for
young people it will
be popular for its
picturesque illustra-
tions of all possible
aspects of a horse’s
career.”
Ipnvich Journal,
Of this book 180,000 have been printed in this country alone. It has
also been very extensively reproduced in the United States, and Editions
have been published in France and Italy.
The present 4to Edition has been produced at great expense. It
contains 120 Illustrations by that eminent Artist, John Beer, Esq.,
facsimiled by the half-tone process, with beautiful results. It is artistically
bound, and will no doubt be highly appreciated as a suitable gift book by
many of the thousands who have been delighted with it in its cheaper
form ; for as the Editor of The Animal World says, “The more often we
have turned over the leaves of ‘ Black Beauty,’ the greater has been our
delight.”
The Popular Editions at 2/-, 1 6, and II- are still on Sale.
London: Jarrold & Sons, io and n, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers atid at the Bookstalls,


I :
I ; I '
Selections from Jacrolbs’ Kero Books.
BEAUTIFUL JOE.
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A DOG.
BY MARSHALL SAUNDERS.
42 nd Thousand. Illustrated. Popular Edition, Cloth, 2/-,
Gilt Edges, 3/6.
The Countess of Aberdeen writes of the Canadian edition of “ Beautiful Joe " :
•• I am sure that all lovers of animals will welcome this book with eagerness as
being eminently calculated to spread that knowledge and thought for dumb
beasts which will lead to their humane treatment.”
"The narrative is admirably conveyed and interesting from every point of
view. If we had our wish and our way, the book should be in every school and
in every house.” —The World.
“ The book is charmingly got up, and would make an excellent school-prize."—
British Weekly.
“ It is a capita) story, and is certain to be popular among all lovers of animals.”
—Sheffield Daily Telegraph.
" For Sunday-school libraries and for reading alike in families, it is a most
appropriate volume, sure to draw out the sympathies of young readers to their
four-footed companions, and to teach them valuable lessons as to the right and
kind treatment of dumb creatures.” —The Freeman.
London: Jarrold and Son*, 10 and 11, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Poeksellers ami a / Ihr Pooista/ls.


Selections from Jarrolbs’ Item Soofts
NEW BOOKS FOR BOYS.
Crown Svo, Cloth Elegant, Gilt Top , 5/-.
The Voyage of the Avenger;
or, in the Days of the
Inquisition. By Henry St. John, Author of “ A Middy of Nelson's Day,’'
&c. With Twen.y»fi/e Illustrations by Paul Hardy.
In this new story by Mr.
H. St. John, the reader is
taken back to the days of
“ good queen Bess,” and in-
troduced to not a few of her
most distinguished and ad-
venturous subjects. As the
sub-title indicates we have
also glimpses of the cruel
work of the Inquisition. The
tale is full of incident, and
should be a favourite with all
those, old or young, who love
the rapid succession of stir-
ring adventure. The book is
illustrated by Paul Hardy.
Crown Svo, Cloth elegant.
Geordie, the
Black Prince.
Rev. J. M. Russell,
Author of “ The Flower
Show of Fairley Court,”
Ac., Ac. Illustrated by
Caroline Manning.
A story of North-country life, in which the hero, a boy of lowly origin,
overcomes difficulties, makes the most of opportunities, and eventually becomes,
what he has long aimed at becoming, a distinguished artist.
The book is especially adapted lor Sunday School and Parish Libraries, as
well as for a reward or prize book.
London; Jarrold and Sons, 10 and 11, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of ail Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


r
Selections from Jarrolbs’ Hem Books,
NEW 5/- BOOK FOR B^YS.
Crown Bvo, Cloth elegant , Gilt Top.
Under the White Ensisrn ;
'o* 1 ’ ok, for Queen and Empire.
By A. Lee Knight, Author of "A Mid of the Naval Brigade," “ Ronald
Halifax; or, He Would be a Sailor ,” •• The Gun-Room Monkey & c . y ltl
Twenty three Illustrations by J. B. Greene.
A story’ of adventure on the
west coast of Africa, and
especially on that part of it
known as the Bight of Benin,
a district with which a recent
military expedition has made
us familiar. The hero, who
is a young Queen’s Cadet,
after distinguishing himself
by his gallant and impulsive
conduct, is taken prisoner by
the natives, and his rescue,
which is effected in a novel
and thrilling fashion, is a
fitting climax to the many
exciting incidents of the story.
The book is profusely and
graphically illustrated by J,
B. Greene.
MR. METCALFE’S
NEW BOOK for BOYS.
Crown Bvo, Cloth elegant, 3 6.
On the Other
Tack : A Story
of the Sea. By \V. C.
Metcalfe, Author of
“ The Boy Skipper," &c.
Illustrated by S. H. Ved-
der.
Those who remember Mr.
Metcalfe’s previous stories,
“A Boy Skipper” and “On the Face of the Deep.” will know that when this
author promises “a story of the sea," he gives us a book which, in very truth,
smells of “ the briny.” None the less in this, his latest tale, many of the most
exciting incidents—and there are not a few such —take place on dry land, though
the sea-faring element is never far removed, The illu-.trations have been again
intrusted to the capable hands of Mr. S. H. Vedder.
London; Jarrold and Sons, io and n, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


Selections from Jmrolbs’ )Tem Soofis
MR. HUTCHESON’S NEW BOOK FOR BOYS AND GIRLS.
Crown B vo, Cloth elegant. 3/6
Bob Strong’s Holidays;
or, Adrift in the Channel.
By the Author of “ Afloat at Last,”
“ The Wreck of the Nancy Bell,”
&c. With Six Illustrations by JOHN
B. Grksnb. 2nd Edition,
A bright, brisk, breezy book, breath-
ing out healthy ozone from every page ;
full of incident and adventure, such
as will be liked and loved by every boy
and girl reader.
“Mr. Hutcheson, being so well-known as a
favourite writer for boys, the volume will, we are
sure, prove very popular. The book deals with
a cruise in the channel, and the adventures which
happened to Bob Strong during the cruise.”—
Devon and Exeter Gazette.
“ ‘ Bob Strong's Holidays; or, Adrift in the Channel,’ by John C. Hutcheson, is the story of
the deadly peril of two youths of resources, who were cast adrift at sea in an open boat.”—
Daily News.
“ ‘Bob Strong’s Holiday’ is a perfect story for hoys. It shows us how Bob Strong's
holiday is of a particularly adventurous order. He makes tbe acquaintance in the train, on
the way home from school, of Dick Allsop, who has run away from home and the tyranny of a
cruel step-father; and at Portsmouth, whither the boys are bound, they fall in with Captain
Dresser, and the adventures, which are the result of the friendship which springs up between
tbe three, arc of a very interesting character, and are admirably related.’’ — Norfolk Chronicle.
“ This healthy tale for hoys, from the pen of Mr. Hutcheson, comes very opportunely. The
plot is extremely simple, and yet Mr. Hutcheson keeps up the interest of the reader in Bob
Strong in a wonderful manner. The book is attractive in appearance, and is a good presenta-
tion work for boys.”— Cambridge Daily Nevus,
“ It is a fine tale of the sea, full of thrilling situations, accompanied with a host of illustra-
tions by Mr. John B. Greene.’’ — Book and News Trades' Gazette.
“ Another sterling sea story, that may safely he placed in any boy’s hands. As a whole,
these are the most attractively-written and best illustrated volumes we have seen this season.’
—Beard Teacher.
“From Messrs. Jarrold and Sons, London, comes a tale for young readers, written by Mt
John C. Hutcheson, and illustrated by J. B. Greene. It is a spirited and lively tale of the
adventures of a lad who got adrift at sea, although this is only the culmination of his ‘ larks, ’
and might have been lost if it hadn’t been for the fisher folk. Its title is ‘ Bob Strong’s
Holiday's,’ and it is a capital book for a boy."— The Scotsman.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and 11, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


-siff
J i
-
Selections from jfcrcolbs’ Hem Boohs.
MR. MANSFORD’S NEW BOOK FOR BOrS.
Crown B vo. Cloth elegant. 3/6.
Bully, Fag, and Hero;
or, In Playground and School-
room. By Charles J. Mans-
ford, Author of “ The Boy Garri-
son” &c. With Six Illustrations bf
S. H. Vedder. 2nd Edition.
Mr. Mansford has put together an
admirable story of school-boy life, as
remarkable for the individuality of its
young heroes as for the excellent descrip-
tions of the routine of a large public
school. The drawings of Mr. Veddei
geographically illustrate an exciting and
wholesome story.
“Mr. Mansford's circle of readers will be
greatly increased by the present story, one of
the best of the kind that he has written. The
illustrations have been specially prepared for the
work by Mr. S. H. Vedder." —Birmingham
Daily Gazette.
“ Incidentally there are humorous descriptions of dormitory fights, football matches, and the
like, and through the whole of the book there is a smack of originality which is extremely
welcome.” —The Star.
“ Healthy in every way, there is enough of the book devoted to descriptions of bovisb
pranks and tricks to make it interesting to all readers. It is well printed, freely illustrated,
and makes a capital presentation book.” —Western Daily Mercury.
“ Mr- Mansford is now one of the most popular writers for boys, and la 'Bully, Fag, and
Hero’ he has given us a splendid school story."— British Weekly.
"The tale is brightly and vividly written, and with a literary Savour. The miniature
tragedy and comedy of school life are mingled with true skill, and the result is a succession
of breathless pages which only a schoolboy can appreciate duly. We can recommend the book,
and compliment the author upon the commendably healthy and anti-mawkish tone of his
story.” —Sheffield and Rotherham Independent.
‘“Bully, Fag, and Hero’ is a capital book for boys. The author, Mr. Charles J.
Mansford, who has deservedly attained great popularity amongst both young and old, has
told a stirring and characteristic story of school life and adventure, which will be immensely
relished by lads in their teens." —Western Daily Press.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and 11, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls,


j
5
I *
|
|
Selections from 3 arr olbs’ eTD Socks.
BOOKS OF ADVENTURE FOR BOYS.
Crown B vo, Cloth, j/6 each.
The Boy Skipper; a
Truk Story of the Sea. By
\V. C. Metcalfe, Author of “Nail-
ing the Colours ,” &c. Illustrated bj
Enoch Ward. 2nd Edition.
The hero of this book is a living
person—William Shotton, of Sunderland.
The story, therefore, has the advantage
of being true, and receives, in confirma-
tion of its truth, the imprimatur of an
authorised dedication to Lloyd's. More-
over, it is replete with manly thought and
sound principle, and boys of all ages will
be the belter for hearing how the “ Boy
Skipper ” navigated the good ship Tra-
falgar from Java to Melbourne, under
exceptionally trying and discouraging
circumstances.
"We have rarely read a more admirable boy’s
«ory than this." — Schoolmaster.
“In 'The Boy Skipper’ Mr. Metcalfe narrates the real adventures of William Shotton
ivho received a medal and a handsome gratuity from the members of Lloyd s for saving the
thip Trafalgari with its valuable cargo."— Tht Times.
“ No more inspiring story of heroism for boys could be found."— Daily News.
“ The volume will be acceptable as the true story, well told of a British lad s pluck, energy
and resource.” —Morning Post.
“We cannot imagine a more pleasing and inspiring gift book for a boy."— Whitehal.
Review. . .
“ A skilfully-woven piece of biography. One that it would be well to pul into every lad i
bands." — Truth, M
“It is a true story of the life and adventures of a Sunderland sailor boy. -Glasgow
Her Aid. .
11 Mr. w. c. Metcalfe has spared no pains to make the heroism of Mr. Shotton as reahsiu.
as possible." —Newcastle Daily Leader .
“ Boys ought to take eagerly to ' The Boy Skipper.' ”-Birmingham Daily Gazette.
‘“The Bov Skipper' has the additional and superlative merit of being true. No fatter
exemplification of conception of duty could have occupied Mr. Metcalfe s pen.
Christian Age,
“ A fascinating story of fact, which all readers will enjoy. Fairpiay.
" A book of entrancing interest to boys, and with much to engage the attention of those o<
•ider growth."— Leeds Mercury. _
“A capital sea story fox boys, having the merit of being founded on fact."— Livery**.
Daily Post.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and n, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


Selections from Jarrolbs’ JTero 25001i5,
BOOKS OF ADVENTURE FOR BOYS.
Crown Srv?, Cloth . 3/6 each.
The Story Hunter. By
E. R. Suppling, Author of
“ Afloat in a Gipsy Fan,” “ Jethou,
or Crusoe Life in the Channel
Islands.” Illustrated by Paul
Hardy. 2nd" Edition.
A volume so varied in its contents as
to please many tastes. Hypnotism is
the weapon which the Story Hunter
uses to bring down his quarry—uses,
too, with such effect that he is able to
present to the reader a collection of
thrilling narratives of the most hetero-
geneous character.
The stories themselves purport to be a
collection formed by a gentleman who lives in
a caravan, journeys about the country, hypno-
tises lively subjects, and obtains from them,
vvhen l in that state, tales of remarkable events
that have happened to them. These tales are
all striking, and quite out of the ordinary line.
There is certainly no lack of imagination in
these tales. ’ —Tke Standard,
„ Z?' stor,es are h 'S h, y imaginative, an( j f onn a very interesting book.”— Essex fftralH.
lbiS b °° k f ° r M " Suffling knOWS hOW t0 thril! *«>
„^ ey ar ' certaln to dell S ht any boys who have a liking for the supernatural,"—Scotsman.
(i Tbere are plenty of entertaining short tales in ‘ The Story Hunter.' "—Graphic.
“A very entertaining volume.”— Daily Chronicle.
A volume consisting of some ten stories, not one of which is weak or ineffective. We can
recommend the book as being a capital volume of literature."-*?**™," ,nenec,lve - We
habit If IrfvelHnv all 6 ,u “ absorb ! n g collection of tales, told by a gentleman who is in the
oabit ot tra\ellmg about the country in a caravan . —Elizabethan,
St ? neS ar f Well told| and will 1,6 acceptable to young people.”— Morning Post.
renHw er fP»Jr e 2ui nl k y n ° 'j Ck ° f i . m L agi , nat , ion in these tales, and we predict that few who start
" e W book until they reach the end of it."-Devon a£
woTd'^™a^ d n:rT inating are Sev !P l tbe stories - The is nicely illustrated, nd
would form a capital prize or present. — Schoolmaster.
qUaint ta>CS ’ “ Which the su P ernatura l P'ays a very important part.”- 1 V
"The tales are well told, and full of interest."— School Guardian
p, ““ h “ “““ in —• ■*»
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and n, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


Selections from 3 arro^s ’ CIU Soofis,
BOOKS OF ADVENTURE FOR BOYS,
Crown B vo, Illustrated , Handsomely Bound, Cloth , Olivine Edges.
Price 3/6. {Postage afed.)
Lights Out. By Robert
Overton. With twenty-six full-
page Illustrations by Reinhold
Thiele. 2nd Edition. 3s. 6d.
Twenty-six complete short stories,
“ Told in the dark by the Boys of the
Big Dormitory—Tales of the Play-
ground and the Camp, of ‘ the Battle
and the Breeze,’ of young boys and old
boys, from grave to gay, from lively to
severe.”
“Will be read with pleasure by boys.”—
Daily News.
“A good boy’s book or a good book for
boys.”— Morning.
“ ‘ Lights Out,’ by Robert Overton, is breezy, lively, and exciting. They a.e stories of
incidents by land and sea, supposed to be told of evenings in a boys dormitory after the lights
were extinguished and before silence was enjoined. Mr. Overton sometimes drops into verse,
and the verses are very good, especially a fiery ballad of the American Civil War. Dke
Times.
•< The stories are sure to be enjoyed by the youths of all ages, and the book will be a popular
gift.”— Guardian.
“ The tales are supposed to be told to one another by boys at school after the lights are out
They are numerous; brief, and adventurous, dealing with running away school, with
burglars, with the battle, and the breeze. They make a capital boy s book. Scotsman.
“A string of stories of adventure of all sorts in all places, ashore and afloat, told in the
dormitory of Dr. Adlem’s College. Every story is interesting. —Tall Mall Gazette.
“ Deserves a place among the most attractive gift books of the year.”— Schooltnaster.
“Mr Robert Overton sets his boys to weave romances for their own edification o nights in
the big dormkory during the hour which precedes ‘ lights out.’ A charming book this, and
sure of a warm welcome.” — Truth.
“ In the last year or two no writer for the younger members of the community has sprung
into greater mominence than Mr. Overton. His success has been the reward of merit He
oossesses what we cannot characterise otherwise than as a genius for story wilting for boys.
He combines a delightful sense of humour with a dramatic power of the very highest order,
and bis style is easy and graceful.”— Home News.
“ Humour, pathos, and adventure are admirably blended in a manner which does the author
credit. His stories deserve to become popular. ’ —Birmingham Daily Gazette.
“ ‘ Lights Out,’ by Robert Overton, is the title of a collection of racy stories, full of adven-
ture and fun, and yet inspired by a sound and healthy moral tone. hradford Observe .
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and n, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


-- ' ' 1 ' W a
Selections from jarrolbs' Hem Books.
OUR GIRLS' BOOKSHELF.
Crown Sz'O, Cloth elegant. 3/6
Common Chords. By
Raymond Jacberns, Author of
“An Uncut Diamond“ Witch
Demi mat" With Six Illustrations
by Annie L. Beat. and Edition.
In “Common Chords” we have an
admirable study of girl life in the present
day. The heroine, anxious to get away
from uncongenial surroundings, takes a
situation as governess, and the story of
her trials, discouragements, and successes
is naturally and pleasingly' told. The
lone of the book is thoroughly pure and
wholesome.
“This is a common-sense tale which touches
the heart of the reader, and will, no doubt,
become a favourite with girls who want to read
-something more than the ordinary ‘love’ story.’'
- Book A'ems Trades Gazette.
‘Mr. Raymond Jacberns has written a story of unusual interest in which lie displays con-
siderable ability in characterization and in terseness and lucidity of expression.”— St. James
Gazette.
“The authoress of‘An Uncut Diamond’ and ‘Mists’ has put her very best work into the
new book, with the only possible result. The characters are wondrously life-like in eveiy
way, and there is that homeliness about the whole which has distinguished all this writer s
works.” —IVestem Daily Mercury.
“We can assure our readers that they will not be disappointed when they introduce
‘ Common Chords’ as a reward hook. In our judgment there is no better girl’s book in the
market.” — Teachers' Aid.
“The enjoyments and troubles of the youthful heroine are well narrated, and a tone of
pleasant wholesomeness pervades the whole book. Girls will like this story for its simple
unpretending aim and its vivid delineation of female character. Nice pictures and good
printing make ‘ Common Chords’ an excellent gift-book.” —Aberdeen Daily Free Press.
“A pretty and interesting story about various girls and a young clergyman, written by
Mr. Raymond Jacberns, and illustrated by Miss Annie L. Beal. It has a healthy interest of
the study of gentle character, with a dash of mystery to keep the plot well together.” —The
Scotsman.
“ ‘ Common Chords’ is admirably written, and is sure to command a ready acceptance on
-the part of the girls of the household." —Eastern Daily Press.
“Another story to interest and delight older girls is ‘Common Chords.’” —Hearth and
Home.
“One of those stories of strong domestic interest which Raymond Jacberns can tell so
well.” —Birmingham Gazette.
London: Jarrold & Sons, 10 and 11, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


J , i i3wfP
Selections from Jarrolbs’ )Tem Soofts.
OUR GIRLS’ BOOKSHELF.
Crown B vo. Cloth elegant. 3 16.
Harum Scarum. By
Esme Stuart. Illustrated by E.
F. Manning. 2nd Edition
A bright, breezy story, full of life and
“go.” The heroine is a young lady
from the bush, who suddenly finds her-
self the inmate of an English home dis-
tinguished for its stately propriety. The
atmosphere is not congenial, and over-
flowing spirits and masterful ways lead
to endless scrapes. The illustrations add
additional charm to a book already widely
popular.
“Miss Esme Stuart has c eated a charming
character in ‘ Harum Scarum,’ a tomboy of a
girl, who suddenly brought from the wilds of
Australia to the coldness and severity of the
house of an aris'ocratic relative in England,
turns it topsy-turvy, and wins the love of every-
body by her goodness of heart and gaiety.”—
The Star.
“ A vivacious and life-like character sketch of a wilful untamed Australian girl. This girl
has a bright breezy nature and an indomitable will. An extremely amusing story, teeming
with natural and spontaneous fun that never for a moment degenerates into frivolous.
buffoonery.”— Daily Telegraph.
“ There is a good deal of fascination in the whole story, by reason of its earnestness and
probability, and it deserves to enjoy extensive circulation.” — Belfast News Letter.
“The tale is admirably told, and it is full of life and interest. A light satire on present-
day conventionalities is perceptible in the dialogue, which is for the most part clever and
natural.” — Dundee Advertiser.
“ Such as relish a bright breezy story told with unflagging vivacity should procure * Harum
Scarum.’ This is one of the brightest and in parts the merriest of recent novels.” — Publishers
Circular.
“ There is an atmosphere of wholesome high spirits and natural kindness about the hook,
which makes it refreshing to turn to after two or three novels full of social problems ami
subtle characters. We recommend it to readers who look to novels for enlivenment rather
than for instruction or perplexity.”— Spectator.
“A pleasant, simple story, brightly told and full of delightful touches of clever character-
painting, the life of the poor relation —who came from Australia to be educated by her
haughty relation, Lady Dove—will be welcomed by all who like to spend an idle hour or two
over something that is sweet, pure, and wholesome.” — Aberdeen Free Press.
London: Jarrold and Sons, 10 and n, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls.


1 ‘ v, H
Selections from Jarrolbs’ new Books.
ATTRACTIVE BOOKS FOR BOYS AND GIRLS.
Crown Bvo, Cloth, Illustrated. 3/6 each.
The Wild Ruthvens. By
Curtis Yorke, Author of “ Died-
ley,” "Once” "Hush!” “A Ro-
mance of Modern London,” & c .
Illustrated by E. F. Manning, 51b
Edition.
A story illustrating the mistakes, failures
and successes of a family of unruly but
warm-hearted boys and girls. They arc
ultimately softened and civilised by the
influence of an invalid cousin, Dick
Trevanion, who comes to live with them.
He recovers, and, years later, marries
the most rebellious and unruly (formerly)
of all the family, Nancie Ruthven.
An enchanting work. The story runs on with
happy blithesome tread to the end, which is
reached ail too soon. — St, Stephen s Review.
E ‘,'r popularity is that enjoyed by Curtis Yorke s capital story of • The Wild
v' u r l<A appeals to reader * y°, un g “d °' d “dike. I advise anyofie ib sea£h of a
suitable book for a present not to choose before having a look at it.” Henrik tend Home,
" The book is most amusing ."—Manchester Guardian.
r VXw? • r bas Yf ut . e e n h«e as good a boys' and girls' story as could be desired The
book is full of life and incident, and the moral is wholesome though not disagreeably obtruded
There is an out-of-doors breeziness about the book to recommend hihedaUy SoVom«
I Frtemkdf/oul^ l t t additional charm of numerous and handsome Wm JSons.*-.oL/wf
r, " ;j h ! l Wi,d Ruthvens ’ is a rattling, rollicking story of the daily Kfe of a 1 holy terror' of a
family they are mot a bad lot at all, but undeniably humans of a vigorous nature whose
delight is in mischief, whose sorrow is in evil, and whose kindliness And true-heartedness
Ld gbls/^Xr«ri«^r/ e 6 • Tbe b °° k ShoUld b£ « ceed higly interesting to both
“One naturally expects from this writer a wholly enjoyable story, and the nature
expectation will not be disappointed in this case. • The Wild Ruthvens ’ Secured ow inteS
at the outset, and retained it to the end ."—Glasgow Herald. ° t l
, full P { the deed ? °[ three mischievous lads. Schoolboys and their eidera
dl find plenty to laugh at. Fun is here and there interspersed with deeds of pathos that
of most of the members of a wild famil’y,”-
Londons Jarrold and Sons, 10 and n, Warwick Lane, E.C.
Of all Booksellers and at the Bookstalls .


V- /
£>/
/ x /
7/


823 ■ 9/2
O 969 esi
O'V Copy)


1508
02233165


