







u Ho, gossip! What's V the wind?” —Old Play.
The "Norfolk" Nowadays.
A NEWSPAPER PUBLISHED WEEKLY
DURING A VOYAGE FROM ENGLAND TO MELBOURNE,
December 29th, 1873, to March 21st, 1874.
EDITED BY
The Rev. J. L. PARSONS,
OF ADELAIDE.
EDWARD L. SHAW, Esq.,
OF DUBLIN, BARRISTER-AT-LAW.
PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.
Illclboutnc:
M/CARRON, BIRD & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS, 37 FLINDERS LANE WEST.




The
“Norfolk" Nowadays.
‘ ‘ Ho! gossip, what's i' the wind?” — Old Play,
No. 1. JANUARY 10th, 1874.
To the modern Briton a newspaper is a necessity. At home or abroad
he feels his life is incomplete without a broadsheet which chronicles
the events happening around him, and by the aid of the telegraph
places before him the principal occurrences in foreign lands —so
keeping him abreast of the world’s history. To this almost insatiable
appetite for information must be attributed the immense multipli-
cation of newspapers in the present day, and the marked growth of
the power of the press in all English-speaking communities. Few
are the towns, even in the dullest agricultural districts, where a read-
able bi-weekly or weekly paper is not sustained; while the London
dailies, by the accuracy and rapidity with which they supply intelli-
gence, leave little to be desired in the work of journalism. Nor is
this all. So important is it for opinion to have a cheap and constant
currency, that all shades of politicians, all schools of philosophical
thinkers, and all sections of the religious world maintain an organ in
which they can advocate their principles and trounce their opponents.
One of the many deprivations of a long voyage is the loss of the
newspaper. Moody passengers embark, bringing with them the Times,
Daily News, or Standard of the day of sailing, last week’s Punch,
Spectator, and Athenceum , and sadly sigh—“ Oh, the tedium of the
coming months, whose ennui no leader, review, or telegram will
relieve ! Alas! for a while, at least, I fear my good days are done.”
With such or similar thoughts, we do not doubt, some, at any rate, of
the present citizens of the Norfolk left Gravesend or Plymouth; and
even those who in the bustle of preparation, or in the more absorbing
sorrow of bidding home and friends farewell, found no space for
these reflections, have since discovered that a life on the ocean wave,
even more than life in city or hamlet, needs a newspaper. While
yet the languor and mental prostration of the mal-de-mer were dis-
tressingly obvious, vague inquiries were made—“ Are we to have a
paper?” “Can we not have a paper?” And though the burden of
response was somewhat despairing in tone, yet the more sanguine
firmly held fast to the hope that with so large a number of passengers,
and among them so goodly a representation of the learned profes-
sions and so much general culture, a journal would ultimately be
established.
After the failure of several preliminary negotiations, the present
editors, with much diffidence, have undertaken their responsible
duties. They feel much more deeply than the readers of the Norfolk
Narbada,ys will be able to discover, their lack of the rare qualifications
and that practical experience which are requisite for the successful
conduct of the humblest member of the press. They will not, how-
ever, angle for compliments under the cloak of professions of unfitness.
Such abilities as they possess they will cheerfully give to their work,
nor will they spare time or effort to secure the excellence at which
they will perseveringly aim. It needs only that all the members of
our community do their part, for the Norfolk Nowadays to prove itself
worthy of the veteran ship whose name it bears, of the passengers
who sail in her, and perhaps of being printed and kept as a pleasant
memorial of companionship from England to Australia.
It will be fitting, and indeed needful, for the editors in their first
issue to place before their readers the principles upon which the
paper will be conducted. The Norfolk Nowadays is not intended to
be a comic paper simply or chiefly. Ample space will be afforded for
facetious remarks, humorous descriptions, puns, parodies, quips, and
jests; but a fair portion of the paper, it is hoped, will possess more
than an ephemeral interest, and earnest subjects will be treated in a
sober and thoughtful spirit. The editors are of opinion that the rock
on which nautical journals are too often wrecked is the unwise
pandering to a depraved taste for flashy, funny writing, in which
sense is sacrificed to jingle, and language is twisted and tortured into
miserable punning.
Eeligious controversy will be rigorously excluded. Experience has
abundantly proved that the odium theologicum is soon developed.
An apparently harmless discussion between two ladies on the respective
merits of low church and ritualism, or between two gentlemen on the
superiority of state churchism or the voluntary principle, is very likely
to end in bitter animosity. The chief object the promoters of the
Norfolk Nowadays have in view is to promote and expand the genial
good fellowship which at present exists. At the same time, as the
bulk of the news must necessarily refer to events in which the indi-
viduals who compose our little world are the actors, it is hoped that
what is inoffensively intended will be kindly taken, and that we may
all laugh with and not at each other. Thus much for the paper
negatively.
On the positive side, the editors promise that, with the aid of their
efficient staff of reporters, no event of importance shall pass un-
chronicled. Arrangements have also been made with various tele-
graph companies for the earliest possible intelligence from foreign
parts. Sporting topics will receive careful attention, and leading
events will be fully reported. Special attention will be given to
Music and the Drama, and every effort will be made to raise the
standard of excellence in each by judicious encouragement and criti-
cism. The lovers of Whist will find a corner for the treatment of
difficult points in the game; and Chess-players will have another for
reports of games and matches played on board, and for original pro-
blems. There will be a column for Correspondence, and also for
Poetry. In these there will be ample scope for our hidden Chester-
fields and mute Miltons to essay their powers in composition; and as
there are few subjects that may not be treated either epistolarily or
poetically, the editors expect to be abundantly supplied with copy in
these departments. Scintillations of wit, filings of humour, puns,
conundrums, et hoc genus omne, will be comprised under the heading
of Facetiae.
Having thus indicated the parallels between which they propose to
travel, the editors launch forth their first issue upon the ocean of
public opinion with confidence and hope. They will not seek to
escape criticism by making that hackneyed appeal of the timorous—
“ Bo to our faults a little blind,
And to our failings a little kind.”
Nor do they bombastically announce that while
“ ’Tis not in mortals to command success,
Yet we’ll do more, we will deserve it.”
But they do ask that every reader will become a contributor, and
they promise that every writer shall have a fair field and no favour,
making only this request that they will
“Nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in malice.”
NOTICE.
The Editors are glad to acknowledge several valuable contributions.
Some are necessarily excluded from this day's issue owing to want
of space. To ensure the insertion of copy, MSS. should be sent in
early in the week.
The Nowadays is indebted for its handsome cover to the kindness
and artistic skill of a lady passenger.


PEOLOGUE.
The sun shines on our birthday! happy omen!
As welcome as the rippling smile of woman
To half-fledged manhood, ere maturer days
Have taught the worth of indiscriminate praise.
Still let the tender heart, or sterner mind.
Grant grace to venture, be to failure blind.
There is a unison in the placid course
Of a wide river. Thread it to its source,
And sight shall fail to search the myriad springs;
And only ear shall know that each fount sings,
“ I hurry oceanward.” Thus destiny
Has driven us to seek our home at sea.
To some the troubled waters speak of health,
While others cast their horoscope for wealth.
As varied as the gamut of the lute
Our wants are cherished, though our tongues are mute.
The gilded chanticleer on towering vane
Confronts in turn each wind’s opposing reign;
So we, like th’ airy down of thistle flower,
Would mark the current of each passing hour.
We ask from you attention to our pains,
Your approbation will be all our gains.
Be it so for both, kind reader; each repays
The other by the “ Norfolk Nowadays.” E. L. S.
THE MAL DE MEE.
{After the Harm-made-he.)
Attend, all ye who list to hear our noble Norfolk's ways—
I sing of the unfamous thing that happ’d in present days,
When that great sea invincible against her bore amain
The wildest waves of Biscay Bay, the fiercest blasts of Spain.
It was about the lovely noon of a warm winter’s day
She came, a gallant ship, full sail from Plymouth Bay,
At midday she had left the Sound and sped a gallant pace,
But the black sickness by the night had got her well in chase.
Many a faint wretched one came up to stagger on the poop,
And with dim eye and aching head they soon began to droop ;
Look how the victim of the sea lifts up his sallow face!
And then upon his clammy hand leans his bad head a space.
So leaned he when he smoked too much on that remembered day
When first he felt, when first he knew, tobacco’s potent sway;
So leaned he when he drank too much at parties long ago,
When strange and fast before his eyes the lights were dancing so.
Ho! speed the vessel fast, good mate; ho! spread the sails, seamen;
Ho! billows, smoothe your angry crests; ho! sea-swell, drop again.
The freshening breeze of eve unfurled the broad sails’ massy fold;
The parting gleam of sunshine kissed that clipper vessel bold;
Night sank upon the dusky deck and on the dark blue sea,
Such nights in Norfolk oft had been and oft again shall be:
From fo’castle to quarter-deck, from stern to bowsprit stay
That time of slumber was as sad and dismal as the day.
The chessman left his chess alone on cuddy table dim,
The gleeful singer rushed to bed: what now was song to him?
Right sharp and quick the time all night rang from the midwatch bell,
But ere the day full many a one felt very far from well.
The passenger in narrow “ bunk” was wakeful through the night,
And saw o’erhanging his hard bed the dimly-burning light,
Then nausea vile and groanings loud the deathlike stillness broke,
And with one start and with one cry his sleeping neighbour woke.
From all the cabins up above peeled loud the groan of pain,
From those down in the “ happy land” ’twas answered back again,
And from the farthest spot was heard the doleful sound
As when upon the foaming sea the swimmer brave is drowned.
And on, and on, without a rest, untired the Norfolk flew,
All night from side to side she rolled, and worse and worse they grew,
Till on his back Judge Nolan lay, a melancholy man;
Till Julien thought, and thinking said, “ How very ill I am ;”
Till Waddington was pale, till Mannering very pale was he;
Till Gill to Edwards whispered low, “ O man, why did we come to sea?”
Till Just grew ill, and thought upon the friends he’d left behind,
And wished that he was back again in body, as in mind;
Till Stephens’ lively agonies the sign to Morris sent,_
And Morris sped the message on where Allen laughing leant;
Till every lady moaned, in pain, “ How very, very sad!”
And the stewards with so many cries were very nearly mad.
* * * * * *
J. L. P.
NONSENSE VEESE.
There was an old dame on the Norfolk,
Who said, “ D’ye know, I abhor yolk
Of eggs beaten up with eau-de-vie syrup,
So I never drink it before folk.” E. L. S.
THOUGHTS.
How strange it seems to be, a world surrounded by nothing but one
vast waste of water. When I sit upon the deck, on a calm, warm
night, I hear the splashing_ and rippling of those gentle waves, it
seems to me as though the sighs of those who have crossed this same
ocean before me, leaving, perchance, behind them all that made life
sweet, were echoed as a warning tone. When I look at that vast
plain of water, and think of the power that lies hidden beneath that
smooth surface, that strength which when roused makes man helpless,
and appear more insignificant than the smallest bubble floating
amongst the foam, I wonder that one so impotent should have been
given the name of “ lord of creation.”
Yet again. I can mirror in that deep blue reflection the green
hills and rippling streams of my native home. Yes, 0 sea! though
thou hast the power to crush ships, to bear upon thy bosom the wealth
of kingdoms, thou wantest that which the smallest limpid brook of
my native country has—a drop of water that one can drink.
Calycanthus.
THINGS NOT GENEEALLY KNOWN.
1. What relation the engineer is to the donkey engine.
2. How eightpence is the half of a shilling ( vide wine card).
3. That there is a land otpure delight (Happy Land).
4. How to divide four boxes of sardines among forty-four people.
5. Who it is that snores in the Happy Land.
6. If Mr. Morgan has a conscience.
7. How much the swinging trays drink during the night.
8. How early you must rise to find the bathroom.
9. That Cabin 24 have found their own carpet.
10. Why those sitting abaft the mizen-mast should be favoured
with such a brilliant illumination.
11. Why on certain days of the month the Vice-President should
ladle soup out of a silver tureen. Can it be to show the wealth of the
service ?
12. How to make a bottle of claret between two last two days.
THE HAPPY LAND.
It’s very dreadful down below,
The place wherein we sleep,
The spot where we our mattresses,
Soap and portmanteaus keep.
Perpetual darkness reigneth there,
The sun ne’er deigns to throw
His light upon the hole we call
The “lowest of the low.”
So many boxes there are piled,
One wonders whence they came —
And two together going down
Are puzzled just the same.
Secured by little bits of wood,
By tin tacks nailed together,
A capital support, of course,
In the most boisterous weather.
They very often fetch away,
Break a few cabins in—
And then they quietly toss about,
With most discordant din.
One inmate there imprison’d was
Three hours (without a doubt),
And heard the cheering breakfast bell,
But could not get her out.
By much hard work she rescued was,
But did not miss her meal,
Because ’twas only the first bell
For breakfast she heard peal.
No light! no air ! and basins which
But breakfast saucers are;
(Oh! what a state of things to tell
To Morgan’s fond Mama[r]!)
And yet we manage to survive,
And come up ev’ry morning
As soon as breakfast bell has toll’d
Its usual three hours’ warning.
’Tis strange indeed! Yet stranger things
Oft happen down below;
For instance—my left boot was cleaned
Two days ago, I know!
We should be happy, but the noise
One man incessant makes
Is dreadful! (Sir, do stop it, do!
Just for the ladies’ sakes.)
THE “NORFOLK” NOWADAYS.


It isn’t pleasant, you’ll agree;
I cannot understand
How any one of us survives
Down in the “ Happy Land.” Francesco.
At dead of night,
In pale moonlight,
A thin clad figure was seen
To issue forth
From out a berth,
Radiant in lightsome sheen.
As it went forth
Towards the north,
About the mizen, I ween,
I observed it stand,
Something in hand,
By the light I thought it green.
“ Spirit,” said I, “ or thing of evil,
Art thou ghost, or art thou devil,
Be the spirit of thy intent
Good or evil, what thy bent ?
Dost come here to rudely fright
Peaceful sailors in dead of night,
Or to trouble the waters calm,
Giving the passengers many a qualm ?”
With many a laugh and many a chuckle
The Spirit replied, rapping time with a knuckle,
“ Spirit I’m not, nor am I a ghost,
I’m a weary mortal just come to the post—
Fearing the Editors, like me, —the sinners—
Might be unwell, after such sumptuous dinners;
So in my charity, thinking they might be ill,
I came to the post to send them a pill.” J UVENIS.
gome Uetos.
OUR Captain. —We have great pleasure in announcing that our
gallant commander, whose cheerful face has for a day or two been
missed from the quarter-deck and the head of the cuddy table, on
account of illness, is once more himself again. Captain Parham has
already won golden opinions by his courtesy and indefatigable efforts
to promote the comfort of all on board. We ai - e sure our readers
join with us in congratulating him upon his appointment to the com-
mand of the Norfolk, and in wishing him a long and prosperous
career.
The Chief Cook. —We are sorry to learn that the health of the
chief cook shows little or no signs of amendment. Quite apart from
all selfish considerations arising from the loss of his services in the
cuisine of the ship, his prolonged and serious sickness has caused
sincere sympathy and regret. We trust he may soon have a change
for thev better. Arrangements have been made by Captain Parham
to meet the difficulties occasioned by the absence of this important
official from the galley. , . .
Happy Land Episode. —A curious instance of misappropriation
of property occurred a few days since, in that Arcadia yclept the
“Happy Land.” A gentleman of comfortable tastes, who desired
that his cabin might present a furnished appearance, bought and
brought on board a length of carpet, which he naturally enough
intended for his own use. Somehow this carpet vanished, and all
inquiries as to its whereabouts proved futile. While complaining one
day of the desolation of his “ den,” as he phrased it, and of the
hardness of the boards upon which he was compelled to walk, he was
invited by a neighbour to visit his domicile and see how sumptuously
it was upholstered. No sooner had he crossed the threshold than his
eye detected something familiar in the pattern of the carpet that
gave such an air of luxury to the apartment; and on closer examina-
tion he made the startling discovery that this was none other than
his own missing property. With his customary vigour and volubility
he announced himself the rightful owner, and denounced the wanton
disregard of meum and tuum exhibited by his young friend; then
quickly snatching it up, tacks and all, with mingled feelings of good-
humoured indignation and delight, he laid it upon his own few square
feet of territory. At the table abaft the mizen, where the “feast of
reason and the flow of soul” is conspicuous, this little affair has
caused no small amusement, and the enterprising furnisher who
made himself so grand in borrowed plumes has been unmercifully
chaffed —we are glad to say, without being chafed.
The Piano in Pound."— We have made the pleasant discovery
that the piano, which has somehow got inconveniently jammed be-
tween the stair-rail that guards the descent to the Wicked World (we
beg pardon, we mean the Happy Land) and Bachelordom No. Z is
not merely an ornament. True, the upper octaves are out of reach
far too high for anyone of ordinary length of arm; still, it has been
played. We understand the proprietor has generously placed the
instrument at the service of all who are willing and able to play.
While we are going to press, we are glad to observe Mr. Chips is
taking the piano out of pound.
Main-Deckiana. —The denizens of the main deck seem to be very
musical. There are several players on the cornet-a-piston, one of
whom, on a recent evening, kindly, and with much excellence, fa-
voured the ship's company with some delightful airs. On Thursday
evening song was in the ascendant, and the “ Rhine Wine,” Annie
Laurie,” “ Molly Darling,” and several other well-known favourites
were capitally rendered.
The Weather. —Neptune has been in a very sulky mood for the
past ten days. His miserable ill-humour has vented itself in a nasty,
short, jumping sea, a long swell and heavy rolls, which have made
the stern cabins anything but a tranquil abode. Boreas, too, has been
viciously playing into the hands of his brother monarch. Not a
favouring puff did he grant us until Thursday, when, after a stagnant
calm which lasted all day, he lazily breathed upon us. Now he is
helping us along five knots an hour. Thanks, 0 Boreas! king of the
north wind! Can you make it twelve? You won’t bore-us if you do.
[We stop the issue to correct this report. We are almost becalmed
again. —Ed. iY.A.]
The Coops.— Distressing mortality prevails among the poultry.
Daily some of our feathered food goes over the ship’s sides, feathers
and all. On Thursday we saw with sorrow our old acquaintances
Quack Mallard, Esq., Mr. Cockalorum, Mrs. Barndoor-Hen, and
Miss Pullet consigned, uncoffined and unknelled, to the deep, much
to the astonishment of a covey of wide-awake gulls following in our
wake.
Great Smash. —Much sensation and some alarm was caused during
dessert on Tuesday last. Just as the ladies were retiring, a gentleman
was doing his best to rise, when his head came into collision with the
swing tray, and to his disgust, about a dozen wine glasses, a bottle of
brandy, another of sherry, aad a third half full of claret (and un-
corked), and a cruet-glass of Worcester sauce descended like an ave-
lanche on his devoted head. Fortunately, he escaped with a drenching
of wine and sauce. The uncharitable suspicion that the gentleman
had been too freely quaffing the “ rosy ”we are able to contradict; in
fact, he had confined his libations solely to “ the milky ,” i.e., the
unfiltered water we have often to drink.
Jxrmjgtt Ildus.
Our communication with the outer world has been frequently inter-
rupted of late. The patent elastic wires, laid on regardless of expense,
have not accommodated themselves to the operation of putting in and
taking out the dead lights. We hope, now that our final arrangements
are complete, that we may not be further inconvenienced, and our
readers deprived of their news.
A special message informs us that our friends, though they miss us
in the old familiar spots, are grown somewhat accustomed to our
absence, after the manner of mankind, and are measurably comforted.
So time soothes all.
We have had the erratic latitudes and ‘longitudes—we have been
compelled to take very much to ourselves. But few sails have been
seen by our mast-head reporter. One misty morning some three or
four were in sight, but they were soon lost in the haze. One pre-
sumptuous barque dared to try conclusions with the “ Norfolk ,”
during part of one day, but was ignominiously dropped astern when
the good old ship roused herself to her work.
On Thursday morning an inquisitive whale came up from the weedy
caves of ocean, and rudely reconnoitred us. A heavy rain was falling
at the time, but at last a sufficient number of passengers got on the
skylights to stare him out of countenance; so recovering his modesty,
he retired into the obscurity from which he came, and which so well
becomes him. This presumptuous monster actually dared to blow
just beneath the stern cabin windows. If he repeats that liberty, he
will be made blubber.
MUSIC AND THE DRAMA.
We are glad to be able,to chronicle an increase of musical interest*
Thanks to the exertions of a few, the latent powers of the many are
being brought to the surface. On Thursday afternoon last, a most
agreeable ballad concert almost allowed us to forget the miseries of
the downpour above. A choir has already been formed to assist at
the Sunday services, and we trust we shall not be disappointed in
our hope that its concerts may prove one of the most agreeable
features of the voyage. There is on board a strong body of musical
talent which only requires combination to become most effective.
A word of thanks is certainly due to the gentleman to whose
providence we owe the advantage of a piano.


SHIP’S
LOG.
Bay.
Lat.
O /
Long.
Dist.
Bar.
Remarks.
1. Thurs.
48 1
9 15
—
30-02
Westerly gale.
2. Fri,...
45 43
10 39
151
30-54
Strong westerly gale, with
heavy sea.
3, Sat....
44 60
11 28
118
30-28
Breeze veering westerly with sea,
wind falling light.
4. Sun...
43 27
13 11
146
30-48
Light S.W. wind, fog, and mist
5. Mon. .
41 10
14 48
29
30-30
S.W. moderate. Rain. Hauled
to N.N.W.
6, Tues..
40 49
15 9
140
30-40
W.S.W. unsteady, moderate,
and fine.
7. Wed..
38 48
15 40
100
30-10
S.W. wind moderate. Head sea
8. Thurs.
38 24
15 43
43
29-80
S.W. strong. Rain. Calm.
9. Fri....
38 2
36 45
16 31
15 40
87
29-50
Light bafiling N.E. Calm.
Westerly swell.
10. Sat...
36 3
18 47
155
“
For the first four days no observations were taken.
THEATRE ROYAL, “NORFOLK.”
THE Managers have great pleasure in announcing to the Public
that they purpose, at an early date, to produce, with unprece-
dented splendour, the Comedy of
A HUNDRED THOUSAND POUNDS,
By H. J. Byron, Esq.,
With a cast unrivalled for general talent.
The theatre has lately undergone a complete re-decoration, and no
expense has been spared to insure the comfort of its patrons.
Full particulars next week.
Wanted.
A LITTLE SENSE, as a present to one of the gentlemen on
board. Apply A. 8., care of Editors.
HOME ONE WHO CAN TALK, at our (Fore) end of the table,
ij Apply X., care of Editors.
ONE of the SALOON CABINS, in exchange for a Bijou Boudoir
in the locality known as the “happy land.” Has a lively look-
out into the second class, and the advantage of sea air and water.
THE best DRAUGHTS supplied at the lowest possible rates. Apply
Nemo, Happy Land.
For Sale.
rpHE SECOND HALF of a BOTTLE OF CLARET. On the
JL receipt of the money the purchaser will be told which swinging
tray it was left on.
The drama is a good wine that needs no bush of ours. We have
only to draw our readers’ attention to the advertisement thereupon in
our issue of to-day to remind them of the treat that is in store. We
understand that the rehearsals are proceeding smoothly, and that
those best qualified to judge are satisfied— verb. say.
SPORTING.
The only sporting event of importance has been a very exciting
cockfight, on the poop-deck on Wednesday last. Both birds, though
game,° were short-winded and out of condition, but we understand
their trainers are determined to commence strict work at once.
CARDS AND CHESS.
Players wishing to join the Scratch-pair Whist Sweepstakes are
requested to forward their names on or before Thursday next to
hon. sec. (care of editors A. A.) We may state that the entrance fee is
2s. 6d. ; the pairs play throughout as drawn at first. Whist cases
and problems will be inserted, if original.
Space will be reserved for chess games or problems. We must
rely on the dona fide of our contributors that they shall be original.
The “Norfolk” Nowadays.
“Ho gossip! What's i’ the wind —Old Play.
No. 2. JANUARY 17, 1874.
Our feelings to-day, editorially speaking, are of a mixed character.
Success and congratulation greeted our earliest eiforts beyond our
most hopeful anticipations ; and “silver-tongued praise” of men, and
the mute flattery of fair animated faces bending over our pages, have
inspired us with a—perhaps—unwarrantable amount of confidence.
Our appreciation of difficulties and troubles has given us all the more
relish for the approbation of our readers.
We are, however, most anxious that each week may find an in-
crease in the intrinsic worth of the “ Nowadays .” To this end much
labour and time are freely devoted, and we feel, with that assistance
we might reasonably expect, much more might be done ; without it,
our task becomes unduly arduous, and the style of the paper mono-
tonous. Surely there are many on board both able and willing to
contribute of their abundance, who will accept of this reminder in
the spirit in which it is intended. Fair winds and tropical suns may
have for the nonce beguiled our staff into Lotos land : at all events,
we trust we may not have to appeal a second time.
CHESS.
Under the awning’s shadow,
Tacing the tinted west;
At that hour, when all creation
Seems hushed to quiet rest;
Wrapt in their deep reflections,
Studying each other’s part,
There sat two silent players
Gambling—a human heart!
His were wilier movements,
For his the richer prize;
Hers were the readier weapons,
She fought with big blue eyes ;
And now and then through the gloaming
There shot a glance, so bright,
That it seemed as if pale Diana
Had winged her silvery flight.
But surely, were heaven concerned
In that unequal strife,
’Twas Venus that lent to our Chloe
A form of divine-like life. - E. L. S.
“A MOURNFUL DITTY.”
Once on a time a boy named Lee
Took’t into his head he’d go to sea.
Heave ho! Yeave 0!
Though warned of much work and very little pay,
He was strong-willed, and wouldn’t be said Nay.
Haul away ! Haul away!
So he sailed in a ship called the Becky Lee,
Which went from Hull to the Zuyder Zee.
He ho! He ho!
Not on the voyage very far got he
When he began to feel oh! so sickly.
Yeave O ! Heave ho!
Oh why, said he, did I ever roam?
Don’t I wish that I was now at home.
Ho Oh! Oh ho!
But regrets were now of little avail,
The ship was then fast making sail.
Ha! ha! Ha! ho!
When he thought he was unobserved away he slunk,
Thinking to find comfort in his solitary bunk.
Haul away! Haul away!
But being discovered, he was dragged out of bed
And for a punishment was sent to the mast-head.
Heave ho! Yeave 0!
Out here again so sick grew he,
He lost his head and fell into the sea.
He! ho! Ho! he!
Poor little fellow, he was drowned,
A boat was lowered, but he couldn’t be found.
Ho! ha! Ha! ho!
Moral.
So all ye little boys, who like he
Think that you would like to go to sea,
Heave ho! Heave ho!


Take warning of those who, by experience understand.
Though the sea may be good, ’tis better far on’land.
Haul away! Haul away!
—Little Toddlekins.
NONSENSE RHYME.
There was a young man of Australia,
Who said, “Diamonds grow on a dahlia.”
So he plucked off the leaves, and washed them in sieves,
And cried, “ Do you see my regalia.” E. L. S.
HOW WE SAW THE SKJiEGGrEDAL* FOS.
We left Odda for the Skjseggedal Fos at seven in the morning. After
rowing up the Hardanger for about four miles, we lauded at Tyssedal,
where the river that comes from the Fos enters the Fjord. We had
heard much of the steep rough path all must clamber who would see
this, certainly one of the finest of the watery sublimities of Norway,
and much, too, of the wonderful sure-footedness of Norwegian
ponies, so our intention was to hire ponies and ride where riding was
possible. At the only farmhouse where these could be obtained we
found they could only let us have one, and as four of the laziest
English tourists that ever crossed the North Sea would hardly like
the ghosts of the old Vikings to see them all riding at once or even
by turns upon one poor hack, we declined him. Our guide (Norse
toll i>), moreover, had all along assured us that if we could get all the
steeds of Norway and all the mules of the Andes, we should have to
go to the Skjaeggedal on our own two feet. Our experience emphati-
cally proved the truth of his assertion.
The best description that can be given of the climb up the steep
side of the gorge is, that for nearly four miles the traveller seems to
be ascending the staircases of whole terraces of twelve-storied
houses; then he scrambles up their roofs, finding occasional variety
in being compelled to take a stroll on the parapets. The fact being,
that in places the shattered fragments of rocks which in the course
of ages have fallen from the precipitous heights above have been
arranged so as to form rude unequal steps, and as these are often
sharp-edged, and slope at every conceivable angle, the ascent of the
Great Pyramid or the leaning Campanile at Pisa is level travelling
by comparison. By climbing up roofs it is meant that every now and
then plateaus of solid granite have to be crossed which slant at an
angle much more acute than the deck of the Norfolk has ever been,
under the strongest wind abeam. This is Nature’s Appian Way,
the whole pavement being of one unbroken block. The explanation
of the parapets is, that where the slope is too steep for any human
foot to find foothold, the road commissioners, whoever they may be,
have placed rough hewn fir trees side by side, supporting them on
forked stakes which rest in ledges of the rocks below. But worse
than the fir trees, the granite rocks or the steps, were the slippery
roots, which made a regular network of traps and a series of most
dangerous slides; for a slip meant rolling down some hundreds of
feet, where a foamy torrent dashed wildly between banks of solid
rock or over a bed filled with gigantic boulders. On this more than
once we came perilously near a fall; but by cautious balancing we
managed to reach, at last, a great razor-back ridge, which our guide
informed us, to our great joy, was the highest point.
We then began to descend, finding that hard as the ascent had
been upon our ancles, the descent was quite as hard upon our knees.
It was very similar in character, and nearly equal in distance. The
final pinch was a scramble over, and under, and between a great
strew of huge masses of rock, scattered over about a mile, in the
wildest confusion. Next came a little green morass, by courtesy
called a farm, where two or three families eke out a wretched
livelihood. Here we engaged boatmen for the lake above, whose
shores we reached after another mile of hard walking. The boat
was a battered, leaky craft, but as there was no other, we, with some
misgivings about our returning, at last embarked. For an hour we
were rowed up its smooth solitary waters. Not a single living thing
did we see, and even the cliffs, which rose between two and three
thousand feet on either side, could scarcely sustain a tree or bush.
It was all bare, barren, desolate rock.
After rounding a sharp point our boat crossed the course of the cur-
rent, and the Skjaeggedalwas opened out to us in all its august (it was in
August , by the way) splendour. In half an hour our keel grated on the
pebbly strand, and we leaped ashore. After clothing ourselves in water-
proof from head to foot, we made for the spot where the stream enters
the lake. Here we found a fall of some seventy or eighty feet; above
this there was a wild cataract of about three hundred yards, by the
side of which, through the dripping plants, and through the driving
spray which dashed upon us like a heavy rain with the eddies of the
wind made by the fall, we forced our way. We approached as near
* Pronounced Shaggadal Pos. It is situate on the west coast of Norway.
as we dared, and looked up at the watery wonder of whose fame we
had so often heard. Fed from a lake in the hollow of the mountains,
itself fed by melting snow, a large river falls between seven and
eight hundred feet over a sheer cliff upon a great block of granite. The
outer portion, what would be the surface waters of the stream, is
shot far out, and suggests the idea of batteries of thousands of
rockets discharged in swift succession and in ever varying combina-
tions, while the great body of the river, as if in utter eagerness to
reach the still lake beneath, seems to take, at a dash, the dreadful
leap.
Language is utterly inadequate to describe the wild grandeur of
the scene. The steep black rock, over whose age-worn surface the
gathered spray streams down in a thousand rills; the majestic,
silence-compelling, almost deafening, roar of the fall; the awful
force of the descending torrent; the dreary desolation of the sur-
rounding scenery, make up a picture so weird and impressive that,
while memory lasts, it must maintain a foremost place. To add to
its solemnity, while the writer lingered for a few minutes, the sun,
which till then shone brightly, and filled the hollow chasm with all
the tints of the rainbow, became shrouded in a dense cloud, and a
dull, deep peal of thunder was like the diapason swell of some
gigantic organ.
The following extract from the Dag-bog at the station is a lady
tourist’s account of her experiences in visiting the Fos :
Oh Skjaeggedal! wild Skjaeggedal! if I were but a crow,
I’d take an annual flight to see thy foamy water flow;
Or, if I even were a goat, I’d scale the craggy steep;
But, frail, fat mortals such as I must look before they leap.
And I will look a long, long time before I climb again
To Skjseggedal’s white water falls, or thy blue ice, Buerbrse.*
' ■ J. L. P.
THE BATH AT MORN.
There was a sound of boisterous mirth at mom—
The Norfolk’s quarter-deck had gathered there
Her early-risen bathing ones. No horn
Had summon’d them from that dark, dismal lair,
Misnam’d the “happy land,” but debonnair
They came—of clothing somewhat bare.
And then arose the pump’s harsh, grating noise,
And all went merry as a play-ground game.
But, hush ! hark ! a dull, deep thump astonishes the boys.
Did ye not hear it ? No, ’twas that snorer’s nose,
Or the sea smashing through another window at the stern.
On with the pump ; keep full the gushing hose :
Best not this morn, when we with ardour burn
To lave us in the briny flood, and spurn—
But hark ! that heavy sound we heard but now
Is follow’d by a groan; we needs must learn
What ’tis hath happ’d, and who hath fall’n, and how.
Quick ! quick! it is, it is brave Gill who made the row.
Within a curtain’d bunk, in Number Two,
Sleeps Scotia’s gallant chieftain. He first heard
The voice that summon’d them gymnastic deeds to do,
And in his manly breast his heart was stirr’d
To show his prowess. No fears had he to quell.
No, not more than hath yon soaring bird,
That with curv’d wing is balanced. Well—
His bath he had -he ran—then backward sudden fell.
And then, with speed, they hurrying came in pairs,
They gather’d round him, all trembling with distress.
His cheeks were pale, and so, in truth, were theirs.
They knew not then how he had made of jumping such a mess,
Nor what possess’d him there to lie and press
The hard deck planks, as if he’d found a prize
Well worth the keeping. Then ventur’d one to guess,
From something rather queer about his eyes,
He’d come a regular “ cropper” down, and then he tried to rise.
Thus, after mounting in hot haste, these men,
Who muster on the poop, and clatter up the stair—
Who make the old pump creak and squeak again ;
Who loudly laxigh, and do not seem aware
They wake the captain from his slumbers rare ;
Who quite forget below are some who wish to sleep,
And who for bathing very little care—
Were taught it is not safe to jump and leap
Upon a ship’s wet deck; and now some quietness they keep
J. L. P.
Those the gods love, ’tis said, they like to tease;
This was consoling ’gainst an adverse breeze.
Now at twelve knots we’re ploughing through the sea,
Just think what sinners all on board must be.
Calycanthus.
* Buerbrse is a glacier of the Polge-fond, not far from Odda.


SHIP’S LOG.
Day.
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Bar.
Remarks.
11. Sun. .
34 52
19 17
76
29-56
Calm. Rain. Later moderate
S.B., squally.
12. Mon..
31 24
19 30
209
29-70
Moderate S.E., veered round
E.N.E. to N., strong.
13. Tues..
27 23
19 35
241
30-06
Fresh. W.N.W. breeze, with fine
weather.
14, Wed..
24 00
19 19
204
30-06
Decreasing, westerly. Fine
weather.
15, Thurs.
21 24
19 16
156
30-11
Less wind, veering northerly.
Trades.
16. Fri...
18 32
19 43
174
30-15
Brisk trade. Fine weather,
N.E.
17. Sat....
14 5
19 45
207
—
Brisk trade. Fine weather
N.E.
gome ffelos.
Window Smashing. — On Sunday morning last a revelling mer-
man, not recovered from his over-night dissipation, or mischievous
young mermaid, taking an early bath, maliciously broke the star-
board quarter gallery window. The tenant of the adjoining cabin
happened at the time to be looking out at the side door ; and, to add
insult to injury, he was drenched, and the bath was filled with water.
A formal complaint has been lodged with King Neptune, who, through
his ambassador, has apologised, promising at the same time that every
effort shall be made to bring the offender to justice. The Tritons have
the case in hand, and the criminal, when captured, will be confined
for seven thousand years in a conch shell.
Dancing. —On Wednesday evening the poop presented a gay and
festive appearance. The hencoops on the windward side were re-
moved ; sundry lanthoms (which looked like miniature lighthouses)
shed a friendly, if not very brilliant, light around; and all the passen-
gers (except a gallant captain, who was caught in the toils of crib-
bage) were above. Mr. Perry kindly supplied the music; and the
devotees of the “ muse of the many twinkling feet” found delight in
the schottische, the polka, the waltz, and the quadrille, and the
“ wall-flower” tribe much pleasure in watching the graceful move-
ments of the dancers. On the main deck, also, there was dancing;
and judging from the crowded appearance of the “ Norfolk ,” there
was a general muster. At half-past nine “ God save the Queen” was
played, and subsequently there was an improvised concert, which was
kept up till a late hour.
The Happy Land. —Our underground reporter informs us that the
inhabitants of this light and airy region have been relieved from the
presence of a great wall of luggage and stores that occupied all their
central territory, and whose fall to starboard or larboard has been
daily expected since we left Plymouth. We congratulate our friends
below on their increased area, and hope they will now breathe freely.
The “ North-East Trades.” —We are glad to announce the
arrival of these welcome winds. Our remarks in last week’s issue
have evidently been taken in good part by the powers that be, and
have produced the desired effect. To-day our running has been 276
miles, and at the time of going to press there is every probability of
an equally good distance for to-morrow. The studding-sails have
been set, and our hopes of a good passage are restored.
iforeupr |lclbs.
A few mornings ago there was great excitement on deck. All the
telescopes and binoculars on board were levelled due east, and sundry
exclamations, such as—“ There it is,” “ I see it ” —indicated that land
was supposed to be in sight. We were then abreast of Palma; but
whether Palma was seen or not is very much a matter of private
opinion. Flying fish have been seen by casual observers, but those
who have made a point of looking for them seem to have looked at
the wrong time. One came on board last night, and was found on
the forecastle at daylight. Mother Cary’s chickens have been hover-
ing around us, and skimming on fleet wing over the crests of the
“ white horses.”
MUSIC AND THE DRAMA.
The delicious weather that we have enjoyed during the past week
has naturally outdone the claims of indoor music. The choir prac-
tices are conducted with a regularity that most other institutions on
board ship would do well to imitate, but it is only a sense of duty or
hunger that can make the saloon draw at present.
On the main deck a very varied collection of songs is served up
nightly about six bells, and as all nations seem to be represented, the
whole performance is very interesting.
We have much pleasure in calling attention to the notice in our
issue of to-day of the forthcoming theatricals. The managers have
had a most troublesome task to perform, but we trust their difficulties
are now smoothed, and that no further complication may arise before
Friday, when we are warranted in promising an evening’s enjoyable
fun to those who go to be amused.
CARDS AND CHESS.
It has been decided, owing to the small number of entries, to post-
pone the drawing for the scratch whist pairs until we catch the S.E.
trades.
Cribbage and whist are still played occasionally in the evenings,
but as the deck has now the additional attractions of a ball-room, the
cuddy seems deserted in its favour.
SPORTING.
Sportsmen for some days have been unfortunate, not from any want
of skill, but from the total absence of game. So far were they
reduced as to commence firing upon some harmless gulls, who had been
our faithful followers since leaving Plymouth, and are certainly un-
worthy of the gun of a sportsman.
Arrangements are being made for quoit scratch-pairs, and Mr.
Allen, with his usual bonhommie. has consented to act as hon. sec.,
stakeholder, treasurer, umpire, and to play himself if necessary.
The sweepstakes on the daily reckoning produces the solitary flutter
of excitement the day brings. The most benefitted parties are the
seamen’s orphans at present.
feTOspnbma.
To the Editors of the Norfolk Nowadays.
SIRS, —Can any of your numerous readers oblige me by an explana-
tion of the shortness of twilight in tropical and southern latitudes.
Yours,
January 13, 1871. IGNORAMUS.
To the Editors of the Norfolk Nowadays.
Sirs, —It is by no means the least enjoyable feature of our present
life, to listen, evening after evening, to the cheerful sounds that
emanate from the main-deck. That this is the case, I think is
evidenced by the numbers who assemble every evening to harken,
and who testify their approbation by the usual signs. This being so,
then, I would ask, Why are no songs and glees, &c., heard amongst
ourselves, except when accompanied by the piano, and sung beneath a
stair ? Surely there is a plenty of vocal power amongst us, and if the
possessors thereof would only act together, “one and all,” and would
try, every one, to do his or her best, they might add not a little
to the enjoyment of their fellow-passengers, and promote a more
sociable feeling. * * * Will no one lead such a movement ?
Yours obediently,
15th January. BXPECTANS.
EXAMINATION PAPERS.
No. I.—Arithmetic.
1. Add toy ether two unoccupied hearts, a ninety days’ voyage,
and a taste for astronomy. Altar the result so as to ( form proper
fractions having a common denominator.
2. Subtract the salt from a red herring, and express the result as
a re-carring decimal.
3. Divide the mortality of our hencoops by our latitude and longi-
tude, bringing the quotient to the power of fowl winds.
THINGS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN.
1. Who is the worst musician on board.
2. Looking at Mr. Edwards and Mr. Morris, to say which is the
militia man and which the escaped convict.
3. That it is considered uugentlemanly to carve at table.
4. Where that dog lives on board that does nothing but growl.
Lost.
—■-»—» —
FRIEZE CLOTH BELT to Ulster Coat. Will be gladly received
at Cabin No. 13.
A Pair of Large SCISSORS, left on cuddy table. Will be gladly
A received at Cabin Ho. 1.
6
THE “NORFOLK” NOWADAYS.


THEATRE ROYAL, “NORFOLK.”
THE Performance will take place under the distinguished patronage
of the Captain, Officers, and Ladies,
On FRIDAY EVENING, JANUARY 23rd,
(Weather permitting),
When the popular Comedy by H. Byron, Esq., entitled,
A HUNDRED THOUSAND POUNDS,
Will be performed.
Cast:
Gerald Goodwin W. M. Allen.
Major Blackshaw W. P. Gill.
Sir Rummy Waters... F. Stephen.
Joe Barlow F. R. MoiTis.
Pennythorne C. Waddington.
Mr. Fluker F. Edwards.
Gibbons F. Stephen.
Pyefinch R. Paulin.
Alice Barlow Miss Paget.
Mrs. Barlow Miss Mannering.
Doors open at 7, commence at 7.30. Carriages ordered at 10.
TO INVESTORS OR CAPITALISTS.
CANE-BOTTOM CHAIR INSURANCE COMPANY,
\J —A company is about to be formed to supply a want universally
felt: viz., The Insurance of Possession of Chairs to their respective
Owners. A most moderate premium will afford a handsome return
to shareholders. For particulars apply at Mizen-top-head.
For Sale.
TWO PAIRS thick-soled BOOTS. The owners having tramped all
sleep out of the weather-side of the poop for the last ten nights,
between 10 - 30 and 11 '3O p.m., have no further use for them. Apply
to Hob Nails.
TO BE SOLD without reserve, on TUESDAY, the 2-lth instant, a
magnificent Property, entitled, the HAPPY LAND. It is well
watered and wooded (the timber has lately been cleared), and is
eminently suitable for the cultivation of rice, or any growth requiring
a damp soil and humid atmosphere.
PROCLAMATION. —Whereas it has come to our knowledge that
several of our male subjects have been lately injured in their
endeavour to avoid early risers of the opposite sex while returning
from their bath,
BE IT KNOWN, that it is our royal will and pleasure that no
lady do leave her cabin before seven a.m.
The "Norfolk” Nowadays.
“Ho, gossip! What's i’ the wind?" —OLD PLAY.
NO. 3. JANUARY 24, 1874.
It is a somewhat notorious fact that the average Englishman is
very imperfectly acquainted with the geography, relative importance,
and general features of the group of colonies known as Australasia.
It may possibly be true that, on board a ship bound for Australia,
there may be some whose ideas of the land to which they are going
are hazy. We propose, therefore, to place before our readers, in an
issue of to-day, a few facts that will, we hope, prove useful, though
they may be commonplace. The Australian colonies comprise New
South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, Western Aus-
tralia, Tasmania and New Zealand. The aggregate area of these
seven dependencies of the British Crown is 2,582,070 square miles,
and in the year 1870 numbered a population of 2,102.055 souls. The
oldest colony is New South Wales, which, before the separation of
Victoria and Queensland, included the entire eastern seaboard. It
was originally a convict settlement, but for many years past it has
ceased to receive the criminals of the mother-country. New South
Wales comprises an area of 323,437 square miles, and has a popu-
lation of 519,182. Its chief products are wool, wine, and gold. It
carries more than 16,000,000 sheep, and produces annually nearly
half a million gallons of wine. The value of its imports in 1871 was
£9.609,451, and its exports £11.245,032. Its Government consists of
a Governor appointed by the Grown, an Executive Council of seven
members, a Legislative Council of 27 members, and a Legislative
Assembly of 72 members. Its capital, Sydney, is situated at the
head of one of the most beautiful harbours in the world ; it has a
population of 134,544, and possesses a University, a Free Public
Library, an Observatory, and a Mint.
Victoria was, originally, a part of New South Wales, from which
it only obtained separation after a long and bitter straggle. It is
one of the youngest and the smallest of the Australian colonies, but
is the most influential and the wealthiest of them all. Its entire
area is only 86,881 square miles, but its population in 1871 was
731,528; its imports were £12,341,995, and its exports, £14,557,820.
Its geographical position, too, makes its climate much more agreeable
to Europeans than either of the colonies of the continent of Australia.
The two chief products of Victoria are gold and wool. Of the former,
since its first discovery, no less than £162,999,392 worth has been
obtained. The chief city is Melbourne, which has a population of
more than 200,000, and has a University, whose degrees are highly
esteemed; a Public Library that would be a credit to many an
European city ; a Mint, and many magnificent public buildings.
The Government of Victoria differs from that of New South Wales
only in number. The Executive* Council has 10, the Legislative
Council 30, and the Assembly 78 members. The strong public spirit
and great energy of the Victorians has done much towards winning
for Victoria the foremost place which she occupies, but it must be
borne in mind that in resources she is immensely rich.
(To he continued.)
THE BUERBRiE GLACIER.
The Buerbrse Glacier is the lowest outfall of the great ice-field of the
Folge-fond, which is the largest glacier-bearing fjeld in Norway. It
stretches a distance of fifty miles on the mountain range to the west
of the southern arm of the Hardanger Fjord. Its highest elevation
is about 5500 English feet, and its lowest the glacier of Buerbras,
which is only 1000 feet above the level of the sea. It is within easy
distance of Odde, little more than six hours being required for the
excursion. Armed with the alpenstock of the district, which is a
stick of juniper with one of the boughs twisted along the stem so as
to form a handle, we set out about one o’clock p.m. For about a mile
and a half we followed a rough steep road, which was cut through a
thicket of juniper bushes; from which we obtained glorious peeps
into a fertile little valley, far, far down below us, through whose
green and quiet depths a rapidly flowing river, plunging over cata-
racts and foaming over its rocky bed, hastens on its way to the
tranquil fjord. The road brought us to a lake where we obtained a
boat, and were rowed for about half-an-hour to the outlet of the
Buerbrse Dal (dale or valley), where the stream from the glacier ends
for a time its turbulent career. We passed through quite an agricul-
tural district (for Norway), albeit it was not more than one hundred
acres, and saw many labourers, women as well as men, engaged in
harvesting, which means hanging up the cut grass on wires or rails
to dry, and tying up the diminutive sheaves of corn on tall poles with
the ears turned to the southward, to dry and ripen, the rain being too
frequent and heavy, and the ground too wet to admit of this without
elevating both. We had been struck, as we approached the shore,
with the bold entrance to the gorge; for on either hand, rising at
least three thousand feet, was a gigantic sugar loafed peak, which
seemed to stand like twin sentinels, grim and mighty, to guard the
approach to the dominion of the ice-king. The walk up the dal was
really grand—so grand, indeed, that beside it even the Pass of Glencoe
is tame. On the right, the great cliff of rock which extends for four
or five miles is splintered so as to make eight gigantic tors like the
two already mentioned. On the left, the cliff rises steeply, and has an
almost level summit, and is clothed with small birch trees which
maintain a struggling existence on the little accretions of soil that
lie upon the ledges and slopes of the rocks. At the base, on both
sides, are huge fragments of rock which, as in all the Norwegian
gorges, have fallen from the overhanging heights; and at one place
we stopped to wonder at the terrific wreck caused by an enormous
rock-slip, which occurred some five years ago, and looking down the
dal, saw, to admire, the gorgeous tinted rainbows painted by the sun
with the spray from the rapidly rushing river. As we slowly toiled
up over the rough and rugged way, the sun shone hot upon us, but
from the great field of ice the wind blew keen and cold.
At the bottom of the last steep ascent, a footbridge, narrow and
ricketty, had to be crossed, and then the deeper excitement com-
menced—the glacier was full in view. As we drew nearer the high
ice-line was lost, and a lower one became the boundary of vision.
Most fantastic were the shapes into which the great mass of ice was
congealed or shivered. In the centre, one vast block had the appear-
ance of a huge seated giant, wearing a robe. This, we said, was
none other than the ice-king himself. Next to this rude outline of a
human form, there was another, which bore a strong resemblance to
an enormous greyhound’s head; and, stretching to right and left
were vast pinnacles, leaning in every conceivable direction. After
creeping round the base of a great rock, the mass of ice, choking up
the gorge, seemed close at hand, though it was still some distance off.
It was split and cracked with large gaps, that, as we looked, became


a deep and yet deeper ultramarine blue. When we came close to
the ice, we found it was slowly slipping down, for great fragments of
rock were heaped up before it, and one huge mass of granite, weigh-
ing hundreds of tons, was fairly tilted up on end. Fifty years ago
the Buerbrse glacier did not exist, now it fills all the higher part of
the valley. In the year 1870 it advanced ninety yards, and in the
summer of 1871 it came down four yards in a single week. For a
long, long time we remained gazing upon the grand spectacle before
us, viewing it from all points. Notwithstanding the obvious danger,
our curiosity drew us into one of the great crevasses, which was
quite a cave ; but a warning crack drove us forth to be content with
more distant and safer views.
A CONUNDRUM.
(1) My first is when in stocks you neither lose nor gain,
My second is the leg of an animal slain.
(2) M y first is a letter with a sibilant sound,
My second you will find in a good play-ground,
From my third a wild beast will come with a bound.
(3) To make my first yourself must doubled be,
My second is as round as round can be,
My third is opposed to all that goes evenly.
(4) My first you must say to a horse that won’t go,
My second you are when you’re physically low.
Think of my four, and put them together;
The Norfolk needs them in every weather.
J a\m |Tclbs.
The Trade Winds. —Since our last issue the North-East Trades
have left us, and the South-East Trades have come to us. We can
hardly say that we sped with benedictions these departing helpers,
for we thought they left us over early ; but we certainly gave a
double welcome to the coming ones, for, indeed, they came before we
expected them, and lifted us out of the steaming heats of a tropic
calm.
Burial of the Old Horse. —This deeply-interesting ceremony
has come off during the week. Most of our readers are aware that it
occurs precisely at the end of the first month after sailing, and
means that the crew have worked off the wages they have received
in advance. The horse was a very creditable caricature both of a
horse and a donkey. It was ridden by a jocular member of the fore-
castle, who, it is hoped, when he rides a real horse, does not belabour
it in the same terrific fashion as he did the canvas representative. If
he does he had better beware of the officers of the Royal Humane
Society. After making the circuit of the deck twice, horse and rider
were lifted to the main yard, and from thence the old quadruped was
ignominkmsly dropped into the deep. Rockets were fired, and cheers
given. A collection made in the cuddy, for the crew, amounted to
£2 3s. fid.; the other passengers collected £l.
PIKE FISHING IN DERWENTWATER.
Just before sunrise on a beautiful morning, Jack and myself pushed
off our boat from one of the small landing-places at the Keswick end
of the Derwentwater. We were well supplied with rods, lines, bait,
and landing-net—in fact, everything deemed requisite for the capture
of the monster of the lake. It was, as I have said, a beautiful morn-
ing. Patches of white mist lay scattered on the lake and surrounding
mountains. Skiddaw’s smooth head was hid in a white cloud, tinted
with the rays of the rising sun; and far away, above Barrowdale,
Seafell and his rugged brother hid their rough heads beneath a similar
covering. Not a ripple was to be seen on the water. The roar of the
Lodore waterfall, more than two miles off, was distinctly audible;
which, with the croak of the heron, as he sought his morning meal,
and the splash of some feeding fish, and the slow measured dip of our
oars, were the only sounds that woke the sweet stillness of the morn-
ing, as we commenced operations against Master Pike. I rowed, and
Jack managed the rods, &c. “Steady,” “a little quicker,” “not so
fast,” “pull your right,” “pull your left,” “ straight a-head,” were the
instructions I received from time to time from the eager fisherman.
Suddenly one of the rods bends with a succession of violent jerks. “ A
fish ! a fish!” we both cry at once. The fisherman, jumping up, pulls
in the rod, and making the line fast, proceeds to play his prey. “ Keep
moving,” he says, “he’s all right; well hooked; what a beauty!”
Gradually the struggling creature is brought nearer to the boat. The
rower quits his oar, and takes the landing-net. At last the right mo-
ment arrives, and, with a flourish of the net, a fine jack of eight pounds
is flung gasping and kicking into the bottom of the boat, and there
despatched by a rap on the snout with a foot-board.
THE MIDDY.
Who is it says “ The thing for me
I’m sure will be to go to sea;
Above all things I’d rather be
A middy.”
So straightway off to Silver goes,
And is equipped from top to toes;
And Silver’s very pleased, and so’s
Our middy.
Soon down the river speeds he on,
Rejoicing in the deed he’s done.
“ I like this game, ’tis jolly fun,”
Thinks middy.
But when he gets to waters rough,
Says to himself, “ I’ve had enough.
Oh dear! I am an awful muff.”
Poor middy!
And all day long he’s sent about,
And called a “ something,” stupid lout.
“I’ve made a great mistake, no doubt,”
Says middy.
The other middies do their best
To set his anxious mind to rest. '
“ You’re in a precious hornet’s nest,
Young middy,”
He grows to hate the mizen-royal,
For upwards oft he’s told to toil,
Upon the poop the ropes to coil.
Ah middy!
“ I never came for this,” thinks he,
“ It’s very hard that I should be
Compelled to use this ’ere squeegee.”
Oh middy!
“ I did’nt come the ropes to coil,
With grease and tar my hands to soil,
Eat no fresh meat, my morals spoil,”
Quoth middy,
“Three weary months go slowly by;
We soon shall land, and I shall try
To run away, lie down and die.” _
Poor middy!
Moral.
So, gentle middy, stay at home;
’Tis folly from your ma to roam;
Unpleasant is the billows’ foam,
Eh, middy?
‘ F. R. M.
NONSENSE VERSE.
(No. 3.)
There was a gay lady of Warsaw
In convivial company swore so,
That to keep her tongue quiet, they tried biscuit diet,
But she cried, “ Au diable ce morceau!”
MUSIC AND THE DRAMA.
A very pleasant hour was spent some evenings ago, by the combined
musical exertions of the entire strength of the company. This is as
it ought to be, and, though on that occasion the rain rather damped
the finale, we trust the voices are not permanently untuned.
There is a strong feeling on board that, between the theatrical
success of last night and the next dramatic performance we may look
forward to, a concert on deck would form a most agreeable interlude.
There is ample material to go to work with, and, if the choir will but
prepare a few glees and part songs, there are many soloists, both
instrumental and vocal, ready at a moment’s notice.
THEATRE ROYAL, “NORFOLK.”
A performance of no ordinary ability and success took place last
night, according to announcement. The theatre was most artistically
arranged for the comfort both of the players and their audience, and
reflected the greatest credit on Mr. Sladden’s good taste and untiring
efforts as stage manager. Wind and weather being propitious, with
very fair punctuality the curtain was raised to the concluding notes
of the overture, which, considering the limited force at Mr. Perry’s
disposal, went admirably. Time does not permit us to give more than
a most meagre account of the play, and, indeed, we feel it would be
superfluous to detail what has left such a fresh and vivid impression on
our readers’ minds. Mr. Byron’s comedy of “ £100,000,” although
constructed of slender materials, is admirably adapted for an amateur
performance, not only from the absence of mere scenic effect, but
also on account of the many interesting and effective parts it con-
tains. That of the heroine (Alice), was undertaken at a very short


SHIP’S
LOG.
Day.
Jau.
Lat.
Long.
Bar.
Dist.
Remarks.
18. Sun...
10 13n
20 11
30-02
235
Steady. Moderate. (N.E.)
Hazy.
19. Mon. .
8 3
21 20
30-00
146
Unsteady. (N.E.) Trades. Hazy
20. Tues..
6 53
22 10
30-03
87
Unsteady. (N.E.) Fine. Losing
Trades.
21. Wed..
5 9
22 20
30-07
106
Unsteady. Northerly. Squally.
Rain.
22. Thurs.
3 59
22 31
30-01
71
Light. Unsteady. (S.E.) Fine
weather.
23. Fri....
2 12
24 10
29-98
146
Moderate Trades, (S.S.E.) Fine.
24. Sat...
00 42s
26 17
30-00
216
Brisk Trade. (S.S.E.) Fine
weather.
lUbcrtiscmcnt.
A FREE PARDON and REWARD are offered to any one giving
such information as will lead to the recovery of much Missing
Property on board, and to the detection of the offenders. Books,
Hats, Caps, Coats, Rugs, Chairs, Tumblers, and Towels are daily
lost. The Government is determined to prosecute the matter to a
solution. By order. Apply Police Office, “Norfolk.”
notice by Miss Paget; its representation presents points of great
delicacy and difficulty, which were most bravely met, and the plea-
sant voice, manner and appearance, together with the inevitable
result of a successful toilet, all told in favour of the actress’s efforts,
and succeeded more than once in obtaining the plaudits of a crowded
house. Gerald (Mr. Allen) was an example of the versatility of
genius. His comic powers, as we anticipated, soon won him the
favour of his audience, but we were surprised to find the natural and
o-rcat pathos he evinced in the later scenes. Mrs. Barlow (Miss Man-
nering) was another example of the marked effect produced by a careful
and unaffected rendering. Not a point was lost, nor was one exaggerated,
though the temptation of an exceedingly droll appearance and role
might have tempted anyone who did not possess all Miss Mannering’s
good judgment to verge upon the burlesque. Mr. Barlow (Mr. Morris)
quite won the sympathies of all. It is in many respects a most difficult
part to play, especially for a young and naturally volatile man, but
it was difficult to find a flaw in the careful impersonation of the
warm-hearted ruined old tradesman, who so evidently possesses the
loving affection of both wife and niece that he may have ours on
trust. Mr. Fluker (Mr. Edwardes) was in our opinion one of the
very best of the many well-acted characters. His get-up, voice, and
tricky manner are beyond all praise, and if, as it is stated, it is his
dehut in public, we can confidently predict for him a brilliant career.
Major Blackshaw (Mr. Gill) will live upon our memory as another
example of what result the entire absence of stagey enunciation and
conventional business will effect. It was the part of a gentleman
acted in a gentlemanly way, and, need we say, was thoroughly appre-
ciated. Mr. Waddiugton played a very uphill and disagreeable rule
with a natural ease of manner that insured its success. The over-
reaching vulgarity of the shallow-hearted livery-stablekeeper was
admirably depicted, and we have never heard minutiae of the dialect
and false aspirations more conscientiously and faithfully attended to.
We must not forget to make special mention of the hit made by Mr.
Paulin in his character as Piefiuch. The easy impudence of the valet
and his philosophical sangfroid were all there to the very life, and we
look forward to seeing the same ability displayed in a more important
part. Mr. Stephen played his two characters with a good deal of
pains, but they were too slight to allow us to form a just estimate of
his powers. On the whole, therefore, it is our pleasing duty to record
an unqualified verdict of approval, and a well-merited success. To
those gentlemen who have assumed the responsible duties of managers,
to the able coadjutors they found in the captain and officers of the
ship, to painstaking and onerous exertions of Captain Newman as
reader and prompter, to the lady artist who has superintended the
scenery and painting department with infinite taste and skill, to all
those ladies whose wardrobes and fingers were equally at the service
of the company, and to the valuable aid rendered by the members of
the orchestra, as well as to the combined efforts of each and all the
performers last evening, we as a community are deeply and most
sensibly indebted; and we trust that before long some such other
treat may be in store for us.
EXAMINATION PAPERS.
No. 2. — Mathematics.
( Euclid — Definitions.)
1. A straight line is a human invention; impossible after the
seventh tumbler.
2. A plane figure is that which lies evenly between his or her
extremities.
3. A circle is a plane figure, formed by putting a line round a
given hole.
4. A square is a plane figure, consisting principally of corners.
5. All other figures arc made according to taste or fancy.
SPORTING INTELLIGENCE.
The quoit scratch pairs have been drawn, and up to the hour of our
going to press, the following games have been played :
Mr. Parsons and Mr. Gatlin beat Mr. Allen and Mr. Manuering—
Score 200 to 74.
Mr. Morris and Mr. Gill beat Mr. Hislop and Mr. Shaw —Score
200 to 192,
Two more pairs remain unplayed, but we hope to give the final
round in our issue of next week.
Last evening, at the close of the theatrical entertainment, the
saloon passengers were entertained by Capt. Parham at supper. A
most recherche and sumptuous meal was succeeded by the usual
toasts, the health of the captain being proposed by Judge Nolan;
of the ladies by Mr. Parsons; the officers by the captain; the
“ Nowadays,” by Mr. Allen, and the caterer by Mr. Shaw. “ God
save the Queen” brought this most pleasant entertainment to a close
in good time.
The "Norfolk" Nowadays.
“ Ho, gossip ! What's i’ the wind OLD PLAY.
NO. 4. JANUARY 31, 1874.
We continue to-day our brief notes on the colonies. In our last we
dealt with New South Wales and Victoria ; to-day we will direct our
readers’ attention to Queensland, South Australia, and Western Aus-
tralia.
Queensland is one of the largest and the very youngest of the five
Australian provinces. It comprises the whole of the north-eastern
portion of the continent, with all the adjacent islands in the Pacific
Ocean and the Gulf of Carpentaria; and comprises an area of 678,600
square miles. It formed a part of New South Wales until 1859, when
it was created into a separate colony with responsible government.
It has, by constant advertising, and by a liberal emigration policy,
succeeded in obtaining a very prominent place in the eye of the
British public ; but there is grave cause for question, whether this
system of forcing does not create an apparent rather than a real
prosperity. The products both of temperate and tropical climates
are cultivated in Queensland. Sheep, cattle, and horses find splendid
pasturage on the extensive “ downs ” which form so prominent a
feature in this colony. Sugar and tobacco are cultivated, and attain
great perfection, while its cotton was stated by the judges of the
International Exhibition to be “superior to cotton from any other
part of the world.” Gold and copper also are found in abundance.
The imports of Queensland in the year 1870 amounted to £1,577,339,
and its exports for the same year to £2,533,732. Its chief town is
Brisbane, but many are of opinion that the inconvenience of having
the seat of Government at the extreme south-east corner of the colony,
will ultimately lead to its transfer from Brisbane to Rockhampton.
South Australia was first colonised in 1835. In 1863 its boundary
was extended to the Gulf of Carpentaria; thus including the entire
centre of Australia. Its area is 750,000 square miles, and its population
in 1871 numbered 197,000. Its chief products are wheat, wool, copper,
and wine. It is, in fact, the granary of Australia, and in the year 1872
no less than 180 vessels, carrying 180,000 tons of wheat and flour,
sailed for Great Britain. Its copper mines, the Burra, Kapunda,
Wallaroo and Moonta are well known and exceedingly rich. It is
through this colony the overland telegraph wire, which connects
Australia with all parts of the world, runs, joining the submarine
cable at Port Darwin, This line was built at the sole cost of the
Government of South Australia, the amount paid being £300,000.
It is carried through a country which, with the single exception of
Stuart and his party, had never before been traversed. The imports
of South Australia in the year 1872 reached £2,801,571, and the
exports for the same year to £3,738,623. Its capital is Adelaide,
which has a population (including the suburbs) of 77,000.
Western Australia embraces an area of 978,000 square miles ; but
has only a population of 24,785. Its climate is salubrious, but the


fact of its being a convict settlement has retarded its progress, and
made it obnoxious to the neighbouring colonies. Its chief products
are wool, timber, and copper ore. The Jarrah timber, on account of
its durability and being impervious to the attacks of marine animals,
is highly valued for jetties, piers and bridges. Western Australia has
whaling stations : and of late much attention has been given to pearl
fishing. Its imports for 1872 were £ 167,914, and its exports £150,840,
and its chief town is Perth.
(To he continued.)
OUR “NORFOLK” NOWADAYS.
Some rise betimes
In these tropic climes,
And in Ulster greatcoats and baggy pyjamas,
Dressing-gowns and head-gear fit for Sultans and Llamas,
And beautiful slippers worked by sisters and mamas,
Come up for a bath
Which each one hath,
Some plying the pump, some holding the hose,
And one by one in varying pose,
Get a jolly good souse
In their open bath-house.
Some lie in bed
With weary head,
‘Till the dressing bell rings its sonorous peal
From its throat, which is brass, and its tongue of steel,
(They ring it too long and too loud a great deal,)
Then up with a spring,
Half slumbering,
Have a miniature wash, and dress in trice,
More in haste to be ready than over-nice,
Get a puff of fresh air
And a smoke if they dare.
Our meals we eat
In the sultry heat
Of the crowded saloon —the ship-name is “ cuddy”—
We breakfast at nine—ham scarce, and tea a trifle soap-suddy,
The tiffin’s at twelve —sardines rare and claret so dear and muddy,
And at three and six (3/6)
Suggests queer tricks—
The dinner’s at four —the spread brings old Morgan abuse,
The fruit pies are few, the peas a ridiculous ruse ;
Then our toast, jam and tea
At seven take we.
Now the ladies.
The girls and the babies,
As the cabins are close, each don a wonderful hat,
Lie back in deck-chairs, where they work or they chat.
(Don’t think that I mean that the babes sew or tat,
But nothing would chime,
Or decently rhyme,
With ladies, but babies. So what could Ido
But mention them both ? I put it to you.
And, though I have falter’d,
The word shan’t be alter’d.)
As for the men,
Of course ’tis true, when
They have nothing to do, why, they lazily smoke,
Retell their old tales, or their fun they poke,
Make very vile puns, or a very poor “ goak
While at quoits and chess
_ Some play, you guess;
And others are writing, to win due praise,
A poem or piece for the “ Nowadays ,”
While here and there, a man
His player’s part doth cram.
But, oh ! the night
Is our chief delight,
When the sun has gone down o’er the gleaming deep,
When the stars by squadrons muster, and peep
At us and our ship, as we southward creep.
We make a great ring,
And each must sing
A verse of a song, or a poem recite,
And then comes a chorus, sung with might.
These be some of our ways
In the Noifolk —nowadays. J. L. P.
ANSWER TO CONUNDRUMS.
1. Par-ham
3. W-o-ods
2. S-lad-den
4. G-ill
pome Ildus.
It is one of the misfortunes of a chronicler, that, in uneventful
times, he must either magnify minor occurrences, create imaginary
ones, or send forth his paper bare and barren. Unfortunately the
past week has been singularly dull, and Saturday devolves upon the
newsmonger of the “ Nowadays" the necessity of filling up the regu-
lation number of pages. There was once a boy, who said “ that he
had made a fiddle all out of his own head, and had wood enough
left for another;” but what that boy has to do with the “home
news” of the Norfolk, it is difficult to tell, except that the recordino-
of his utterance helps to fill up the before-mentioned pages, and fui”
nishes a convenient peg upon which the reporter can hang the state-
ment that he cannot make facts all out of his own head, or manufac-
ture events that didn’t happen. Perhaps the members of our com-
munity will kindly take the hint, and though, doubtless, the weather
has been almost too warm for anything to occur, will try next week
to furnish material for one who is worse off than even a penny-a-
liner. Kind readers, pray do something; do—do—do?
We crossed the Line on Saturday morning, January 24th, about 8
o’clock. We were speeding along at the time at the rate of ten knots
to the hour, which has, of course, induced a very large amount of
scepticism as to the existence of any such region as the “Doldrums”
in the minds of those who have never before visited the southern
hemisphere. In the evening old voyagers were on the qui vice for
the arrival of Neptune, Amphitrite, aud their suite, especially the
Doctor with his famous pills, ami the Barber with his still more
wonderful razor. They never came, however, and those who on the
first occasion of their crossing the line, complied with orthodox
customs, and paid time-honoured fees, feel that regret which all
lovers of the antique experience when they see the new displace the
old. The Maypole and a hundred ancient institutions are gone on
shore, and now, it seems, lathering with tar, shaving with a piece of
hoop iron, and burning a tar barrel on crossing the line are gone too.
We must not fail to mention that one lady at least had a good view
in passing—a remarkable telescope on board enabling her to detect a
thin dark line on the horizon—or somewhere else.
The path of the sun was crossed on Friday, the heat being some-
what intense ; but as the favouring south-east trades are still blowing
freshly, we heard fewer complaints than we expected. There have
been many squalls, which are attributed to solar influence.
On Monday afternoon much excitement was caused by the an-
nouncement that a large homeward bound ship was approaching us
on the weather bow. Quoits aud chess were immediately abandoned,
and in a short time nearly all the passengers, armed with glasses,
were mustered on deck. It was a beautiful sight to see the vessel
with all her square sails, studding sails, aud stay sails full, stretching
northward before the strong fair wind. Soon our ensign graced the
end of our spanker-boom, and eagerly we watched for his reply;
declarative alike of his nationality and willingness to report us.
Ho was an unconscionable time hoisting his colours, which were
American; aud before we could do more than send up our number
(which we doubt whether he read), he was too far away for the flags
to be read. We hope he will bear to our friends at home the good
news that we have come so far in safety.
THREE SONGS FOR MUSIC.
PAGE’S SONG (TO GUINEVERE.)
(contralto.)
Oh, lady ! is it mine to soothe
The sorrows of thy soul ?
To charm thee from thy lonesome woe,
And tyrant care’s control ?
Ah ! dry those fair, those weeping eyes,
The channel of grief’s brooks
Should course down cheeks by time engraved,
Not furrow thy sweet looks.
Tears, like the dews that feed the lea,
Make nourishment for grief.
Kind Heaven, send my lady sleep,
Oblivion’s relief!
LANCELOT’S SONG (TO GUINEVERE.)
(tenor.)
Deep in my heart thy tender image dwells,
Nerving my faith amid my life’s despair,
To its lone self my wild pulse, leaping, tells
The secret of my love —my Guinevere.
What though grey walls defend thy shrouded form,
What though thy vigils pass in faultless prayer,
Still memory whispers, “ Her loving heart is warm ;
Once thine—for ever thine is Guinevere.”


Oh, witching love ! to crown my soul’s desires ;
Oh, last farewell! —death’s bitterer compare.
Oh, my lost love! the thought of thee inspires
Battle for empire and for Guinevere.
KING ARTHUR'S SONG (TO GUINEVERE.)
My Guinevere!
Bright in thy grace, thou still art fair,
But false and fair.
Thy beauty waketh as of old,
But thy false heart is smiling cold,
Guinevere.
Queen Guinevere!
Once in our bliss, nor thought, nor care,
But holy prayer,
Did shade thy soul Avith reverence—•
Ah ! fled are days of innocence,
Guinevere! Teipsum Nosce.
MUSIC AND THE DRAMA.
At the very last hour before going to press we are informed that
the musical entertainment promised for this evening has been post-
poned. It is impossible not to regret this in the present dearth of
amusements of all sorts; but musically speaking, we have no doubt
the management have exercised a wise discretion in delaying a per-
formance which has been so lately contemplated as not to allow
sufficient opportunities for rehearsals.
It is a subject of great regret to many on board (and Ave have re-
ceived several communications thereupon Avhich Ave refrain from
publishing for the present), that the piano is kept in so thoroughly
useless a condition. Surely one of our many spare half-hours might
occasionally be devoted to the tuning key !
By the advertisement appearing in our issue of to-day it appears
that the next theatrical performance is fixed for Friday evening next.
From the great success attending the last effort, avc may augur that
the company Avill be eager to eclipse themselves.
SPORTING.
The Quoit Tournament proved, as avc anticipated, a great success.
The play in the few last games AA r as exceedingly good; but we are
disposed to think the “ go-back ” game a mistake.
The following is a complete record :
Ist Round.
1. Morris and Gill beat ShaAV and Hyslop.
2. Paulin and Waddington beat Edwardes and Julian.
3. Parsons and Gatlin beat Allen and Mannering.
4. Parham and Young beat Allen and Edivardes, vice Just
and Browne.
2nd Round.
1. Parham and Young beat Paulin and Waddington.
2. Gatlin and Hyslop, vice Parsons, beat Morris and Gill.
3rd Round.
1. Gatlin and Hyslop beat Parham and Young—and won.
PROLOGUE.
(As read on Friday evening, January 230
Abound us night has cast her sombre pall;
Beneath us ocean’s billoAvs rise and fall;
While o’er our heads, like showers of golden sand,
Twinkle and corruscate the starry band.
The brightest planet that now sheds its ray,
Or the Avide glamour of the “ milky way,”
Are veiled until the purple-blushing Avest
Has drawn her royal paramour to rest.
Then, while black shadows climb th’ empyrean heights,
Steal out a multitude of lesser lights.
Thus we, as yet, but votaries have been,
Whilst Drama’s priests have shone before the scene,
Contented that it was our lot to be
Spectators of their witching mimicry.
Ah! noAV, alas! the art that dimmed our eye,
Or stirred our laughter, is but memory;
And recollection’s charm bids us at sea
To avoo their muse. Kind friends, be this our plea—
To meet your present wants we take these parts;
For lack of better men we try our arts.
If “ fools rush in where angels fear to tread,”
Angels may keep you waiting till you’re dead.
Your favour, then. And do we tyros prove,
Remember that the whole thing’s done for love. E. L. S.
EDITORIAL NOTICE.
We shall feel obliged if contributors will , as far as possible, hand
their contributions to one of the Editors.
A CHEAP RAILWAY TOUR.
I WAS travelling from London to Exeter on the S.W. line last summer,
and having a season ticket which took me nearly thirty miles on my
Avay, I determined to pay the difference Avhen I arrived at my journey’s
end. I got into a smoking-carriage, Avhere I found four other gentle-
men, none of Avhom I had ever seen before. We soon got into con-
versation, and the time passed very pleasantly, when Ave arrived at
the small platform Avhere they take the tickets. I showed my season-
ticket to the collector, and asked Avhat the fare Avas. On referring
to his book he told me 31s. I happened to have nothing smaller
than a £5-note about me, which I offered to him, but which he Avas
unable to change. I was just going to tell him to come on to the
main station, where I could get change, AA r hen one of the gentlemen
opposite me, Avith whom I had had a long chat, handed me the 315.,
asking me to alloAv him to lend me the money. I accepted his kind
offer, and Avhen avc arrived at the station, I got out of the carriage,
and asked him to come Avith me to the booking-office, Avhere I would
get my “ fiver” changed, and be out of his debt. He did not seem at
all anxious about the money, and I had some trouble to get him to
come with me to the booking-office window, I went inside the
barrier, and asked the clerk to oblige me Avith change, which he did ;
and when I turned round to repay my unknown banker, to my utter
astonishment, he Avas gone! I looked everywhere for him, and
AVaited nearly half an hour in hopes of his returning ; but I have
never seen him since. Where he went, or Avhy he did not wait to be
paid, you may be sure Avas and always Avill be a great mystery to me ;
and all I could do was to console myself with the fact that I had had
a very cheap journey. “ Übique.”
MIRABILE VISU.
A bush unto the good ship’s side,
A Avondrous sight to see,
Some frightened land-lubbers exclaim,
“ Alas ! what can it be ?”
With winged flight, a shining band
Is coming o’er the wave,
With noiseless speed, and flashing looks,
Defiant, fearless, brave !
With scaly armour covered o’er,
A zig-zag course they take ;
The foremost warriors in the front,
The hindmost in the wake.
Quoth one on deck, “ I wish they’d go !”
StraightAvay had he his wish;
All disappeared into the sea,
For they were flying-fish. Fkancesco.
IN MEMORIAM.
Oft of late years I watched him growing frail,
And felt a sickening pain that Avrung my heart —
A vague indefinite fear of coming ill;
Then would I throw my whole soul into prayer,
That he might live to see a good old age ;
Might live to see his children all matured
And doing well, each in his different path.
’TVas not to be : for God, who rules on high,
Spared not His servant from Himself so long.
But when the spring by some six weeks had passed,
And the full bloom of summer clad the earth—
The very time when it had been his wont
To take us all, for tAvo bright, happy months,
Down to the sea, or England’s pleasant lakes—
There came a day, the darkest of my life,
When his kind spirit sought its Maker’s home.
I could not weep when I stood by the grave,
And saAV it take for ever from my sight
All that remained of him I loved so well.
I heard the sound of the soft summer breeze
Sigh through the trees above the grassy sward.
With boAved, uncovered head, I prayed to God
That I might live a credit to his name ;
That, when my allotted days on earth were run,
I might meet him in paradise again. (CONTRIBUTED.)
PUZZLE.
Two clerks receiving each £5O per year, are to have their salaries
increased in the folloAviug proportion for 12 years: —A. to have £5 more
every year, and B. to have £lO more every second year. What will
each have received at the end of 12 years, Avhen all the salaries are
added up ?
(Correct solutions of the above will be acknowledged next Aveek.)


SHIP’S LOG,
Day.
Jan.
Lat.
o t
Long.
Bar.
Dist.
Remarks.
25. Sun...
3 42s
28 26
30-01
222
Brisk trade. (S.S.E.) Fine
weather.
26. Mon. .
6 51
29 33
29-95
202
Brisk trade. (S.S.E.) Fine
weather.
27. Tues..
9 56
29 42
29-98
185
Decreasing trade. (S.F. to F.)
Fine.
28. Wed..
13 17
29 7
30-02
204
Fresh trade. (E.byS.) Squally.
29. Thurs. 16 14
*27 54
30-07
191
Moderate trade. (E.) Squally.
30. Fit...
19 15
27 8
30-10
187
Moderate trade. (E. hy S.)
Cloudy weather.
81. Sat...
22 13
26 12
30-20
186
Moderate trade. (E., h S.)
Squally.
Ilbbatiscinmls.
Wanted.
TMMEDIATELY, Two Dozen TOLERABLE CLARET, and Four
JL Dozen LEMONADE. The advertiser embarked on board the
“ Norfolk ” without supplying himself with these necessaries of tro-
pical life, as Messrs. Money Wigram and Co.’s circular, containing
instructions for passengers, explicitly forbade them to bring wines or
spirits, but announced that they could be obtained on board at a
moderate price ; he found out long ago that he could not obtain them
at a moderate price, and unhappily he now discovers that he cannot
get them at all.
Apply at the Mizen-mast.
TO BUY A TOOTH-BRUSH ; a liberal price offered.
Apply Cabin 13.
IJIHEATRE ROYAL, “NOR F O L K.”
Under the distinguished patronage of the Captain, Officers and
Ladies of the Ship.
FRIDAY EVENING NEXT, FEBRUARY Gth,
(Weather permitting) the Farce of
“ICI ON PARLE FRAN C A I S,”
Will be performed.
Characters —
Major Regulus Rattan...W.P. Gill. Angelina
Victor Dubois R. Paulin. Julia
Mr. Spriggins F. Edwardes. Anna Maria.
Mrs. Spriggins G. Manneriug.
F. Marshall.
. .L. Stephen.
. Paget,
After which, the Laughable Farce of
BOX AND COX.
Characters—
Box W. M. Allen. | Cox F. R. Morris.
Mrs. Bouncer G. Mannering.
THINGS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN.
1. What they put in the marmalade.
2, What some ship owners consider fair profit.
3 Why they do not put Mr. Morgan into the present cabinet,
i’ If the tropics have the effect, of making sardines grow.
5. That the cry of “ Murder 1” drives away all one’s happy
thoughts. , _ „ , . ,
6. That the hot weather need not have the effect of making people
walk about “ a la hath." . .
7. That the proverb, “ You may take a man into No. 2 cabin, but
you cannot make him drink” does not apply to me.
J Übique.
NONSENSE VERSE.
There was a sweet damsel of Baden,
Who didn’t possess a brass “ farden
Said her friends, “ It’s not cheap, this young maiden to keep,
So we’ll bury her deep in the garden.”
Francesco,
The "Norfolk" Nowadays.
“Ho, gossip! What'si' the wind?” —OLD PLAY.
No. 5. FEBRUARY 7, 1874.
Tasmania, originally called Van Diemen’s Land, is an island lying to
the south of Australia. It contains an area of 26,915 square miles,
and in 1871 had a population of 102,915. Its chief products are wool,
wheat and timber. The various woods of Tasmania, especially the
myrtle, which grows to a height of 200 feet, the Huon pine, which is
beautifully grained, and takes an excellent polish, and the blue gum
tree, which sometimes attains the height of 350 feet, measuring 100
at the base, and being more elastic than the teak or oak, are, as may
be supposed, a great source of wealth to the country. The climate of
Tasmania is said to be one of the finest in the world. -Like Western
Australia, Tasmania has suffered much from being a penal settlement,
though it has ceased to receive convicts since. 1853. Its imports
from" the United Kingdom, in 1872, were only valued at £198,795,
and its exports to the same place at £256,425. Hobart Town is the
capital of the country.
New Zealand consists of three islands, called the Northern,
Middle and Stewart’s Islands, with a number of islets off the coast.
It is subdivided into eight Provinces —each with a Superintendent,—
Auckland, Janowaki, Hawkes’ Bay and Wellington in North Island;
Nelson, Marlborough, Otago and Canterbury in Middle Island. The
entire area of New Zealand is 106,260 square miles. The total white
population in 1871 numbered 766,393, and of the Maories there
were 38,540. Wool, wheat, kauri, timber and gum, white, black and
and red pines, the fibre of the Phorraium Lenox, and gold, are its
chief products. Upwards of £25,000,000 had been exported up to
the year 1871, Owing to the grasping conduct of the New Zealand
Association, and others of the early settlers who obtained large
tracts of land from the Maories by unfair means, the colony has
several times been involved in war. The chief towns of it are
Dunedin, Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Nelson and Hokitika.
Its total imports in 1871 amounted to £4,078,193, and its exports, &c.,
£5,282.684. Each Province has a Provincial Council, and a respon-
sible ministry. The general Government consists of a Governor, five
Ministers, and a Legislative Council of thirty-six members nominated
by the Crown for life; and a House of Representatives of seventy-
six members, elected for five years.
The climate of New Zealand is well adapted to emigrants from
Great Britain. Its resources are enormous ; its progress has been
most rapid, and its scenery may be described as magnificent.
With these very brief, and somewhat statistical descriptions, we
close our notices of the colonies, with the warm hope that, in which-
ever of them any of our fellow-passengers of the Norfolk may find a
home, there may peace and happiness, long life, and prosperity await
them.
THOUGHTS.
Ambition, partly made up as it is of vanity, urges on its victim
along the path of fame, until death or misfortune raise an insuperable
barrier. Ambition, says a great mind, is a thorny path full of diffi-
culties and pitfalls. I add, that it is a lash so cruel and cutting that
it will flay from its victim all his natural flesh and leave him standing
naked, until fame clothe him in a new form.
Ambition is a path of difficulties and pitfalls. Yes ; but to the
really ambitious man, the overcoming of these obstacles constitutes
a part of his pleasure—lends a zest to his life. Have you ever,
gentle reader, after climbing some steep and dangerous mountain,
uncertain as to whether your next step would place you in safety or
dash you down to destruction, stood upon the summit, and seen, lit
up by a glorious sunset, smiling valleys, towering mountains, roaring
torrents, silent glaciers, thundering avalanches, and frowning preci-
pices stretched at your feet in one lovely panorama, and enraptured
exclaimed, “ What a lovely view ! ” Have you not thought yourself
well rewarded for all your pains and danger by that one glance ? If
so, you can appreciate the feelings of the ambitious man who has
attained his end. On looking back upon his life, he sees lit up by
his sun (fame) the rugged and dangerous path he has passed, and
thinks himself well rewarded by one moment of success.
Calycanthus.
NONSENSE VERSE.
There was an old gent lived at Cookham,
When his friends wished to fish, out he took ’em,
To try and catch whales by the ends of their tails ;
But he only managed to hook ’em. 1’ RANCESCO.


POISONED WITH STRYCHNINE.
I HAD not been well—nor was I exactly ill, yet ill enough to make
me think that I ought to go and see my doctor. Accordingly, to the
doctor I went. He felt my pulse—looked at my tongue—asked me
the half-dozen customary questions about appetite, digestion, etc. ;
and, then, being an Aesculapius of the modern school, he said,
“ Well, there’s nothing the matter with you. Just a little below par,
that’s all. If you like I’ll write you a prescription for a tonic ; but
you don’t want physic.” I felt inclined for the tonic, however, and
he wrote me out the prescription, which I recollect was mainly com-
posed of gentian and orange, with the inevitable copious dilution of
water. On my way home I called at the chemist’s for the medicine ;
but, as the shop was full of customers, and I had not long to wait, I
handed the prescription to a young man, and said, “ Put that up for
me, and I will call in an hour or so for it.” I called, paid 2s. 6d.,
received a bottle, sealed and parcelled up in the orthodox style. The
next morning, when dressing, I felt rather more out of sorts than
usual. I said, “ I’ll try that tonic.” I broke the seal, untied the
string, and poured out according to directions two tablespoonsful,
and took it. No sooner was it swallowed than a vague sense of
dread took possession of me, and I very well remember muttering to
myself, Well! that’s the bitterest stuff I ever remember tasting in
my life.” I remember, too, as I was entering the breakfast-room
feeling a curious weight in my legs, and a numbness in the back. I
had not been seated five minutes when I felt that I must move about,
and hurry into the fresh air, unless I wished to be suffocated.
“ Excuse me,” said I to my brother and his wife, with whom I was
staying, “ I feel very queer ; that medicine of Dr. A.’s has not suited
me. I can’t breathe. I must go out. I hope there has been no
mistake in making it up.” I went out into the verandah, and kept
walking up and down as if for my very life, for in movement alone
did there seem to be any hope, while upon me there rested a drear
sense of impending death, and every moment it seemed as if some
overwhelming influence was stealing away vitality and conscious-
ness. It was a lovely spring morning—the sunshine warm and
bright—the sky blue and cloudless ; and beneath me, in all their
beauty, lay the picturesque town, the calm clear bay, and the green
valley. Beyond, were wooded hills, and the great ocean with its
multitudinous laughter.
And I was sure I was looking upon them for the last time. I felt
that I had the sentence of death upon me. Disjointed snatches of
song, single lines of poetry, in which the fairness of the world was
sung, floated from the depths of my memory ; and, as one who is
convinced that in a little time the dark veil that hides the unseen
world would be drawn, I tried the anchor of faith that long before had
entered within the veil, and found that it held. In a few seconds
there passed before me the panorama of my life, from my early child-
hood down to the last moment, and no important event seemed omitted
in that sudden and swift retrospect. Then I stepped out into the sun-
light, and the rays of the sun seemed as if they were aimed at me
from above. Just at that moment the strokes of a carpenter’s hammer
in the distance seemed to fall upon my head. In a moment I fell in
the convulsions of tetanus. I lost all control over the voluntary
muscles —my limbs twitched and jerked. I was unable to rise, but
I was quite conscious; indeed, my perceptive faculties were painfully
acute. Again and again the horrid, irresistible, dreadful tetanus
returned ; and with such recurrences there was an experience as if
the bitterness of death were passed. Gradually the paroxysms
became fewer and less, and then ceased. The next day, and for
days after, I felt as if I had been beaten with rods all over, and
for years I felt the effect of the poison, for I learned that the chemist
had made a mistake in the medicine. At the same time I gave in my
prescription, another for strychnine mixture had been given. Of
mine, the dose was two tablespoonsful; of that, one teaspoonful.
The labels had been put on the wrong bottles, and I had swallowed
15-32nds of a grain—nearly half-a-grain of strychnine. In Taylor’s
Texicology an instance is given of a fatal result from a smaller
quantity. J, L. P.
DE REBUS.
Sunday Morning- Service. —Around, nothing but the sea. A
few gulls hovering over the restless waves—the bright warm sun—
the bonnie blue sky smiling on the ocean, till the waves catching its
tint glowed with the colour of the sky itself—and through all this
glory rose the sound of devotion and praise to the Maker of nature
and all its beauties.
Sunday Evening Hymns. —And again, when the sun had gone
down, passing through his curtains of gold to other lands; leaving
them hanging tinted with his glory, slowly waning and melting into
the shades of the coming night—how beautiful then sounded the
hymn of praise rising from the ship alone upon the ocean glistening
in the silver light of the pale full moon, hiding by the mist of her
light the small stars from our view, and leaving the stars of greater
magnitude to shine alone in the glory of their pale cold splendour.
Night by night, week by week, year by year, they keep their appointed
watches, shining unaltered, while mankind live their allotted lives,
and return to the dust that they were, obeying to the utmost iota the
unalterable laws of their Maker. Past and beyond them all, from
our ship, which is but a little atom on this planet, which is in itself
but as a drop of water to the ocean, in comparison with the numerous
and mightier occupants of space, there ascended the voice of prayer
and thanksgiving to the throne of the universal Creator.
IS SUICIDE JUSTIFIABLE?
In a case of self-murder which occurred lately, the following
schedule of misfortunes was found in the victim’s left boot; —
“ I married a widow who had a grown-up daughter—my father
visited our house very often, fell in love with my step-daughter, and
married her. So my father became my son-in-law, and my step-
daughter my mother, because she was my father’s wife. Some time
afterwards my wife had a son; he was my father’s brother-in-law and
my uncle, for he was the brother of my step-mother. My father’s
wife— i. e., my step-daughter, had also a son—he was of course my
brother and at the same time my grandchild, for he was the son of
my daughter. My wife was my grandmother because she was my
mother’s mother —I was my wife’s husband and grandchild at the
same time, and as the husband of a person’s grandmother is his
grandfather, I was my own grandfather .”
IN REQUIEM.
William Owen, A. 8.; Born, 1805; Died, 31st January,
1874. Buried at Sea, on Sunday, Ist February, 1874.
Long has he toiled—for fifty years or more—
For ever sailing on from shore to shore.
Through many a danger has he safely past
Since first for sailor’s life his lot was cast.
But now ’tis o’er. He’s safely laid at rest,
Where earth’s stern troubles can no more molest;
And he has found a peaceful sailor’s grave,
Far out of reach of tempest-driven wave.
Oh ! grant that he, on judgment day, may hear
The welcome tidings spoken in his ear,
“ Well done, thou good and faithful servant! See
The mansion that thy Lord’s prepared for thee.”
And when for us this earthly strife is o’er,
And dread death’s angel standeth at the door,
May each of us soar upward to the rest
Prepared for those who have their Lord confessed.
Francesco.
Why are they hastening
Over the wave,
The old and the young,
The fair and the brave ?
Some go on business,
Some to get health,
One or two just for pleasure,
And some to seek wealth. P.
MUSIC AND THE DRAMA.
Amid such an abundance of musical talent it seems strange that
week after week there is such a dearth of musical news. Thanks to
the efforts of the forward passengers, aided by one or two from the
poop, we had the pleasure of listening to a boundless variety of
popular songs on Thursday evening; but this has been the only
attempt made, as far as we know, during the week by those who have
voices to enliven the passing hours. We have heard a rumour that
the concert postponed last week may take place before we reach Port
Phillip— Nous verrons.
Fortunately, however, while music is dull the drama is unusually
brisk. The promised performance in the Theatre Royal, “ Norfolk,”
took place last night before a crowded and fashionable audience, and
elicited so much applause and laughter that even the hardest-worked
manager or actor must have felt amply rewarded for all his trouble.
“ Ici on pafre Frangais” was the first dish of the entertainment; and
we venture to say that this well-known and popular farce has seldom
been so ably given by a company of amateurs. It is difficult to par-
ticularise where all were so anxious and able to please ; but we must
note the exceptionally clever acting of M. Dubois (Mr. Paulin), who
fairly convulsed the house by his inimitable “ Frenchiness.” If his
part last night had been the result of years of professional training
it would have been a performance above the average, but as the


SHIP’S LOG.
Day.
Feb.
Lat., S.
Lon./W.
O /
Dist.
Bar.
Remarks.
1. Sun. .
24 53
25 17
168
30-30
Decreasing trade. (E., a S.)
Squally.
2. Mon..
26 48
23 29
151
30-28
Light breeze. (E. by N.) Fine
weather.
3. Tues..
28 3
22 22
96
30-29
Light breeze. (E.N.E.) Fine
weather.
4. Wed..
28 1
22 25
3
30-30
Calm and fine. Boat down all
day.
5. Thurs.
28 49
20 51
96
30-20
Light and unsteady. (Westerly.)
Cloudy.
6. Fn...
29 37
19 2
107
30-18
Light and unsteady. (Westerly.)
Cloudy.
7. Sat....
30 46
16 35
145
30*15
Light breeze. (S. by W., in*
creasing.) Fine.
work of an amateur, at a few days’ notice, it cannot be praised
too highly “ Spriggins” found a capital representative in Mr.
Edwardes This gentleman, as we predicted from his last appear-
ance only required the opportunity of a more important character to
display his full powers as an actor, and last night, though labouring
under the disadvantage of a part thoroughly familiar to all Mr
Toole’s admirers, nevertheless created an excellent impression, and
won fresh laurels for himself.
We are sorry that our time does not permit us to point out in detail
the many excellencies that met our eye. Suffice it to say that the
peppery irascibility of the Major (Mr. Gill), the calm hauteur of his
lofty spouse (Mr. Stephen), the patrician bearing and reminiscences of
Mrs Sprio-gins (Mr. Mannering), the volubility and “ cheekiness ” of
Anna Maria (Mr. Paget), and the feminine reserve of poor Julia (Mr.
Marshall), all found able exponents, and made up a very perfect cast
of a by no means facile play.
After an interlude, during which the orchestra discoursed sweet
music our old and venerable friends “ Box and Cox” made their bow.
Mr Allen and Mr. Morris were more than successful. They would
have accomplished thus much had they contented themselves by
simply producing the farce as we are accustomed to it, but with
their unflagging spontaneity the old farce was played with a thousand
variations, each more comical than the preceding one, and, aided by
Mr. Mannering as Bouncer, were as funny and ridiculous as it is
possible for even this immortal trio to be. _
We have spoken thus far in unqualified praise ; but before we bid
them au ravoir , we would suggest that, foi the futuie, two faices
immediately following one another should be avoided, if possible.
The second is apt to destroy the effect of the first, and is certain to
lose its own to some degree. We know that the repertoire is some-
what scanty, and we are speakiug now without book; but if this fault
(for we cannot help regarding it as such) can be remedied, it would
give more backbone to the evening’s entertainment, and enhance the
value of each actor’s efforts.
The thanks of all are again due to the captain and his first officer,
and to the ladies of the ship, for their countenance and energetic
assistance.
||omc ITcfos.
William . Owen, able-bodied seaman, died on Saturday last, aged
69, and was buried after the Sunday morning service. He was a
general favourite among both passengers and crew, and an old
servant of this employ.
On Wednesday night two vessels were seen, one apparently on
our own course, about five miles to leeward, and the other homeward
bound, about half a mile to windward.
Dancing has recommenced on the poop deck, and two evenings
during the week were spent in this agreeable way.
Cmxespnbma.
To the Editors of the Norfolk Nowadays.
Sirs, —There is a piano in the saloon, which I am given to under-
stand is carried out to Melbourne free, on the condition that it may
be used by the passengers. It is, possible, however, to outwit Mr.
Morgan, and to forget to tune it.—Yours, MUSICUS.
SPORTING NEWS.
A little quoits and whist, and a good deal of powder burnt
shooting at a bottle astern. This is all.
THINGS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN.
1. How many hours sleep some people have in a day.
2. That the “happy land” possesses everything (living and other-
wise) except comfort or health.
3. That I draw the line of honesty at Mr. Morgan.
4. What is the difference between E sharp and A flat on the
piano.
5. When we shall have the opportunity of saying Boh ! to a goose.
PUZZLE.
A TRAIN leaves Boston daily for San Francisco, and vice versa,
and takes seven days on the journey. How many trains does a
passenger meet en route ?
NONSENSE VERSE.
There was a young lady of Riga,
Whose income was so very meagre,
That she married a swell, with a fortune as well,
And cut a magnificent figure.
The "Norfolk" Nowadays.
“Ho, gossip! What's i’ the wind?” — Old Play.
NO. 6. FEBRUARY 14, 1874.
All men, says Sydney Smith, think that they can do three things—
drive a tandem, manage a theatre, and edit a newspaper. We know
two men at present who find it exceedingly difficult to do one of them ;
and the worst of their case is, that, as time goes on, there is no re-
lative degree of increased facility. We imagine that there are few
people who have ever seriously thought of the difficulties in the way
of the production of even so modest a serial as the “ Norfolk Now-
adays.'" Saturdays come round—the paper makes its appearance—
if half-an-hour late, everybody wants to know “Where that paper
can have got to.” Lightly skimmed over for any chance effervescence
of fun, it is handed round—“ Rather flat this week,” “Always knew
the thing would’nt last,” “ Not likely to if they only put their own
compositions in,” “ Why look here ! I sent in a poem of 250 lines—
where is it ? ” and so on ; until the satisfactory conclusion seems to be
arrived at upon all sides, that the “ Norfolk Nowadays ” is a thing to
be criticised, growled at, and laughed at; but not to be written for
or assisted. We gladly make our exceptions, that we may prove our
rule ; but the fact is patent to all on board, that the contributing, the
management, the editing, the transcribing, the responsibility, and (of
course) the profits, are divided amongst a very select coterie. Now,
though ourselves interested, we protest against this ; monopolies are
exploded, protection is abolished, and free trade is the order of the
day— w hy then this exclusiveness in the interests of this paper ; is it
not a monstrous and unheard-of thing, that in this 19th century, a
few should be permitted to wax fat on the spoils of the many ? Men
and women of the “ Norfolkt” to the rescue! we lay an El Dorado at
your feet. For the future all contributions shall receive—our closest
attention.
SUNSET AT LAUSANNE.
A writer upon Milton has said that one of the poet’s chief charms
consists in his leaving so much to the imagination. In describing
the effect produced upon me by a Swiss sunset, I too must leave much
to imagination ; and I trust the same virtue may be made of my
deficiency. _
After a luxurious dinner at the Beau Rivage, Ouchy, and whilst
the band was discoursing sweet music, I wended my way along a
pleasant path leading down to the lake, bordered on either side by
beautiful flowers. This path terminated upon a wooden jetty, which
projected a few yards into the lake, and here I took my stand,
anxious to see a much vaunted Swiss sunset.
I had not long to wait ere the sunlight took a deep orange tint,
which is the herald of a fine sunset. At my feet lies a deep blue ex-
panse of rippling waters, stretching away to a rugged wall of red and
black rocks. Up ! up! they tower, marked here and there by streaks
of deep green forests." Through a rift in this wall I see a sugar-loafed
cone. It is Mont Blanc, -whose ancient hoary head is now dyed a
deep-red orange.
The sun sinks lower now, and the crests before me are a blood-
red ; the water at my feet a deep purple ; the valley one plain of
gold. _ . .
Another moment, and a bluish-purple tint, hovering like some
spirit, glides towards the mountains. Now the hills beyond are a
deep purple, set in a back-ground of fire. All the busy sounds of the


day are gone, and the ear hears only the tinkling of the cow-bells
and the twittering murmur of the birds. The cool breeze wafts the
half-distinct sound of the band past my ears. I can hardly see the
mountains now, so shrouded are they in a deep purple, shot here and
there with gold and red. The hills above me are crimson ; the peace-
ful valley is a deep blue ; the lake at my feet is one sheet of bur-
nished gold. The band ceases ; the cow-bells are silent; the birds
are still. Night enfolds in her dusky wings all around me. The
moon silvers the glassy lake. It is night ! Calycanthus.
CURIOUS CAPTURE OF AN OTTER.
This incident, which .-happened some years ago, took place in one
of the western counties of Wales.’ My father was trout-fishing at the
time in one of the little mountain streams which are so numerous in
that locality ; towards the middle of the day, finding the fish were
getting very indifferent to the tempting morsel he so gratuitously
offered them, he thought he would take advantage of a lucid interval
to “ bait” himself. He had scarcely commenced this pleasant and
highly-interesting occupation when he was interrupted by the appear-
ance of a stranger, in the shape of an otter, who had also some idea
it was about luncheon time, for he had a fish in his mouth, with which
he quietly landed, and then devoured it at ease, not being aware that
a stranger, with the most hostile of intentions, was observing him.
Before my father could settle in his mind a plan to effect his capture,
the otter disappeared in the brook, evidently in search of more prey.
My father, hoping he might land again about the same place, hid
himself near the spot. He was not disappointed, for in a few
minutes his friend appeared again with another victim, but this
time, alas ! to fall one himself. When he had fairly landed, my
father made a rush at him, and was just in time to catch him by the
tail as he was once more disappearing in the dark waters. To carry
him in this position to a safe distance from the brook was a task of
no ordinary difficulty and of some danger, as it was necessary care-
fully to avoid placing any part of the body within reach of the otter’s
head. Having achieved this, my father scanned the horizon in the
hope of finding some one to render him assistance. At some distance
he espied a man ploughing, and by calling loudly and gesticulating
wildly, he was happily enabled to make this person understand that
he wanted him. He got a rope, which they then fastened to the
otter’s tail, and with a little judicious use of the end of his fishing
rod, my father was able to persuade the otter to jog along before
him ; and as he had to pass through a village on his way home, the
consternation and amusement caused may be better imagined than
described. He kept the otter for some time, but finding his majesty
required so many luxuries, and was, on the whole, a nuisance, it was
decided to send him to my uncle, who kept a pack of otter hounds.
A “ strawberry mark ” was branded upon his arm, and he was long
known to the sporting community of Carmarthenshire as having
given many excellent hunts, but unfortunately, one day, a gentleman
failing to recognise an old friend, speared him. Alas ! poor otter !
Amphibious.
ABOUT CARRIOLES AND DAG-BOGS.
Everyone knows that travelling in carrioles is one of the most
characteristic features of travelling in Norway, and possibly a little
information on this subject may be of some interest. The carriole
is the carriage of the country. It somewhat resembles the Italian
carricola, and is usually built without springs. The shafts are long
and made of very elastic wood. The ends are fitted to the axle-tree,
and the seat, which will only hold one person, is placed well forward,
and by cross-pieces rests upon the shafts, the elasticity of which
serves instead of springs. When the traveller is seated the legs are
brought nearly to a horizontal position, so that in descending the
steepest hill there is but little inconvenience and no danger of being
thrown out, even if the horse should fall. At the back of the seat a
board is fixed for a portmanteau, on which the boy who has charge
of horse and vehicle sits. The horses used are little cobby ponies,
very strong, very sure-footed, and mostly of a kind of cream-colour.
The harness beggars description, beiug mainly composed of odds
and ends of leather, tied together with cord, and the reins are some-
times made of twine, and sometimes of small rope, but rarely or
never of leather.
The stations at which carrioles are hired are placed at distances
varying from 1 Norske mile, i. e., 7 English miles, to If Norske, or
about 12 English miles. The station-master is usually a farmer. He
is compelled by law to keep a certain number of horses and carrioles,
for which he receives a certain annual sum from the Government,
and is entitled to charge for each horse and carriole at the rate of
about two shillings per Norske mile ; and the Skydsgut boy who goes
with the traveller expects a gratuity (called drikke-penge or drink
money) of three pence. It is obvious, therefore, that the cost of
posting is extremely light.
At each station a book called the Dag-bog (day-book) is kept, in
which the traveller must enter his name, destination, and the number
of horses he hires. The object of this is to prevent the station-mas-
ters from imposing on travellers, by stating that all the horses they
are bound to keep are out, and then demanding extra pay for those
required—a weakness common to the Norske station-man as well
as to the London cabby. In this Dag-bog there is a column for
remarks or complaints ; and the book is periodically inspected by a
Government official, and in the event of overcharge or neglect of duty
heavy fines are inflicted. It so happens, however, that Englishmen,
with their usual rage for scribbling, fill up this column with jokes,
doggrel and nonsense ; and as a consequence the inspectors now pay
no attention to any entries not made in Norske. The following are
some of the entries culled from the remark column in sundry Dag-
bogs during a recent tour.
At Vosserangen S. Trevor Francis inserted a long poem recounting
his sorrows in a journey to that place. Underneath this effusion
another scribbler wrote—
“ Good rhymer, if -with other eyes
Your verses you could only read,
I fear ’twould cause you much surprise,
But you would find them poor indeed ! ”
At the same place some tourists had inserted some absurdly worded
commendation, and below a wag took them off in this fashion—
“ What cads ! Tea bedads !
Jolly lads !
From the City and dreadfully witty ! ”
One man broke out in poetic phrase, thus—
“ Of all good stations for man and rest
That ever I’ve seen, this is the best,”
and he got settled by the laconic rejoinder
“ Of any verses
This the worst is.”
At Nysteun, on the summit of the Fille-fjeld, some reader of
“ Ouida’s ” wrote the following cynical verse—
“ As through this book I glance my eye,
I see many lines which surely lie ;
If folks would write the honest truth
The world would be much better forsooth. ”
He was commented upon rather sharply—
“ That fellow thinks himself a poet,
Though no one else does know it;
He fills the books with idle trash,
And perhaps does not pay the cash.”
Odd liberties are taken, too, with the names of eminent men and
heroes of fiction. At a place called Yinge it was entered soberly that
Ben. Disraeli and Will. E. Gladstone had gone on together in one
cart; and at Nysteun we learned that Nicholas Nickleby had hired
a carriole to Skogstad. Such is the humour of the English tourist;
and as he writes his name on the Yenus de Medici, and cuts it out on
the pyramid, and scrawls his dull jokes on every conceivable and
inconceivable place, it is too much to expect that the hardy Norse-
man’s Dag-bog should escape.
fuim fas-
In our last number, owing to the Editor of the news columns being
unable to spend his Saturday, as he usually does, in the delightful
occupation of writing up the Nowadays we omitted to record the
fact that we were becalmed two whole days. This event occurred on
the 4th and sth instant. On the former day (Wednesday), Captain
Parham kindly allowed one of the boats to be lowered, and many of
the passengers had an opportunity of a row on the genuine ocean
wave, and a sight of the Norfolk as she appears to onlookers. The
graceful lines of the good ship were made the subject of general
remark. In the evening a party of adventurous bathers set out and
had a swim in very deep water; but the wisdom and safety of the
“dip in the briny” were made questionable when, about half-an-hour
after coming on board, a huge shark was seen off the starboard
quarter. “ I don’t think I’ll do that again,” has been a somewhat
frequent confession of those who went forth to swim and not to be
eaten.
Great excitement was caused on Tuesday by the cry of “ An alba-
tross ! an albatross!” The dinner-bell had just rung, but those on the
deck preferred to see the king of ocean-birds to hot soup. There was
a general rush to the vessel’s side, wherefrom the “ broad-pinioned
i5
THE “ NORFOLK” NOWADAYS.


SHIP’S LOG.
Day.
Feb.
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Bar.
Bemarks.
8. Sun...
31 45s
14 8w
140
30-18
(S.W. to S.E.) Squally. Thun-
der and lightning.
9. Mon. .
33 54
14 14
130
30-21
Moderate. (S.E.) Cloudy wea-
ther.
10. Tues..
34 50
13 46
61
30-12
Calm. Fine. Later, light nor-
therly.
11. Wed..
35 48
9 14
230
30-13
Fresh. (N.N.E.) Cloudy wea-
ther.
12. Thurs.
36 31
5 21
194
30-20
Moderate. (N.N.E.) Showery.
Veering N.N.W.
13. Fri....
38 6
00 51e
233
30-25
Fresh, (N. gale to N.N.W.)
Showery.
14. Sat....
39 37
3 55
241
30-24
Fresh. (N.N.W. to N.N.E.)
Hazy weather.
AN AUCTION will take place on Wednesday afternoon next, 18th
February, at 2.30 p.m., punctually (weather permitting), in
which sellers will be able to procure an enormous price for such
articles as they may wish to dispose of and buyers will be able to
obtain unheard-of bargains for a mere trifle, owing to the forced sale
of several bankrupt stocks.
For particulars and bills of sale apply to
Messrs. ALLEN and MORRIS, 24 and 25 Happy Land.
CHALLENGE!!!
MR WM. GILL being anxious to try his powers in the walking line,
'is open to make" a match with any of the passengers, female or
otherwise, to WALK, either ONE MILE or TWO, on the poop, and
will give five yards start. Anyone really meaning business can be
attended to by applying to Mr. Allen (Mr. GilTs private secretary),
who has full power to make all arrangements.
Stern Cabin No. 2.
denizen of the southern seas ” was plainly visible soaring over the
waves During the week several others have been seen, and a whole
company of sportsmen have been on the look-out, but hitherto they
have found the albatrosses a little shy. .
Sundry sea-hawks have been the cause of the burning of a good
deal of powder, much to the amusement of the shooters and not at all
to the injury of the birds.
Yesterday we crossed the meridian of Greenwich, and those who
have not altered their watches, have been able to test their qualities
as time-keepers; and most of them have discovered that sea-air is
not conducive to keeping good time any more than good tempei.
To-day is St. Valentine’s Day, and after breakfast the post-bag of
this popular saint was opened, and the contents duly distributed.
Rumours have reached us of surprising comic efforts by local artists;
and whispers have been heard of some suggesting the true tender
emotion. It was stated to us—on good authority—that Cupid has
been on board for some time. ,
The Fancy Dress Ball, which has been the topic of conversation
during the week, and the inspiriting spur to inventive genius, has
been unavoidably postponed from this evening to some evening next
week.
THINGS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN.
1. That the second-class passengers like to feel the weight of the
poop-quoits on their heads.
2. That cursing and swearing is at any time gentlemanly, especially
in the presence of ladies.
3. That those who “ thump, thump ” up and down the deck at
night, help those who have turned in, to sleep.
4. That the occupants of No. 2 cabin care for the order of the Bath.
5. That those who lose quoits overboard pay Mr. Sladden the shilling
fine.
6. That books improve by being left on deck all night.
7. That the word “ grumble ” means to complain without a cause ;
which is not our case.
8. That we are only half-way to Melbourne.
9. That asking for anything in the way of provisions is a dangerous
game.
10. How proud the pigs must feel from which we get our hams.
11. That there is any secrecy as to who are the senders of
Valentines.
12. That there is something after all in the complaints about the
atmosphere of the “ Happy Land.”
MUSIC AND THE DRAMA.
The piano has been once more brought into use, and we trust will
continue to prove an amusement throughout the voyage.
We understand that some pieces are in active rehearsal at the
Theatre Royal, “ Norfolk particulars will be announced in our
next.
SPORTING NEWS.
Mr. W. Allen has consented to take the duty of secretary and
treasurer to the forthcoming quoit tournament, from which we may
safely predict a thoroughly well-managed affair. Names and sweep,
2s. 6d., to be given to him.
CHALLENGE!!!
Two members of the Stock Exchange (Messrs. A. and M.)
champions of the world and elsewhere, beg to announce that they are
in a position to play a match at quoits with any two gentlemen of the
“ Norfolk ” for the championship.
(N.B. —This advertisement has not been paid for as yet.—Ed. N.N.~)
Cjamspnbma.
To the Editors of the “ Norfolk ” Nowadays.
Sirs, —I beg a portion of your valuable space to say a few words
on a much-vexed topic—the state of the piano. A reference to this
subject has been made in each of your two last issues. With regard
to the (editorial) first, I will only say this —that it was my intention
to have tuned the piano at the time your first notice appeared ; and
any direct request made in an amiable and social manner would have
met with a willing response ; but when the notification came in such
a questionable form as to imply a threat, the means certainly defeated
tho desired end. In reply to your clever correspondent “ Musicus”
(who, by the way, can never have heard the old proverb —“We should
never look a gift horse in the mouth”), I give these facts—
1. That though it is true I volunteered the use of the piano for the
amusement of the general body of passengers, my being a passenger,
and not the public uses of the instrument, was the consideration for
its carriage in the cuddy.
2. As to the freedom of carriage, “Musicus” forgets that each pas-
senger is allowed 40 cubic feet in the hold, free, a piano only occupy-
ing 25.
3. Supposing the statement of “ Musicus” was true, the passengers
have the free use of the piano; but this does not entitle them to a
vested interest in my services as tuner.—Yours, Ch. W.
[With this, and an entire repudiation of any idea of a threat,
implied or otherwise, we close this correspondence, as we are glad to
notice the removal of all ground for complaint.]
SERENADE.
Sleep, lady, sleep!
Wake not in dull, drear night.
Sooth ! eyes like these should never keep
Watch for the morning light.
Sleep, lady, sleep!
Only the roses dare
To climb thy latticed height, to peep
At thee, so chaste and fair.
Teipsum Nosce.
The following was picked up under the table :
My darling, I have loved you long,
And watched you from afar;
I’ve looked with tender eyes upon
Your venerated pa.
’Tis true, I’m rather short of cash —
Avaunt! all paltry greed !
My love for thee’s so very great,
That no more canst thou need.
My future, own, my love, _my life,
Oh ! say thou wilt be mine ; _
If not, just send me what I paid
For this dear Valentine. F.


The " No r folk” Nowadays.
“ Ho, gossip! What'si' the wind?" —OLD PLAY.
NO. 7. FEBRUARY 21, 1874.
In a series of short articles we have endeavoured to give our
readers a general idea of the Australian Colonies, towards which a
stream of emigration constantly tends. To-day we propose to
consider, very briefly, the causes of emigration itself. Chief among
these, is over population in the mother-country. No one can look at
a map of the world, and note the small space occupied by the
British Isles, with their population of nearly forty millions, and then
turn to the antipodes, and mark the enormous area of Australia and
New Zealand, with a population of less than two and a-half millions,
without feeling that the one is much over, while the other is much
under peopled. And though we bear in mind that the enormous
productive industries of Great Britain, and her undoubted position
as the mart and exchange of the commercial world, give occupation
and afford means of livelihood utterly disproportionate to her size,
yet a knowledge of the social condition of the masses of her people
abundantly proves that an outlet for her surplus population is a
necessity.
The long columns of advertisements in the London and provincial
papers of those who want places, and the great number of replies
to advertisements offering situations, are pretty conclusive evidence
that the avenues of labour are choked up, and that the bread
winners are in excess of the bread to be won. The higher wages
for skilled and even unskilled labour that are given in the colonies
are, of course, a tempting allurement to British artizans and working
men, especially when the hours of toil are shorter, and the relations
between employer and employed afford greater independence to the
latter. Then the desire to possess land, to hold the fee-simple of a
portion of the acreage of the earth, is a strong attraction to many.
In old and wealthy countries like England, only the rich can be lords
of the soil, but in Australia, any man of enterprise and sobriety can
in a few years obtain an estate. But perhaps the spirit of adventure,
the eager restlessness of the heart, the longing to get free from
conventional trammels, the desire to know life in new conditions,
and to wrestle with fortune in communities where the highest prizes
are possible of attainment by every citizen, are, after all, the most
potent. In the Anglo-Saxon race there is the blood of the Yikings
and of Crusaders, and the old spirit that drove them to cross the
seas impels their descendants towards the new world in the East.
AN AWKWARD PREDICAMENT.
While at Stockholm last year, I heard so much of the beauties of
the trip across Sweden to Goteborg, that I decided to judge for myself
whether these things were so or not. So one beautiful evening I
found myself standing on a small, almost flat-bottomed tub of a
steamboat, looking at the justly called “Venice of the North” fast
disappearing from my view. The trip was to take about 2£ days, so
when I had seen the last of the land I had just left, I went down
below to see with whom I was to share my cabin, and was very
agreeably surprised to find, instead of a dirty Swede, a Cambridge
man who had just taken his degree, and who turned out to be a
capital companion.
For many hours the steamer wended her way among the thousands
of little islands. The land between the lakes was rendered navi-
gable by means of a canal —except when the water lay above us, in
which case we mounted up by a series of locks, until, at last, we were
rewarded by a magnificent sight of the calm lake lying below.
We expected to reach the celebrated Isbllhattou Falls (said to be
the largest in Europe) about six hours before we steamed into
Loteborg; unfortunately we arrived at the locks, 'which are about two
minutes’ walk from the falls, at four o’clock in the morning, and were
called out of bed at that unearthly hour. Determining to see what
there was to be seen, and to turn into our bunks again, we did not
think it worth while to take off what me had on, nor to put on much
else, and jumping off the boat, we were at once accosted by about a
score of young Swedish ruffians, who wanted to act as our guides ;
but as we could not understand one word they said, we dispensed
with their services. After seeing the Falls, we began to retrace our
footsteps towards our warm blankets, bent on a sleep of many hours,
as a set-off against the hardship of turning out so early, and so thinly
clad. But alas ! No sleep for us that day! Somehow or other we
missed our way, and after about an hour’s wandering, when we came
to the spot where we had last left her, she had gone on her way
without us. We looked at each other, and at our rig-out, and seeing
that the best must be made of a bad job, we made tracks to a small
hotel near, where with great difficulty we managed to get some break-
fast, through the medium of a person who spoke English, and who
imparted to us the joyful tidings that the small weekly mail-boat
would start in about two hours’ time from the bottom of the locks, a
mile off. On our return journey, when we landed on the quay, we
had to walk half-way round before we came upon our old friend.
Then we lucky thought ourselves that no one had taught us Swedish.
My friend thought he heard somebody laugh ; but of course that was
a mistake.
Robert le Diable.
IN MEMORIAM.
WILLIAM CURTIS,
Died, aged 34, February 16, 1874.
Dark, lowering heavens, and the fringed storm-cloud,
Were the black trappings of his funeral pall.
Bright foam, up-tossed, around him wove a shroud —
For mutes, the sea-birds watched his burial.
Dare we to augur ? Off the Cape of Hope
We laid this lion-hearted man to rest.
And He, who comprehendeth in His scope
The sea and all therein, will make him blest.
“ Teipsum Nosce.”
THE EXILE.
Down a green-clad hill, I see descend a dusty figure, whose halting
steps and frequent pauses denote a weary, foot-sore traveller. At
the bottom of the hill he stops to gaze at a group of laughing, shouting
children, happy and careless as the butterflies floating lazily in the
hot summer air. As he approaches me, I see a smile lighten up his
haggard, weather-beaten face. Now he is amongst the band. The
children pause, and look at the stranger, who holds out his hand as a
token of greeting ; but they, wavering for a moment, break away
with shouts, scatter hither and thither, leaving the traveller alone.
The smile fades from his face, the tear trickles down his cheeks, and
I hear him sigh, as he resumes his journey, “ L’exile partout est
seul !”
As the last strains of the organ are resounding through the vaulted
aisle, filling the air with a wondrous melody, and stirring the hearts
to prayer, I see a dusty figure glide into the church, screening himself
behind a pillar. Now the tide of sound rushes along, eddying into
the corner where the figure stands. It starts ; then kneels. Now the
congregation pace slowly out, passing with averted gaze the kneeling
figure. The last devotee has left the church. The organ ceases, and
yet the figure stirs not. His hands are clasped in prayer. The
clergyman, as he passes, sees the kneeling figure. He goes up to
him—touches him; the supplicant falls forward, the blood gushes
from his mouth, and, as we raise him, he breathes forth, “ Ici, ici,
enfin, I’exile n’est pas seul! ”
The above happened at Lucerne four years ago. Had the exile
lived till to-day, very different had been his lot, for his son is now
one of the rising stars of the French Assembly. His name is Bocher.
Calycanthus.
THE SAIL OF THE “NORFOLK.”
(Tuesday, February 17th, 1874.)
I.
Half a gale, half a gale,
Half a gale blowing;
All through the rough, rolling sea.
Sped the good Norfolk.
“ Stand by your royal halyards,
“ Let go !” the captain said.
Into the trough of the sea
Sail’d the good Norfolk.
11.
“ Stow the mizen topsail.”
Was the new “ mid” dismay’d ?
Not though the young “ salt” knew
Good sails were sunder’d.
His not to make reply,
His not to reason why,
His but to climb on high.
Into the trough of the sea
Sail’d the good Norfolk.
i7
THE “ NORFOLK” NOWADAYS.


111.
Billows to right of her,
Billows to left of her,
Billows in front of her
Bellow’d and thunder’d.
Beat at with wave and swell,
Boldly she rode and well,
Into the storm-lash’d sea,
Grim as the mouth of hell,
Sail’d the good Norfolk.
IV.
Spread was her canvas fair,
Spread every stitch she’d bear,
Parting the billows there,
Mocking the ocean, while
All of us wonder’d.
Flung back the salt sea spray,
Right through the midst made way.
How the old “ Galleries”
Reel’d from the billow-stroke,
Trembl’d and quiver’d ;
Then she sail’d on, and not,
Not were they shiver’d.
v.
Billows to right of her,
Billows to left of her,
Billows aft of her,
Bellow’d and thunder’d.
Beat at with wave and swell,
While the bitter, cold rain fell,
Then ’twas she sail’d so well,
Right through the storm-lash’d sea,
Grim as the mouth of hell,
Strong still and beautiful,
Sail’d the good Norfolk.
VI.
When shall her glory fade ?
O ! the brave sail she made !
All of us wonder’d.
Honour the sail she made,
Ne’er shall her glory fade,
Noble old Norfolk.
SALMON POACHING ON THE TWEED.
Salmon poaching on the Tweed is a confirmed habit with a large
number of people resident on the upper banks of the river, and is
looked forward to as a means of great sport for the winter months,
particularly by the young men. It can hardly be said to be carried
on for the love of game, as the salmon at this season is out of condi-
tion, and of small value ; besides, the precautions taken by the
police and the River Commissioners are so great, that it is almost
impossible to send the salmon to any market. Nevertheless, there
are merchants who buy this inferior fish ; and many unfortunate
people on board ship, and in the colonies, enjoy it as a dainty morsel
in its preserved state.
It is not my intention, however, to go into the details upon the
preserving, or the natural consequences of eating this kind of salmon,
or to speculate where it is sold; but to endeavour to give an idea of
the method the poachers adopt to kill it. These men are by no means
the scum of creation, but generally, in every other way, respectable
members of society ; and perhaps the Tweed Fishing Act is the only
law of the realm they would think of breaking.
A band of from ten to twenty will go at midnight to the best pools
in the neighborhood; two men will wade across the river a little
above a pool, with ropes attached to one end of the net; other two
men will take charge of the net on the opposite side. In the mean-
time they have placed men on the look-out for the bailiffs and blue
men. Just as they have succeeded in landing a good lot of salmon,
a whistle will be heard from one of the men on the look-out, denoting
that they have been watched, and that the bailiffs are upon them. A
short consultation is held, and, if the police are not in force, they will
decide to fight them. The poachers are all disguised, so that they
may not easily be recognised. This is the more easily managed, as
the river policemen and water-bailiffs are usually strangers to the
district, and only engaged for a few months in winter. On they
come, expecting the poachers to run. This is not always the case,
however ; and a free fight ensues, in which broken heads and a good
ducking in the river are not always the worst consequences. Cases
have been known of two men struggling in the river like otters, until
both were nearly drowned. If the police are beaten off, the poachers
have still great difficulty in getting home without being recognised ;
and as to be summoned before the County Court is almost sufficient
to ensure a heavy fine or imprisonment, this is rather disagreeable,—
to say the least of it.
Strong efforts have been made of late years to put an end to this
sort of thing. Last season four men were stopped three miles from a
stream ; a salmon was found upon one of them, and though this was
the only case really known against them, they were each fined £2O.
The love of adventure is so strong, however, that I doubt very much
if the strong measure had the desired effect. The poachers justify
themselves by saying that the salmon are only allowed to come up
the river when out of condition, for when the nets are down at
Berwick, there are only a few stragglers seen far up the river, and
therefore they may as well take them when they can. It is to be
hoped that the day is not far distant when they will be made to see
that it is absolutely necessary that salmon should be left undisturbed
at this season.
SCOTUS,
MUSIC AND THE DRAMA.
A CORNET recitation was given by Mr. Perry in the saloon on
Thursday evening, ably accompanied by Mr. Waddington on the
piano. Mr. Perry’s playing was always correct and facile, and at
times brilliant, especially in the triple-tongue passages. We hope to
have another opportunity of hearing him shortly.
If we are correctly informed, the dramatic performance expected
next week will not take place until we are close in shore. Doubtless
the management have good reason in thus stopping this supply of
amusement, and it is only fair that they should be complimented on
the severity of our loss.
SPORTING INTELLIGENCE.
Albatross shooting has commenced. On Thursday four bit the
dust, or would have done so had there been any. And yesterday
(Friday) some sooty albatrosses (nautice “stink-pots”) were added
to the gazette. It is retributory justice we believe, but very poor
sport, except with the rifle. Two large shoals of whales were passed
yesterday, said to be grampus whales. A large “right whale”
spouted about a mile astern in the evening,
Ijomc lletus.
It is our painful duty to record another death on board. On Monday,
the 16th, at about a quarter to 5 p.m., William Curtis, the captain’s
cook, died of phthisis. He had been ill all the way from Plymouth,
and quite unable to do any work. More than a month ago his life
was despaired of, but he rallied, and for a week or two we hoped the
poor fellow would reach Melbourne. For some days, however, before
his death, his appetite and strength quite failed, and at the time stated
above he passed away. He was buried on the morning of the 17th.
We passed the meridian of the Cape on Tuesday, the 17th, and not
without experiencing a little of the traditional Cape weather. On
Monday the wind veered about from north-west to south-west, and
towards night settled well in the latter quarter. A reference to the
log will show that the chief officer enters the weather report for
Tuesday as “ strong breeze with hard squalls but one of our
poets (?) has ventured to call it “ half a gale.” No doubt, this is a
poetical license, but, after all, it probably expresses the popular feeling
about our little “blow.” The dead-lights were down, the quarter
galleries closed, a great deal of sail was taken in, and some carried
away ; there were several vacant seats the next morning at breakfast;
we did 275 miles, the ship kicked and pitched and rolled in a most
disgusting style for a well-mannered vessel; and if it wasn’t “ half-a-
gale,” we are all agreed that we don’t want to be personally introduced
to a whole gale this side of Melbourne.
It is, perhaps, needless to announce, however the question of
“strong breeze with hard squalls” versus “half a gale” may be
settled, that the Fancy Dress Ball, postponed from last Saturday
night, has not found a quiet evening this week. This morning there
w r ere rumours that to-night our company would undergo their
metamorphosis, and in new and strange guises disport themselves
on the poop ; but, though the day is superbly lovely, there is a
head swell on, and consequent pitching, which it is thought would
put out dancers both in their figures and steps. The Fancy Dress
Ball is, therefore, still a thing of the future. We heartily sympathise
with those members of our community, especially with our fair
friends, who have their dresses ready, and who are thus deprived of
their long anticipated pleasure; but delay will doubtless give that
pleasure an additional zest, when the calm night actually comes.
Meteorological conditions interfered, also, with the Auction Sale
advertised in our last to take place on Tuesday. On Friday, how-
ever, at 2 p.m. those enterprising auctioneers Messrs. Allen and
Morris submitted for sale as miscellaneous and (if we may be par-
doned the word) as comical a lot of hric-a-krac as it has ever been
our fortune to behold. Marine soap and surplus candles were quite
a drug in the market; while the two pipes, the few dozens of paper


SHIP’S
LOG.
Day.
Feb.
Lat.
Long.E.
Bar.
Dist.
Remarks.
15. Sun...
40 13
8 00
30-19
191
Decreasing. Misty. (Yeering
to S.W.) Light.
16. Mon. .
41 49
11 28
29-88
185
Squally. (Variable between
N.W. and S.W.) Raining.
17. Tues..
42 14
17 28
30-02
275
Strong breeze, with hard squalls.
(S.W.)
18. Wed..
42 54
22 59
30-15
248
Fresh. (W.S.W.) Squally.
Decreasing.
19. Thurs.
42 59
26 18
31.18
146
Light. (W., latter part nor-
therly.) Increasing.
20. Fri....
43 18
30 49
30-19
199
Moderate, (1ST. by E.) Breeze.
Fine weather.
21. Sat...
43 15
35 04
30-7
187
Northerly breeze. Moderate.
■Wanted.
T)1 a HANDSOME YOUNG MAN of gentlemanly manners and
U brilliant conversational powers, some INTRODUCTIONS to a
few of the leading families of Melbourne and Sydney, with a view
to the saving of hotel bills.
Address (prepaid) “ HARD-UP,” care of Editors AUY.
N.B.—No objection to a sheep run.
Challenge.
MR. GILL’S CHALLENGE to WALK having received no notice,
and as he is anxious for something to do, he is willing to make
a match to skip, (either double or otherwise), to dance or to play
anybody on board for anything from a “ Fiver ” to an old hat. ’
Any communication addressed to Mr. W. M. Allen, private secre-
tary to Mr. Gill, will be attended to.
collars, and the two bottles of port wine offered for sale, fetched long
prices. Dresses were placed at the low quotations of from 6d. to 9d.
All kinds of farinaceous food were eagerly sought after. A copper
box, a chignon, and a tin of German rusks were disposed of very
much to the advantage of the sellers, but no purchasers could be
found for two rifles, a real cashmere shawl, and a somewhat seedy
opera hat. The senior member of the firm of auctioneers proved
himself a most efficient knight of the hammer by both endurance and
lively sallies ; but we regretted to observe that his partner’s voice
soon gave signs of giving out, and he was compelled to retire from
the rostrum. The entire proceeds of the sale amounted to £8 7s. Bd.,
and sellers and buyers are alike grateful to Messrs. Allen and
Morris.
On the main deck an amateur bear has been disporting himself, and
has shown a wonderful knowledge of the habits and feelings of the
dwellers in the Norfolk. Lovers and the engaged were infallibly
picked out, and their secrets blazed abroad.
THINGS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN.
1. How long it takes to get tired of mutton.
2. How vegetables taste when they are hot.
3. That some people will not be bounced.
4. That a fair wind does not always bring a good temper.
o. How many pounds of powder it takes to kill an albatross.
6. Who thought it a joke to put sea-water in the tea.
7. That black dirt is sugar.
8. Who is the worst shot on board.
9. What the stink-pots think of a straight eye.
10. That beer or claret tastes nice out of a breakfast cup.
11. That a ham sandwich has been seen.
12. That we don’t all believe in allopathy.
13. That we are really a very jolly and agreeable party.
14. That the champion quoit players are duffers.
15. What all this going out to tea means.
16. How much truth there is in the “ personalities” indulged in at
night abaft the mizen.
17. What the cries of “ Stephen !” “ Stephen !” mean.
18. What the whales thought of us yesterday.
19. That musical people are noted for their harmony.
20. That the Norfolk has more than eight bell(e)s.
STATE OF LONDON MARKETS.
(Not) by Submarine Cable.
Lead continues very heavy, and strychnine is still a drug in the
market. We gladly notice a rise in yeast, and a consequent improve-
ment in bread. Three per cents.—several above pa(r.) Annuities
plentifully inquired after, but no actual business. Hides fetched
tough prices ; nutmegs scarce, and as a consequence holders asked
greater prices than last week. Foreign railways slow ; stocks, as
usual, very holding.
NEW BOOKS.
“ How to Dance,” by the Skipper, with notes by Messrs. Gill and
Julian. “ How to Shoot Sea-birds, with Practical Hints where to Hit
them,” compiled for the use of the merchant service. “ Albatross,
How to Hook it,” in two parts, the latter by an old bird. “ The Life
of a Patent-Log,” by a Passenger. “ Patent Fun and Latent Satire,”
by Eds. N.N. “ Specimens of Table-Talk,” (not after Coleridge),
by the author of “Abaft the Mizen.” “Mr. A.’s Peregrinations,” by
the author of “ Stern Cabin and Stern Necessity.”
The "Norfolk" Nowadays.
“Ho, gossip ! What's i’ the wind?” —Old Play.
NO. 8. FEBRUARY 28, 1874.
We are now entering what we trust will prove the last month of our
voyage; and the thoughts of all on board are naturally directed once
more shoreward. lor many, familiar places and faces group themselves
easily in the mind's eye; but to others the “terra incognita” is a
hazy dream-land that refuses to take any tangible form from the elabora-
tion of a squatter’s yarn, or the cameo-cutting of a Trollope. To
these last the great element of interest in our making land will be
Old World News, the accumulation of some eighty days, during
which we doubt not the world has run its course of war, and
and revolution, and crime, and marrying and dying, regardless of the
handful of its salt that was cast upon the ocean two months ago.
How fares it with our little army in Ashautee land? Have they
accomplished their mission, and is Wolseley now decked with the
“spolia opima ” so hardly earned through the rank tangle and jungle
of an African wood ? We trust that victory, so long synonymous
with the British army, may be decisive enough to rid us of such
enemies for long to come. Parliament, we take for granted, is
sitting, and the Queen has once more congratulated her faithful Lords
and Commons on everything in general; grievances are being aired,
and both parties take stock of each other’s strength before the coming
dissolution. The Derby favourite and the opera prospectuses are in
everybody’s mouth. The River—boats’ crews are being trained, and
photographed as usual, and the Senior Wrangler for 1874 is a name
for history now. The Duke and Duchess of Edinburgh will have
made their entry into London. Skating and holly are succeeded by
snowdrops and east winds. The Emperor of Germany is either
better or dead; and the Drury Lane Pantomime has been seen to
death. Lenten services have commenced, and the Steeplechasing
world is getting ready for Liverpool, and knowing ones are getting a
straight tip for the Waterloo Cup. The Attorney-General is fighting
for his seat; and the new Irish Lord Chief Baron has taken his.
HOW ABOUT TICHBORNE?!!
All these things await our arrival—safely stowed away in a file of
newspapers—and a “ big read ” will be about the choicest luxury of
the shore.
NEW YEAR’S DAY.
During one of my annual travels in Switzerland I had the pleasure
of witnessing one of those curious old ceremonies, which, as a rule,
are grouped around those festivals held on the world’s holidays
Christmas and New Year’s Day, and which serve as a connecting
link between the past and present.
I was staying as a guest in the town of Wyl, a small, out-of-the-
way spot, which once, like so many of the other towns in Switzerland,
was a fortified city, wholly devoted to the rule of the Pope. In its
centre stands a noble old castle, whose grim dungeons and iron walls
could tell (had they tongues) of fearful deaths and doughty deeds.
The snow was lying four to six feet deep, and all around was sleep-
ing, fast bound in winter’s icy clasp. It was New Year’s Eve ; and
we were passing a merry, boisterous time, when suddenly the bells of
the church tolled. In an instant the cards and drinking-cups were
swept from the table, and our loud mirth gave place to the muttering
of prayers and “ Aves.” When the prayers were over all the men
and boys rose, and the latter, in two rows, made a passage to the
!9


door through which all the former passed into the night air. Hat
in hand. I followed my friend with the rest, and soon found myself
in the church of the town. I here asked my friend what was the
programme, and was told that we were going to sing away the old
year. “ Oh ! all right!” quoth I; “I can do that as well as any.”
So up I mounted into the belfry. Here we met a priest, who first
prayed, then sprinkled the bell ropes as well as us with holy water.
My friend and I lent a hand at one bell, and pulled for dear life.
Not a word was spoken ; and, after pulling and tugging till I nearly
dropped, I was well pleased to see the first couple receive the
blessing, and file down stairs. We all followed to the house, where
upon entering we were presented with an enormous drinking-horn,
full of some extraordinary drink, so strong that the fumes alone made
the eyes water. I whispered to my companion that I could never
swallow this bitter cup ; but he informed me that, unless I drank, I
should give great offence. “But I shall be drunk,” I remonstrated.
“That’s nothing,” said he ; “ so shall we all be.” Now we all stood
around the table in silence. Suddenly the bell rang slowly, then
quicker and quicker, then burst into a merry peal. All now placed
one foot upon a chair, and yelled, “Mn gutes.frohes Neu-jahr ,” “ A
happy new year,” and, offering to each other a hand, they clinked
together the horns, and shouted together “ Gesundheit,” drained the
cups, and turned them upside down. So did I; but here my recollec-
tion fails me ; until the next morning, when I have a perfect remem-
brance of a bad headache. Then the village children, high and low,
dressed in masquerade, after reciting or singing, received from the
lady of the house an enormous cake and a bottle of wine, and it was
a most amusing sight to see these small mites toddling and stagger-
ing along to give their nurses these offerings.
Calycanthus.
A TRIP UP COUNTRY IN SOUTH AFRICA.
Towards the close of 1871, being obliged to leave England for my
health, I chose “ The Cape ” as a promising place for regaining ray
strength. On board the steamer going out, I made friends with a
passenger bound on the same errand as myself, who remained with
me in all my wanderings, and also on the return journey home.
After some little time spent in Cape Town and its pretty environs,
we took steamer for the busy, money-making town of Port Elizabeth,
and from thence went up by post-car to Graham’s Town, a small
town built in a valley, and one of the fairest spots I have ever seen.
After some seven weeks spent in this hospitable little place, we deter-
mined to buy a bullock-waggon and oxen, and travel up to the
Diamond Fields, and then on to Natal. We were strongly advised
not to attempt this trip, and the general prophecy was that we
should turn up again in three days. We managed, by good luck, to
pick up a small and very serviceable waggon, with canvas top and
sides, the two ends of which rolled up as we required. We had the
top lined with green baize, and pockets all round with rests for our
guns above them, while our mattress lay on a cartel swung over the
luggage, and fixed to the sides by means of pieces of untanned hide ;
under the waggon hung a keg of boer brandy, and another for water,
with some of the larger cooking utensils ; while at either side boxes
were fixed for our cups, plates, etc., and a hatchet and spade were
fastened on the top of the boxes. We also bought a small span of
eight oxen and an old shooting horse, and having engaged the
services of a black Mozembique for driver, and a smaller black boy
for vorloper (or leader), we set off. Half the town turned out to see
us start.
We soon settled down to our every day routine ; up before sunrise,
inspanned the oxen, and then we trecked off for about three hours,
when we outspanned, and while the oxen were being driven off by the
vorloper to feed and water, we lit a fire and cooked some mutton and
damper (made of coarse flour and mutton fat), and the black boys ate
the leavings. After three or four hours’ rest, if the sun was not too
hot, we inspanned again and trecked on for a couple of hours ; then
mutton, damper, and rice for dinner. After this, we waited for the
cool of the evening (or moonlight), trecked on again until the sun set,
when the oxen were tied up to their-yokes for the night, and we had
our supper, pipes, and boer brandy by the fire; often we had to treck
for many hours before we came upon water, and very filthy it often
was. Our course, until we arrived at the lofty Catberg mountains,
lay through a rich grassy country, covered with mimosa, thorn, and
other bushes. But after we had, with great difficulty, crossed to the
other side (two of our oxen having died of the incurable disease of
lung sickness), the country changed to a monotonous stretch of
prairie land, without bush or tree to be seen, only broken by hills of
rough ironstone, and deep and swift rivers which we had to cross as
best we could. We saw no other description of country but this for
800 miles, until we arrived at the borders of Natal. We had great
trouble with our black boys; and as I found out that they intended
to make a bolt of it, I waited up with my revolver all night, and
spoilt their little game. More of our oxen also caught the malignant
lung disease, and we were very glad when the little village of Aliwal
North appeared in sight. It is situated on the Orange River, dividing
the English from the Dutch possessions. Here we sold the remaining
four oxen, and having borrowed a horse for our driver, I got upon our
own, and galloped off in search of fresh cattle. After a ride of 50
miles, I was fortunate enough to secure a magnificent span very
cheaply; and after driving them for a day and a half, and swimming
them and the horses over three rivers, I reached our oxenless waggon
again; took the waggon and all appertaining thereto across the broad
Orange River (over which task we spent many hours, owing to the
oxen being very young and unused to the yoke), and we had much
trouble with them for two or three weeks. We soon began to fall in
with larger game than we had hitherto secured, and as we went
farther on we came across herds of bucks, until, at last, “ one fine
morning ” we woke to find the plains all round covered with spring-
bok, blesbok, and wildebest, the latter being about the size of small
cattle ; we also got wild turkeys, ducks, koran, partridges, quail, etc.,
so we managed, to a great extent, to live upon our guns, and whenever
we came to a Dutch farmhouse we bought a sheep, and I soon became
quite an experienced butcher; but often we have gone without food
for a day at a time, and once I had the pleasure (?) of fasting for two
days. In about ten weeks from our start, we reached the Diamond
Fields, and outspanned near Du Toit’s Pan, and chancing to come
across some diggers whom we had met down country, we soon saw all
there was to be seen. The fields themselves were very unhealthy,
although the country around is as healthy as any in the world, owing
to its being so high above the level of the sea. There are no sanitary
arrangements whatever.
The richest digging of all is called “De Beer’s Rush,” on Kolisbcrg
Kopje, and at the time I was there the place was in the zenith of its
glory. There were plenty of good sell-everything shops, although
roughly put up with canvas, wood, or zinc—wide streets, post-offices,
canteens, and everything denoting a successful and thriving trade.
The Kopje itself looked like one enormous pit, with the claims, dug
different depths, all over it. There were twelve roads running through
it. When diamonds were first discovered there the rush was made,
and those who were fortunate enough to secure a claim cut it up in
pieces, varying from 5 to l-32nd, and sold them at enormous prices.
Each digger was obliged to keep his claim square, so as not to
encroach upon his neighbour’s possession, and the earth was sent up
in buckets by the Kaffirs working below, and taken along the road
either in the small bullock-waggons, which were continually toppling
down over the sides, or in baskets, to be first sifted of the large earth, and
then to be sorted by the fortunate proprietors, in which occupation I
have assisted my digger friends.
In many places the roads were undermined and frail woodwork
put up instead, and frightful accidents were continually occurring.
The diamonds themselves were found in a strata of rock of which
the whole Kopje is composed, and when extracted nothing whatever
adheres to them. Many claims had been dug over 70 feet deep, far
below water, and since I left I have heard that a much greater depth
has been dug, and diamonds were still being found. The diggers’
tents and waggons stretched far away in the distance, and storms
often came with such violence that the tents were blown up and
carried away.
There are many other smaller diggings in the vicinity of De Beer’s,
and the digging is carried on in the same way as there, while the
sorted earth rises in hills, forming a circle all round the excavation ;
mounted on the top of the hillocks sit the diggers sorting. _
I was offered a claim gratis by the magistrate at Du Toit’s if I
liked to stop and work it, but as our oxen had nothing whatever to
eat, we thought it wiser to depart. Besides which, we had the
trouble of pumping the water every night from a well which a
Dutchman has been enterprising enough to dig, instead of drinking
from the large bley (lake) where oxen and Kaffirs lay dead. There
were many unlucky diggers about who had taken up the profession of
cattle-stealers, and we always slept with loaded revolvers to guard
against any of these characters. The rule at the diamond fields is
“Fire first, inquire afterwards,” and many a man has been shot by a
fiery digger for coming too near his domains.
About twenty miles off the Dry diggings lie the River diggings,situated
on the Yaal river ; much purer stones are found there, although not
in such large quantities, and other stones, such as rubies, garnets, See.,
are found among them. Quartz gold has been discovered about 300
or 400 miles north of the diamond fields.
Before we left we sold our horse, as we were short of cash, and he
was too slow, and bought a few stones as a memoir; we then trecked
off to Bloemfontain, the capital of the Free States, where we made
friends with the president, and astonished him and the public with
some theatricals, which were an “ unprecedented success.” We then
pushed on to the Dragonsberg mountains, separating Natal from the
Free States ; the whole way we passed kraal after kraal of natives of


different tribes. Soon after crossing the mountains we very nearly lost
all our possessions, through the waggon being swept down the Togella
river, some 200 yards, while I (being the only one who could swim)
was leading the bullocks across. We reached Pieter Maritzburg, the
capital of Natal, on the Queen’s birthday, just four months after our
start, well satisfied with ourselves, and delighted at having disap-
pointed those who h;id “prophesied evil things concerning us.” We
then went by post-car to D’Urban (Port Natal), a lovely place, sur-
rounded by a dense bush full of monkeys and beautiful birds, and
after spending eight weeks there, riding about Victoria among the
coffee, sugar, and other plantations, we sailed for England, sorry to
leave a country which had done so much for our health and amuse-
ment. Francesco.
THE FANCY DRESS BALL.
The Fancy Dress Ball, which has been so long a hope, is now a
memory, and we dare to predict one of the very pleasantest of our
voyage. The light and somewhat baffling winds it has been our
fate to endure, have verified the old saw that “it is an ill wind that
blows nobody any good,” and these, though they have crushed our
anticipations of a smart passage, have furnished a clear evening
and a level deck for the masquerade to which reference has been
made in our recent issues. It is true the notice was short, and when
the tidings flew through the ship in the morning that, in the evening,
the ball was to be held, many a fair lady sighed “ Oh, dear, and my
dress is not half done and, as for the gentlemen, they rushed
frantically about to collect the miscellaneous articles that were to be
combined in one fantastic whole. Some of our less sanguine wise-
acres shook their heads, and croaked their fallacies that the whole
thing would be a failure, but we are sure the most doleful seer
among them will he glad to agree with us, that notwithstanding the
short notice, the ball was a most successful one, of which the Norfolk
may be proud.
At intervals during the day the officers and the midshipmen, under
the careful and experienced direction of Mr. Sladden, were very
busy preparing the ropes necessary for the sails and flags that were
to form the ball room, and by eight o’clock, when the awning was
spread, and the break of the poop and the two sides were enclosed
as far aft as the mizen-mast, with gay bunting tastefully arranged,
the ship’s lights and lanterns admirably disposed, a more attractive
salon the most fastidious could not have desired.
Shortly before eight (the hour for commencing) rumours were
afloat that all the ladies were ready, and crowded in two of the
cabins ; some said that they might peep out and see the gentlemen as
they ascended the companion. By and bye, ladies and gentlemen,
singly or in couples, arrived on the poop, and were greeted with
murmured applause or peals of laughter, according as the character
chosen was grave or comic. Punctual almost to the minute, the
real business of the evening commenced. The gentlemen were
hurrying to and fro, making engagements for the successive dances,
and the ladies were as busy referring to their cards ; and we believe
that when the light and cheerful notes of the music for the first
quadrille were heard, not a few had engaged themselves for every
dance.
Taking our place in a quiet nook, we watched the gay and festive
throng, and performed the function of “ the chiel among them takin’
notes,” with a deep sense of our inability to do justice to the masquers
and the scene. We have tried, however, to do our best, and must
beg our readers to give wings to their imagination, and thus supply
our lack of adequate description.
Towering high above the rest we saw a dignified, bespectacled
eastern potentate (Mr. Mannering), we believe of the Persian per-
suasion, with a white turban twined around his head, and habited in
a gorgeous, flowery robe, and broad, baggy pyjamas. This awe-
inspiring ruler of the Orient suggested to many the question, “ Have
you seen the Shah ?” and as he strode with a calm and dignified air
of an Asian mystery, most wondered whether he had sold his
diamonds, and whether the Grand Vizier was yet restored to favour,
and how Baron Reuter was likely to come out of his Persian specula-
tions.
Close by, fearless and gay, was a charming flower-girl (Miss Nelly
Smart), in a white dress bespangled with flowers, blossoms, and buds,
and carrying in her hand a dainty little basket, filled to the brim
with Flora’s choicest offerings. We do not know whether or not
these flowers were for sale, but surmise that incessant dancing must
have sadly interfered with legitimate business. No doubt many were
thankful for the suggestion of shore life and of gardens which this
pretty costume gave, and wished, if but for a moment, that they
could smell the perfume of the early spring violets that are now
peeping above our English soil.
From a flower-girl to a ferocious pirate is a startling change, but
the ferocious pirate (Mr. Catling) was there, with a belt bristling
with dirks, daggers, and pistols, and with the horrid insignia of his
craft—a death’s head and cross bones —ominously emblazoned on his
breast. Rakish in appearance, daring in manner, and with the
advantage of a tall, stalwart form, it was not difficult to imagine that
ill-fortune had brought the Norfolk into the power of some lawless
rover of the seas, who had come on board to levy black mail, and,
perchance, to make us all walk the plank ; yet, when we saw him
whirling a fair form through the mazy movements of a dance, and
that he was everywhere greeted with cheerful smiles, it was safe to
conclude he was, after all, not such a ferocious pirate as he looked.
Housemaid Susan (Mrs. Francis) with faultless white linen collar
and cuffs, and a cap of the trimmest and sauciest pattern, was
obviously more at home in the ball-room than in looking through the
linen closet, or dusting the boudoir. The costume, though exceed-
ingly simple, was very effective, and was a proof that, as in the
gayest garden the eye rests with pleasure upon the modest violet and
the lowly lily, so among the showiest toilettes there is always an
acceptable place for the modest and quiet.
It was to be expected that with St. Patrick’s Day so near, Paddy
would avail himself of so good an opportunity to qualify for the fes-
tivities connected with the day of his patron saint. So Paddy (Mr.
Gill) was present, the very impersonification of oddity, he was odd all
over—his stockings were odd, the smart bows on his shoes were odd,
and even the tails of his coat were odd, for one was so short it was
quite useless for him to ask any one to “ obleege him by steppin’ on
it.” The hat suggested the wilds of Connemara, and the shillelagh
would have done tremendous execution at Donnybrook.
There is an old song sung often in Erin of a Captain Brady, who
describes himself as—
“ I’d make a most iligant Turk,
For I’m fond of tobacco and ladies,”
and who finishes his description by announcing—
“ And when I’m too ould for more fun,
I’ll marry a wife with a fortune.”
We can vouch for the partiality of this particular Paddy both for
tobacco and ladies, and may perhaps be allowed to predict that long
before the distant time when his capacity for fun will be past, he will
have made the acquaintance of Hymen. Gaily, gallantly and jovially
did he bear himself, only the brogue was a trifle awanting; but then
everybody knows he is too good a Scotchman to be an Hishman.
Conspicuous among so many who represented British and Irish char-
acters, was a French femme de chamhre or bonne —we are not quite
sure which —(Mrs. Smart). There was the charming demure white
cap which always strikes the English eye on a first visit to Paris, in
the courtyard of the hotel and in the gardens of the Tuileries. There
were too the vivacity, the brisk agility, and the piquant manner of
our neighbours across the channel, which gave a consistent whole to
the continental personation.
Of course our old friend Paul Pry put in an appearance. He (Mr.
Allen) came in a hat that bore a suspicious resemblance to the opera
hat that found no buyer at the recent auction ; but which, with a gay
band of ribbon, (if we may be pardoned the poor pun) seemed now quite
(h)at home, and disclosed a brow that was the home, the head-centre
in fact, of peering curiosity. The double eye-glass was constantly on
the nose, and welcome or unwelcome he poked into all companies
with no apology but “ I hope I do’nt intrude.” The costume was in-
deed capital, from the necktie that suggested a breadth of imperti-
nence which nothing could put to the blush, and the umbrella which
was large enough to cover any amount of investigation, to the panta-
loons which, though broadly checked, indicated by their vicious
shortness that he was not to be checked in any inquiries he chose to
make.
Altogether, there were no less than four queens present. Let us
first speak of their two allegorical majesties the Queen of Spades
(Miss Nolan) and the Queen of Hearts (Miss Hanson). Much taste
and considerable ingenuity were displayed in these two toilets,
which, from their similarity, we shall try to describe together. On
the broad coronet above the brow was a large spade and heart respec-
tively, and over the dresses on the one many spades were scattered,
while on the other were many ruddy little hearts. We do not know
what other realm beside the suit in the pack of cards confesses the
sovereignty of the Queen of Spades ; the rule of the Queen of Hearts
is of course universal, by the very force of obvious suggestion ; but
we are quite sure these fair ladies are fitted to reign over, as they
would certainly adorn, that most sacred of empires, the empire of a
happy home, with a loving kindred heart. It would have been hard
to miss so fitting an attendant upon fair dames as the Page of the
thirteenth century (Mr. Just), Comparisons are of course odious, but
we cannot refrain the expression that this was one, at any rate, of the
very best costumes of the evening, and gave quite a middle-age air to
the assembly. The doublet of scarlet was slashed with black, with
lace on the collar and the cuffs, and the trunks and hose were of the
2 I


SHIP’S LOG.
Day.
Feb.
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Bar.
Remarks.
22, Sun...
43 28s
39 23e
190
29-8
Increasing. (N.E.) Freshening
fast.
23. Mon. .
43 4
44 12
213
29-91
Rain. (Gradual to W.) Fine.
24. Tues..
42 56
50 31
277
30-02
Fresh. (S.S.W.) Misty wea-
ther. Seaweed.
25. Wed..
42 42
53 18
124
30-00
Light, variable, and calm.
26. Thurs.
42 42
57 40
192
30-19
Variable. Latter part strong
southerly.
27. Fri....
41 15
61 15
176
30-29
Fresh. (Southerly, hauling S.E.
and E.) Fine.
28. Sat...
41 18
62 16
46
30-26
Light baffling airs. (E., light
N.E.)
period, while in the pert cap, worn jauntily on the head, was a long
ostrich feather. Surely if any fair dame needed one to bring her
falcon or bear a dainty love-note she could desire no trimmer page.
The most enthusiastic lover of the Emerald Isle would have been
satisfied with the brilliant little Gipsy Maid (Miss Fanny Nolan),
personated by one of Erin’s daughters. The scarlet jacket and skirt,
the blue hood, the showy many-coloured scarf, blended well, or
better contrasted well with the white dress of her companion the
Flower Girl. Whether she told fortunes or not we know not; and to
what extent she is skilled in interpreting the lines on the hand, and
reading the meanings of the stars, we cannot tell; but this we know,
she danced much, and evidently had many who were in no wise
afraid of her spells.
Queen Elizabeth (Mrs. Hyslop), and Mary Queen of Scots (Mrs.
Shaw) the former in ruffles and a flowing tulle head-dress, and the
latter with a point-lace head-dress of the Tudor period, and ruffles,
also deigned to honour the ball with their presence, and neither the
fate of Essex or of Dudley seemed to mar their enjoyment, but as
their particular Essex and Dudley were present, they might well be
happiest among the happy.
Already we have far exceeded the space assigned for the report of
this ball; we trust those who may have a shorter notice will not feel
that any invidious distinction has been made ; we only wish we could
publish an extra supplement, but that is impossible.
Our old friend of the Pantomine and the Circus, the Clown (Mr.
Morris) was a most careful and elaborate personation, even to the
vermilion patches on the cheeks. The cap was a miracle of illus-
tration and surmounted with the customary three balls, and the
jacket, pants, hose, and slippers were en suite. Wonderful were the
acrobatic feats he performed, and his grins were inimitable. Frank
Mildmay (Mr. Waddington) was an excellent representation of the
naval middy, resplendent in gilt buttons and trimmings. Quite at
home on the poop, a Man-o’-War’s man (Mr. Young) entered into the
fun and the frolic ; habited in white ducks, jumper, broad blue collar
and black tie in a true sailor’s knot, he was an excellent type of the
heart of oak whose allegiance is equal to Black-Eyed Susan and our
gracious Queen.
Bonnie Scotland was represented well (Mr. Hyslop) with the plaid,
the bonnet, decked with albatross feathers, and the dirk in the hose.
A bold brigand (Mr. Julian), shawled, booted and sworded, with a
most effectively disposed sou’wester for head-piece, strode unfeared
among the crowd. A Waiter (Mr, Paget), known only by the napkin
which he carried across his arm from those in evening dress ; a
Gamekeeper (Mr. Marshall), with leather leggings, a short belt across
his shoulder, and gun in hand ; an Officer (Mr. Edwards), in full
regimentals ; a Dutchman (Mr. Paulin), in a white suit with broad
brimmed hat, and huge boots, who smoked his pipe and was far too
phlegmatic to join in anything so light as dancing ; all deserve
ampler notice than our space permits. This is also true of an Arab
Sheikh (Mr. Shaw), who, clothed in a white flowing robe, and
wearing a white turban, calmly contemplated the scene.
The music was, as usual, most admirably rendered by Mr. Perry,
and the ball, altogether, was an unmarred success. Supper was
served in the cuddy by the kind hospitality of Captain Parham, who
acted as master of the ceremonies throughout, and the toasts of The
Captain, the Officers, the Ladies, Absent Friends, and the Queen
were uproariously drunk. The programmes were beautifully executed
by Misses Hanson and Addis, and will, no doubt, be preserved as a
pretty sonvenir of a most pleasant evening. The arrangements
were admirably carried out by a committee —Captain Newman, and
Messrs. Allen and Shaw.
MUSIC AND THE DRAMA.
The Fancy Dress Ball will be found elsewhere, fully reported.
The approaching theatrical performance is not advertised in our issue
of to-day, but we understand it will take place on Friday week.
SPORTING NEWS.
On Wednesday last, the 25th instant, a grand albatross 'battue
came off. Two caught and five shot, with five gooty albatrosses, made
up the bag.
POLICE NEWS.
[We had hoped to have got through the voyage without intro-
ducing this report, but circumstances have been too much for us.—
Eds. N. A 7 !]
Riot. —Three men called Sandy Lig, Rut. Nailyou, and Deloraine
Mewlin were summoned for riotous and disorderly conduct. Penalty,
six hours on their back next day. Several others were taken into
custody, but as no previous convictions were proved against them,
they were discharged with a caution.
A DRINKING SONG.
Bacchus, when young—so by Ancients ’twas sung—
Sorry boy, met a fate which some few know ;
Bor, pierced by Love’s dart beyond surgeon’s art,
Unwisely he spooned Mrs. Juno.
Now she had married his Pa, so was almost his Ma,
Thus the amour was quite uncanonical. '
So to punish the lad, she drove him quite mad,
And he, in his turn, grew sardonical.
The king of the place he killed without grace,
As he climbed a branch of Cicadoes.
(Between you and me, he wanted to see
The charms of religious ladies.)
So, when Bacchus did nod, they cried, “Lo ! a god !”
And with him no man cared to bicker ;
And as each god has his own particular throne,
He chose a cask of good liquor.
So to Bacchus I’ll sing, for he is my king.
Drink thrice to the glorious trinity,
Song ! Woman ! and Wine! They are all in his line,
And believe me, they are no bad divinity.
NONSENSE VERSE.
There was a young lady of Chili
Who called her grey pony King Billy.
When they said “ She’s a mare,” she said “ What do I care,”
And fed her on green piccalilli. E. L. S.
(The first was not good enough, so we add the second. No extra
charge.)
There was a young person of Chili,
Who was so exceedingly silly
That he married a girl called Jane, with one curl,
And called her his beautiful Billy. > F. M.
The “Norfolk” Nowadays.
“Ho, gossip! What's i’ the wind?’’ —Old Play.
NO. 9. MARCH 7, 1874.
As week by week we draw nearer and nearer to our port, we believe
most of our fellow-passengers are conscious of a feeling akin to regret
that the period of separation is at hand. In a fortnight, at the
longest, if we have anything like fair winds, we may expect to be in
Hobson’s Bay, and the acquaintanceships and friendships formed on
board will, in many instances, be broken, never to be renewed.
Gathered from different and widely divided parts of the three
kingdoms, we have lived together in that closest of social intimacies—
cabin life of a ship—for more than two mouths. We have sat at the
same table at more meals than we care to calculate ; we have seen
each other—morning, noon, and night; we have joined in the games
that are possible in our unsteady home ; we have paced up and down
the same deck, engaged in converse —grave or gay ; and now pio-
bably know more of each other’s disposition and habits than our
closest friends in the ordinary relations of life. It cannot be, theie-
fore, that we can think of the hour of farewell without a sense o
sadness creeping about the heart. In all our future this voyage wi
be one of memory’s frequent haunts. Sitting by our quiet flresi es
we shall think of our chequered experiences; and over the dinner-
table, or between the whiffs of a soothing pipe, we shall talk o _e
events that befell us, the things we saw, and the folks we knew in


the Norfolk. It has passed into a proverb, that a long voyage and a
crowded cabin are about the severest tests to which temper and
amiability can be put. If a person be selfish, rude, and disagreeable,
it is certain to be no secret to his or her fellow-passengers; and if,
on the other hand, he or she be kind, polite, generous—this, however
hidden, is sure to be discovered. Without indulging in flattery, or
setting an example for the members of “ The Mutual Puffing
Society” to follow, we think we may congratulate ourselves and each
other on the goodfellowship that exists, and the feeling of harmony
that has prevailed throughout. We have been told that those who
come down the Channel looked upon the Plymouth contingent as
decided interlopers, and wished them well ashore ; but we trust and
believe that, long before now, they have been glad that they were
turned out of their places, and re-arranged. For our own part we
shall be sorry indeed when we shake hands for the last time, and
say, “ Goodbye,” in all probability for good and all, to not a few of
our fellow-passengers.
EVADNE.
Where bursts Pirene, muse-haunted water-springs,
Forth from the Akro, through plain Emphyrean,
Uprose, in splendour majestic,
Corinth, the city of two seas.*
Euton of Lesbos, rich in possessions,
Wooed Evadne, high-bred Heracliden.f
Nor pasture, nor tilth-land had she :
Beauty alone graced the orphan.
Saith Arrianus, angrily chiding her,
“Kinswoman, rumour, fed by thy waywardness,
Gives thee as lover a Dusgenes. £
Tell me, hath Artemis known it? ” §
Downcast was she, and aspen-like quivering,
“ Sire! my beloved long hath affianced me :
And vows to the Jove-born we uttered,
Kneeling devout at her altar.”
“Yet for a little, Euton entreated me,
Patient awaiting Hymenseus’s favour,
To hide this from thy displeasure. ”
He then, regardless, upbraiding—
“ Go, get thee off, girl! seek thou thy base-bom one !”
Icy, and silent as marbled resemblance,
Forth from the Atrio she wandered :
Seeking the pathway to Lesbos.
Met her Cakiste, gossiping garrulous,
“Forlorn Evadne, seek’st thou thy own true love?
Another’s white arms are encircling
Euton’s cmled tresses ambrosial.”
Heard she no more ; but, heart-broken, doubting not,
Madly she sought the white-robed mountains,
And not long afterward, the snow-drift
Brought down death-stricken Evadne. Teipsum Nosce.
EXCITING CAPTURE.
Disciples of Isaac Walton, or the lovers of the gentle art in general,
must be well aware of the excitement caused and the great skill re-
quisite in landing a large salmon in good season with a fly rod. The
following account of a capture, though by no means a gentle one, will,
I think, prove original. A Staff-Sergeant of Militia quartered in the
west of England obtained, in the early part of last spring, a day’s
leave of absence to pursue his favourite diversion of a day’s salmon
fishing. He proceeded to the river, doubtless in a state of great ex-
pectation, having chosen one of those days that delight the veteran
fisherman by a “ southerly wind and a cloudy sky; ” but in this in-
stance he was unfortunate, for having persevered without success for
a long time, and no doubt beginning to feel desponding, he at last
came to a weir. He was just passing, when his experienced eye
caught sight of a salmon passing over within a few feet of where he
stood. On making down to the other side, he saw the fish lying per-
fectly motionless, as if stunned by the fall. To divest himself of his
fishing-rod and outer garments was the work of a moment—to place
himself in a position to tickle the salmon was his next move, which
he did in the most insinuating manner, until he was able to place his
fingers through the fish’s gills, and thereby obtain a firm hold. But
the salmon, evidently not approving of this mode of recruiting,
showed fight, and dragged the gallant Sergeant into the water. Then
began a terrific battle between the army and navy, which lasted
several minutes ; but ended happily in this case in favour of the for-
mer, the Sergeant having struggled to his own element with a 221 b.
fish, I may also add that I had the honour of tasting a portion of it.
Amphibious.
* “ Bimarisye Corinthi.”
t The Heraclides were the aristocracy of the city, claiming descent from Hercules,
t Dusgenes, i.e.. plebeian, ill-born.
§ At Corinth, affianced lovers swore fidelity before Artemis.
MUSIC AND THE DRAMA.
We have much pleasure in referring our readers to our advertising
columns for a programme of the forthcoming theatrical performance.
We would suggest that it should be for the benefit of the Seamen’s
Orphan Asylum.
THOUGHTS ABOUT MUSIC.
During the period we have been imprisoned in the Norfolk , many
an hour has been beguiled pleasantly away by music, either vocal or
instrumental. I think, therefore, a few thoughts upon that subject
will not be out of place. I would first draw your attention to a fact
that all must have observed, when at home they have listened to fair
damsels, whom, having had much money and time spent upon their
education, the sweet mamas or stern papas order to play to amuse (?)
the guests, viz., that it is quite possible for them to play correctly,
and yet fail to produce any of that effect upon their hearers to which
the poet refers—-" Music hath charms to soothe the savage breast.”
Why is this ? Because many teachers and more pupils quite lose
sight of what music is, viz., the expression of the feelings of a human
heart; all its woes, its joys, its triumphs, its losses. It is the com-
poser speaking to generations in notes, bars, harmonies, just as the
poet speaks in words, sentences, and stanzas. All will admit that in
reading poetry it is possible to recite the words without a fault, and
yet fail to convey to the audience a single spark of the writer’s fiery
eloquence, or a single feeling of the passion wrapt up in the poet’s
words. Such a reader, if asked what he had read, might well reply,
“Words ! words !” Now, the power of music is far greater than that
of poetry ; it is an eloquence to which no poet or speaker can ever
hope to attain. The grand rolling strains of the organ seem to uplift
man from himself to bridge over the space ’twixt heaven and earth,
and lay him panting and awe-struck at the feet of God. Not only
can it move the heart to love and kindle human emotion, it will
convey the hearer back upon the stream of time to scenes long for-
gotten. The sound of some air, however simply, can reproduce to the
aged grandfather the home of his childhood so vividly that he will
tell you what book he was reading when that air was played.
When we hear those grand soul-stirring melodies of the great
masters, we cannot fail to notice how beautifully, how faithfully all
the passions of the heart are expressed by them ; so faithfully, indeed,
that in the most mixed gathering each one will be able to pick out
some passage that seems to speak to him alone, to his very heart, to
his joy, or his sorrow. Yes, to him and for him, until the sorrow is
assuaged or the joy heightened, and the music overflows his entire
being, and taking possession of mind and imagination makes him the
slave of each pulsation of that living power ; for once in the grasp of
the soul of the great master he knows naught, hears naught, feels
naught except what he is taught by the music.
And this influence is not confined to the hearers, it moves the
performer. I have seen one who was playing one of Beethoven’s
pieces, with the tears coursing down her cheeks. She felt the music, and
that feeling having once taken possession of her, she no longer played
notes to her hearers, but burning, speaking ideas that take as firm a
hold upon those who listen as they have done upon herself. It is an
influence that none can explain, a power none can possibly compre-
hend, and as little combat against. Calycanthus.
SPORTING NEWS.
On Tuesday last the wind and weather proved favourable for alba-
tross fishing, and some very good sport ensued—no less than seven
birds being hauled on deck, Capt. Parham proving most successful.
somc |)elus.
Owing to the pressure upon our space last week, we were compelled
to omit our column of news. Some of the events narrated to-day
happened last week.
Since leaving the Cape we have passed the following islands
Marion and Prince Edward, in 46-40 S. lat., 38-6 E. long.; the
Crozets, in 46-45 S. lat., 48‘0 E. long.; Kerguelen, 48'41 S. lat., 69-2
E. long.; and yesterday we weathered St. Paul and Amsterdam, in
38 - 42 S. lat., 77 - o2 E. long. St. Paul is now celebrated as the place
where the Megcera was run ashore to escape foundering. We have
now no land before us until we reach the Australian shore.
Yesterday week, in the evening, much excitement was caused by
the appearance of a penguin, who seemed very anxious to study the
trim and gear of the Norfolk, and apparently wanted to know whether
any of his acquaintances were on board. He swam round and round
the ship, and dived underneath her, and was evidently very much
astonished, and from the knowing expression of his eye, and the
comical angle at which he held his head, a little amused at the


cries of “ Penguin ! Penguin! ” varied by “ Peregrine ! Peregrine! ”
which greeted him from all quarters. These amphibious creatures
are very numerous both at Cape Horn and the Cape of Good Hope,
we understand; but this, no doubt, was a visitor from the Crozets, and
even then was far afield.
On Saturday a large fin-back (in whaling parlance a “ fin per ”)
whale spouted close to" the starboard side, and disported himself gaily,
displaying, as he played, his huge proportions. A competent authority
assured us he was more than eighty feet long ; but English whalers
do not kill them, the oil being black and comparatively valueless.
In consequence of the success attending the albatross sporting,
angling, and shooting, a great deal of time and attention has been j
given to the care of their skins. Fortunately, there happens to be i
among the third-class passengers a skilful naturalist, Mr. Richard j
Snarey, who has taken off and dressed the breast and wings, and in
several cases skinned the entire bird. The breasts of these noble birds
make very handsome and cosy muffs, and the whole bird fitly I
mounted will be an imposing ornament for a hall. The wing bones
are also valuable for pipe stems, while their large web feet make
capacious tobacco-pouches, and, no doubt, will be given as presents to |
home-staying friends. We sympathise deeply with the gentleman j
who had the breast of his bird blown overboard by an ungallant puff j
of wind, as no doubt it was intended to minister to the comfort of j
some fair lady. ,
During the" past few days an intense rage for domino-playing has
set in. A group of interested players may now almost constantly be
seen lying on the deck, or on the gratings over the skylights, and
even at night some have forsaken their whist for dominoes. This
game, so popular with English children, is a great favourite with
foreigners, and gives scope both for the exercise of memory and the
display of judgment.
Last night there was another dance on the poop, the music being
kindly and very efficiently rendered by Mr. Perry, who has proved
himself a most valuable acquisition to the company of the Norfolk.
Lie has at all times cheerfully complied with the frequent requests that
have been made to him, and with a power of life and lung that seems
astounding to the uninitiated in cornet playing, has kept up the
music until waltzers and dancers have been glad to cry “ Hold,
enough.” We have not noticed specially the occasions on which
there has been dancing, for in the calm weather they are really
“ too numerous to mention,” being almost a nightly amusement.
On Saturday last a large ship was sighted on the port quarter,
some ten or twelve miles to the north. The wind at the time was
light, and her masts were visible until dark, but next morning she
was out of sight. The knowing ones affirmed she was the Lock
Katrine —who knows ?
While we are going to press, a kite, the result of much careful
workmanship, has been successfully flown. For a time it held
bravely against the fine south-west wind, but unfortunately the string
got foul of the spanker gaff, and the newspapers carried away.
After a good deal of difficulty, young “ Benjamin Franklin” was got
on board again, but in a very dilapidated condition.
AN ADVENTURE IN SWITZERLAND.
In the early autumn of 1872 I took my sister for a tour on the con-
tinent. Passing, somewhat carelessly, through Belgium and up the
Rhine, we travelled leisurely—ah! who could do otherwise ?
through the earthly paradise of Switzerland. En route for Geneva
we determined on seeing Mont Blanc on the way, and for this purpose
left the train at Lausanne, and, going by steamboat from Ouchy to
the eastern end of the Lake of Geneva, and thence by another
short railway journey, we crossed the mountains by the pass of
the Valle de Salvan et Finhaut, and arrived at length at
Chamounix. It was glorious weather, and we were told that many
had waited patiently for weeks in the hope of seeing Mont Blanc as
we then saw it, and had gone away disappointed. Two or three
parties made the ascent of this mountain just after we arrived, and
such the force of example, that, in a few days, I had made up my
mind to do the same. Arriving at this determination on a Saturday,
I arranged to start on the following Monday. There is, however, an
old saying, “Theie’s many a slip betwixt the cup and the lip,” and
there happened to me an adventure which not merely exemplifies this
adage, and stopped my proposed ascent of Mont Blanc, but which
had very nearly terminated my earthly existence altogether. On
Sunday morning, after a somewhat late breakfast, I set out (taking
with me my Alpenstock) towards the mountains facing Mont Blanc
on the north, thinking that I should be able to go high enough to
get a very good view of that snow-capped mountain, whose ascent I
proposed commencing on the morrow. I had not proceeded far ere
I met my sister and a clerical friend returning from church, and
to them I stated my intention. Fortunate was I that I did so, for
thus they were enabled afterwards to send help in the right direction.
The path up the mountain being zig-zag, I determined on climbing
straight up the mountain side, and, leaving it, I ascended for about
four hours through the forest. Emerging then, and proceeding a
little further over rocks and browse, what was my delight to come
suddenly on a plateau, on which was a little chalet and a herd of
goats. Here I partook of some slight refreshment, and, entering into
conversation with the old man who lived in this lovely spot, I found
that I had reached about two-thirds of the mountain’s height.
Though I had now attained the object with which I set out, I was
not satisfied, and finding that several men had been to the summit
without the assistance of guides, and that I could not in any case
return to the hotel in time for table d’hote, I resolved to continue
the ascent. I received a few directions from the old man, who,
however, tried to dissuade me, and warned me that I must be very
quick, or I should be overtaken by the darkness, before I could get
down even to the chalet. Then I started, and soon seeing that I had
missed my directions, I began to climb as best I could. How I
arrived at the top I have but a very indistinct idea, but I know I
passed through snow and over ice, and climbed where, even in my
bird-nesting days, I would never have dared to venture ; and at last,
much exhausted, reached the summit, only to see Mont Blanc
opposite uplit by the last rays of the setting sun, which in another
minute had vanished. I began to look hastily for some signs of a
path or way down, but saw none ; and to my dismay found myself,
in about five or ten minutes, with only the light of the stars to aid
me. What could I do ? I knew it was impossible, even if I knew
the way by which I had come (which I did not) to attempt to get
down that way again. It being a beautifully clear night, I could
see the snowy outlines of the mountains opposite, and far beneath
me glimmered the lights of Chamounix. Even in my dismay I
paused several minutes to gaze with admiration on this most beau-
tiful scene. But then, how to get down ? I saw no way. I shouted ;
but the only answer was the manifold echo. Then, seeing that the
mountain sloped gradually away on the side remote from Chamounix,
I determined on trying to get down that way, if I could, in hope of
finding some shepherd who would conduct me to some safe shelter
for the night. I tried this, but only to find myself on the edge of a
dark lake, or again peering over precipices, and beneath me deeper
gloom. Thinking rightly, as it turned out, that it was no use trying
this plan any more, and that, if I was sought for, I should not
most likely be found where I was then, I resolved to return to the
top. This, however, was a by no means easy task, and took me
a long time. Once, indeed, I thought I saw a smoke rising
from a cleft in the rocks, and I thought there might be
gipsies, as there were then large numbers travelling through the
country; but after reconnoitring cautiously, and resolving at
length to call out, I found that it was but a mist after all. With
sinking heart I started again for the top, but giving my ankle a
slight sprain did not mend matters, and it was midnight ere I reached
the summit again. I was now very much exhausted and inclined to
sleep. I had no flask or even cigar-case with me, and seeing a little
piece of wall, which I learnt afterwards was the ruin of a hut built
by the Alpine club, I thought of resting, but finding myself on the
verge of sleep, and recollecting that if I once gave way I should pro-
bably never wake again in this world, I roused myself by an effort
and began to walk up and down. Arid up and down a distance of
about a dozen yards on the very summit of that mountain I walked
for four weary hours with but slight intermission. I, however,
climbed down again and again to some running water that I had
previously observed, and on the first occasion of my doing so an eagle
started from directly under my feet, causing such a vibration in the
still air, that in my w r eak state my heart beat fearfully for several
minutes. Having quenched my thirst, I looked up and beheld what
seemed to me a white wall with dai’k fantastic figures on it, which,
coming towards me, seemed about to overwhelm me. With the cold
sweat on my brow I made again for the top, but ere I reached it I
saw the cause of my terror disappear through a cleft in the mountain-
side, and seeing what had caused this curious phenomenon, I laughed
at myself for my folly in being so easily frightened. The moon, or
rather what was left of it, for it was well on the wane, had risen, and
the forms I had seen were the shadows of the tops of the mountains
showing on the background of cloud or mist that was moving slowly
up the valley below. I had now well-nigh given up hope, felt
certain any way that even if found the adventure would have unfitted
; me for anything, when I saw lights emerging from the forest beneath.
To shout loudly in smatterings of all the languages of which I knew
l anything was ray first act, and I fancied I heard a reply. I realm
j afterwards that they distinctly heard me, though I could scarcely, it
at all, hear them. Again and again the lights shone out, and again
and again they disappeared. Once I did not see them for at least
half an hour." But they at length reappeared, and I saw by the
increase of lights, and the direction in which they lay, that they hart
reached the chalet. Afterwards they seemed to go downwards, and
I did not see them for what seemed an age, and again my spurts


SHIP’S LOG.
Day.
Mar.
Lat., S.
o /
Lon.,B.
Dist.
Bar.
Beno arks.
1. Sun..
41 25
65 27
144
30-68
Moderate. (Northerly wind.)
Fine weather.
2, Mon,.
41 44
68 51
154
29-98
Moderate. (Northerly.) Fine
weather.
3. Tues..
43 32
69 48
107
29-68
Light. (E. to S.E.) Raining.
4. Wed..
43 00
73 37
168
29-58
Light. (N.E. to N.W. to S.W.)
Raining.
5. Thurs.
42 54
79 20
253
29-95
Strong. (Southerly.) Fine.
6. Fri...
43 2
83 50
198
30-20
Decreasing. (Veering S.W. to
W.S.W.)
7. Sat,...
43 22
88 49
221
30-31
Freshening. (S.W. to S.S.W.)
Squally.
HEATRE ROYAL, “NORFOL K.”
ON FRIDAY NEXT, 13th MARCH,
Will be performed (weather permitting), a Burletta in 3 Acts,
entitled—•
“A LOVER BY PROX Y.”
Harry Lawless W. P. Gill.
Mr. Bromley W. M. Allen.
Blushington B. Paulin.
Squib F. Edwardes
Penelope M. Just.
Ulysses F. Morris.
To conclude with the Burlesque of
PATIENT PENELOPE.
Nib J. Young.
Miss P. Prude Guy Mannering.
Kate L. Paget.
Harriet F. Marshall.
Eurymachus A. Julian.
Medon W. M. Allen,
fell, and hope fled. But as I waited, more composedly now, for the
dawn, I heaixl voices and saw lights, and soon two guides reached
me, felt me all over to ascertain that I was not benumbed, tied a rope
round my body, and one going before and the other following me we
soon got down over the really dangerous part, and then taking oif the
rope the elder guide produced a bottle of wine, which I immediately
emptied. On my way down I was able to point out to my guides
where I went up, and they said it was the way of the avalanche, and
that no one had ever been up there before. At the chalet were two
Americans who were staying at the same hotel as myself, and who
were the only ones the guides would allow to accompany them, and
very warm and earnest were their congratulations on my safety. I
warmed myself by the fire, and after seeing the sun rise, and sending
on a guide to tell my sister (who, as you may suppose, was naturally
anxious) that I was all right, we recommenced the descent. Though
very fatigued I bore up till we arrived very near the foot of the
mountain. Here, however, I began to stagger so much that but for
the friendly arms of my American friends I should have after all
come to grief. Arrived at the hotel I went to sleep ere I could touch
any refreshment, so I was put to bed at once, and slept soundly all
day, and then had to listen patiently to the reproaches and congratu-
lations of all the hotel. I still hoped to go up Mont Blanc, but an
English physician who was there warned me not to attempt it, so
much was I exhausted. I rested for a time in Geneva, and then
retui’ned home ; but still the recollection of that night is fresh in my
memory, and often in my sleep I am standing on the summit of that
mount, and see again as I saw then the snowy crest of the mighty
monarch of European mountains crimsoned with the last rays of the
departing sun; and as fancy carries me again through the dark
horror of that night, once more the cold sweat stands on my brow,
and I pray again in agony that I may at least die without pain, and
as the moment of my dissolution seems to draw nearer and nearer to
me, and I am commending my soul to the care of the Almighty, I
awake to find that I have but been dreaming of the past, and to
thank God that he answered my prayers on that night, and sent me
aid in time. J.
NEVER AGAIN!
Never again ! will the voice of the cat
Be heard, with its pitiful wailing,
Disturbing all; and for many a one
A sleepless night entailing.
Never again ! will Brown, Morris and Just
Stand armed with brooms, bootjacks and boots;
And try to allure her from under the stairs
With alternate allurements and hoots.
Never again! will they stay in the cold
Making ten times more noise than the cat;
Waiting until they can hear her shrill scream,
And her steps coming on pit-a-pat.
Never again ! for she’s tied up fast
By the deck-house, where bootjacks can’t reach her;
And she thinks as the cud of reflection she chews,
I’m no longer a troublesome creature.
Francesco.
NONSENSE VERSE.
There was a young girl of Jamaica,
Who slept so, they never could wake her,
So they tied her back hair to the leg of her chair
And said, “ if she won’t, we must make her.”
The "Norfolk” Nowadays.
“Ho, gossip! What' si’ the wind ?”—Old Play.
NO. 10. MARCH 14, 1874.
From the song of the Ancient Mariner downwards—and that, in all
conscience, covers sufficient ground—we have been accustomed to
the one unvarying tale of the monotony of ship-life. How or whence
this idea sprung, it is needless to inquire. All will recognise the
expression as an old friend, on whose shoulders are laid all the short-
comings of lazy letter-writing friends, and the flatness and vapidity of
authoress travellers. Those who are even the least familiar with our
myriad, of English proverbs will admit that its popular currency by
no means argues in favour of its truthfulness, so little apt are people
to question their fathers’ most slip-shod sayings.
On the eve of our eleventh week of trial, we are ready, armed with
a certain degree of experience and confidence, to challenge this terrible
bogie that has been talked and written into an existence ; and in this
matter, our sole object is to saddle the ennui and tedium that may
exist upon the proper back. For the sake of illustration, let us
suppose that from some unavoidable cause, say forty adults, for-
tuitously selected, were brought upon terms of perfect equality into
a daily companionship for some two or three months ashore. Let
them eat and drink together at every meal, at fixed hours and in
fixed places. Let their habitation be within four walls, some eighty
feet by thirty, and let the doors be made fast, and their sole play-
ground be the roof-top. Let every possible means of communication
with the outside world be interrupted, and all letters or newspapers
or new books be denied them. Let all the provisions and stores
necessary for their housekeeping be laid up at the start for good and
all. The men without a tailor, or a game of billiards ; the ladies
without their shopping, or even a curate. Let their house be
morning, noon, and night subject to the convulsions of the worst of
earthquakes, ten times magnified. Let them not be told the day of
their release, but tantalized by false hopes. Let them be given to
understand that their situation is highly precarious, and that a fire or
violent tempest, or other calamity, may in an instant overwhelm the
whole community. And if such a society live upon such terms in all
the concord and goodfellowship we have enjoyed during our imprison-
ment, then we will think it worth our while seriously to discuss the
“monotony of ship-life.”
THE TEA PARTY.
On the good Norfolk the news spread like wildfire driven by east wind,
That a great Tea would be held on Tuesday at six in the evening,
By Edwardes, Julian and Gill, the members of Number Two cabin,
Aided by Mr. Allen, their worthy, their health-seeking lodger.
Invitations were sent, written most neatly on cream-laid,
Forwarded some time before, so that prior engagements
Might not stand in the way, and well was their foresight rewarded ;
Scarce a refusal was seen when the post came in in the evening.
And when the morning came, nought was heard but the hammer
Driving the stubborn tacks right through the rugs to the woodwork,
Covering up all the bunks, and keeping refractory pieces
Of carpet from tripping up those whom that night they’d asked to
assemble.
Shortly after the time named on the letter of greeting,
Guests began to leave their quiet and peaceful cabins,
Dressed in their Sunday attire, carefully walking and slowly
Through the long saloon, on to the hall of the gossiping.
Introduced were they, as soon as their names they had given,
Shouted in basso profundo, by a gentleman waiting on purpose,


Handed politely to seats (taking great care of the ladies),
While all admired the way the cabin adorned was with pictures.
After a time was heard the clatter of cups and of saucers,
And tea was handed round, plates too bravely endeavouring
To hold the cakes that were piled, regardless of any expenses,
One on the top of the other, disdainfully viewing the jam pots.
Never was seen before of luxuries such a profusion,
And nearly every one ate until they could do so no longer,
Then cleared away were the things, and someone politely suggesting
That a round game should be played, everyone straightway assented,
('hosen out of all others was that of “ The Stool of Confession,”
Played in this manner—outside the room stepped one of the party,
While inside two others, armed with pencil and whitest of paper,
Took down the thoughts of the party concerning their missing com-
panion.
Then was he told what was said, without any names being given,
And he at once endeavoured to guess the name of the person
Who had expressed an opinion, and if he hit on the right one,
Outside the room was he sent, to be quizzed in similar manner.
Then a duet was sung by Messrs. Morris and Julian,
Followed at once by a song from the lodger (by name Mr. Allen),
Then Miss Smart was heard, singing a well-known old sonnet,
Bearing the hearts of the hearers to the voices they’d left far behind
them.
Many more songs were sung : then wine from bottles of ebony
Was handed in well-cut glasses round to the party assembled.
'Then much mirth was caused by a bunk too heavily weighted
Breaking down with a flop, and spilling all seated upon it.
Then Mr. Parsons proposed the health of the hosts, very fluently
Thanking them all for the way they had treated their guests of the
evening,
Wishing them every success, and a happy wife in Old England. ■
Then the four hosts returned thanks in a manner both hearty and graceful.
After much shaking of hands, the party broke up, while the ladies
Handed were to the door, leaving th’hospitable cabin,
Gathering up their skirts, shivering, chilled with the night air,
While the gentlemen tucked up their trousers, and walked away to their
cabins. Francesco.
THOUGHTS.
On ! on ! speeds the good Norfolk. A few short days more, and
we may anchor in the haven of hope. We have braved the sea and
wind, and now may for a few hours rest—Rest? Cananymortal rest
until he has crossed that small invisible boundary, and entered the
land where hope ends? Nay ! though he stay from his labours, yet
will his mind soar far from the sleeping body, and passing these
earthly bounds of the finite, spread its wings and speed its flight to
those realms of the infinite. In sleep these flights take the forms of
dreams, and are mainly reproductions of past events. When this
alienation of soul and body takes place during waking hours ; when
the ills of the present are forgotten, and the brain and soul alone are
mindful ; we call this reverie or thought. Once let the mind of man
enter this boundless realm, all is strange and new to him. The most
ordinary sounds and objects suggest ideas to him that never crossed
his mind before, and these ideas rushing unbidden, occupy, infatuate,
inspire the soul ; and at last the man speaks—as a dreamer, hardly
knowing what power his words contain ; and when the world reads
these burning words, it exclaims “What originality! what genius !”
Yes, it is in this boundless space of thought, where earthly things
have no power to clog the soul, that the mind obtains its rightful
sway, that genius is born. Now, this fact of the mind being able to
release itself from the body, and act independently, the rapidity of
thought, and the space of time covered by a dream—all these suggest
to one the Omnipresence—the Divine in man—and how inadequate is
language to convey the conceptions of one mind to the understanding
of another. How immeasurably inferior are the words of the orator
to the inspirations that dictate; and why? How can the finite
convey the infinite ? Calycanthus.
A RHAPSODY.
What shall I write about ? This was the puzzling question I put to
myself this morning, on remembering that the last opportunity of
distinguishing myself (or otherwise) as a contributor to the “ Norfolk
Nowadays ” had arrived. But the multiplicity of subjects that
crowded my brain made it as difficult for my genius to select one, as
it is for Mr. Sladden to take aim at one bird when many are hovering
round his I offer this illustration as an excuse for any paucity
of eloquence or incorrectness of style. Out of the many subjects the
“ Port Stern Cabin ” presented itself as the most familiar. When I
gaze around its vast proportions, and think of the great deeds and
mighty events mighty amd great indeed, for they have influenced
tk® heads and hearts of the whole population of the
cuddy my brain turns dizzy and my heart swells with pride. When
I glance back at the past, I see at one moment the eloquence of a
Byron and the wit of a Burnand flowing from the lips of an Allen or a
Morris; and at another, methinks I hear the dulcet notes of a cornet,
which could only be produced by the lips of a Jullien. Then the
•• Muffin-struggle.” Never, in my wildest dreams, did I conceive it
possible that the grim walls of our cabin could have been hung with
tapestry so ancient, and pictures so priceless, looking down upon the
fair and lovely forms of lady passengers. My mind would desire to linger
fondly upon such a scene as was presented there last Tuesday even-
ing; and, therefore, I cannot do better than draw this short reverie
to a close with such a sweet and ever vivid remembrance.
Amphibious.
THE YORING-FOS.
What the Matterhorn is to Mont Blanc, the Voring-fos is to the
Skjaeggedal-fos. We saw it in a hurry, and made two unusually
severe days’ work to see it at all. We rowed up over night from
Utne, a distance of nearly thirty English miles, having already made
an excursion from Odde, and come from that place to Utne the same
day, and only reached the hotel a little before midnight. The next
morning we were up at four, and off to the Vbriug at half-past, for we
had to be back to catch the steamer to Eide by a little after noon.
For about a mile and a half we walked up an unusually (for Norway)
wooded valley, with the same stern, bleak mountains of rock that are
everywhere to be seen, rising on either hand, which brought us to
the shore of a lake. Embarking in a leaky, rotten old boat that
nobody but an English tourist “ doing a country” would trust his life
in. we were rowed across, a distance of about three miles. Compared
with the lake at the Skjfeggedal this one was poor and tame, though
its steep mountain shores are nearly 8000 feet high. In the soft,
early morning light we were struck with the pertinacity with which
nature endeavoured to tone down its grey, barren desolation ; for,
wherever there was soil enough to nourish a seed, and support a
shoot, there she caused the seed to be wafted, and the shoot to spring.
It is really wonderful to see firs and birches growing on hard, solid
rocks, with only a bed of moss, and their roots nearly all exposed,
and yet managing to hold on, and grow, and year by year put forth
foliage. Our landing-place was a little below the scattered village
of Ssebo. From that place we made our first pony journey ; and suck
a journey! No one, unless he had seen it, would believe that any
four-footed creature, except a goat, could have picked its way where
these ponies carried us ; and no one, except he who has gone where
we went, would believe that anybody would be such a fool as to
jeopardise his neck by riding it. We went up rough rock-stairs,
and down rough rock-stairs, over bare, smooth, sloping rocks,
through long stretches of monster boulders, and across a couple of
ricketty wooden bridges, with great gaps in the planking, filled up
with stones, and which creaked, and swayed, and trembled as we
went over them in Indian file. Our course was now on one side
and now on the other of a roaring mountain-torrent, and up a
narrow gorge, whose towering mountain sides rose between 2000
and 3000 feet above us, and whose bed was strewn with gigantic
blocks of rock, which had in the course of centuries fallen from
above. It was, of all the places we visited, the most lone-
some and most desolate; and we could imagine no fitter or
more congenial region to which the misanthropes (or rather pro-
fessed ones) who say they pine for solitude might be banished.
One month’s residence there would give them a healthy appetite for
human society, and make even a chat with Jack Ketch a delightful
entertainment. There was one little oasis in the rocky desert where
the grass grew green and fresh, and there we halted for a while and
studied the narrow zig-zag path up the mountain’s face —some 2000
feet high, we were told—which tourists were compelled to take even so
late as two years ago, for then the only way by which the Voring
could be seen at all was to go up to the top of the fjeld, and look
down on the fall below. Now, however, the Tourists’ Club have built
a bridle path right up to the head of the gorge, and spanned the
torrent with a substantial bridge. Along this path, soft arid slushy
with recent rain, we proceeded, rounding many a sharp point, des-
cending and ascending many a steep gradient, and wondering always
at our own courage in riding where there was literally only half a
step between us and destruction on the great jagged rocks beneath.
The gorge, we found, ended in a rude semicircle of cliff, and as wc
turned the last corner we knew by the dense, wind-flawed, smoke-
like spray which filled the entire space that the object of our journey
was near at hand. Leaving our ponies on the hither side we crossed
the bridge, and threading our difficult way over the loose stones, we
reached the point where the best view of the fos is obtained. No
words can convey any true idea of the magnificence of this watery
sublimity. Tearing its way over the sloping side of the upper cliff,
through which it has worn a channel, the water reaches the edge of
the perpendicular rock, and then plunges at one leap, some say GOO,
some 000, feet into the chasm below. Grand and beautiful are the
ever-varying forms the outmost waters take ; wild and weird are all
the surroundings, deafening is the roar, and wet to the skin must


SHIP’S
LOG.
Day.
Mar.
Lat.
0 /
Long.E.
Bar.
Dist.
Remarks.
8. Sun...
43 22
93 17
30-12
207
Decreasing. (Veeringwesterly.)
Cloudy.
9. Mon. .
43 44
98 35
29-74
229
Fresh. (S.W. to S.S.W.) Rain.
Squally.
10. Tues..
43 46
104 20
29-73
248
Strong southerly. Later, fall-
ing calm.
11. Wed..
42 25
109 54
29-93
258
Strong southerly.
12. Thurs,
41 57
114 1
30.17
186
Moderate. S. by E. to S.S.E.
Cloudy.
13, Fri....
42 2
115 55
30-20
98
Light, unsteady. (S. to S.W.)
Cloudy.
14. Sat....
41 29
118 47
30-0
134
Moderate breeze. (N.N.W.)
every tourist be (unless clad iu waterproofs) who would gaze upon the
Voring-fos. The body of water that ordinarily falls is about equal to
that of the Handek, in Switzerland; it is the highest waterfall iu
Europe, except that of Gavernie in the Pyrenees, and is undoubtedly
the lion of Norway. A well-known traveller and writer says about
it—“ I have seen most of the waterfalls of Europe, but this far
exceeds and is undoubtedly the finest of them all.” J. L. P.
Home |Ubs.
Another week of bafiling winds, so far as the closing days are
concerned, makes our arrival in Hobson’s Bay before next Saturday
rather problematical. All sorts of opinions are hazarded, and very
contradictory wagers have been offered and taken as to when we
shall sight the Otway ; but at present the weight of opinion inclines
to Saturday.
Yesterday we were becalmed all the morning, and, as our sporting
column shows, the boat was lowered and a band of sportsmen went
out in search of ocean game. To-day, a fine fresh north breeze is
blowing—Australia’s welcome to us, we take it—and we are going
direct for Cape Otway at the rate of nearly ten knots an hour. May
it continue.
About the witching hour of midnight on Thursday, we crossed the
parallel of Cape Leuwin (115 E.), and passed (too quietly by half)
into Australian waters. The nearest laud point was about 350 miles
north of us.
During the week dancing has been spiritedly kept up on the poop,
the calm evenings and the fair ones alluring some of our veteran
whist-players from the cuddy. Those who stayed below, however,
on two evenings, had an unexpected and a rare musical treat.
Gounod’s “Prayer,” a song entitled “She wandered down the
mountain’s side,” a number of Irish melodies, and other songs
were exquisitely sung by Mrs. Shaw, whose beautifully clear and
cultivated voice, and spiritwelle rendering, stopped all the games iu
progress, and compelled loud and hearty applause.
On Tuesday a large tea party was given by the “ Inhabitants of
Gossiping Hall ” to a number of their friends and, may we say,
admirers. As one of our poetical contributors has chosen this as a
theme for an experiment in hexameters, we will not be guilty of
tautology in dull prose. Unfortunately—or perhaps, fortunately,
because furnishing an excuse and opportunities for gallantry iu
taking care of the lady guests—the evening was rough ; and, conse-
quently, the cabin floor had a strong slant to leeward, and very
careful balancing was needed to preserve the perpendicular. We
are informed all the guests invited were present, except Judge
Nolan, who was indisposed (not to come, but in health). One of the
replies to the invitation has been handed to us for publication, which
we gladly do, as proof positive of the wealth of poetical talent on
board.
From you who’ve taken tea and cake
At many a pleasant party,
And now are going to pay your debts
In a manner true and hearty,
Have I, who sleep with “Pills*” along,
And am a single man,
Received a note, inviting me
To tea and cake and jam.
Ye merrie, wise, and happy men,
Who dwell in No. 2,
Most happy shall I be to take
Tea, cake, and jam with you.
With Cambria’sf son, and too,
And England’s|| brave and bold,
To-morrow night I’ll come to tea,
For I know I shan’t be sold.
With the Norfolk belles, the cabbage poet,§
Whose songs are yet unsung,
With pleasure I will drink the cup
That cheers, not screws—
J. Young.
MUSIC AND THE DRAMA.
Yesterday evening we were favoured with most exceptionally calm
weather, and it was therefore peculiarly unfortunate that the thea-
trical performance advertised iu our issue of last week did not take
place, owing, we understand, to the unpreparedness of several members
of the company. We are sorry to be unable to give our readers any
idea of the probable date of the postponement.
* A sea phrase for the doctor. f Mr. Edwardes. J Mr. Gill. || Mr. Julian.
§ Mr. Morris, an erroneous reference to a passage in his account of his South
African trip.
To the Editors of the “ Norfolk Nowadays .”
Dear Sirs,—Two powerful sensations are felt, I think, at present,
111 cvel 7 breast on board the Norfolk. One, of pleasure, at the
prospect of soon setting foot once more on terra firma { although to
many of us it is terra incognita J • the other, of sadness at sayinc
“ good-bye” to our fellow-passengers. With many of us the latter
piocloniiiicit6Sj and as we think that never again may we see those
who have been our partners iu many a charming dance or rubber of
whist, or with whom we have played so often at chess or quoits, or,
still further, those with w'hom we have shared our cabin, and with
whom we aie probably on terms of greater intimacy, a feeling akin to
sorrow steals, and w T e almost wdsh we had the voyage to go over again.
Yet, after all, the parting is nothing like so painful as "the one that
took place for most of us nearly three months ago ; and there will
probably remain in the course of a few weeks or months no deeper
feeling than a pleasant recollection. But this, at least, will be always
kept alive by the sight of the “ Norfolk Nowadays .” The object
with whrch this paper was started, and has since been kept up, will,
no doubt, have been attained, if it serves iu after years to recall to
our memories the varied incidents of this voyage of the Norfolk. I,
for one, shall always feel deeply grateful to you, gentlemen, for the
perseverance, courtesy, and tact which you have shown in the con-
duct of this paper, and I am quite sure that, in tendering you my
warmest thanks, I am but expressing the unanimous feeling of rny
fellow-passengers. I remain, gentlemen, yours sincerely,
The Norfolk, 14th March, 1874. ARTHUR JULIAN.
THINGS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN.
1. How many cups of tea were drunk at the tea party.
2. That entomological researches are all very well ashore,
3. How many people Mr. Gill’s bunk will hold.
4. Who the man is w T ho has got fusees.
HYMNS—ANCIENT AND MODERN.
No. 18.
“God who madest earth and heaven.”
(Id Lat. red.)
Magne Terrarum, Superum Creator !
Qui regis lucem, tenebrasque caecas,
Das die nobis operum labores,
Nocte quietem?
Angeli servent vigiles precamur,
1)e Tua prsebes bonitate somnum ;
Spesque coelestes, simulacra sancta,
Noctis in umbris.
Protegas somno placido carentes,
Dormiens noctu, moriensve quisque
In Tuis, pater, manibus, saluber,
Pace quiescat.
Dum die auditor tuba personare
Ultima, nunquam teneras relinque,
At, Deus nostras animas maneret,
Gloria Tecum? “ Teipsum Nosce.’’
SPORTING NEWS.
Yesterday, in the calm, a boat was lowered, and under the com-
mand of Mr. Sladden, a shooting party, consisting of Messrs. Gatlin,
Morris, Allen, Young, Johnson, Paget, Edwardes, and Marshall, em-
barked. They succeeded in bagging 5 albatrosses, 2 mollyhawks,
and 4 Cape doves. And if they only enjoyed themselves as much as
the spectators did the sight of their chase after the ship, they had a
very pleasant morning of it.


P OSTSCRIPT,
We published our last issue on board the good “ Norfolk ” 1160 miles
west of the Otway. To complete our record of the voyage, we
append a short account of our doings during the eight remaining
days.
Sunday, March 15 th. —Beautiful weather, smooth water, and a fa-
vourable wind. Towards evening the wind fell nearly calm. Hymn-
singing as usual in the cuddy.
Monday, March 16 th. —Wind once more fresh and fair. Shoals of
blackfish chased the ship during the day. In the evening perform-
ance at the Theatre Royal—the first piece played was “ A Lover by
Proxy.” The principal parts were admirably rendered by Mr. Gill
(Lawless), Mr. Paulin (Blnshington), Mr. Edwardes (Squib), Mr.
Allen (Mr. Bromley), and Mr. Young (Nibbs), with our three lady
friends, Miss Mannering, Miss Paget and Miss Marshall; all did full
justice to a somewhat weak comedy, and the curtain fell to a voci-
ferous round of applause. The second part of the evening’s enter-
tainment was the musical burlesque of “ Patient Penelope ; or, The
Return of Ulysses.” We are sorry our space does not permit us to
dwell on what was generally admitted to be the most successful effort
of the company during the whole voyage. We were introduced to
two new actors in Mr. Julian and Mr. Just, as “ Eurymachus,” and
“ Penelope,” while the parts of “ Ulysses” and “ Medon” were sus-
tained by Mr. Morris and Mr. Allen. The elaboration of the antique
dress and scenery, and the perfection of the singing and dancing and
acting of each of these four gentlemen would have done credit to any
stage in the world, and formed a tout ensemble that was irresistibly
comic and effective. The following topical song, written by Mr.
Morris, was sung by Mr. Allen and the talented author :
Ulysses —So long I’ve been away that I
Should like at once to know
Whether the Tichbome case is o’er,
Now tell me, is it so?
And is the second son of Queen
Victoria married yet ?
Who is this worthy man who keeps
Sailors from getting wet ?
Medon —The trial’s o’er, but d’ye know,
The jury don’t agree.
So they discharged him ; ’twixt ourselves,
He’s really Roger T.
The Duke of Edinbro’ married
The beautiful Marie ;
The Germans say the Queen was there.
The New Loan’s 93.
Ulysses —How nice ! And the Ashantee war
I hope is over too ?
Who’s won the Derby ? will Light Blue
Turn out the stronger crew ?
Medon —The Blacks were beaten thoroughly,
And all the papers said
That Captain Edwardes shot the great
King Coffee through the head.
Couronne de Per the Derby got;
The Boat-race Cambridge won;
The rape before they shot Barnes bridge
Was virtually won.
Ulysses —The Licensed Victuallers’ Act, I hope,
Has been repealed ? Now then,
I’d like to know if I can get
A liquor after ten ?
Medon—ol course you know the Radicals
No longer hold the sway,
Conservatives came into power
On the election day.
And every one is satisfied
(They have such strong supporters)
They’ve taxed all bachelors and pleased
Miners and railway porters.
The Education Bill’s revised ;
Each day before they part
The teachers hear the children say
The Bible off by heart.
And Pliinsoll’s made a baronet
For saving lives at sea;
And every one admires him much,
And so, I’m sure, do we.
Ulysses —l’m not surprised, for so’t must be
When they come into power;
Now, my returning is to me
A very happy hour.
Chorns —But get you to the Happy Land,
To No. 25;
And in the morning when I come,
I hope you’ll be alive.
Tune—“ Maggie May.”
The following epilogue from the same pen wound up the per-
formance :
We thank you all for your kind patronage
Of us who acted on the Norfolk stage ;
And as w r e bid you all a fond farewell.
We wish you happiness unspeakable.
May health increasing e’er attend your way,
Be heaped upon you—May you ever be
An honour to th’ Australian colony.
We hope that you, who’ll soon return to see
Those three dear things, old England, Home and Beauty,
May, finding all, oft think with fond regret
Of th’ amateurs you on the Norfolk met.
A supper kindly provided by Captain Parham brought a delightful
evening’s amusement to a close.
Tuesday, March nth. —Cleaning ship. Fair wind. St. Patrick’s
day observed in the usual loyal fashion by Hibernians on board.
Wednesday, March 18 th. —Still a fair wind. Excitement running
high as to our arrival.
Thursday, March VMh. —Excitement increasing ; but wind not so
fair.
Friday, March 20th.— Sighted and signalled Cape Otway, at eleven
a.m.—B3 days from Plymouth. In company with many vessels.
During the evening caught in a hard squall. Night very black and
wet, and wind foul.
Saturday, March 21s£. —Wind light and contrary. Signalled ship
Oheron and steamer Cyphrenes. Afternoon fair wind. Picked up
pilot at 4.30 p.m., passed up West Channel, and dropped anchor off
Williamstowu about 8.30 p.m.
Sunday, March 22nd.— At anchor all day ; most of the passengers
went ashore.
Monday, March 23 rd. —Towed alongside Sandridge pier about
10.30 a.m. In the evening farewell dinner at Scott’s Hotel. Chair
taken by Judge Nolan ; Vice-chair, Rev. J. Parsons. The toasts of
the “Queen,” “Army and Navy,” “Ship,” “Officers,” “Norfolk
Nowadays,” “ Chairman,” Sec., given and responded to.
M‘Carron, Bird & Co., Printers, 37 Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.
z8
THE “NORFOLK” NOWADAYS.






SHIP
"NORFOL K"
/ 953 Tons, A. PARHAM, Commander.
From London, 2 srd December , via Plymouth 29 th December , 1873.
PASSENGERS (CABIN).
Rev, Mr. PARSONS.
Mrs, PARSONS,
Miss ELSIE PARSONS.
Master H. PARSONS and Nurse.
Captain NEWMAN.
Mrs. NEWMAN.
ylM’
Judge NOLAN.
Miss NOLAN.
Miss FANNY NOLAN.
Mr. EDW. 1.. SHAW.
Mrs. SHAW.
Master JOH^NPATRICK SHAW.
Mrs. SMART.
Miss F.VNNY SMART.
Mrs. FRANCIS and Maid.
Mr. HYSLOP;.N? (
Mrs. HYKLOP.
Mr. ADDIS.
Mr. ADDIS, Jun.
Misses ADDIS (3).
Mrs. HAYDON ROGERS.
Mrs. KEMBLE.
Miss HANSON.
Mbs. ROGERS.
Miss ALLEN.
Mrs. LEBEAU.
Miss GOSLIN.
Mrs, PANTON.
M essrs. EDWARDES.
GILL.
JULIAN.
STEPHEN.
MANNERING.
EDMONSON (2).
WADDING TON.
Paulin.
• ATLIN.
YOUNG.
MORRIS.
BROWN.
JUST.
W. M. ALLEN.
And seventy-eight in the Second and Steerage.
OFFICERS.
ALBERT PARHAM, Captain.
First Officer Mr. SLADDEN.
Second Officer —Mr. WOODS.
Third OJjicer Mu. GILL.
Fourth Officer Mr. JOHNSON.
Midxhipmci! -Mu. PAGET.
Mu. BRACKENBURY.
Mr. MARSHALL.
Mr. CLARKSON.
Doctor— Dr. STILLWELL.








