

7 , , , *&&****?(
r ? r ' <
I ' .THE TIMES?: ' I
i ? I
j ? A SATIEE, ? .. ,|
I I
f ? i
BY r\ ?
? ...
r
INSCRIBED, BY PERMISSION, )
f \
\ . T0 J
i THE HON. WILLIAM B. HALLEY, Q.C., M.P., I
l Jj
( Attorney-General of New South Wales j
'
'. :
)
SYDNEY: 1
[ F. CUNNINGHAME & Co., GENERAL PRINTERS, 1
? ' 146 Pitt Street )
' -
?( 1884. SI
J
/ Price?One Shilling.
U . ?
. . . . ..


t
k
ft


HE TIMES:
A SATIRE,
N. O. L?
INSCRIBED, BY PERMISSION,
THE HON. WILLIAM B. DALLEY, Q.C., M.P
Attorney-General of New South Wales.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME & Co, GENERAL PRINTERS,
146 Pitt Street.


?
~w
Printed by
F. CUNNINGHAME & CO.,
146 PITT STREET.
Sydney.
M-


? CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTORY LINES, HAVING REFERENCE TO THE
TEMPORARY SUPPRESSION OF THE FIRST CANTO,
BECAUSE ITS TREATMENT OP THE ?SOCIAL AND
MORAL DEFORMITY ? OF THE TIMES WAS CONSIDERED
PERILOUS TO THE WRITER?S INTEREST.?SENATORIAL
SKETCHES.?PLATFORM SPEAKERS.?PULPIT ORATORS.
?VAGARIES OF THE PULPIT?THE SUPERIORITY OF
GENIUS TO RANK?ARCHBISHOP VAUGHAN, THE GREAT
OPPONENT OF INFIDELITY?THE DARWINIAN THEORY.
AN APPEAL TO CHRISTIAN MINISTERS.


X


THE TIMES.
(A SATIRE.)
Thou know?st, ? my guide, philosopher and friend
Vice to attack is virtue to defend,
But when assailed in high-placed Pharisees
There?s danger to the assailant and his fees;
For life and liberty hang on the die,
And Truth once more points up to Calvary.
On the Tarpeian Hock I doubtful stand,
Here looms Elysium ?there a barren strand ;
Here Glory crowns the martyr?s sacred head,
There helpless infants cry in vain for bread.
My manhood would not Virtue?s claims ignore,
But wife and children touch my weakness more.
If but divested of these human ties,
My soul would soar untrammell?d to the skies?
Pour the full tide of my indignant song
On hissing prejudice, and damned wrong,
Strip the base hireling of his tinselled state,
And show what?s infamous can not be great,
Till villains hnd their schemes themselves appal,
And Haman?s rise but leads to Hainan?s fall;
My portrait be complete without a name,
And wretches own the likeness to their shame.
Methinks I see them now, in cruel glee,
Arraigning wit, morality, and me, ?
Me, whom their hatred would condemn to rot
For drawing lines between a sage and sot,
And mental portraits of a sombre tone,
Which no true man could ever make his own.
Adown the stream of time man smoothly glides,
Toys on its banks, or wantons in its tides;
But while disporting on the Biver?s brink,


Why should a mortal from his shadow shrink ?
Why should the image be with horrors rife
When the reality makes half his life ?
Or why the picture so offend his taste,
While its dark object burns with love unchaste ?
To those who traffic in the merchandise,
If from the shadow such commotions rise,
What must the substance be to Virtue?s eyes ?
0 ! might disgust from truer sources spring,
And practised libertines trace home the sting,
Abhor the crime, but spare the truthful page
Which but reflects the vices they engage.
Men dally ?neath the hideous monster?s mien,
And love it most when most it is unseen,
As, under covering of genial night,
Lust toys with flesh that will not bear the light.
0, speechless love! that speaks but in a sigh,
Or in the expressive language of the eye,
Deepest emotion of the human soul!
Divinest instinct which can life control!
Why should thy language e?er convey a lie,
Thy mantle cover nameless infamy ?
Thy name profaned with cruel jeer and taunt,
Thy home, ?of villainy the favored haunt ?
Oh ! might the brutal instincts men obey
Lead them ?mongst other brutes to seek for prey,
Leave purity to men, and feed their lust
On kindred garbage, and dishonoured dust.
Rather than vice .exalt, or virtue wrong,
Perish my hopes and blasted be my song !
But fail I will not, ?gainst impending fate,
To lash high crimes, and lechery in state
And now give warning,?whilst the vampires live
No quarter will I take, no quarter give,
But living only their base plots to mar,
? Crv havoc, and let slip the dogs of war.
On every culprit fix the mark of Cain,


That men may see, and villains feel the stain :
Women no longer take his worth on trust
Who prates of Purity and worships Lust;
But warning from his hollow heart beware,
And shun the warner, and they shun the snare.
But turn we from the myrmidons of lust,
Nor, for the present, stir unhallowed dust;
For higher quarries and a nobler game
Inspire the poet and his song inflame.
Our leading men to conflict still invite,
And, in or out of power, show best in fight.
Trials of strength make strong men doubly strong,
And, to succeed, the struggle must be long ;
Collision will the sparks of truth disclose,
And contest lead us to respect our foes.
Nor, therefore, will we shun the mental strife
Which fires the dull monotony of life,
Strengthens our manhood, and improves our parts,
Confirms our heads and fortifies our hearts.
First on the list, with regal, upright mien,
Forster and failure at a glance is seen ;
Too high of thought, and single in his sight
To build on Policy the claims of Right,
He sought the highest good by noblest ends,
Alike repugnant to his foes and friends,
And failed, as honest men have failed before,
For want of weeding less, and trimming more.
Merit is measured by th? advancing tide,
And with its ebb our hopes and claims subside,
While Pharasaic pride expands her sails
To placid waters and auspicious gales.
To honest failure never show contempt,
For from reverse no mortal is exempt;
Let Fortune?s favored sons be honored less,
And own, ?mid persecution and distress,
Defeat is sometimes greater than success.
Who nobly falls before a mighty work


He cannot master, and he will not shirk;
Or, by calamity and woes oppressed,
Sinks, like great Galileo, to his rest,
Ranks high among the bravest and the best;
Though Wealth and Fame and Honour fly the van
And all he lost save all that makes the man,
Upon his name no common splendours light,
And Glory crowns the martyrdom of Right!
A gifted mortal, learned, just and wise,
Save when in foes he wisdom could despise.
Who never yielded to the sins of youth,
Nor in his manhood bade adieu to truth ;
He could not with cold falsehood calculate,
And barely touched its skirts in hot debate.
Though wanting in civility of tongue,
The instincts of his heart were seldom wrong ;
And, had his ? quips and quiddities ? been less,
Greater had been the man, and his success.
One faculty, indulged at others? cost,
Gained in proportion as the others lost,
Superior plants rank wormwood overran,
And cynicism half submerged the man;
For he and bitterness did so unite
That friends and foes alike took instant flight;
And when a compliment fell from his tongue,
It rarely mollified, but often stung;
His blandest smiles were half developed sneers,
And his eulogiums but incipient jeers.
The love of satire led to grave excess,
And Yirtufe groaned beneath the bear?s caress ;
Scarce had she marked the smoothness of his paws
Before she felt th? inevitable claws.
The keen, sarcastic vein, indulged in youth,
Perverted manhood, and impaired its truth ;
His age confirmed the sad, and early choice,
And Satire?s self monopolised his voice,
And the source tainted whence emotions spring,


Till, like a nettle, touched, ?twas sure to sting.
And you, who learn of others, wisely learn,
And excellence from oddity discern;
Ape not the man, but study all you can
To emulate the worth that makes the man.
But what is he whose contour, glance and mien
Strike every eye as something rarely seen ?
Of shapely head, and proud, patrician face
Which Courts might envy, or which Courts might grace
This man, when seen, shows almost without fault,
But heard, makes visible perfection halt:
Nature was deaf to o?er look the sad defect,
Which sight had never led us to suspect.
A hard metallic voice according ill
With Roman visage statuesque and still,
Save when with passion stirred, then blends awhile
Both thought and tone with his sardonic smile,
His varied powers discordantly rejoice,
And all the man?s transformed into his voice ;
The impetuous torrent thunders on its way,
Earth feels its force, and owns its glorious sway,
Ten thousand voices swell the mighty strain,
And Harmony accepts the wild refrain.
Societies, as constituted now,
Admit great scamps, but small ones disallow;
See to the front how meanness marches on,
With here a Baker, there a Yelverton,
Whose touch might tarnish Innocency dead ;
See where they come with cat-like, stealthy tread,
?And twenty mortal murders on their head,?
Night-visioned scoundrels, with their victims blind,
To teach men true nobility of mind !
From such gentility my country save,
Whose code debases, and outslaves the slave.
?Tie well ?mid such a slippery multitude,
Steeped to the very neck in turpitude,
To find some truth, although with faults imbued ;*


And in this man of more than common fame,
Apparent foibles loudly call for blame ;
Successive shifts succeed at manhood?s cost,
And Trickery is crowned where Virtue?s lost;
In great things true, in small he makes you feel
There?s common clay mixed up with sterling steel,
Each little white lie makes the last seem less,
And on Deception, Satan builds success ;
For quick as crimson dyes the silken skein
Runs through the character th? insidious stain ;
And, once indulged, however high the name,
These little vices greater will inflame;
Title exempts not, learning is no bar,
The evil deepens, and extends the scar.
Tired of plain things he did the motley don,
And what was ?honest Jack ? is now ? Sir John,?
But still a gentleman in every part,
Despite these trappings from the Royal Mart,
Above the average far, though far below
The imperial standard Denham dared avow.
Careless implied engagements to fulfil,
I A nd, though in years , a man of promise still,
His favors merely see-saw with his word,
And both regard performance as absurd.
Meanwhile his dupes, less fleeting find the breath
Of Poverty?s mock life, and lingering death,
Till, one by one, the vital stays give way,
And Hunger is appeased by dull Decay;
Desire forsakes th? o?ertaxed and weary eyes,
And trouble ceases, when the troubled dies.
Selection after survey?s made at last,
And weirdly links our future with their past ;
We to the State our life and vigor give,
She teaches on how little we must live,
With one hand sweeps the wide and fruitful plain
And with the other doles out grain by grain,
Barely enough Health?s appetite to tease,


I And just enough to keep alive .Disease.
Better defer to Shylock?s bloody deed
Than month by month, and year by year, to bleed
Hemmed on all sides, what else to us remains
Between starvation and a felon?s chains ?
If honest, let us still slave on, and rot,
All claims and promises alike forgot, *
Nor tantalize with false and flickering breath,
The sombre shades of Poverty and Death.
Better a promise never make, than make it
Just for the pleasure it affords to break it,
A genteel privilege, to men unknown,
And practised by gentility alone.
Heedless of Wisdom?s cry on Worth?s behalf
Man reverent bows before the Golden Calf,
And Interest gives to Patronage it?s tone, ?
And men are raised by gold, and gold alone;
They win who pay ; in these degenerate days
Power leans to Vice, and Vice on Virtue preys;
Corruption is the passport to success,
And Honesty but makes our chances less.
O ! might the veteran but redeem the past,
And in unbroken splendour set at last,
Gather at eve the fragments of his fame,
And reconstruct his high, but shattered name ;
At his accustomed post resolved to stand
When shrinks the soul, and fails the palsied hand
Bike broken Chatham to the rescue fly,
And others save, though he himself must die;
And, just as Genius takes her farewell flight, ?
Sink, like great Butler, in a blaze of light
As the struck eagle seeks his native skies,
Saik on the air, and on his pinion dies,
Sublime he falls, and though the race be run,
Still his glazed orbs rest on th? undying Sun.?
rw A S fV^ where Timoleon rears his ponderous head,
Oi Art the study, and of foes the dread


Whose shaggy brows invest a massive face,
And deep set eyes, with Cyclopean grace ;
Where every lineament betokens strength,
And Nature draws a giant at full length.
From its beginning trace the power which throws
It?s splendour now alike o?er friends and foes ;
Just as a stream which leaves the mountain s side,
Meandering sweet through many a forest wide,
Toys with the veriest trifles in its course
E?en while it gathers its tremendous force,
Then pours its deep, majestic tide along
To the great Ocean whence its waters sprung.
Or as an eaglet, mixed with common fowl,
Takes puny flights, nor soars beyond an owl,
Still feels, within, the attraction of the sky,
And longs for heights he yet shall occupy,
So did this man with men in common things
Participate, the while he pruned his wings ;
And who shall say but out disordered plight
Marred their bright plumage ere he took his flight
Tainted with earth the less ethereal part,
And warped the minor feelings of his heart;
Else why should he, true to life?s holiest ties,
The secondary claims of life despise ?
If Chroniclers say true, nor do him wrong,
If not, be blistered every lying tongue,
This tender parent sometimes stooped to hate,
This man oracular was an ingrate,
And on his brow both Shame and Glory sate.
The first in Power, perchance the first in fame,
A brilliant history, but a tarnished name,
He ruled uprightly, though to error given.
And with soiled pinions soared to highest heaven.
His Cemetery powers took straighest line
Where Glory beckons, and great virtues shine,
But quite disturbed the air of common life,
Till honest nature shuddered at the strife.


Hence much unsightly rubbish underlay
A superstructure more of gold than clay,
But what sustained its weight ?twere hard to say.
Of sad experience, varied, deep, and long,
Hardships of youth but making manhood strong,
He marched triumphant ?gainst opposing ill,
And made desire subserve the mind and will,
All obstacles gave way before the shock
Which, like great Hannibal?s, could rend the rock.
From life, in Poverty?s low, narrow walls,
To life?s supremacy in marbled halls,
Life simple, complex, multiform, and crude,
Life of all kinds ? tried, lived, and understood.
He lived two lives his fellow men among,
The social fragile, and the public strong;
Erratic seemed the parts, though firm the whole,
And Nature looked askance through his inverted soul.
In the same breast where Home?s best virtues shone
Love found a place, but Friendship turned to stone.
For each strange face a strange attraction grew,
He loved and honored most whom least he knew;
And yet, strange feature in this strangest man,
Hostility commenced where love began;
And just when union seemed to have no end,
The tie relaxed and Friendship knew no friend.
He never hated where he never loved,
But bitterly assailed all whom he once approved !
If Fame allure thee to her noblest height,
While Time suspended marks thy daring flight,
If with th? Immortals thou wouldst play thy part,
Then take Timoleon?s head, and Forster?s heart.
Close by his side, and in the foremost van,
The Macedonian lineaments we scan
Of one with neck full stiff, if not awry,
And features formed to impress the public eye;
Talent for once the Beautiful outbid,
And in a casket rough her treasures hid:


To a strong will yet stronger sense was joined
Blended with fire Prometheus purloined.
His genius lent a charm to common things,
Drew silk from worms, and gave the grub its wings;
On homely facts bestowed position proud,
And Logic?s skeleton with form endowed :
The Practical assumed the Ideal?s dress,
And Poesy reposed on Usefulness.
Let criticism, steadfast to her trust,
True to his merits, to his faults be just.
The statesman we admire, the zealot blame
Whose narrow bigotry damns half his fame.
On one side viewed, a giant form appears,
Matured, but not impaired, with passing years,
But on the other, meagre, lean and wan,
A mildewed dwarf and withered skeleton:
The Politician?s stream flowed deep and wide,
The Bigot?s narrowed to a gutter?s tide.
All-prodigal of courage and of strength,
Made good by foeman grovelling at full length,
Our David, still devoted to his sling,
Indulges many a true, and random fling.
A foe to peace, a devotee to strife,
Whose restless elements compound his life,
He quarrels for the pleasure quarrels give,
And lives to fight, as others fight to live;
Friends, foes and neutrals his hard blows have felt,
And cursed consistency which thus could pelt.
The ally of yesterday now bleeding lies,
And at the foot of Brutus, Caesar dies.
Alas poor Mac ! had he thy virtue known
How well its chords vibrated to his own,
And studied the affinities of mind,
A fellow-feeling might have made him kind,
Discretion spared the devastating blow,
Which murdered Friendship when it killed a foe;
And, if not altogether straight and fair,


Yet straight enough official loads to bear,
Both had survived, like Pisa?s leaning tower,
Lords of strange gravity, and crooked power.
Others, refined as Grecian Art, appear,
With there a Pericles, a Dailey here,
Sound both in head and heart, and deep as clear.
Such pillars stand, with chaste designs inwrought,
And beautify the temple they support.
When Nature would her scattered rays combine,
And make of human human and divine,
The wealth of many minds transfuse in one,
She moulds a Dailey, and the work is done.
Judge not his merit by his mirth alone,
Nor deem his wisdom by his wit outgrown ;
Who drinks the rich liqueur will find ere long
The sumptuous draught not only sweet but strong,
Or gaily grave, or trenchantly severe,
There?s nothing frivolous or little here ;
No mere automaton or learned dunce,
Exponent of the head and heart at once,
He rises to the grandeur of his cause,
And from all sources inspiration draws.
Unrivalled beams unrivalled worth display,
And hardest gems emit the brightest ray ;
Vitality and light co-equal run,
And Power resides, like Uriel, in the Sun.
Not less the glacier?s majesty and might
When fringed with gold, and all ablaze with light,
Than when the sombre shades of night invest
Its massive sides, and proudly towering crest.
When storm-clouds rise, and heaven is overcast,
The loftiest pine bends graceful to the blast;
Safe in its tapering form and pliant length,
Successive trials but increase its strength,
While sturdier trunks, unbending, haply break,
And all the forest with their ruin shake.
See Fancy, Wit, and Eloquence combine


To make the gift of Wisdom brighter shine,
And blend in one harmonious, living whole
The varied powers of body, mind and soul,
Strength of the limb, and beauty of the face,
Alcides? vigor with Alcides? grace,
While all their forces, earthly and divine,
Build up the man, and through his manhood shine.
Our individual gifts, like faces are,
So very like, yet so dissimilar ;
How vast the space from Milton?s awful height
Down to the deep abyss of *Allen?s night;
Yet through the whole the human we may trace, ?
Much of the fiend, much of angelic grace, ?
But not a vestige of the monkey race :
Rave as you will, strain every point you can,
Man still is neither more, nor less than man ;
Human, however low, or high he be,
Sunk in the dust, or raised to Deity.
From the same source the living waters rise
Which stagnate into bogs, or paint the skies ;
Sprang Darwin?s being from the self-same clay
That formed a Newton, or a Faraday ;
For the Great Source Eternal fires the whole,
And lights a pigmy?s, or a Dante?s soul.
The hand that gilds the tiniest insect?s wings
Its glowing splendour o?er the seraph flings ;
And the same ray which gives the worm its light,
Flames from the Sun, and crowns the Queen of night
How often, in the race of life, we see
The smaller nature gain ascendency ;
With tact enough to play the trickster?s part,
He soars at ease, untrammelled with a heart;
And meanly gains no mean celebrity,
As carrion crows build on the loftiest tree,
And kites are perched where eagles ought to be ;
* Pastor Allen.


He, rising worth, unworthily assails,
And more than genius impudence avails,
Material forces overcome divine,
And Marat treads o?er Danton?s form supine.
Each has his hobby, whether great or small,
One trundles marbles, one a cannon ball;
This marks his way with dainty, mincing tread,
That with a heel would crush oppression?s head;
This speaker almost puts himself to sleep,
That can the drowsiest mortal wakeful keep.
One in extremes, and the extremes are small,
Tires with a never-ceasing rise and fall;
Like folly ever jumping to his feet,
And only rising to resume his seat;
Or in successive jerks from side to side.
An oscillation rather than a ride,^ ?
No pause, no poise, no dignified repose,
But to and fro, like quoits, his thoughts he throws ;
A see-saw eloquence of high and low,
Though higher than the plank he cannot go ;
And, as he feels the pleasure of ascent,
Back to the earth, all earth-stained, is he sent;
Sudden his rise, more sudden still his fall,
Flight unsustained is scarce a flight at all,
Forgetting, what stump orators should know,
Descent, if dignified, must needs be slow.
See Darley without effort make ascent,
And elevation seems his elernent;
Nor is his rise much grander than his fall,
When from great thoughts he would descend to small,
Nor from his pedestal comes tumbling down,
For such strange antics best become a clown.
But here is one with face all smiles and tears,
Big with rhapsodic hopes, or groundless fears,
Where every human feeling seems at once
To take possession of th? impassioned dunce ;
No sooner does a smile escape his lips,


Than sorrow veils it in a dun eclipse,
And when his narrative might tears evoke,
There drops instead some silly, senseless joke.
His feeble efforts in transition die,
And end at last between a laugh and cry;
Nor much can he excite our spleen or gall
Who barely rises high enough to fall.
Of platform orators the platform shows
Virtue has many friends and many foes.
While some weak men would stay the stream of vice
By nice appeals, for others, far too nice,
And little critics nibble blade by blade,
Cook with his mighty scythe sweeps down the glade;
Before his stroke fall bramble, brier and thorn,
And the wild waste is changed into a lawn.
When moral censors inspiration draw
From dim Philosophy?s material lore,
Their inspiration is not worth a straw.
Uncertain creeds must needs uncertain stand
On Sophistry?s for ever shifting sand,
And vain th? attempt of scientific skill
From dirt and dust to build up mind and will,
Materialize emotion, thought and soul,
And give to matter the supreme control;
Their teachings, like themselves, of doubtful birth,
Tend downwards, like themselves, to common earth,
Ignore Heaven?s claim?angelic life forego,
And plunge the hopeful into hopeless woe.
Such moralists but tickle into life
The vice with which they seem to be at strife,
Anxious at least to keep alive the foe,
Lest with its life their living too should go:
Thus medicoes, their harvest to ensure,
Tamper with ailments they affect to cure,
Yet keep a timely checkstring on disease,
As life protracted, means protracted fees.
But higher themes to loftier strains invite,


Where Reason steadies Fancy?s airy flight,
And true Religion sheds her purest light.
Fearless t? investigate the sacred way,
Or mark a blemish in the eye of day,
With cheek unblanched t? approach each honored name,
Willing to praise, though not afraid to blame,
We note what is, what may he, and has been
In the disciples of the Nazarene.
The muse may picture at no distant date
A God-abandoned, heartless reprobate,
Who takes thy vesture, O, my gracious God!
Thy crimson vesture lately dipped in blood,
And, underneath the sinner?s costly dress,
Without repentance hides his wickedness ;
But now, while mixing with the pure and good,
Turn from Iscariot and the field of blood,
From the ? Eleven ? choose our company,
And let awhile the kissing scoundrel be;
Black Judas leave, when shorn of every hope,
To choose his gallows and adjust his rope,
Who, as a fitting close to crime?s career,
A hangman dies, and rots without a bier !
But if you want a preacher, there he stands,
Or wriggles rather, shoulders, feet and hands :
One nameless to the muse though known to fame,
Who needs not here record his honored name,
Whose action strained, and ineffective voice
But ill accord with diction pure and choice;
Who, though unversed in oratoric skill,
Could move and sway an audience at his will,
As though great Kepler stood before our eyes
And offered prayer and praise and sacrifice.
Great natural gifts, with earnestness allied,
To highest purposes were sanctified;
Forgotten was the preacher in the theme,
And the rough channel in the glorious stream.
Nor wanting learning, though he would not scud


Through Pagan lore, and Mythologic mud,
Till one might deem dethroned was Jesse?s Rod,
And Delphi?s shrine contained the only God ;
Yet, when occasion called, he could unfold
The Book of Human life, or new or old,
And what was wanting to his high design,
In raising mortals to a plane Divine,
To furnish argument, or polish wit,
Was sure to be supplied, and sure to fit.
Not all are gifted with this wondrous skill,
Mind ruling mind, and will enslaving will;
Some with the Fancy play a middle part,
Scarce reach the head, and never touch the heart
Others the judgment stir with reasonings bold,
But leave emotions motionless and cold.
One in a sea of woe his hearer laves,
And light ne?er gilds his darkly crested waves ;
While yonder stands th? antithesis of gloom,
Whose sparkling fancy radiates the tomb.
One pours the oil of gladness on your head,
Another, oil of vitriol, pours instead,
And fulminates as though all vices known
Sat with his hearers in the Church alone,
And all the outside world were good and true,
And Crime were nurtured only in the pew.
Bankrupt of thought, but prodigal of blame,
Whose innuendos Passion?s fires inflame,
And burst the barriers of Virgin shame ;
His language, marked with endless adjectives.
On which the weakest thinker mainly lives,
Darkly suggestive of impurity
Which parents would not have their children see,
Makes matrons tremble lest his blundering skill
Tempt to the very lust it means to kill.
The picture seen may wider mischief do
Than the great Harlot when concealed from view
Familiarize the youthful mind with vice,


And the fair maid abjures distinctions nice,
O?erleaps the bounds of Purity?s restraint,
And thus becomes a sinner?through a saint.
Strange dogmas sometimes from the pulpit fall
And shake our confidence in one , or all ;
Either the preacher sadly errs, or we
Live in a haram unconfined and free,
Where every neighbour shares his neighbour?s fire,
And choice has only to consult desire ;
Or love of sin inspires th? exhausted rake,
And Whoredom pleases but for Whoredom?s sake.
If true, the creed this modern sage revives,^
There?s little truth in widows, maids, or wives;
How small a share of real bliss we taste,
? To lip a wanton and suppose her chaste,?
And, in our blindness, call the babe, ? our own,?
Whose sire is scarcely to the mother known.
Such charming pictures of domestic life
Charm only, when divested of a wife ;
But, should a mother?s shade for vengeance call,
Say that she lived before the second fall;
For other kindred no such pretexts suit,
We look like men, but live below the brute.
While with grim visage, horribly elate,
He marks the deep damnation of our fate,
His iron heel, trampling on moral corns,
Drives to the head the embryotic horns,
The pointed honors every mortal wears,
But point a finger not a mortal dares ;
Men from their hearts their fellow men despise,
For Love is treachery, and lives are lies !
And, thus condemned to one disastrous fate,
In silence feed their mutual scorn and hate;
Who sees his neighbour?s fault, but sees his own,
And foul Adultery makes the wretches one,
One moral, ever-seething, putrid mass
That taints the universe of God, alas !


Makes foul the Heavens, and gives a deeper dye
To Hell?s black night, and blacker treachery!
Vain all the lessons by our fathers taught,
Vain our experience though with wisdom fraught.
Vain every admonition deep or loud
From hooded infancy to hoodless shroud,
And vain the Cross if universal shame
Brands every home, and mildews every name.
But censure, aimed at all, strikes home to none;
Guilt hides its head behind the guiltless one,
And virtue never was by blame outdone;
Hence the conclusion forced on every dunce,
He strikes but feebly who strikes all at once,
And those distinctive strokes alone are wise
Which individuals individualize.
Some preachers move impressively alike,
But more the pulpit than the audience strike,
And were the cushion sentient to the blow,
How many tears would from that cushion flow.
Others allure us by a silken cord,
Or catch, like Whitfield, with a single word.
Some robe their thoughts in mantles so profuse,
To reach the thought you twenty folds must loose.
Others affect a strange indifference,
As careful to display their negligence ;
Whilst some again in beauty run to waste,
Whose wit, by nature exquisitely chaste,
Too highly polished, o?er informs the taste.
Some sermons, deftly formed of odds and ends,
Made for division, suit dividing friends ;
Others with parts so blended into one,
That once divided the effect?s undone?
Break not the pearl, but take the whole or none?
Parts only show us what the whole may be,
As chips from bust, or splinters from a tree.
When drawn too fine the blade Euphonius takes,
Turns the keen edge, nor deep incision makes,


But when in form, we rather see than feel
In its clean passage the refulgent steel;
And here the images are so complete,
To share would mutilate or hands or feet,
Deface th? embodiment of heart and soul,
Or flay perfection, and thus mar the whole.
Should Shylock?s hand abstract Antonio?s heart,
Life with the precious fragment must depart,
But Portia?s wit and wisdom his control,
And with the body bear away the soul.
Yet did the Artist more attention draw
Than all his pictures without fault or flaw ;
Through every part the mannerism ran,
Till you forgot the subject in the man.
?Twas art refined, but art ?twas all the same,
Though criticism found it hard to blame.
Voice, action, language, thought superbly fine,
Left little cause to murmur or repine;
Yet would the mind, with all its powers astir,
Too often to the orator recur,
Nor thought nor feeling could you analyze,
But above both the speaker?s form would rise ;
The teacher, not the lesson, you acquired,
And having him you nothing else desired.
Others, less polished, equal culture show,
And, if less sparkling, with more fervour glow,
On every ear their utterances fall
Still with more weight because more natural.
Thus rivers make divergencies and rounds
All unrestrained by artificial bounds;
Through meadows smooth they take their silent
Or, over precipices tumbling gay,
In thundering cataracts dissolve in spray,
Which gilds the wild with ever-varying bows,
And then to earth the grateful moisture throws.
Nature?s first charm which ravishes the eye
Is boundless freedom and variety;
way


Perfection tires when redolent of schools,
And the effect that ever points to rules.
While Genius spreads her richest garlands o?er
The sacred shrine, and consecrated floor,
How rarely Rank a worthy tribute pays,
And all its splendour on the altar lays;
We boast the higher gifts of heart and thought,
But all our gifts should to this shrine be brought,
And pride of Mind, of Money, Rank or Place
Yield to the sovereignty of Saving Grace.
Class learns from class derision to deride,
And by example hate is justified,
Plebeian rancour by patrician pride ;
Nobility, with prejudices rife,
May scorn the noble man in humble life.
The man in humble life may fail to see
The worth that elevates nobility.
?Tis not position makes true genius great,
The mind transcends the dignity of state.
Place upon Milton?s head a diadem,
?Twill dimly shine beside a rarer gem;
Make Shakspeare?s brow still nobler if you can,
And higher than the title towers the man;
And Coila?s wreath, on Burns?s forehead set,
Throws into shade the spangled coronet;
While Erin?s Genius gives the sea girt gem
The brightest jewels in her diadem.
Louis was but the pageant of a day
Matched with Massillon or a Bossuet;
And weaker spirits, envious of his fame,
Damn life and character to make a name,
Till death, of vicious progress, galls the heel,
And beds of down are changed to beds of steel;
Better by far the Martyr?s crown of thotua
Than the regalia that a knave adorns !
Extraneous glory?s but a borrowed light,
Genius the orb which rules both day and night.


Honor?s of value only in its place,
You dignify a fool into disgrace ;
The wretched impotent, to luxury horn,
And wealth, from many a needy victim torn,
If raised to power, is only raised to scorn ;
But merit, like the sun, shines all the same
Or if we sneer, or worship, praise, or blame,
We neither can exalt it, nor degrade
By base detraction, or deserved parade. .
Gold is as pure, the cynic must allow,
Upon a mountain as a monarch?s brow;
Nor less its value when, with gems inlaid,
It decks the mitre, or the mitred head.
?Tis something, in the Sceptic?s giddy reign,
To see great talents greater truths maintain,
And bearing still, ?gainst wind, and tide and flood,
The banner stained with superhuman blood.
When down Hostility the gauntlet throws,
The warrior rises fearless of his foes,
The Crescent soon below the Cross is nailed,
And the assailant is in turn assailed.
The doubtful heroes fly Achilles? face,
And other walls than Troy?s, resound the chase ;
But as they fly, like panthers, still they fight,
Nor trust alone their safety to their flight;
In the vain hope that random shafts may hit,
And the great Chief, by chance, to death submit,
Higher than Paris hurl their vengeful steel,
Deeming his head more dangerous than his heel.
0 for the gift of utterance to give
A vital form to all the thoughts that live,
And surge and swell within the troubled breast,
Conscious of power, imperfectly expressed ;
To other souls our own, in full, impart,
Mind fuse with mind, and heart submerge in heart,
Give Truth the pristine glory of her name,
And sink all Falsehood into endless shame !


Time was, ere man aspired to be a brute,
When human frailty formed th? heraldic root,
And vanity, content with normal things,
Its lineage traced to kings, or whores of kings :
But sadly erred the Christian and the Jew,
For monkeys are our gods and fathers too ;
Then homage to the long-tailed matron trapes,
And all th? illustrious ancestry of apes !
Most strangely he his lineage forgets,
Who traces it to peers, and peerless pets,
When all the honor rests with a baboon,
And culminates into a rare buffoon,
Whose mind alone might indicate his birth,
And rank him with the creeping things of earth.
What wonder if degraded jackanapes
Believe their sires were never more than apes ;
Nor doubt such sons to such grand sires belong,
For kindred ties are true as well as strong;
Nor is the difference evolved so great
From senseless chattering, to senseless prate,
And for their lives I solemnly aver
That to the brutal, I the brutes prefer.
But Infidelity, when sorely pressed,
Would make of Truth a byword and a jest,
Sense laugh to scorn, and reason high dethrone
To a base pedestal of blood and bone:
Things in this life which but begin to shine,
Immortal love, vitality Divine,
And towering intellect to death consign.
Powers which eternity alone may mete
To end in slums, a gutter, or a street;
Feelings which look beyond the earth and sky
To shrink within a narrow cell, and die!
The wonder is such men retain their shape,
Nor back recoil into a grinning ape,
Abjure the human, to the brute defer,
Forsake their homes and kennel with the cur.


Trace back the ages to remotest known,
And find remotest equal to our own ;
Stripped of our Bible what have we to boast
Over what Greece attained, or Egypt lost ?
In Architecture, Letters and in Art,
We ?not our fathers ?play the second part;
Where is the city underneath the sun
That can compare with ancient Babylon ?
Where flourishes the Art, to Athens known,
Which almost gave vitality to stone,
And chiselled forms and faces with such skill
That marble failed to keep expression still,
And lovers? hopes and fears transfixed so well,
They seem still living the sweet tale to tell ?
Pales our Philosophy?s material light
Before great Plato and the Stagirite,
Nor mates with him who quaffed the poisonous bowl,
But knew its power could never reach the soul.
Nor modern science earlier claims eschew
Until we know how much our fathers knew,
Whose giant works gigantic schemes portrayed,
Of Pyramids Observatories made,
And through vast mediums, truth divine surveyed,
Leaving us still in doubt, with all our store,
They had perchance amassed as much or more ;
In all that can he known the greatness lies
In favor of the men whom fools despise,
And, where the lapse of time, leaves much to guess,
E'en there Conjecture cannot make it less.
And are not Homer?s verses matchless still ?
Or only matched by Shakspear?s higher skill,
A man whose fathers were of savage type,
Nor passed through toads and lizards to grow ripe.
Strange that a man, who boasts of bestial fame,
And rakes the dunghill for fictitious shame,
Should grasp at honors which a name affords,
And live, and batten on high-sounding words.


The poorest slave of poor mortality,
Makes the ? Eternal principle ? his cry,
And talks of ? freedom ? in a dungeon?s gloom,
Or boasts of ? reason ? maggots may consume,
As though a term might change a verity,
And poison Truth, or consecrate a lie.
Give to the blushing rose the hemlock?s name,
And rose and hemlock will remain the same ;
Words may not change the principle of things,
Slaves still are slaves, although you call them Kings,
Who, in assumption?s most inflated dress,
Conceals deformity or barrenness,
And with ? material ? stuffs her form so well,
That fruitless breasts to fruitful semblance swell ?
Who of ?free thought ? a badge of Slavery made,
And sought by ? reason /? reason to degrade,
Great principles reduced to a pretence,
And ? social virtues ? made the slaves of sense,
And, with the cry of ? right ? upon his tongue,
Spurned every right, and fostered every wrong ?
The sceptic loiterer, on a barren coast,
Boasts of exploits, which ever end in boast,
But will not venture on the boundless sea,
Or face the fact of an Eternity.
Her narrows down the infinity of thought
Below the lessons by a pagan taught;
And, having traced to apes his pedigree,
Looks to the savage for morality.
What wonder when a man betrays his trust,
Belies the Deity, and worships dust,
When intellect and manhood sink apace,
Till Feeling can no longer feel disgrace,
Inverted nature bears inverted fruit,
And God-like man claims kindred with the brute !
O ye ! who wield the Spirit?s flaming sword,
Untie the Gordian Knot, or cut the cord ;
Join with bold Jefleris in the noble strife,


And in our freedom, rescue more than life;
Strike, one and all, for God-like Liberty,
And, free yourselves, teach others to be free,
Till light breaks through on every darkened mind,
And Blindness sees at last, that she is blind,
And Nature thunders forth the final cry,
And ? Ecce Deus ? rings through earth and sky !
F. Cnnninghame & Co? Pi inters 146 Pitt Street, Sydney.


?
? *
*


P. CUNNINGHAME & Co.,
(general (Steam JRachine printers,
PAPER RULERS,
ACCOUNT-BOOK MANUFACTURERS,
146 PJTT STREET.
SYDNEY.


?
V
f f ?? ? n
v
?
- V
?
*
.
'
y
\
$
.
. * ? -
JL* .


,
.
I
f
.
.
.
r
.
. 9
IkiI ? .


? . - ? * 5
'
? * fci > -?
*
T.Tn "
.
*
*
' p | 1
