



SALT-GLAZED STONEWARE
Sanitary Pipe Factory,
DUNEDIN.
Price List, wholesale, delivered
in Railway Trucks:
4 inch, per foot
6 inch, per foot
9 inch, per foot
12 inch, per foot
15 inch, per foot
18 inch, per foot
Double Junctions equal to three Pipes
Single Junctions, Elbows, and Bends, equal to
two Pipes.
Tariff of Charges for 1879 :
Class N., Pipes charged as Minerals, up to 50 miles,
2d. per ton per mile; over 50 miles, Id. per ton per mile
for a full truck of 4 tons.


Hiitt/f 73*50
G. H. GLOVER & Co.,
WHOLESALE & RETAIL
GENTLEMEN’S HOSIERS, GLOVERS, fee.
INUEOE T E E S OE
Gentlemen’s Hats, Shirts, Collars, Scarfs, Ties, Braces,
Belts, Gloyes, Studs, Handkerchiefs, Sox and Un-
derclothing, Umbrellas, Portmanteaux,
Carpet and Leather Travelling
Bags, &c,, &c,, &c.
All Articles will be found at these Establishments to be of
the best quality, and at strictly moderate price.
Sole Agents for the celebrated Yankee Cottars
in all shapes.
Hats of every description made to order on the shor-
test notice. Eit and style guaranteed. Price moderate.
We do not make any extra charge for Hats made to Gen-
tlemen's own order. We guarantee all Hats marked with
our trade mark — Maoei Beand.
Hatters’ Materials and Tools, &c., on sale at Hat Fac-
tory, George street, opposite National Bank.
IPfittses and Stf®®l%
DUNEDIN.


BEST IN THE WORLD.
Wanzers Improved Hand & Treadle
Sewing Machines.
PRICES FROM FOUR GUINEAS UP.
TO BE HAD ONLY FROM
A.. JB. S I D F O R D ,
4, ROYAL ARCADE,
DUNEDIN,
SOLE AGENT FOR NEW ZEALAND.
THOUGHTLESS OE SELFISH?
A MOVEMENT has been carried on for upwards
ot twelve months past, urging our Citizens to
make all their purchases before G p.m. on Saturdays.
Such a reasonable request by the Shop Assistants
cannot but be warmly supported by all true lovers of
justice, for it has been proved beyond doubt that it is
no longer necessity, but thoughtlessness or selfishness
that cause the Shop-man and Shop-woman to be kept
behind his or her counter until most unreasonable hours
on Saturday night.
The Early Closing Association most heartily
thank that numerous portion of the public who have
already ignored the pernicious habit of late shopping,
but as our population is ever a moving one, they must
continually give the movement publicity.
Individual Support Imperative..


THE
ACCEPTING THE FOLLOWING DEFINITION OF TERMS:
1. By “ Divine originit is xmderstood to he of Divine
origin in the sense in ivhich no other religion is.
2. In the term “ Christianityit is understood that there
are included the Deity of Jesus, and His death as an
atonement for man's sin.
DE B A
BETWEEN
M. W. Gr IE IE IN’
(AFFIRMING)
CHAELES T
(DENYING).
thmrtuu, N. 2.:
GEO. T. CLAEEE, GEOEGE STREET;
Melbourne and Adelaide: GEOEGE EOBEEiSON
Sydney: G. EOBEETSON & J. J. MOOEE.


A. H. ROSS,
OPTICIAN,
llulosophital. |l;iutiral, and Jlurtcjimg
Jmtfnmwnt
PRINCES STREET, DUNEDIN,
Has on Hand :
Theodolites, Levels, Sextants, Compasses, Telescopes, Field
and Opera Glasses, Microscopes, Graphoscopes, Stereo-
scopes, Barometers, Thermometers, Sikes’ Hydrometers,
Sacharameters, Lactometers, &c., &c. Crystal and Pebble
Spectacles and Eye-glasses in great variety, all of the best
quality, and selected by himself in the Home markets.
All kinds of Optical and Surveying Instruments re-
paired on the premises.
G. STOKES,
TAILOR,
CLOTHIER & OUTFITTER,
Opposite Baptist Chapel,
Great King Street, Dunedin.
Established, 1862.
A very large assortment of first-class Goods always
on hand, »
Style, quality, and fit guaranteed.


yHE piVINE pRIGIN OF p HRISTIANITY.
FIRST EVENING.
SHE CHAIRMAN (Mr. A. H. Ross) opened the pro-
ceedings by saying :—Ladies and gentlemen, it u
scarcely necessary for me to state the object of our
meeting to night, and I think the best thing I can do is'to
read the announcement in to-day’s paper, which is as fol-
lows :
PUBLIC DISCUSSION BETWEEN REY; M. W. GREEN AND
ME. CHAS. BRIGHT.
Subject-.. “The Divine Origin of Christianity,” accepting the following
definition of terms: —1. By “ Divine origin ” it is understood to
be of Divine origin in the sense in which no other religion is.
2. In the term “ Christianity ” it is understood that there are in-
cluded the Deity of Jesus, and His death as an atonement for
man’s sin.
Mr. Green affirms; Mr. Bright denies.
The discussion will commence by Mr. Green making a
speech of half an hour’s duration, to be followed by Mr.
Bright for the same length of time. Then, both gentlemen
will alternately make speeches of a quarter of an hour’s
duration. It is intended to extend the discussion over three
nights, but Mr. Green desires me to intimate that it is ex-
tremely probable he will require a fourth night. Before in-
troducing Mr. Green to you, I would just say that on the
part of the disputants this discussion will be conducted in a
courteous and gentlemanly manner. I would ask the audience
also to assume an attitude befitting the importance of the
subject —that is, one of decorum and gravity. I would advise
that there should be no expressions of applause or dissent,
and that you should listen to the arguments that may be ad-
vanced in a calm and dispassionate manner. This is the


■best method of arriving at the truth. I now introduce Mr.
Green to you without further remark.
Me. Geeen : Mr. Chairman and respected friends—l
would like to say, in connection with the advertisement calling
this meeting, so that I may put myself right with the public,
that while the Committee have inserted the word “ Eeverend,”
in the advertisement, and while I may be addressed by that
designation by many outside, I lay no claim to the title, and
have had nothing to do with its insertion in the advertise-
ment. I make this explanation because Ido not think it wise
that any of us should take such a designation.
I feel that perhaps an apology is necessary for my standing
here to-night to address this large assemblage upon the subject
which this debate is to take place. It may appear as though,
in my judgment, I considered that Christianity required to be
defended. Now, I have no such thought. 1 believe that
Christianity, having begun in the manner it did, having to
tight its way step by step, we may say inch by inch, until it
had gained by peaceful measures its mighty influence over the
millions that lived in that early period, it may be said to
really require no defence in this age. For at least eighteen
centuries Christianity has maintained its own conquering way;
it has over-ridden all opposition, and although vast forces
have concentrated all their efforts to overthrow it, Christianity
vet remains, and I believe will remain until the grand climax
that God intends to bring about shall have been effected by
its instrumentality. The only reason why lam here to-night
is because I find it stated in that book which I venerate and
love, that we are to ‘‘Prove all things,” and to “ Hold fast that
which is good,” and further, that we are to be “ Eeady to give
to every man who asks, a reason of the hope that is within
us with meekness and fear,” I have been led to undertake
this debate because I believe there are many persons whose
minds have been unhinged by statements which they have
heard in regard to Christianity, and I know r that when per-
sons listen merely to one side of a subject, and when they
are continually having it dinned into their ears that Chris-
tianity is behind the age, that it is really only fit for old
women, and is not fit for full-grown men, they sometimes
come to have the impression, if they are not properly in-
structed, that there is some truth in the loud statements that
are made by those opposed to Christianity. I believe that


‘Christian Ministers ought always to be ready to give a reason
for the faith that is within them ; that they ought ever to he
ready at proper times to lay before the intelligent people by
whom they may be surrounded, the evidences on which they
believe it reasonable and right to receive Christianity ; the
evidences on which they are led to urge Christianity upon the
.attention and for the acceptance of their fellow human
beings. Simply for these reasons I am here to-night. Be-
lieving in my heart that if there is anything true
under the Heavens of Grod, it is the religion of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and that if there is anything at
all adapted to the wants ot man in his present condition
it is that holy religion. I feel happy, under these circum-
stances, in being here to-night, in order that I may present to
you some of the evidences upon which I, and many in common
with me, believe that that holy religion is worthy of the ac-
ceptance of every thoughtful and intelligent person.
Now, with regard to the occasion of this debate,itseemsne-
cessary that I should make a remark or two at this opening stage.
I may say that I am only a recent resident in Dunedin, and I
feel that I occupy, to some extent, an invidious position to-
night, seeing that there are ministers of long standing and of
greater ability than myself, in this city, who might ably have
defended the truth. But they have'not, thus far, done so, and
therefore, on that account, there may be some justification for
my present position. I would also say here that I have been,
as it were, drawn into this matter, without any original inten-
tion on my part of having anything to do with such a thing
as a debate. "When I came here I found that Mr. Charles
Bright —for -whom personally I have a sincere respect —was
lecturing in opposition to the Christian religion. I saw an
announcement that he would lecture on “ Our Saviour,” and
being curious to ascertain what would be the line of his argu-
ment upon such a theme, I attended his lecture. In my ser-
mon on the following Sunday evening, I just adverted to a re-
mark which I heard Mr. Bright make. I spoke to this
effect: That the infidel lecturer at present in the city, while
admitting that Christ was a good man, had yet been guilty of
the illogical statement that while being a good man, his claim
to be Divine was untrue —was a lie. This discourse was re-
ported without my knowledge in one of the local newspapers.
I cannot bind myself to that report because it w r as very im-
perfect, though I regarded its being published as an evidence


of kindliness on the part of the newspaper proprietors. Mr-
Bright wrote a letter to me, through the newspaper, in which
he took exception to the term “infidel lecturer,” and in which
he asked if I would prove certain matters. Having heard in
the meantime that Mr. Bright had challenged all the ministers-
of Dunedin to debate with him, I decided that I, at any rate,
would not hold back if he should consider himself, in writing
that letter, as challenging me to debate. I therefore asked
him in my reply whether he wished me to answer his state-
ments —or rather to prove the positions that he suggested—
through the newspapers, or whether he desired me to do so on
a public platform, where he would have the right of reply.
Many of you have doubtless read the correspondence, and"l
may therefore simply add that out of that correspondence has
arisen this discussion. That Mr. Bright is regarded by the-
people of this city as having thrown out challenges to the mi-
nisters of the city is evident from the following announcement
which appeared in the Horning Herald of the Bth of Janu-
ary : —“ It appears that Mr, Charles Bright, the Freethought
lecturer, has at length, after repeated challenges, induced a
gentleman of the clerical order to meet him on a public plat-
form. for the purpose of engaging in a controversial discus-
sion.” It thus appears from this paragraph that Mr. Bright
has been throwing out challenges, and I would say that if he
believes that he has the truth, and that all we, who hold to
the verities of the Christian religion are in error, all honour
to_ Mr. Bright for daring to come forth and challenge the
ministers of the day to sustain their position before the
world.
I feel that I occupy a position of some little disadvantage
to-night, from the fact that, although Mr. Bright has been the
assailant of Christianity, he occupies simply the position of ade-
fendant, and I that of an affirmant in this debate. I may say-
further that I feel the disadvantage of my position because, hav-
ing wholly to occupy an affirmative position, it prevents me from
making that assault upon the position of Mr. Bright which I
would like to have made, if time and opportunity had per-
mitted. I tried very hard to get Mr. Bright to take an affir-
mative proposition, as well as myself, covering the ground
which he occupies as a Freethought lecturer; but he was not
wdlling to do so. One of his committee was of the same
opinion as myself—that in order to cover the wffiolc ground,
and to make this debate really what it ought to be„


Mr. Bright should affirm a proposition covering his ground
as an advocate of the all-sufficiency of human reason
for man’s guidance. Then we would have been able to
put this matter in a more complete form before the public..
In justice to my friend, I ought, however, to say that
he did suggest several propositions when I urged this matter;,
but they were in such a form that I could not consistently
take the negative of them, inasmuch as I believed they would,
not cover the ground which was desired.
Now, having made these preliminary remarks, I would
remind you that our proposition to-night is, “ The Di-
vine Origin of Christianity,” and that there is this de-
finition in connection with our subject: 'That it is Di-
vine in the sense in which no other religion is Divine; and
that Christianity includes the Deity of the Lord Jesus
Christ —the word “ Deity ” has been used in deference
to Mr. Bright, who holds with the Divine origin of all things
in a certain sense. I say, then, that Christianity is taken to-
include the Deity of Jesus, and His death as an atonement
for man. Now there was an absolute necessity,
for tins definition, for I may say that, although from report
and our correspondence, I was led to believe him to be an op-
ponent of Christianity absolutely, yet Mr. Bright professes
that he is not an opponent of Christianity as he understands
it, but that he does not regard as parts of Christianity, either
the Deity of Jesus, or the doctrine of the Atonement.
Now, I regard these a/, fundamentals, and that without
them there can be no Christianity. Mr. Bright takes the po-
sition that man’s reason is his highest guide, and that he
has a right to use his reason in any manner he thinks fit.
I must say that I consider his understanding of the use of
reason, and the principles which he professes, are detrimental
to the welfare of society at large: that if the principles he
holds were to gain general acceptance with the people —while
he would doubtless deprecate such a state of things as much
as myself —they would produce anarchy and wide-spread
misery; they -would utterly disorganise society, and prevent
life and property from being secure.
But to return to the one point : Mr. Bright affirms
that the moral teachings of Jesus Christ constitute, in
his judgment, the sum and substance of Christianity, and
that the Deity of Jesus, and His death as an atonement for
man, are simply accretions which have been added by persons


who lived subsequently to Christ, and are no part of the ori-
ginal Christianity of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now you will
perceive that I have, therefore, a very plain duty to perform
to-night. That duty is to show from the Christian records
that it is an essential part of the religion of Jesus that He is
Divine—Divine in a sense in which no other mortal is, and
that He really did die, according to the teachings of those
Scriptures which are our only guide and direction in con-
nection with Christianity, for and on behalf of man. I
know not what line of argument my friend may take
in the course of this debate, nor how he may deal
with this volume; hut I certainly shall expect him to use
reason in his manner of dealing with the subject. I would
therefore say that, as we have no other records which pro-
fess to embody the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ and
really proclaim His gospel, this book must be taken as the le-
gitimate expounder of what Christianity is. In order to esta-
blish that Christianity includes the two points in dispute, and
to show that my definition is entirely true, I will first take the
Gospels written by the Apostles of Christ and their imme-
diate companions. I shall take, then, the early Christian lite-
rature, the Acts of the Apostles, and the epistles addressed
to believing persons; then the statements made by early
writers of the Christian Church; and I will also show from
the writings of profane historians, and also from bitter ene-
mies, that those two points are essential features in Christi-
anity. Then, I say, that if I understand the necessities of Mr.
Bright’s position aright, or at all, it seems to me there will de-
volve upon him the duty of showing that these records, and
the testimony which we have had handed down to us from
those living in that time are not reliable ; for if the genuine-
ness and authenticity of these records cannot be overturned,
then I say that beyond all controversy, beyond the possibility
of its being shaken at all, I shall have proved that Mr Bright’s
statement as to what Christianity really is, is based upon an
utter want of information as to the Christian records and the
teachings of those early writers of the Christian Church ; and
that in maintaining that Christianity has nothing to do with
the atonement for man, and the Divinity of Christ, he is really
manifesting culpable ignorance of that with which he ought
to be acquainted.
I know that in an assembly like this it will seem
tedious for me to take the Bible in my hand, and refer


to portions of it, verse by verse. But, ladies and gentlemen,
let us understand each other. lam not here to-night to ap-
peal to you by declamation. I do not want to excite
feeling. I believe that Christianity, while it appeals to the
heart of man, appeals also to his reason ; and I wish during
this debate to appeal to your reasoning faculties. I ask you,
therefore, patiently to bear in mind what I read from this
volume to-night and on subsequent evenings in connection
with this important theme. In many parts of the Scrip-
tures we have these two doctrines clearly presented as essen-
tial features of the teaching of Jesus. I will take each of
these Gospels in their proper order, and cite from them.
In the Gospel of Matthew xi. 27, we have the Lord Jesus
Christ speaking in language which can only be understood in the
sense of his proper Divinity. In that verse he says : —“ All
things are delivered unto me of my Father; and no man
knoweth the Son, but the Father ; neither knoweth any man
the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him.” If you will allow me to paraphrase the verse, by
substituting the first person for the word “ Son,” and the
word “ God ” for “ Father,” you will see the full force of the
passage. It will then read as follows : —“All things are de-
livered unto me of God ; and no man knoweth me, but God ;
neither knoweth any man God, save me, and he to whomso-
ever 1 will reveal him.” No mere mortal, unless he wore
guilty of the most daring blasphemy, could utter words like
these. In chapter xvi. of this same Gospel, and in the
16th verse, Simon Peter, in answer to a question from the
Lord, said: “ Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God.”
1 know that some persons endeavour to explain away these
words ; but, I would simply say that, if the expression “ Son
of the Living God ” is only to be understood in the sense in
which you and I are sons of God, it was altogether unmean-
ing for the Lord to say to Peter, “ Blessed art thou, Simon
Bar-jonah, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee,
but my Father which is in heaven .” And it would be further
unmeaning and unnecessary to give to him such a precious
privilege as is here recorded merely because he had announced
that which was previously known —that he was simply a son
of God as Peter was himself. In the last chapter of this
Gospel, and the last three verses, Jesus says : “ All power is
given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore and


teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father,,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” I ask : Can it be
possible that Jesus would place himself along with the infinite
God—the Father and the Holy Spirit—if he did not claim to
be divine in a sense in which no mortal on earth is divine ?
Passing, then, these statements in Matthew in regard to the
Divinity of Christ, I notice the subject of His atonement, as.
found in this Gospel. You will probably remember the
words in the 21st verse of chapter i., in which it is said:
“Thou shalt call His name Jesus, for He shall save his-
people from their sins.” Again, in chapter ix. 12, 13,
we have these expressions : “They that be whole need not a
physician, but they that are sick. But go ye and learn what
that meaneth, I will have mercy and not sacrifice ; for I
am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. ,r
In chapter xx., 27, 28, we have this further state-
ment : “ And whosoever will be chief among you let him
be your servant: even as the Son of Man came not to
be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ran-
som for many.” Thus, in the Gospel by Matthew we see the
proper Deity of Jesus is manifest, and His death as an atone-
ment for sin. Taking now Mark’s Gospel, we have at the
very outset this declaration ; “ The beginning of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.” Then we have the state-
ments made in chapter xiv., 61, 63, in connection with
the same subject: “ Again the High Priest asked Him and
said unto Him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed ?
And Jesus said, I am ; and ye shall see the Son of Man
sitting on the right hand ofppo r er, and coming in the clouds of
heaven.” How r , the word “ Blessed ” is simply another desig-
nation for “ God,” and the question really was, “ Art thou
the Christ, the Son of God?” and His answer was “I am.”
How, in this same Gospel, in connection with the atonement,
in chapter x., 45, we have the words I before quoted from
Matthew, “For even the Son of Man came, not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give His life a ransom
for many.” I now pass on to the Gospel of Luke. I
can only refer to one or two passages in this Gospel, in con-
sequence of the limited time at my disposal. In chapter x.
21, 22, we find this statement: —“ In that hour Jesus
rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes even
8
The Divine Origin of Christianity.


«o, Father, for so it seemed good in Thy sight. All things are
delivered to me of my Father; and no man knoweth who the
Son is, but the Father ; and who the Father is, but the Son,
and he to whom the Son will reveal him.” We have in chap-
ter xix., 10, in connection with the atonement, the state-
ment that He “ came to seek and to save that which was
lost.” And in the last chapter of the book, verses 46, 47, the
purpose of his coming is most clearly stated : “ And said unto
them : Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer,
and to rise from the dead the third day. And that repentance
and remission of sins should be preached in His name among
all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.” How here, in the Gos-
pel by Luke, we have substantially the saim teaching as we
■find in previous Gospels. In connection with the Gospel by
John it seems almost unnecessary that I should read any
Scripture at all, because I think even Mr Bright will admit
that that Gospel is full of this theme. In the first four
verses of that Gospel we read : “ In the beginning was the
"Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God. All things were
made by Him ; and without Him was not anything made that
was made.” And as identifying this “Word” with the per-
son of Jesus, in the 14th verse we find it stated : “ And the
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld
His glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father),
full of grace and truth.” As I find that my half hour has
•expired, I have now to give place to my friend.
Mr. Bright : Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen • I
must ask such indulgence at your hands as you may be
inclined to give to me this evening in the tremendously
difficult position in which I find myself placed. At the outset
1 would say, that this is the first time I have attempted to
hold a public debate ; therefore, for that reason as a
debutant, I may claim indulgence. But beyond and above
that, the position occupied by a man like myself this eveuing J
in i u lining counter to popular opinion, in appearing so pre-
sumptuous as I must appear to a vast number of the
intelligent crowd I see before me, is such as to give me a claim
to your very kindest consideration. I know this question
will be in the thoughts of many of the ladies and gentlemen I
9
The Divine Origin of Christianity.


see before me : Why should a poor puny mortal, like myself,
venture to stand forth and to assail so grand an organisation,
so world-wide a system as that of the Christian religion ?
The only answer I can give, is this : That I am impelled for-
ward, almost in spite of myself, as I have been for these many
years past, simply and solely by one thing, and one thing
alone —a reverence for truth. It is because I feel within
myself that I am following that brilliant star of truth which
I see before me - that which appears to me, at all events, to
be truth —that I venture thus alone to stand before an
audience like this, and to find myself in so startling a minority.
I ask you for all the indulgence you can give me. At the
same time I wish to say that I honour and respect my friend
Mr. G-reen, for thus coming forward in order to give a reason
for the faith that is in him; for surely the truth need not be
afraid of public discussion; surely we may say in the words
of that most liberal of men, possibly one of the clearest
thinkers the world has known, John Milton : “ Let Truth and
Falsehood grapple. Whoever knew Truth put to the worse
in a free and open encounter?” Some will urge, I doubt
not, that even if I, by reading modern literature—and the
literature of the day is saturated with what so many call
infidelity —have come to this conclusion, that much of what is
styled Christianity is false, I ought not publicly to proclaim
it. Tennyson, in one of his verses, has put this thought most
beautifully:—
“ Leave thou thy sister when she prays,
Her early heaven, her happy views ;
Nor thou with shadow’d hint confuse
A life that leads melodious days.”
This would doubtless be well if there were merely a happy
future to be found in this popular belief. But, alas ! there is
something behind that. In this belief, which is the orthodox
conviction of our day, there is something besides “ early
heavens ” —something besides “happy views.” That sister, if
her brother happens by more extensive and broader reading,
to become a Freethinker, will night and day be upon her
kuees in an agony of grief, shuddering at the conviction that
her brother is doomed to endure an eternity of torment. It is
because of this dreadful background to the views of happiness
that I feel, as all must feel who think unreservedly, that it is
necessary we should no longer hesitate to speak out freely
and frankly what we hold as truth —that we should no longer,
10
The Divine Origin of Christianity.


as Leslie Stephen says, “apologise for being in the right.”
We should no more “ travel in disguise by circuitous paths,”
but should come forward and face whatever obloquy there
may be in stating our convictions. In reply to the remarks
made by my friend, that I, too, should have had an affirmative-
proposition, I deem it justice to myself to say that several
affirmative propositions were stated by me, as my friend
admitted ; but on these propositions he was unable to take the
negative side. The reason why he was unable to take the-
negative side was because on all questions, except as to the
weight we respectively attached to the Scriptures, we were
almost at one. I offered to take this ground : “ That human
reason is superior to Biblical authority.” I think my friend
supposes that he is himself of that opinion—
Mr. Geeeh: No.
Mr. Bright : For at all events he wished me to add :
“ And is our highest guide.” I thought that this would mean
that I was setting myself up as a God Almighty. Therefore,
I said that I would take that proposition, if it were worded as-
follows ; “ And is under God our highest guide.” But then
my friend would not take the negative, showing that he
simply wished me to place myself in the position of affirming
that there is no_ God, while I in my heart of hearts believe
that God is all in all—that we, without the Divine mind above
us, and through us, and in us, would be absolutely nothing,
and that this grand and magnificent world would have been
but chaos. Therefore I could not take the affirmative of a
• proposition which seemed to exclude the Divine direction from
the Divine Universe. I say this much in defence of what
might perhaps appear to be something like finesse on my part
in forcing Mr. Green into the position of affirming, while I
should simply have to stand and put him to the proof.
No w, with regard to this question that we are here to debate.
The question, as you have heard it read, is one which was adopted
by myself and my friend at a private meeting as bringing us
on two opposite sides of the platform upon a tojiic where
we realty are in genuine antagonism; for surety it is not
worth while spending our time in debate, unless there is a
positive and true subject of opposition between us. I could
not take negative of the proposition that Christianity is
of Divine origin, unless there had been some such interpreta-
tion as my friend s attached to it, because I conceive that of
all things we know in this world, the system, or rather the-


systems o£ religion, which have served the turn of the best
part of our race for so long a period, must be of Divine
■origin —that is, must have emanated, in the broad sense, from
the Mind which controls and rules the Universe. Therefore
I could not take the negative of a naked proposition of the
Divine origin of Christianity. But when it came to a state-
ment of what was meant my friend by “Divine origin,” and
what was meant by “ Christianity,” I could very easily assume
the position I hold to-night, because he speaks of the Divine
origin of Christianity as bearing a totally different sense to
the Divine origin of any religion which has helped forward
other portions of the human race. Moreover, w r hen he came
to state what he meant by “ Christianity,” still more did I
feel that I could readily take the negative. Christianity, in
his idea, means that Jesus of Nazareth was God; that the
Deity of Jesus is part of this Christianity, and also His death
as an atonement for man’s sin. Now my friend, has not yet
commenced to prove this allegation. He has proved that
there is a certain printed book containing statements which
dead him to this supposition ; but he has not in any way
advanced the slightest argument that Jesus was in very truth
God. What will have to be the very first step in an argu-
ment of that kind ? Surely the initiatory step will be to
give us some sort of definition of what he means by God.
What does the term “ God ” imply ? How are we to conceive
•of God P Surely in anything like clear thinking that is the
first stage we must set out upon in considering this strange
smdimportant question as to whether Jesus of Nazareth was
God in person. What do we mean when we so glibly talk of
Hod ? In attempting to get at something like a definition of
what we mean by the term God, I would draw your attention
to what is said of him by one or two capable minds of the
.past. The writer of the Psalm Ixxiii., says : “ God is the
strength of my heart.” I presume he meant that God is
the strength of all hearts that call upon Him for strength,
or look to Him for strength, and even of those hearts which
do not professedly look to him for strength. In another part
of the Scriptural writings God is spoken of as manifesting
himself, not in the tempest, not in the storm, but in the “ still
small voice;” evidently illustrative of the still small voice
within each of us if we will but listen to it—the voice we term
ii conscience ” instigating us towards righteousness. Then we
have the statement attributed to Paul, and contained in the


that He is omnipresent and omniscient. Then we have Plato’s
statement, four centuries before the time of Paul, that God is
Infinite Good, and the Author of Good, and that it is the per-
fection of man’s existence to bring his nature as far as
possible into harmony with God. Coming down to our own
<lay we have that well-known and memorable definition of
Matthew Arnold’s, that God is “ the stream of tendency
which makes for righteousness,” —the “ Power, not ourselves,”
which impels to goodness. Now we have all these, and in-
numerable other deliverances relative to God, but onr
highest and noblest ideals of the Almighty Ruler and
Inspirer of the Universe fall short of what he must be, and
therefore, there is, in my humble judgment, no way in which
we can define our ideal. I leave it, then, to my friend to
say what he means when he speaks of God. For myself I
may say only two words contained in all the creeds which I
can adopt as giving anything like a statement of what God is.
These two words are “ infinite” and “incomprehensible.” It
seems to me we are bound to discern that God is thus infinite
and incomprehensible —that any god who is less than univer-
sal cannot in this age (or any age but one comprised of very
ignorant beings) satisfy the ideal and aspirations of religiously-
minded men. In the past, we know the God of the Universe
was represented as Jupiter, a great and powerful man domiciled
on a high mountain, with his Court and courtiers around him.
Again we have him described in the Biblical Scriptures as a
man who walked about in a garden, who was angry, who had
revengeful feelings, and who is delineated in all respects as a
Great King seated on a throne. His hands, his feet, his
back, are spoken of ; and in fact in all ways he is presented,
as it is called, anthropomorphically. Ho is described as a
vast man, but still a man. Kow it is well known that this
ideal of God existed in the world, and was the highest ideal
that the human intellect could conceive. 80 long as this was
the case we cannot be surprised that in the olden times
mortals were supposed to be the children of God in a
different sense altogether to that m which we are all of us
children of God—that throughout the olden times men, and
women too, were put forward as the offspring of God. We
have many instances of this kind. The learned author of
“Supernatural Religion,” adduces several of them. We
know that not only was it the case in Greece and in Home
that various mortals were supposed to be children of God’s in
13
The Divine Origin of Christianity.


a different sense to otters—in an absolute sense—but also in
the East, far away in India, and in China, they bad their God-
begotten men, wbo appeared to them too great, too glorious,
and altogether too remarkable to be mere mortals like them!
selves. They were so prominently in advance of their era,
that they were believed to be God-begotten. But what does
my friend mean when be affirms that Jesus of Nazareth was
God in person P The difficulty to be surmounted is this:
God being universal and infinite", how could the infinite have
ever been comprehended within one finite body ? If he
alleges simply: “ We have in Jesus of Nazareth a manifes-
tator of Divinity greater than any the earth has seen,” to
the last letter I am with him. I revere the character of
Jesus as much as anyone now listening to me can revere it;
and if Mr. Green simply means that Jesus of Nazareth was a
Divine manifestation, then I am cordially and heartily with
him. But he affirms far more than this. We can look upon
the lily as it grows and spreads out its glorious white leaves
in the sun; and we can say: There is a manifestation of
God in the vegetable kingdom. And if what is meant by the
statement that Jesus was God is simply that he was a glorious
manifestation of the divine spirit in the human kingdom, then
lean heartily endorse the sentiment. But it is precisely be-
cause more than this is meant that Eationalists start back. It
is not because they are Godless that they decline to run with
the crowd, and to affirm that Jesus is God. It is because of
their high and noble ideal of God—it is because they cannot
conceive of the Almighty mind of the Universe having been
cramped and confined in one poor mortal body—that they
start back when this creed is thrust under their noses. I
have nearly exhausted my time, and my friend will doubtless
say that I have not answered the propositions he has put for-
ward. Well, to me there seems no occasion for an answer to
them. I can thoroughly subscribe to much that he has said.
At the same time there is this great distinction between us :
That book which he held in his hand and requested me no
longer to reason over, for that is what it amounts to—l am
v to prostrate my rational faculties before it, and worship it as a
fetich —is the same to me as any other book. All that is
good in it is good, and all that is bad in it is bad. I use my
reason in its interpretation. Still lam quite prepared to
admit that there is probably no such remarkable book in the
Universe—at least none such familiar to us. Doubtless other


nations have their sacred works which they revere just as
highly, and many of them containing morality almost as noble
as the best which is to be found in that book. The simple fact
that there are other works regarded as sacred by other families
of mankind should prevent us from bowing down before that
book in its entirety, and should lead us to read it with free
minds. Where we see anything we can approve of, wo should
approve of it; and where there is anything that startles us,
we should examine it more carefully. Where wonders and
miracles are put before us, as in so much of the literature of
ancient times, we should await further evidence. But wher-
ever good, high, noble, and moral sentiment is to be found in
that work we can heartily coincide in it, and probably revere
it quite as highly as those who subdue their reason before it
and accept all its statements as infallible authority.
But I am told that in that book we have evidence of the
way in which we are to regard Jesus of Nazareth. It seems
to me that even in that Book, when intelligently read, you
cannot deduce this from it : That Jesus ever declared himself
to be God —the God of the Universe. There does not appear
to me to be one line in that book—and I have read it most
carefully —that to a rational mind, free from prejudice,
trained to enquire into everything with a doubting and
sceptical spirit (for that is a pure and good spirit, which has
ever been useful to the progress of the race in the past, and
will be useful to it in the future) —nothing that absolutely
binds the intellect down and declares that you must conceive
of this man, who walked the earth nearly two thousand years
ago, as being the infinite God in person; that there was no
other God anywhere when he walked the earth; and that
when he died absolutely, God himself, the Creator of the
universe, died, and poor mortal man had put an end to the
earthly career of his own Creator. Possibly my friend will
say that I misstate the case in this ; but then surely he must
be landed on the other horn of the dilemma. If Jesus were
not in this sense God in person, then he was no more than a
Divine manifestation in human form. And the moment that
signification is introduced, it becomes a question for each
nationalist to form his own judgment upon. If not God in
person, then he was less than God, and it is wrong to worship
him. If he were God in person, surely at that time, when he
was alive, God was to be found nowhere else. The whole
world beside was in a Godless state ; nowhere else could God


have been at that lime; he was there and there alone, walk-
ing the fields of Judea as a poor carpenter. As an infant, too,
in the cradle by the side of Mary his mother, and there alone,
the Almighty Mind manifested in this marvellous Universe,
was “ cribbed, cabined and confined.”
Mb. Green ; My friend has very properly anticipated
that I would make the remark that he had not met the argu-
ment, which, it appears to me, is his proper and legitimate
•duty ; and further, that he was not stating the case of Chris-
tianity aright when he gave such a representation of our views
of the Lord Jesus Christ as he did. I do not intend to be
drawn away from the proposition before us by any side issue.
I do not intend, either to-night, or at any other time, God
helping me, to trouble about a definition of the Deity, for
the finite cannot comprehend the infinite. But one thing
must be clearly understood : —That no Christian at all affirms
—certainly I do not, and I am not aware of any who do—that
the whole of the Godhead was manifested in the person of
Jesus Christ. Mr. Bright ought not to have taken this matter
for granted, inasmuch as he knows that I simply used the
term “Deity” in the proposition on account of his special
interpretation of the word “ Divine.” He considers himself
to be divine; he considers each of us an emanation of the
Deity—this bouquet of flowers —these books. Now I say if
he uses the term “ Divine ” in that sense, then I am under
the necessity of finding a word which will convey Divinity in
a higher sense in connection with the Lord Jesus Christ. We
do not affirm that Jesus was God, nor was he man ; we say
He was God manifested in the flesh. He was the express
representation of the Bather’s character and the brightness of
His glory. He came in order that he might manifest, as far
as that manifestation could be given in human form, the infi-
nite Deity that fills the Universe. Therefore I say that Mr.
Bright, in haying spent so much time upon the definition of
the Deity, and then in charging me with saying that Jesus
was the only .God, and reasoning on the absurdity of sup-
posing that the whole of the Deity was cooped up in the per-
son of one puny man, was really using his time for a purpose
foreign to this debate.
Mr. Bright defines Christianity as the moral teachings
of Jesus Christ. Now I would ask what right Mr. Bright


has to give an arbitrary definition of Christianity, and ta
throw aside that book which is alone to be taken as expound-
ing what Christianity is ? When was my friend constituted an
authority to define by his own mere ipse dixit what Christianity
is, and to say, “ I will not take that written or printed book
as explaining Christianity, but I will say what Christianity is ?”
This appears to me, not to be reasoning, but just leaping
right over the point which requires to be proved. If my
friend says these statements are not the statements of Jesus
if he affirms that this book is not reliable—then we have a
clear issue, and I.must ask him to say why it is not reliable.
But our position at the present time is to show that these-
two points—the Atonement, and the Divinity of Christ’s
nature in a sense in which no other being in the Universe is
divine, except God—are parts of Christianity. Inasmuch as
He assumed human form, he was, properly speaking, neither
Grod nor man, but Grod manifest in the flesh, or as the Greeks
would term Him, Theanthropos. I say that having the
declarations of the Scriptures upon this matter, we have just
to go on in the course we began—to point out that these
Scriptures declare that Jesus was Divine in the sense that is
stated in the proposition, and that He did die as an atonement
for man’s sin, and I shall expect my friend, if he declines to
accept this definition of Christianity, to show why he will not
accept it—to show reasons why these records are not to be
received as the true expounders of the nature of the Christian
religion.
Now let me just finish the remarks I was making on the
teachings of the Gospels, as to the Divinity of Christ. In
this first chapter of the Gospel by John, we have Jesus
spoken of as the “Word thatwas with God, and that was
and also as the one “ by whom all things were made,”
showing that there is true and essential Divinity predicated of
Him in this verse. Then in chapter v. of this same Gospel,
17-23, it is said; “But Jesus answered them, My Bather
worketh hitherto and I work. Therefore the Jews sought the
more to kill Him, because He not only had broken the Sab-
bath, but said also that God was His Bather. Making himself
equal with Ood. Then answered Jesus and said unto them,
verily, verily, I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of Him-
self, but what He seeth the Bather do; for what things
soever He doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. Bor the
Bather loveth the Son, and showeth Him all things that Him-


self doeth ; and He will show Him greater works than these,
that ye may marvel. For as the father raiseth up the dead,
and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He
will. For the father judgeth no man, but hat committed all
judgment unto the Son. That all men should honour the Son
even as they honour the Father. lie that honoureth not the
Son honoureth not the Father ivhich hath sent Him.” Now,
that certainly cannot be predicated of any mortal man in the
w r orld. It can only be predicated of a Being who is Divine
in a sense in which no earthly being is. Now we find in con-
nection with the Atonement, in this Gospel, the following
statements; —Chap, hi., 14-1(3, “And as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be
lifted up ; that whosoever believeth in him should not perish
hut have everlasting life. For God so loved the world that he
gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him
should not perish but have everlasting life.” In chap, vi., 51,
the Lord Jesus says : —“I am the living bread which came
down from Heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he shall
live for ever, and the bread which I will give is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world.” Thus, we have in
these Gospel records the declaration of the Divinity of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and His death as an atonement; and if
my friend denies that these things do form part of Christianty,
then it is for him to show that these words can be properly
understood in a different sense to that which I have named.
If he can also show that these books are not to be relied
upon as explaining what Christianity is, he will then be in
his legitimate line of disproof; but unless he does this, he is
certainly not meeting the argument which is legitimate in
connection with our proposition.
Now, the next book which is regarded as of authority—or,
for the moment we will leave out authority, and take it as simply
written in the early period of the Christian age —is the Book of
Acts. That book, whether written by inspired men or not,
was beyond doubt, even by the admission of the enemies of
Christianity, written in that early Christian period, and there-
fore if it teaches the Divinity of Christ and His death as an
atonement, it will be part of our proof that the proposition as
worded can be legitimately affirmed — that the Divinity of
Christ and His death as an atonement are parts of Christianity.
Now in the Acts, chapter ii. 36., the Apostle Peter, in
preaching to the Jews, concludes his discourse with these


memorable words:—Therefore, let all the house of Israel
know assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom
ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ." The term “ Lord ”
is the translation which is given to the Hebrew terms Jehovah
and Adonai —the one applying to the Divine Lather, the other
designating more especially the executive power of the
Divine Being ; and we see that this term is applied to Jesus,
indicating that he occupied the position of the Divine
Executive in connection with the government of the world.
Again, in the /th chapter, 55th and following verses, we find
the following with regard to Stephen, the first martyr of the
Christian Church “ But he, being full of the Holy Ghost,
looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God,
and Jesus standing on the right hand of God; and said’
Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of JVTan. stand-
ing on the right hand of God. Then they cried out with a
loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one
accord, and cast him out of the city, and stoned him; and
the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet,
whose name was Saul. And they stoned Stephen calling upon
God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit." lam not
concerned at this stage of our controversy to explain how
Jesus can be Divine. _ I am simply establishing the fact that
it is part of Christianity; and I want my friend to meet that
point, for it is the first point we must settle. How, in con-
ith His atonement, as taught in this book, in chapter
v*,_ JO, 31, we have these words:—“The God of our fathers
raised up Jesus whom ye slew and hanged on a tree. Him
hath God exalted with" His right hand to he a Prince and a
Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of
sins." In addition to the Acts of the Apostles,’ let me point
that we have certain letters addressed to believers in
various parts of the world. These letters form part of the
early Christian literature, and whether it be admitted that
they were written by apostle or apostolic men or not —whether
it be admitted that they were written immediately subsequent
to the death of Jesus, or towards the end of the first cen
tury—they certainly are the earliest Scriptures that we have
next to the Boot of Acts. I shall be prepared to show,
when my friend is prepared to take up and grapple this point, that
these Epistles were written in the first century, by the men whoso
names are attached to them, and that they are legitimate writings
-declaring to us what is and what is not the religion of Christ. °


Mr. Beight : As I had almost anticipated, it seems, if I
may be allowed to say so, that my friend has not clearness of
thought upon this question. It seems to me that he asserts
the Deify of Jesus, and in the same breath declares that there
was somehow or somewhere, a Deity superior to Jesus, or at
all events, that Jesus was not all God. Then I say, we are
entering upon the sphere of a plurality of Gods. If he was
a Deity at all, surely he must have been the Deity. Is there
any other Deity F If he were the Deity, then I again ask,
where was the rest of the universe without the support of its
God—that God who, as Paul says, is above all, through all,
and in all ? And not only Paul, but all the great minds of
the past, and all the great minds of the present, admit the
infinitude of God. Therefore, it all turns upon this point—-
Was Jesus the whole of God, or was he not P If he were
not, then he must take his rank with other creations. He is
no longer the Creator ; and in that case, a vast stumblingblock
in the way of Eationalists is removed. It is the fact that
Jesus of Nazareth is put before us as the Creator that is so'
abhorrent to rational minds. Therefore again I say, it is
upon this ground, and upon this ground almost alone, that
any material difference of opinion should arise; because if
Jesus be a Deity, he must, so far as I can form an idea on
the subject, be the Deity. Otherwise he is merely a manifes-
tation of the Deity —vastly superior in degree, possibly, to
other manifestations, but still a manifestation of the Deity,,
the same as other men who have lived and breathed upon this
globe.
My friend says I defined Christianity for myself as the
teachings of Jesus, and asks me to show why I defined
Christianity in that manner. Now, I did not define Chris-
tianity in that manner as a dogma for others. I defined
Christianity for myself alone, because that is the position
taken by a Freethinker. I did not come forward and say
that others must believe as I believe. But for myself I
define Christianity as comprehending mainly the teachings of
Jesus and the example of his life. The reverence I entertain
for Jesus is based more upon my appreciation of his life, as
set forth in the traditional history concerning him, than even
upon the goodness of his teachings. It seems to me to have
been the life of a man who, of all the men I have read of, sur-
rendered himself a willing sacrifice for tl*e common weal.
But that surely does not, in any sense or Vay make him to-


be God in person. The moment you make him to be God in-
person, in that moment and to that extent you degrade
humanity, because humanity, through the manhood of Jesus,
is elevated. If you take away the highest peak of our
mountain range of humanity, and declare that it is not a
mountain peak of humanity at all, but something dropped
down miraculously from the heavens, then the whole range is
dwarfed. But if you leave that high and lofty peak before
the view of men as an example of human life—a life towards
which all may aim, however far short of it they may fall—
then, indeed, you make it of some use to the race. And I
maintain that the time when Christianity will play its noblest
part in the history of mankind will be when Jesus is looked
upon as our elder brother, one whose example is not rendered
abortive by his being conceived of as a Deity, a superhuman
production. I am asked to state why I take a view of
Christianity different to that which is taken by the majority of
people —because that is what my friend’s interrogatory amounts
to. I have surely the right of formulating my ideal of
Christianity so long as I retain that right for myself alone.
The wrong would begin if I put it forward as an act which is
to be in any shape binding on other people. But for myself
alone I assert that that book must come before my reason just
the same as any other book. All that is in it of which my
reason approves, I value and esteem; but with it, as with any
other volume, I will not degrade my intellect by bowing down
and saying that is good and moral, which appears to me bad and
immoral.
Even taking the orthodox view of that book, regard-
ing it as a Divine production, the very book itself as it
stands now, is undergoing examination by the race, in order
to discover whether it is in every respect the word of God or
not. In the earliest copies of the New Testament that we
have —those which scientific criticism deems to be the earliest,
the version found on Mount Sinai, and the version in the
"Vatican—many portions of the authorised New Testament
are not to be discovered within those versions. Therefore it
is alleged by the profoundest critics of our day that they form
no part of the Word of God itself. Why, that beautiful
incident in the Gospel to which my friend referred—the
Gospel of John—that beautiful incident of Jesus, and the
woman taken in adultery, is not to be found either in the
■Sinaitic or the Vatican version. Therefore, so far as those


Torsions are concerned, it is not a part of the Word of God;
and to those who think that we are bound by the book, and
nothing but the book, and that that book is to be regarded as
totally different to every other description of writing and print-
ing, the moment it is shown that certain passages are not in
the early writings, they cease to be a part of the Bible in any
•sense. So, all the concluding verses of the Gospel of Mark,
all after the eighth verse, including that most important
passage upon which more than any other the whole Baptist
schism is based—the doctrine of immersion—are not to be
found in the Sinaitic and Vatican versions. Hence even
taking this comparatively superficial ground of Biblical
criticism, I assert you cannot hold forth any book as being in
itself—within its boards and nowhere else—the infallible
word of God. Moreover, we know that a vast section of
Christendom, consisting of at least 180 millions of believers,
does not regard that book, which my friend holds forth, as
the Word of God. It has another Word of God—the
Douay version of the Bible as accepted by the Homan
Catholic Church —and there is very much within it that is not
to be found in the version accepted by my friend. The
Sinaitic MS., discovered by Tischendorf in the Convent of
St. Catherine, Mount Sinai, is admitted, as I have said, by
Biblical critics to be the earliest version of the New Testa"-
ment. This is shown in many ways, one of which I may
roughly intimate, viz.: that passages mentioned by some of
the earliest Bathers, which are not to be found in other versions,
are found in the Sinaitic version, showing that it must have been
of early date. There is especially a passage mentioned by Origen,
which is found in the Sinaitic version and no other. There-
fore I say the Sinaitic version is regarded as the most
ancient; and in this version—now in the Kussian Emperor’s
library at St. Petersburg—there is a book entitled the
“ Epistle of Barnabas,” and one entitled the “ Shepherd of
Ilermas,” which form no part of the Word of God as received
by my friend. Therefore I maintain even on this ground of
mere Biblical and verbal criticism, I have a right to sav that
reason must not bow down before the book held out on this
platform, as if it were proved to be of Divine origin,—a
special revelation. But as you will have noticed, the whole
argument of my friend upon this question is that certain
statements are contained within the Gospel records. Well,
1 assert that the statements advanced by him from those


Gospel records are of no authority to Freethinkers. The
Freethinker holds the right to examine everything, no matter
where it may be found—to examine everything for himself
—to bring his own judgment to bear upon it. This right is
not claimed by those who conceive themselves to be orthodox
believers, yet in reality they themselves pick and choose cer-
tain passages as having more authority than other passages,
and will not be bound by everything that is to be found,
especially in the older portion of that book which they term
the infallible Word of God. They will not take these
passages as if authoritative over their reason now. There
are commands given in these earlier portions of Scripture
which they will reject and plead a right to disregard. Well,
if that be the case with orthodox believers, surely a Free-
thinker cannot be regarded as presumptuous if he goes still
further and says, “ Upon every statement that you put for-
ward out of that book, I claim a right to exercise my rea-
son—to see whether it accords with reason —to see whether it
is consistent with the facts of the Universe as approved by
science to the senses —to discern whether I am to receive it as
really the truth, according to the highest truth known—-the
manifestations in nature of the Divine Mind.” I say this is
the right which every Freethinker asserts, and insists on
exercising.
Mr. Green : I will take the remarks Mr. Bright has
made in the latter part of his speech first in order. Let me
say that we are very glad that the works of Barnabas and of
Hernias were found in the place referred to ; but until he can
show that these two books have any claim to inspiration, and
that they put forth any claim to be of authority in connec-
tion with the Christian religion, the mere fact of their being
found along with the books of Scripture proves nothing
whatever. With regard to other portions of the Scriptures,
I do not quite agree with the correctness of my friend’s state-
ment, but will pass that by for the present. Christians show
their anxiety not to receive anything but what has clear
evidence in its favour, so clear and convincing that it cannot
be overcome; hence, when manuscripts have been dis-
covered, and have been compared with the others, if upon
careful examination it was found that there was not evidence
sufficient to establish their claim to be considered inspired


writings, writings which have come from the pens of the
Apostles or of Apostolic men, they rejected them. I think
this in itself is one of the most powerful arguments in
favour of the authenticity of this book—that those who
were examining the manuscripts should determine to accept
nothing as coming from an authoritative source, unless it had
all the evidence that human reason can possibly demand in
favour of it.
Now let me say that my friend claims a liberty of
a vast kind. He says books are of no authority to the
Freethinker. Well, my impression is that it is difficult to
tell what is of authority to the Freethinker. But can any
of us by our mere statement, say that these historical records,
which have been handed down to us from past ages, are to be
taken as true or untrue merely because we say they are true
or untrue ? I say my friend must prove that the records
which he refuses to accept as being true have not
evidence in their support which all true records ought to
have; and if he says he exercises his reason, he must
certainly allow us the right to exercise ours, and to say:
“ With all deference, Mr. Bright, we refuse to accept your
statement as an authority, affirming that this book is not to he
received, merely because you say it ought not. We want rea-
son, argumentation, and not mere statement.”
My friend has defined Christianity : First, he says he de-
fines Christianity for himself alone. What is his guide in this
definition ? Another will define it in another way. How am
I or you to decide which definition is true if we are not to
refer to the records which tell us of *the origin and promulga-
tion of the Christian religion p The Baconian philosophy can
only be known from the writings of Bacon ; and the character
of the Christian religion can only be known from the teachings
of Jesus and of the Apostles. Therefore Mr. Bright’s mere
judgment of Christianity, apart from the records, can be of
no weight to any intelligent and reasonable audience.
But let me show you how Mr. Bright places himself in a
great dilemma. He says Christianity consists of the teachings
of Jesus, and the example of a life. Then I have to ask : If
Christianity consists partly of the teachings of Jesus, of what
part ? For I have shows that part of the teaching of Jesus
consists in the affirmation of His Divinity, Divinity such as is
possessed by no mortal being, and of the possession of power
in His Human person, committed to Him by the Father, such


as no mortal can claim. Now, if Mr. Bright says he declines
to accept those statements of Jesus, is it not reasonable that
I should ask him what portion of the recorded teachings of
Jesus he takes as really having been spoken by him, and what
part he rejects P Is it not reasonable that I should ask on
what authority he accepts part as the teachings of Jesus, and
rejects the other part ? Are we to accept this or that merely
because my friend says it P If so, are we exercising our
reason in the manner in which he says every human being in
this world ought'to use it ? Unquestionably not.
Again, let me say that my friend has spoken hastily. He
charges me with want of clearness of thought in connection
with the Divinity of Christ, and says that if Christ is Grod,
there must be another G-od—a superior Grod —and that conse-
quently there are two Grods in the Universe. I would just
remind my friend that this is altogether beside the question.
We ha ye first to ascertain whether the Divinity of Christ is
part of Christianity. We are not concerned at present with
the question as to its reasonableness or otherwise. He affirms
that this is not a part of Christianity, and I affirm that it is.
Now, I say that the only way in which we can prove that it
is a part of Christianity is, to take the records which declare
what Christianity really is. If my friend will admit that this
book teaches the Deity of Jesus, then I will be happy to pass
oyer that part, and to grapple with him on the question of the
reasonableness of the position taken up by this book. But he
commenced his last speech by saying that even upon a reason-
able—or, as he terms it, a rational —interpretation of the state-
ments m this book, Jesus cannot be shown to be Divine. I
have simply to ask him to take those passages, and to give us
a rationalistic exposition which will be in harmony with gram-
mar, and with those general principles of interpretation which
guide us in our understanding of all books, and show that the
declarations in this book do not legitimately mean what I have
asserted to-night they do.
Now, as further establishing my affirmation upon this
matter, I have to say —and I will just affirm it broadly, and
if my friend calls it in question, I will then give the proof—
that in all the epistles which were written by the Apostles, or
by Apostolic men, the Divinity of Christ, and His death as an
atonement for man, form the sum and substance of those
writings, and are the basis upon which the hopes of those
Christian people are said to rest. Take those two points from


Christianity, and you rob it of its very existence-—of its very
central truth—and yqu leave nothing to which the term Chris-
tianity can be legitimately applied. Let me further say, with
regard to those early writers of the Christian Church who fol-
lowed the Apostles in the age immediately succeeding, that
Bishop Blunt, in his work on the “ Use of the Early Bathers,”
gives abundant quotations clearly showing that they held
the Divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ, and His death as an
atonement for man. But as these were Christian men, and
may therefore be said to be in favour of that of which they
spoke, I will pass them by, and just go. on to those who
were not Christians, and we shall see that they, too, declare
that those two positions were held by the Christians in that
early age.
In a letter of Pliny’s to the Emperor Trajan, we find him
speaking of the Christians, and in connection with them he
makes this statement“ They (Christians) assured me that
the main of their fault, or of their mistake was this :—that
they were wont, on a certain day, to meet together before it
was light, and to sing an hymn to Christ, as to a God, alter-
nately ; and to oblige themselves by a sacrament (or oath), not
to do anything that was ill, that they would commit no theft,
or pilfering, or adultery ; that they would not break their pro-
mises, or deny what was deposited with them when it was re-
quired back again ; after which it was their custom to depart,
and to meet again at a common but innocent meal.” How, the
Divinity of Jesus is clearly manifest in the remark of Pliny
that they offered worship to Jesus as to a God.
We have further testimony from Lucian, who wrote about
the year 170. Speaking of the Christians, he says: —“They
therefore still ivorship that great man who was crucified in
Palestine, because he introduced into the world this new
religion.” By these two writers, who could have no purpose
to serve, and who simply wrote from a knowledge of actual
facts, we have it stated that the Christians worshipped Jesus
as being Divine.
We have also the writings of Celsus ■ —the greatest
opponent of Christianity in that early age and I will
merely make the statement, without, at this point, proving
it by quotations, that in his arguments against the religion of
Christ, he refers, not only to the Divinity of Christ and to His
death as an atonement, as being held by Christians universally,
but also to almost every event in our Gospels. Having the


testimony of these profane historians—having the testimony
of unbelievers, who were opposed to Christianity and wrote
against it (not only such as Celsus, but also Porphyry, Julian,.
and others subsequently) —it is clearly shown that it was part
of the Christianity propagated in that first age, that Christ
was Divine, and that He did die as an atonement for man.
But more than this, I will show you, even from the work
of Strauss himself, that the Divinity of Jesus is really the very
basis on which the Gospels are written. He says, the “hy-
pothesis of the Gospel writers is that Divinity was the opera-
ting principle in Christ, irresistibly determining His every
word and action.” He says this is not his theory—nor is it my
friend’s ; but here we have Strauss’s admission, that the theory
on which the Gospels are written, is that of the Divinity of
Christ operating as a principle in him, irresistibly determining
his every word and action. This being the case, and as 1 see
my time is just expiring, I have to ask my friend whether he
is prepared to admit-that the definition which I have given of
Christianity is true or not —that it includes the Divinity of
Christ and His death as an atonement ? If he is not so pre-
pared, will he show that those historians are not reliable ? As
a reasonable man and a rationalist, will he give us the reasons
on which he rejects this testimony, so that we may see
whether he is really acting reasonably in so refusing to accent
what, in any Court of Justice in the land, would be regarded
as legitimate evidence ?
Mr. Bright : Replying to the last observation of my
friend first, I would say that no Court of Justice in the land
ever has to examine evidence about such a startling pro-
position. The testimony required in order to prove an event
has, according to all rules of evidence, tO' be doubled, trebled,
and multiplied, if that event is of a prodigious and impro-
bable nature. Therefore when such an extravagant proposi-
tion is required to be proved, as that an individual of the race
who lived nearly two thousand years ago was a “ Deity ”
—for that is the mildest way in which I can state the pro-
position put forward by my friend surely any Court of
Justice would demand evidence of the most overwhelming
character. I ask you to think for a moment what description
of evidence would convince us at this day that any living man
was God ? That is what the definition accepted in this debate


means, and I can put no other construction upon it. In
what possible way could we at this day be persuaded of that
fact ? Suppose a man were now to be working all the mira-
cles said to have been worked in Judea —suppose he were
healing the sick in various directions wherever the faith of
the people permitted him to so heal —suppose he raised in
some instances the apparently dead to life suppose he
changed water into wine—and assume that he lived in all
respects the life which is said to have been lived by .lesus
himself in the records accepted by my friend —could we yet
believe that we had before us in any sense whatever, the cor-
poreal representative of the Almighty Mind which controls
this Universe, the Being who is Grod over all, above all, and
in all? I think not. Ido not see how evidence could be ad-
duced to the satisfaction of any Court of Justice, of such a
startling and marvellous fact as that would be.
My friend says he cannot receive the conclusions of my
reason as being of any authority to him, I never supposed
that he could. But the question is, why—using my reason for
myself alone —am I to accept any statement simply because
it comes, or purports to come —for we have no conclusive evi-
dence even of that —from some ancient writer termed an
- Apostle ?If the man w r ere living and breathing before me, and
declaring to my face : “I am inspired by the Almighty to write
this which you see me writing,” I wmuld still turn round upon
him and say : [“ Where is the evidence of this miraculous
fact ? And even if you are inspired, still, is that which you
are writing to be regarded as of infallible authority to me ?
Am I not to use my reason upon it ? Must every super-
natural fact there set down be taken by me as absolutely true,
without any process of ratiocination ? Inspired or non-
inspired I maintain my right to reason over it and gauge its
truthfulness.” ;Seeing that these accounts come to us
through various translations of manuscripts and printed
books, with alterations and discrepancies at every stage, with
various sects adopting various readings and interpretations—
is it to be thought for a moment that our reason is to be held
in bondage to these old writings, when, even if the writers
were before us, we would decline to take their allegations as
conclusive proof of infallible inspiration ? My friend says
that there is nothing of authority to a Freethinker. What I
assert is that there is nothing of authority to a Freethinker
which outrages his reason. A vast difference ! Everything


has to be brought to the bar of reason. There is nothing
which can be of authority over that. He must use his reason
on every statement which is presented to him. The moment
his reason is satisfied of the demonstration of any statement—
of the excellence of any life presented then he yields to it
the loyalty which every intellect must give to that which ap-
pears to be good, true, and beautiful. But not till then. It
is therefore as much a question of reason with these old
writings as with writings of a later date. Would my friend
yield his reason captive to any other writings ? And why to
these ? I have not heard a scintilla of argument urged why
our reason is to be prostrated to these writings, and to no
others in the world. Therefore, each one who feels so dis-
posed—this is the position of Freethinkers—may, without
fear of priesthoods, or of any other social organizations, use
his own reason, with such aid as he may get from the writings
of the past, in judging of the truthfulness or untruthfulness
of every portion of that written and printed record. My
friend wishes me to prove that these writings are not authori-
tative over reason P Am I called upon to prove a negative ?
Why should I demonstrate that they are not authoritative
over reason ? I simply take these writings as I take every
other writing, and I honour everything in them that appears
to my reason to be good and true ; but I refuse to honour
and revere that which appears to me rather degrading than
honourable. I say that in dealing with these writings, as in
dealing with every other, reason has to be freely exercised ;
and it is not for me to prove that they are not authoritative
at the bar of reason. lam asked, how do I examine the
writings of Bacon, and take them as authoritative ? But do
I take them as infallibly authoritative ? If any portions of
his writings appear to me to be irrational, do I accept them ?
Not in the least. If I undertake to study his writings, I
examine them on their merits, page by page. One portion
may appear excellent, another portion the reverse; and I de-
tach one portion from the other. It is for my
friend to prove that I am to take a different position in
the case of the book which he held up at the beginning of the
debate.
My friend says that we are landed in confusion,
and have nothing to hold on by, if we reject this
book as authoritative. That is the same warning cry as
was raised three or four hundred years ago by the Eoman
c


Catholic Church, “If you let go the Infallible Rock of the
Church, what have you to hold on by ? If you refuse to
accept the duly appointed successors of the Apostles as the
living means of receiving the true interpretation of these
infallible writings, you will be landed in chaos. Each in-
dividual will follow his own interpretation.” Just the same
as was said then, and has been outlived by Protestants, is
said now, —that if reason is allowed unfettered play by these
ancient writings, you will be landed in chaotic confusion.
I think we may trust above all things to the human reason;
always remembering that there is the same Divine Mind
regulating the processes of the world now as in the remote
past. We have to look to that Divine regulation and inspira-
tion, the same as they had in the earlier ages ; and if we re-
fuse to surrender our liberty to that book, wdnch, I say,
regarded as infallible, stands in the way of progress instead
of helping it—so far from being hindered, we shall be en-
abled to advance with a peacefulness and rapidity to which
the human race is as yet a stranger.
I am called upon by my friend to remember that
certain heathen writers speak of the ancient Christians
as worshipping Jesus of Nazareth. I ask :Is it likely that
these old philosophers, in the supercilious glance they
threw at the early Christian worshippers —an obscure
sect, Tacitus calls them, of superstitious men —according
to him, the scum of the earth—would be enabled to
determine whether they worshipped Jesus as a Deity, or
merely revered him as a good and noble prophet of the
Lord ? Is it liktly that those ancient writers would be
able to distinguish on nice points of this kind, on which even
in our day—with all the light thrown on the subject —there is
so much difference of opinion ? We may take these
references simply as they stand —admitting, although it is by
no means proved, that they are genuine—as indicative of
what the old philosophers thought regarding an obscure sect,
which, as stated in their writings, they looked down upon as
thoroughly degraded. Therefore they do not help my friend
in his theological assumptions. If my friend would convince
Freethinkers of the truthfulness of his position, he has to
demonstrate that Jesus was the Deity, —Divine in a totally
different sense to any other human being. That is the
position he has taken up, and that is wEere his proof has to
come in.


I am told that the death of Jesus made atonement for
man’s sin. How comes it then that the sin of man still ap-
pears to be unatoned, and produces as ever, evil consequences.?
Even according to the showing of the religious sects of
the day, there are ninety-nine chances that a man living at
this time will elude salvation, to the one chance there is of
his obtaining eternal happiness. Therefore even from that
point of view, how has the -atonement acted so as to pro-
cure what it is affirmed to have accomplished ? Moreover,
we have this to look at: that throughout the wide wide world,
there have been millions upon millions in every generation
passing away who have never heard even the name of Jesus.
Was this atonement made for them ? Did it produce any
effect upon them ? Why, at this present day, there are 622
millions of Hindoos and Buddhists, the Buddhists standing in
somewhat the same relation to Hiudooism as Protestants do
to Roman Catholicism. So you have half the living world of
this present moment given up to Hiudooism and Buddhism—•
religious wdiich have served their turn very well for them, but
which my friend will still maintain, are not of Divine origin.
Hence I ask : Where has this atonement, which was vouch-
safed the earth 1800 years ago, been able to prove efficient?
If these people, who have thus lived without a knowledge of
this atonement, without a recognition of Jesus, are still able to
obtain salvation, then I say that this veryjhct which my friend
terras a beneficent and atoning act, has caused millions upon
millions to be plunged into damnation, who otherwise might-
have escaped. For the populations who never heard of it
are able to obtain salvation ; while the vast majority of those
who did hear of it, fail to secure the benefits which it was
supposed to give.


SECOND EVENING.
R. BRIGHT: Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentleman—•
I feel satisfied that all concerned in this debate will
felicitate themselves on the manner in which it passed
off last evening. Ror my own part I may say, that it has
been my earnest desire that this discussion shall be conducted
with the utmost calmness, because, in considering a question
of this nature, we know that there are naturally excitable
feelings evolved on both sides, and unless we have something
like a philosophical spirit in the audience as well as in the
disputants, the debate becomes a mere wrangle. Therefore, I
say, last night, we on this side may tkank the audience; and X
trust the audience on its part was satisfied with the way in
which myself and my friend conducted our arguments.
My friend undertook last night to prove the Divine
origin of Christianity in the sense which he put upon it in the
interpretations well knowm to you. Had that Divine origin
not been specified as in a different sense —not in a different
degree—to that of other religions, I could not have taken the
negative. But when it is asserted that Christianity,—with
this explanation of it, involving as it seems to me what is
false in theology—is of Divine origin, and all other religions
are asserted to be, by comparison, of human origin, I main-
tain we require .a large amount of proof. If the proof is not
merely to satisfy those who are already satisfied—those who,
through early training, believe in the same way as my friend
believes —if it is to prove satisfactory to those who doubt and
disbelieve—then surely it will have to be of a very complete
and thorough nature. Now I do not think that as yet the
proof has been thus complete. My friend stated that he
occupied a difficult position in having to prove, while I might
be satisfied merely with denying. But surely if he has truth
on his side, affirmation should become tolerably easy. If it
be simply truth which has to prove itself against falsehood,


surely he has the better side of the argument. Would it be
difficult to advance evidence in favour of the truth of the
law of gravitation against a simple negative? Or if my
friend were trying to show the wisdom of the command that
we are to do to others as we would have others do to us,
would he then occupy a difficult position in affirmation against
a simple negative ? Hence I say that if he have the full truth
on his side, which he declared he had at the commencement —
and as he no doubt thoroughly feels he has —he ought to
occupy an easy and not a difficult position. For myself, I
may state it seems to me all the other religions of the world
are also of Divine origin, differing, if you will, in degree—not
so well fitted for the foremost races among mankind —but
still having their genesis in the same Divine Mind from which
emanates the Christian religion. Of course Ido not allude
specially to the Jewish religion, as doubtless ray friend would
not accept that from his divinely originated faiths, as upon the
Jewish, the Christian religion itself affects to be based. But
taking other religions, my object now is to try to show to
those who may not have previously studied this question that
the devotees of these religions put forward the same preten-
tions on behalf of their Divine origin as are put forward by
the devotees of Christianity. I would refer first to the religion
of that large mass of people, the Hindoos, now numbering
something like 139 millions. In the work I hold in my hand
—that very excellent treatise by Viscount Amberley, entitled
An Analysis of Religious Belief” —a statement is made re-
garding the extreme antiquity of the sacred books of the
Hindoos ; and I allude to this subject of antiquity as showing
that what may be good in these books is not merely indepen-
dent of the teachings of Jesus, but to all appearance, does not
emanate from any sacred source as acknowledged by my
friend. Lord Amberly says :
“ The extreme antiquity of our extant Veda, is guaranteed
by the amplest testimony. In the indexes compiled by native
scholars 500 or 600 years before Christ, 1 we find every hymn,
every verse, every word and syllable of the Veda accurately
counted.’ (Max Muller’s ‘ Chips from a Herman Workshop,'
vol. 1, p. 11.) Before this was done, not only was the whole
vast collection complete, but it was ancient; for had it been a
recent composition it would not have enjoyed the pre-eminent
sanctity which rendered it the object of this minute attention.
And not only is the A 7 eda ancient, but it has been shown that,


from the variety of its component strata, it must have been
the growth of no small period of time, its earliest elements
being of an almost unfathomable antiquity. Max Muller,
who has elaborately treated this question, divides the \ aidik
age —the age during which the Veda was in process of forma-
tion—into four great epochs. The most primitive hymns of
the Eig-Veda he attributes to what he terms the Chhandas
period (from Chhandas, or metre) the limits of which cannot
be fixed in the ascending direction, but which descends no
later than 1,000 B.C. And he thinks that ‘we cannot well
assign a date more recent than 1200 to 1500 before our ei’a/
(Chips, vol. 1, p. 13) for the composition of these hymns.” A
page or two further on, Lord Amberley says: —“Whatever
their antiquity, the sanctity of these works in Indian opinion
is of the highest order. Never has the theory of inspiration
been pushed to such an extreme. The Veda was the direct
creation of Brahma; and the Eishis, or Sages, who are the
nominal authors of the hymns, did not compose them, but
simply ‘ saw ’ them. Although, therefore, the name of one of
these seers is coupled with each hymn, it must not be supposed
that he did more than perceive the divine poem which was
revealed to his privileged vision.”
Now r these Vedas contain morality of as high a character
in many respects as is to be found in the sacred books of
Christianity. I will read you just one or two short passages
from one of the Vedas. It says: —“Any place where the
mind of man can be undisturbed, is suitable for the worship
of the Supreme Being.” “ The vulgar look for their gods in
water ; the ignorant think they reside in wood, bricks, and
stones ; men of more extended knowledge seek them in celestial
orbs; but wise men worship the Universal Soul.” “There is
one living and true God; everlasting, without parts or
passions ; of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness ; the
Maker and Preserver of all things.” “He who considers all
beings as existing in the Supreme Spirit, and the Supreme
Spirit as pervading all beings, cannot view with contempt any
creature whatsoever.” “To know that God is, and that all is-
God, this is the substance of the Vedas. When one attains to
this, there is no more need of reading, or of works; they are
but the bark, the straw, the envelope. No more need of them
when one has the seed, the substance, the Creator. When
one knows Him by science, he may abandon science, as the-
torch which has conducted him to the end.”


There are many other similar passages in the Yedas ; but
I will now read just a short passage from the sacred book of
the Reformers among the Hindoos—the Buddhists—whose
religion sprang up with Buddha, some 500 or 600 years before
Christ, and being banished from India at an early date, took
gradual possession of all that vast congress of peoples
occupying China, Thibet, Japan, Ceylon, and elsewhere. This
religion also contains the same high morality as the other
religion. It has among its commandments a commandment
not to destroy life, a commandment not to obtain another’s
property by unjust means, not to indulge the passions so as
to injure the legal or natural rights of other men, not to tell
lies, and not to partake of anything intoxicating. The
highest order of spiritual morality is inculcated in many
passages of the Buddhistic sacred books. One passage runs
thus:—
“ Buddha said : Who is the good man ? The religious
man only is good. And what is goodness P Hirst and fore-
most it is the agreement of the will with the conscience.
Who is the great man ? He who is strongest in the exercise
of patience; who patiently endures injury, and maintains a
blameless life. He is a man indeed ! And who is a worship-
ful man (one deserving reverence, or a Buddha) ? A man
whose heart has arrived at the highest degree of enlighten-
ment. All lust removed, all wicked actions uprooted, all
within calm and pure, without blemish; who is acquainted
with all things from first or last, and even with those things
that have not yet transpired; who knows and sees and
hears all things ; such universal wisdom is rightly called illu-
mination.”
So with the religion known as Iranism, dating still earlier;
—the religion which has Zoroaster for its author, and numbers
the Parsees among its modern followers. The morality incul-
cated in its sacred books is of a similarly high character.
These are some passages ;
“Do not allow yourself to be carried away by anger.
Reply to thine enemy with gentleness. Avoid everything cal-
culated to injure others. Take not that which belongs to
another. Be not envious, avaricious, proud, nor vain. To
refuse hospitality, and not succour the poor, are sins. Be
scrupulous to observe the truth in all things. Fornication
and immodest looks are sms. To think evil is a sin; strive
therefore to keep pure in body and mind. Every man who is


pure in thought, words, and actions, will go to the celestial
regions. Every man who is evil in thoughts, words, or actions,
will go to a place of punishment.”
I may state that the extracts I gave from the Buddhistic
and Hindoo writings are contained in a hook entitled “ The
Bible of the Ages.” The last extract is from a volume by
Hudson Tuttle, entitled “ The Christ Idea in History.”
These illustrations might be multiplied to any extent, but they
serve my purpose in sufficiently showing that among these
great nations, during past ages, the people have been strug-
gling towards righteousness. They have not the same animal
force as the nations have with whom the Christian religion is
the accepted faith ; but notwithstanding that, they have
peopled in an orderly fashion large quarters of the globe.
And I ask: Are these religions simply human in their origin,
while this other religion, with a morality of little, if any
higher cast, is the sole religion that has been inspired by the
Divine Mind? In my opinion, and in the opinion of nearly
all those who deeply consider this question, the infinite Bather
of Humanity has left no portion of His family without its
representative of the highest morality the most perfect
spiritual faculties. Throughout the wide wide world, we find
that everywhere this Supreme Mind has been operating during
ages past; and that it has not been left to one small secluded
portion of the globe—one infinitesimal corner, as it were —to
nave conveyed to it, and it alone, a message of love for the
comfort of the children of the Almighty. This is the ground
large numbers of Freethinkers take in believing that all these
religions have also been of Divine origin' —that everywhere
there has been operating in a more or less conspicuous degree
the same Divine impulse. The Buddhists at this day, accord-
ing to the latest edition of “ Chambers’ Cyclopaedia,” number
483 millions. Surely we cannot suppose that all these people
now living, and all their predecessors throughout the past,
who never heard even the name of Jesus the only and
solitary specimen of Divinity in human shape, according to
my friend—were left in utter darkness without some evidence
of that light which seems, in broken rays, to have come to
the whole of mankind.
I ask, too, why is my reason to act differently in con-
sidering the sacred books of those peoples who, during ages
upon ages, have managed to live by them, and work righteous-
ness by them, —w r hy is my reason to act differently by these


writings than by some other alleged sacred book ? Why am
I to be allowed to select what is good from these books, to
take their enunciations as authoritative to the extent that my
reason approves, and to reject in them all that appears
fabulous and immoral, while the moment the sacred book of
my friend is held up before me, I am to bow down and
worship it as the infallible word of Glod ? I ask : Where is
the proof of this in the one case, and not in the others ?
Where is the proof that this Christianity is a Divine religion,
and that no other religion known to humanity is similarly
Divine ?
Mr. G-reen : Mr. Chairman and respected hearers, I
would just say in regard to the reference that has been
made to other religions, that the mere profession of a religion,
and the assertion that that religion is of Divine origin does
not make it so. If those Hindoos and others can prove that
their religion is of Divine origin by evidence which stands the
test of all the rules that we are guided by in judging of evi-
dence, then by all means accept it. If we are thus guided,
and after examination are convinced that the evidence proves
Divine origin, as far as evidence is capable of proving such
a thing, then we ought to accept it as being so. But as I
have said, the mere statement of Divine origin does not make
anything so ; and I am here to-night not merely to assert
that Christianity is of Diviue origin, but I am endeavouring,
with the help of Grod, to prove that this proposition is abso-
lutely true.
In regard to the Hindoo writings, I think it would have
been better if my friend had read a little more at first hand,
and not merely at second hand. Professor Max Muller is
confessedly a scholar of the very highest reputation in con-
nection with the Hindoo mythologies, and if my friend will
take Max Muller’s work, “ Chips from a Grerman Workshop,”
and read his lecture upon those ancient Vedas, he will find
from Muller’s own statement, the estimate which he puts
upon the Yedic hymns, and upon the morality which is taught
in these ancient writings. I admit they are the most ancient
writings in the world next to the Scriptures ; but as Professor
Muller, after a most thorough and searching investigation
into those writings, has said, when compared with the Scrip-
tures which have come down to us through the Jews, when


compared with their pure morality and their elevated con-
ceptions of the Deity, those Yedic hymns sink into utter
insignificance. If my friend had been better informed in
regard to these Yedic hymns, he could never have passed the
eulogy he has upon the morality and elevated conceptions of
the Deity contained in them. I did not expect that he would
refer to these matters to-night, and consequently I am not
furnished with the testimony that would thoroughly establish
this. But I will be to-morrow evening, and I will therefore
pass it by, simply affirming that I have positive knowledge,
from actual personal research, that his statement in connec-
tion with those books is not based upon clear and reliable
testimony.
Now, let me point out to you that my friend altogether
misapprehends the position which he occupies in this debate,
and certainly, although he is a great advocate for reason, he
must permit me to say that, in my humble judgment, he is not
pursuing a reasonable course. You are aware that lam
called upon to prove a proposition, namely, “ The Divine
Origin of Christianity.” I am called upon to prove that
Christianity consists of certain items along with others ; and
Mr. Bright denies that two special items have any part in
Christianity. Now, what have those statements about the
Hindoo religion to do with our proposition to-night ? What
have those disquisitions upon the Deity, that he gave us last
night, to do with our proposition? We are not considering
the nature of the Deity, but the fact as to whether the
Divinity of Christ, and His death as an atonement, are essen-
tial parts of the Christianity announced by Christ and His
Apostles. It appears to me that my position is to present
evidence to establish the definition of Christianity which I
have given, and which Mr. Bright denies, in order that I may
then proceed to establish its Divine origin ; and it is Mr.
Bright’s duty to take the arguments which I present, and
show, if he can, that they are not arguments that can be relied
upon. He has not even attempted to do this. I think the
audience must be convinced, that my friend last night did not
for one moment attempt to grapple with the real subject in
hand I understand that I have a certain duty to perform in
this debate, and although my friend may try to draw me to a
side issue, and which I am willing to debate with him if he
will give me the amount of time necessary, still I am deter-
mined not to be drawn aside from the proposition we have


under consideration. He shall be kept, as far as I can keep
him, to the point, and I will endeavour to keep myself to it.
Mr. Bright may be said to deify reason, for he says that
nothing is of authority above reason, and that everything
must be brought to the bar of his own reason (speaking of
himself), or, making it more universal* to the bar of every
man’s own reason. Now, I quite agree that nothing is above
reason in a sense, providing that we put in the “ Divine”
reason; but if my friend means that nothing is above
“ human” reason, then I draw a clear issue with him, and say
that all the facts of history, and the evidence that comes
from daily experience, are directly opposed to his principle.
Do we not see that it is utterly impossible to find any human
being whose reason is uninfluenced, either by passion, or self-
interest, or inclination of one kind or another, and thus his
reason has not the power of free exercise ? Hence, we find
men under the influence of reason inflamed by passion, be-
coming drunkards, indulging in lying, in swearing, in thieving,
in thousands of vicious practices ; and I ask, if, as my friend
affirms, that what appears to any man’s reason is right to that
man, in the name of reason, what is there in this world to
prevent any man from being guilty of the most atrocious
crimes, and justifying himself in them, if he can reason him-
self into the belief that those crimes are right ? But if I take
my friend’s own comparisons, I say that the insufficiency of
human reason is clearly demonstrated. My friend believes in
a God —as you heard last night—but some of his friends do
not believe in the existence of a God ; and they profess they
are brought to this by their reason. Now, is not this an evi-
dence that mere human reason is not a sufficient guide ? All
the violations of law, all the evils that have arisen in the
world in the past, have been committed under the guidance of
reason, inflamed by passion, by self-interest, or some other
feeling. I would call attention to this fact, that our partially
informed reason cannot always guide us in the discovery of
what is true, inasmuch as if a thing appeared improbable to
my friend, he would reject it, not because the thing was really
untrue, but it might be because of lack of information. You
remember the. Eastern prince who refused to believe that
water congealed under certain circumstances, because it
appeared to be contrary to his reason, and was contrary to
his experience ; and yet it was true. Now, I say that seen
facts, and facts which have been related upon credible testi-


mony, are above human reason, simply because there is no
human being in the world who can say he has such a general
information of all things that have taken place, and of all
things that can possibly take place, as to be able to decide
that any fact that may be stated to him cannot really have
taken place, I say that a man, guided at all by true reason,
would not allow his own partially informed reason to be the
criterion by which he would decide everything that is brought
before him.
My friend professes to consider the idea of Christ’s being
the Son of God as so abhorrent to his nature that he cannot
for a moment accept it. But he accepts some things that are
far more surprising, and far more difficult of belief than this.
Let me put it to this intelligent audience. If it were that
the Divine Father saw it was wise, and for the good of His
creatures on earth, to embody in human form a manifestation
of Himself, and to communicate a knowledge of Himself
through a human being, and to present a perfect example in
human form ; what is there in the nature of things to pre-
vent our believing in the possibility of the Deity thus mani-
festing Himself ? But now, here are points in which my
friend believes, and which to me appear immmensely more
absurd than even he would say this is, and which are in
defiance of reason, of testimony, and of authority. My friend
is an evolutionist. In other words, he believes that we sprang
from a little speck of jelly, that grew in process of time, and
in some way, into an oyster, from an oyster to a seal, and on
from a seal to a monkey, which monkey ultimately became a
man. I ask : Is this consonant with our reason ? If we go
to the rocks, and ask geologists if they keep any record of
this change which he says has taken place —this development
from the smallest speck and through the lower orders of
animal existence to majestic man, as he now is, we are told
that not only is there no testimony from the rocks, but that
their testimony is directly opposed to any such theory. Not
only is there no testimony from our own reason, but our
reason revolts against it as utterly opposed to the intuitions
of our higher nature, and it is not only of no authority, but I
may say that some of the highest scientific minds are not only
opposed to this theory, but say that there are such chasms
that have not been, and cannot be bridged, as render it im-
possible that this theory can hold water, when fairly looked
at. Yet if I understand rightly, my friend believes this


theory, and that without either reason, testimony, or authority.
But more absurd still, my friend believes that man is
infinite or immortal, and yet believes that man, the infinite,
has grown from the finite ! Now, let me ask you if there is
anything in this volume which I hold in my hand (the Bible),
so incomprehensible, so repugnant to our reason, so contrary
to all that human thought could suggest, or that the reasoning
powers of man could demonstrate, as that the finite creature
could grow into the infinite ? Yet my friend believes, that
from the little speck of jelly, the oyster, the seal, the monkey,
have been produced man, whom he terms an infinite and im-
mortal being! I ask, then, what is there in the Scriptures of
Truth that calls upon us to believe anything so monstrous, so
capping the very climax of the absurd, so revolting to our
reason, and our senses, as this which I have mentioned.
Last evening, I showed that Christianity included the
Divinity of Christ, and His death as an atonement, and I gave
proof. You will remember that I cited the Scriptures, and
the early Christian writers ; I quoted profane historians, also
those who were opposed to Christianity, and then I quoted
Strauss. Now my friend rejects this definition of Christianity,
and says : “ I claim the right to define Christianity for my-
self ! ” You will remember that I endeavoured to convince
him of the unreasonableness of that course, by pointing out,
that if we wanted to know what was the Baconian philosophy,
we must go to the writings of Bacon in order to find out
what it was. Now, my friend appeared to be in a state of
confusion, for he said: “We do not take Bacon as an
authority.” The question was not as to the authority of
Bacon ; but, how can we know what Bacon taught, except by
consulting Bacon’s writings P Now, let me give an illustration
from Mr. Bright himself. In the correspondence that took
place between us in the newspapers, he said : “ I should not
have deemed it necessary to communicate further with you
publicly, had you not stated in your last that my position is
generally regarded to be that of an opponent of Christianity.
My position is not generally so regarded hy those who are in
the habit of attending my lectures , and the opinion of others
can be of little value, as it is based rather on ignorance than
knowledge.” Now, my friend in that letter takes it for
granted, that anyone wishing to know what his views are,
must go and hear him ; and that is just what I say in regard
to the subject under consideration, that anyone wanting to


.know what Christianity is, must go to the records where we
have the sayings and doings of Jesus. My friend’s state-
ment, “ I define Christianity for myself,” is the very apex of
unreasonableness instead of reason ; and I call upon him
during the further course of this debate to manifest more
reason in his arguing than he has shown in connection with
this matter.
“ The teachings of Jesus and the example of a life,” Mr.
Eright defines Christianity to be. Now, in my concluding
words I ask him again, as I asked him on the first night, either
to show that the statements I have quoted from this book,
are not the statements of Jesus, and if, in his judgment, they
are not, let him tell us what he takes to be the statements of
Jesus, and which are not, and on what authority he takes or
rejects them ; or, if he cannot do that, let him take the
passages I have cited from Christ’s own words as proof of
the Divine nature of Jesus, and show that I am not giving
them their legitimate meaning. Unless he takes this course,
there is no reason on his side of the debate. It is for him to
meet the arguments I am presenting, and I would say that as
my friend wishes us to reject Christianity, and to accept his
ignus fatuns of human reason, which has led to such disastrous
results in the history of the race, he must give us evidence
that will convince our judgment ere we can do so.
Me. Eeigiit : It is a very fortunate thing for my friend
that he is addressing an audience already for the most part
convinced of the truth of the view he takes. (Strong tokens
ef dissent.) Otherwise he -would indeed be in a very serious
predicament, because he has not yet advanced the slightest
proof why there should be any difference made in taking as
Divine the writings which he believes in, in preference to
other writings believed in by other portions of mankind. He
eimply makes assertions, but he has not advanced one iota of
proof why, when we see in these writings things w'hich are con-
tradictory to observed facts, we should believe them to be true
merely because they are in that book. I say that my ideal
of Christianity must be made to accord with my ideal of
what is true. If it does not accord with that it has to be re-
jected, and so far from my being in a position winch may be
denominated as a muddle, I would leave those who are un-
prejudiced on this question to say wkat sort of a muddle my


friend was in last evening when he attempted to explain how
Jesus of Nazareth was at the same time the Deity, and yet
was less than the Deity; how he was and was not God in per-
son ; how he was equal to the Divine, the Creative, and the
Eternal Power, and yet at one and the same time was some-
thing less. He never attempted to explain how those two
contradictory assertions could be made to agree. My reason
is ready to be convinced if he can advance anything in the
nature of proof of that which he asserts ; but until that is
done, I have just the same right of selecting from those
writings that which appears to me to be true, and rejecting
that which apjDears to me to be false, as I have in the case of
sacred writings published in unfamiliar parts of the world.
I challenge him, also, to show why I am not to act by those
Biblical writings the same as I do by other commingled his-
torical and moral compositions. Take, for instance, the life
of Plato. Am Ito be told that everything which appears in
the life of Plato is to be accepted by me as authoritative
truth, if I agree with the teaching advanced by Plato, and the
morality which he and his friends practised ? Surely I must
accept that which appears to me accordant with proved facts,
with truths of Nature, and reject the rest. Mr. Lewes, in his
“ Biographical History of Philosophy,” states, in regard to
Plato :
“ So great a name as Plato’s could not escape becoming
the nucleus of many fables ; and we find, accordingly, the
later historians gravely repeating all sorts of miraculous
events connected with him. He was said to be the child of
Apollo, his mother a virgin. Ariston, though betrothed to
Perictione, delayed his marriage because Apollo had ap-
peared to him in a dream, and told him that she was with
child.”
There are innumerable fables mentioned by other his-
torians of a somewhat similar character. Now the pro-
position which my friend has to prove, not to the satisfaction
of those who have been trained in a special form of belief,
but to the conviction of a jury previously unacquainted with
the facts of the case, —a jury, say, composed of half a dozen
Buddhists, and half a dozen Hindoos —is : Why mankind
should receive as absolute fact all that is stated in one
published book; but that with another book, published
about some other personages, they may use their reason to
reject all that does not accord with the observed phenomena


of nature, and to accept all that appears to be good and
worthy of acceptance by rational beings? That is the proof I
ask. To prove merely that certain allegations are to be
found in a certain writing —to prove that that writing has for
a long time been received in a certain sense —is absolutely no
proof. Why, for something like 4,000 years known, and an
immense period non-historical, the whole of mankind—not
merely one section of it —believed that the earth was simply
a plain, and comparatively a small one; that the heavens con-
stituted a solid canopy supported on pillars resting on the
outskirts of the earth; that the sun was a luminary which
absolutely rose at one side of the earth and went down at the
other. All that was believed in such a thorough way that
men who contradicted it, because of their clear observation of
facts, were put to death. Tor 800 years that struggle went
on between the rational minds —the freethinkers, the observers
of facts and those who pinned their faith to what had been
believed in the olden days. We know the result. We know
now that a man would be regarded as tremendously ignorant
if he spoke of the Universe as being what it was believed to
be by the ancients. Yet the very book which my friend
holds to be the Word of God contains the statement that at
a certain time the sun was held suspended in its course —that
by some miraculous process the sun was not allowed to move
iu its supposed transit. And for what purpose? That a
certain commander, with a horde of bravos might slaughter a
larger proportion of the enemies opposed to him. If we are
to take everything in that book as absolutely true, without
bringing our reason to bear upon it, we must believe that that
phenomenon occurred, and for the reason therein stated.
A Voice: You cannot prove the contrary.
Me, Height : I know I cannot prove the contrary, but
I can prove that if that is accepted as true, it must produce
in the mind of the believer a lowering and degrading ideal of
the Deity. If the infinite God, to whom we all look— aye,
even those whom my friend terms Atheistic, though they may
ignore the mere name, is to be described as commanding that
the sun shall be stopped in its course in order that there may
be a larger slaughter of His human children by their brethren,
the ideal of the Deity is degraded, and the mind of the man
who entertains that ideal is proportionately impaired and
dwarfed. All I contend for is that rational Christianity stall
be made to coincide with observed facts—that it shall not out-


rage those facts. It is an all important matter that this shall
be, because at the present time the religion set up as some-
thing that is not to be bowed down to and worshipped whether
it be rational or not, is of such a character as to divide man
from man, to prevent humanity uniting as a brotherhood, and
advancing in the path of progress. It is for that reason that
those who are denominated by all sorts of opprobrious names—
Atheists and Infidels desire that the truth should be-
come better known, that people should come to think what
their religion really means, so that it may no longer stand in
the way of men acting together for the public good. By the
fruits of a religion you may judge it, and 1 ask what must be
the nature of that religion which sets up a clannish spirit,
which prevents one man from fraternally acting with another
merely because of a question of opinion ? Why, the othef
day, in a religious paper published here, I saw a strong ob-
jection urged to the course pursued by Mr. Gough, the
teetotal lecturer, because he affirmed he would act with a man
in the temperance cause whether that man was a Christian or
not. Surely it is self-evident that a theology which would
thus attempt to step between man and man, which would en-
courage its disciples to say, “ Stand aside, for I am holier than
thou art being based, as Freethinkers believe, not on truth
but on errors of the past —should give way to a more rational
belief. All that is good in the Christian religion—all its high
morality, all that which says, “ Love thy neighbour as thyself,”
“ love God by performing acts of goodness towards man”—we
should retain. But this barbarous theology, declaring that a man
in order to be saved from some terrible and eternal punishment,
must believe, whether his intellect enables him to believe or
not should be at any rate relegated to the realm of specula-
tion, inasmuch as it cannot be brought down to the platform
of proof. My present objection to the theology advanced by
my friend, and declared by him, rightly or wrongly, to be con-
tained in that book (some people assert that it is not in that
book, but I have nothing to do with that subject, inasmuch as
this is not a debate between a Ilnitarian and a Trinitarian;
it is a debate between a religionist and a freethinker) —my
objection is not so much that the idea of Christ being Deity
is abhorrent to my reason, but that it is a dogma which is not
proved. That is the vital point in this debate. It is a doc-
trin.e which emanates from times when people were not
critical in their judgment when they did not know the
D


characteristics of nature as we know them when they
believed the universe to be a large square plain, and that the
Deity was in the shape of a big man sitting on a throne above
the firmament. But now, when, greatly through the teachings
ef science in the direction which my friend appears to con-
ceive to be so ridiculous—through the hypothesis of evolu-
tion, which is by no means such a new thing as he would
make it out to be—we conceive of an Infinite Mind ruling
the universe by eternal laws which are eternally operative,
we cannot assume as true what was readily received in the
past. "We bring a more critical spirit to bear upon these
questions, and if they cannot prove themselves as facts, we
relegate them to the realm of speculation and poetry.
My friend has made himself merry at the expense of the
evolutionary theory of creation. It forms no part of the
questions before us this evening, but assuredly the idea of
the universe having advanced by eternal laws of the Creative
Mind from primeval fire-mists to a nucleus of matter, con-
taining the potentialities of all the marvellous developments
we see around us, is not more incredible or ridiculous than
the idea that at a certain specific time, and in one corner of
the earth, the Deity stepped down from his heavenly resi-
dence, and moulded a man out of clay like a sculptor w r ould
mould him, and then, discovering that this man wanted a
wife, set him asleep, took a rib from him, and transformed it
into a woman. If we come to the merely extravagant and
ludicrous, surely the latter idea is far more inconceivable than
the former.
Mb. Geeek : I am sure your intelligence must at once
see that there is something far grander and nobler, something
which commends itself more to the intelligent judgment, in
the account of the formation of man given in Genesis, than
in the theory of my friend that we came from that little speck
of jelly which progressed in the way I have described. lam
■quite willing to leave that matter to your judgment.
Now my friend took up Strauss’s statement, that Chris-
tianity must be made to coincide with ascertained facts. But
suppose that some person was writing a work on geography
in the country of that Eastern prince I have mentioned, and
that a traveller came to the writer and said, “ In describing
certain parts of the globe, such as England, America, and
46
The Divine Origin of Christianity.


other countries, it will be necessary to mention that water,
under certain atmospheric influences, congeals, and becomes
so hard that people are able to walk over it.” The writer
replies, “Oh ! not at all. It is contrary to ascertained facts,
and in writing on geography, of course we must make it
coincide with ascertained facts.” Now I would ask: Are
that man’s “ascertained facts” the whole of the facts of
nature P And does my friend, acting in the same spirit, pre-
tend to arrogate to himself such a wide, universal knowledge,
that he can state what, in every part of our globe, coincides
with fact? The thing is absurd upon the face of it. And in
■connection with the manifestation of the Deity in human
form, you will observe that he has not attempted to show that
the Christian doctrine of Divine manifestation is at all more
absurd than that of the creation or growth of an infinite being
out of a finite being, as he holds.
Now let me say in regard to one portion of my friend’s
speech, that I was very sorry to hear it, because he was
evidently appealing to the lower feelings of the audience when
he talked about certain things mentioned in the Bible as in
bis judgment wrong. In proving the Divine origin of
Christianity we have nothing to do with the slaughtering of
the Amalekites, or with any of these other things written in
the book, and to which my friend objects. lam prepared to
defend all that is there sanctioned if my friend is willing to
take it up, and he need not fear any unwillingness on my
part to meet him on those points. But I say those matters
have nothing to do with the question now in hand ; and you
must have seen that he did not attempt to meet the point
really before us. If he allows me to take it for granted that
bis definition of Christianity rests simply upon his mere
assertions, and that he wants us to take it upon his authority
—which authority, in the case of others, he so denounces—l
am willing to let it rest there. But you will see clearly by
his silence, that he has been compelled to admit that his
definition of Christianity is purely arbitrary, and utterly
irrational, and contrary to all reason. He asks, “ Why are
we to accept this book above all other books ?” Now I have
not said a word during this debate about inspiration. It is
not our proposition. I take the facts of the Bible just as I
am bound to take the facts in the History of England or
Erance, or of any past age, if that history comes down to me
upon testimony that cannot with reason be refuted. A man


would be regarded as a simpleton who refused to accept the
facts of history. So I say in connection with the history of
Christianity in this book. During this debate I take it simply
as credible history, and upon this 1 am willing to rest my
case. In answer to my friend’s request, I will now give you
a brief outline of some of the evidence on which we accept it
as credible history.
Last evening my friend spoke of the deterioration of
manuscripts. Let me say that Scripture manuscripts have
not deteriorated more than classical manuscripts, nor more
than is reasonable, when we consider that in copying all
written documents, there must be many clerical errors, such
as the wrong spelling of a name, leaving out letters, inserting
a pronoun instead of a proper noun, &c. Now, unless he
will say, that because these errors are in the classical
manuscripts, we must therefore reject them, he cannot say
that because similar errors are in the Scripture manuscripts
we ought to reject them. Of the work of Cicero, called De
Amicitia , one thousand copies were made from the original
copy carefully written out by Tiro his freedman; and although
Atticus, Ins friend and publisher, sought out the cleverest
copyists to be found, of those thousand copies no two of
them agreed with each other. Therefore, we say that although
there lias been great care shown in the copying and preserva-
tion of Scripture manuscripts, yet there have been such errors.
But as my friend accepts the classics as being substantially
the same as written by their authors ; so we say, that on the
same grounds, the manuscripts of the New Testament are to
be received. Now, the oldest manuscript of the classical
authors, that of the historian Herodotus, does not date back
more than to the ninth century, and there are only fifteen
manuscripts by this author, whereas we have more than one
thousand manuscripts of the Scriptures, more than fifty of
which are more than one thousand years old. The Alexan-
drian manuscript dates to the middle of the fourth century ;
the Vatican manuscript is even older; and the Siuaitie
manuscript, to which reference was made last night, comes
evidently, very nearly to the beginning of the third
century.
My friend spoke of the Epistle of Barnabas, and of the
Shepherd of Hermas, found by Tischendorf in the nunnery or
Convent of Mount Sinai, as if those books were recently dis-
covered, and were regarded as newly discovered inspired


writings. Now, no person read in ecclesiastical history was
ignorant that the Epistle of Barnabas, and the Shepherd of
Hermas, were books known and read in the second century,
and extracts from which had been preserved in the work of
Eusebius. If I did not misunderstand my friend, he also
said that some of the books we have in our New Testament
are not found in that Sinaitic manuscript. Let me say that
if I understood him rightly, he is in error. That Sinaitic
manuscript dates doubtless to the early part of the third
century, within about 170 or 180 years of the death of Christ;
and with the exception of the latter part of the Gospel of
Mark, and the first eleven verses of the Bth chapter of John,
the authenticity of which was questioned long before this
manuscript was discovered, all the ether portions of our
Scriptures are found complete in that ancient manuscript.
Now, is there one cl issical author of whom we have manu-
scripts of such a date as this ? IVe see that from these three
manuscripts alone—the Alexandrian, the Vatican, and the
Sinaitic—’we get a purer text of the Scriptures, than can be
obtained of any one of the classical authors, whose writings
are taken without question in the present day,
Now let me proceed to a few more facts. I would say
that it is not needful to go back to prove that those books
existed centuries ago, because we have the admission of
Strauss, in the first volume of his “Life of Jesus,” which I
hold in my hand, that in the year 150, beyond all question,
tie first three Gospels were i i existence; and he admits that,
between the years 170 and 180, all the four Gospels, as we
now substantially have them, were inexistence. Now, mark,
this is the admission of Strauss, one of the most bitter and
most learned opponents of Christianity in modern times, and
we take this admission of an enemy as irrefragable proof of
our position, that our New Testament, as it is now, existed in
the year 175, and that that testimony cannot be refuted.
But I likewise hold in my hand the work of Ernest Re-
nan, and he states that, in his work, Strauss has paid too
much attention to the theological, and too little to the his-
torical view of the question—that he has passed over the
historical facts with insufficient consideration. Renan de-
clares in the introduction to his book, that the Gospel by
John —which is the one most questioned of all in the present
day (though not anciently), because of its clear teachings as
to the Divinity of Christ, was so widely known, and generally


accepted in the year 150, that it was quoted from on all sides-
without the slightest question. Not only so, but Kenan states
that the whole of our four Gospels, when the historical
testimony is fairly taken into account, must be placed within
the first century of the Christian era. Now, let me read an
extract from the historian Eroude, showing the bearing of
this fact upon our position. He says ; —“ If, as English com-
mentators confidently tell us, the Gospel of St. Matthew,,
such as we now possess it, is undoubtedly the work of the
publican -who followed our Lord from the receipt of custom,
and remained with Him to he a witness of His ascension; if
St. John was written by the beloved disciple who lay on Jesus’
breast at supper; if the other tw 7 o were indeed the composition
of the companions of St. Peter and St. Paul; if in these
four Gospels we have independent accounts of our Lord’s
life and passion, mutually confirming each other, and if it can
be proved that they existed, and were received as authentic,
in the first century of the Christian Church, a stronger man
than M. Kenan will fail to shake the hold of Christianity in
England.” * And with all due deference to my respected
friend, I would say that, unless he can shake the evidence
which I have just very briefly and imperfectly outlined, but
which lam prepared to present more at large; unless he can
show that these narratives were not written within the first
century of the Christian era, I have no hesitation in saying,
that it will take many more men than he, and of far greater
mental power, to shake the hold of Christianity on the people
of New Zealand, Australia, England, and of the world ; for
while those testimonies remain, I care not whether they are
regarded as inspired narratives, or as simple histoiies, and
considering what those men who wrote them had to suffer
for no earthly good that they could gain, no power on earth,
no human ingenuity, no human skill or eloquence, can at all
destroy their influence over the minds, and, we thank God,
also over the hearts and affections of myriads of our fellow
human beings, whom they have raised, and elevated, and made
happy, by their cheering promises, by their pure and elevated
morality, and by their description of a Being of infinite love,
of infinite mercy, and at the same time, of infinite justice,
and who has manifested that love in a scheme which is in
harmony with man’s nature, and in adaptation to all his
wants, and to the dearest aspirations of the human spirit.
# Short Studies, page 207.


Me. Beight : The chief question in this debate, my
friend seems entirely to lose sight of, viz.—that it is a question
of dogma as against reason. My friend introduces such an
argument as, that an Eastern prince did not believe in the
formation of ice, because he had never seen it formed, and the
testimony relative to its formation was insufficient. That was
a very proper position for the Eastern prince to take up. Why
should he believe in the formation of ice, if he had insufficient
evidence of the fact? By-and-bye, after he had ample
evidence of the phenomenon occurring, he would accept it
and believe. But here lies the whole point. We assert that
we are asked to believe a marvellous story on insufficient evi-
dence, or on no evidence whatever; that dogma, and not evi-
dence is thrust down our throats. The moment we can get
testimony which our reason accepts, that moment, as a matter
of course, everything becomes clear, as it would with those
who, having hitherto had no evidence regarding the formation
of ice, declined to believe in it until approved on good testi-
mony, This is a process which is perpetually being performed.
Science is continually advancing, in despite of incredulity,
into the domain where it compels submission to that which it
declares to be true. But how does it compel submission?
Not merely by assertion, not by pointing to its formulas in
ancient writings, not by showing that men believed so at a
time when they were credulous and not scientific, but simply
by demonstrating it —just as Newton demonstrated the law
according to which the heavenly bodies move. By mathematical
calculations he showed that a body like the moon, for instance,
must move precisely with the rapidity with which the moon
moved, if his law was correct, and he pointed to what abso-
lutely occurred as proof of what he advanced. That is the
way science challenges our acceptance. But hero it is dogma
we are speaking of.
My friend seems to me to surrender the entire question
in dispute when he says that those infallible Scriptures—the
word of Grod put into black and white —if we do not accept
which, we are told we shall be condemned to an eternity of
torment, are, forsooth, only a little freer from error than cer-
tain classical manuscripts, regarding which it scarcely matters
anything what our opinions maybe. It seems to me that
everything is surrendered if that is the view he accepts. I
ask, where is the infallibility, where the truth, of every word
within that book, so that upon the authority of that book


alone, we are to believe that certain occurrences took place
that our mind would otherwise reject ? Where is that infal-
libility gone if we are simply to consider that book in the
same way as we would consider a manuscript of Cicero’s ?
That is the position I am maintaining, but surely not the
position of my friend. That is the view in favour of which
lam arguing. I say : Take that book, and look at it with the
same rational eye with which you would examine the writings
of Homer. Take within it all that is good and beautiful, all
that can be made to advance humanity farther than it is at
present; and reject all that is degrading, or opposed to scien-
tific conclusions. That is my line of argument, and I cannot
understand my friend taking up the same position, and put-
ting those writings forward to be examined in the same way
as writings about which it matters not what our opinion may
be. In dealing with a subject where dogma is thrust at us,
we have to deal with it far differently to any question where it
does not signify much what our belief may be. That Eastern
prince would be just as well off, disbelieving in the formation
of ice as believing in it, except that he would be minus the
knowledge of one fact of natural truth. But we are told
that if we disbelieve the Deity of Jesus, all eternity before us
is to be of a dismal and horrible nature. Surely the two
things cannot for a moment be brought into comparison. When
we have it dinned in our ears that our personal salvation de-
pends upon some specific form of belief, our reply is that the
evidence on which that belief rests, must be of a character far
more conclusive in its nature than that affecting the critical
aspects of certain Grecian or Eoman manuscripts.
My friend affirms that the statement he puts forward—
the theology he advances —is not merely part of Christianity,
but is absolutely true and rests on demonstrable testimony
and credible history. My argument is that it rests upon in-
credible history and insufficient testimony, and that so soon as
our reason is free to act, his theology is rejected ; that we see
nothing like it happening around us ; that there are no such
marvellous occurrences now as he believes in—no such un-
natural incidents as many of those described in the book
which he declares to be entirely the Word of God. That is
the reason why those who think freely say : We reject this
because it is not borne out by what we observe around us. But
my friend asks, do I know all the observed facts of nature ?
!No —of course Ido not. But when I have to reason for my


own satisfaction, as Pope asks;—“How can I reason but
from what I know ?” From what other foundation am Ito
reason ? I do not profess to know all things, but when I
come to reason on any question of history or nature, I can
only reason from the knowledge I possess from my own ob-
servation, or such testimony of others as seems to me to be
credible and trustworthy. That is the way all men through-
out Christendom, act by every writing in the known world,
save and except the Bible. My question to my friend—and it
is a question that remains unanswered —is : Why am Ito bow
my intellect before that writing and that alone, and in all
other eases to judge by m 3" reason, by my knowledge of ob-
served facts, and by what appears to me to be natural truth ?
That is the question I put to my friend. It is useless to
point out that certain things are in a certain book ; or that
that book was written at this or that date. If the men were
here and wrote the book now, and declared that every word
was inspired by G-od, why are we not to use our reason re-
garding their utterances and writings ? The question at
stake between us turns on that point. A revelation to one
man is not a revelation to any other man. A revelation to a
man who may be writing before me, and who may say that
what he is writing has been revealed to him by the Divine
Mind, is no revelation to me. It would merely be a statement
by that man that he had something revealed to him, and then
it would be a question for me to consider whether or not his
alleged revelation were true; which means, whether or not it
were in accordance with the ordinarily observed facts of
nature. Therefore all the argument my friend is advancing
regarding the date of the writing of those Scriptures is
beside the (question. Rational men must use their reason
upon those Scriptures ; and incidents like that of a man living
three days and nights in a fish’s belly", or of another man
slaying a thousand Philistines with the jaw-bone of an ass,
may bo regarded by them just as incredible when found in the
Bible, as if put forward in Homer, in the Yedas, or in any
other ancient MS. Therefore, throughout the Scriptures, the
same as through those other writings, my reason must operate.
I dare not, I cannot abandon it simply because certain inci-
dents appear in one book rather than in another book.
The word “ Christianity ” is used by my friend as if,
when he used it, he had stated something specific beyond the
definition as it stands in the debate now being argued. But


his Christianity differs materially from the Christianity of the
Homan Catholic Church, the Presbyterian Church, or the
Episcopalian Church. The Roman Catholic Church com-
prises, at the lowest estimate, 180 millions of followers, who
conceive that the dogma of the Virgin Mary being the Queen
of Heaven, is part of Christianity. In that respect their
Christianity is something opposed to the Christianity of my
friend, and yet they likewise affect to base their faith upon
what they conceive to be the Divine Word. When he uses
this term “ Christianity,” he ought to remember that in this
debate it simply means what he has explained it to mean :
the Deity of Jesus, and his death as an atonement for man’s
sin. We cannot go beyond that, and these are the two points
which, if he wishes to convince those who do not think as he
thinks, he is si ill called upon to prove —to prove in some shape
or way, so that our reason may accept them as Divine truths —
so that we may see that this man, who lived nearly 2,000 years
ago, was truly and really the Deity—and so that we may know
—because he has scarcely as yet touched upon that question
—that his death was an atonement for man’s sin, and that our
belief in that death (for I presume that would be part of
what he would state) is necessary for our salvation. We
want some distinct proof of that—something more than its
being written in a particular book ; for we all know that the
doctrine assumes to be based on what is written in those
ancient MSS. No Freethinker denies that; no one has the
temerity to assert that it is not written there in some shape. We
know that divers people put a different interpretation
upon those writings in many ways. We know that vast num-
bers of Christians deny that there is any proof of the Divi-
nity of Jesus in that book. But that is not what lam here to
debate. Let some Unitarian debate that. But what I hold is
that I, as a Freethinker, have a right to reason through and
through that volume, and that anything therein contained not
acceptable to my reason, I, acting for my individual self alone,
am justified in rejecting.
Mb. G-eeen : That matter of the Eastern prince and the
formation of ice, is rather a stumbling block in the way of my
friend, for this reason : my friend’s principle is, that whatever
appears to be true to my reason, and his reason, and the
reason of every other person, is true to that person. But the


mere denial of the existence of ice by the Eastern prince, did
not make the existence of ice not to be a fact; and therefore
I saiq that just as my friend is not fully informed of the
evidence in connection with Christianity, his rejection of
Christianity does not make Christianity untrue. I would say
further, that, while I shall not be drawn from the point by his
statement about damnation, &c., that if Grod has not given
sufficient evidence to convince every reasoning man who will
impartially and carefully consider the evidence that he has
given in support of Christianity, he could not with justice,
judge or condemn any for not accepting it. But just as the
man, who knows he cannot walk on air, if he steps over this
platform, must come to grief by falling on the floor, and can
keep himself from doing it by knowledge and reason, so G-od,
who has a right to impose laws on His creatures, does so for
our good, and if He has given us evidence that those laws do
emanate from Him, then, if the punishment which comes from
the violation of law comes upon us, it results from our own
ignoring of that which reason —which our own intuitions,
springing from our relationship to our Creator, would teach
us ought to have been observed.
In regard to this statement of my friend that
Christianity began in a non-critical period, I may say that it
is just like some other of his statements —not based on
sufficient evidence. May I ask if Plato, Zeno, Zenophon,
Socrates, and others, had no critical acumen F If not, then
may I ask, why those samples of ancient eloquence have not
only been handed down to the present time, but are even
models in our seminaries and universities ? My friend knows
—I cannot presume that he is ignorant—that the age in which
Christianity arose was not a mythical age; that, leaving out of
consideration the present enlightenment of the modern age,
there never was a period of more enlightenment, or a period
when philosophy was more highly cultivated, and critical
acumen keener, than the time when Christianity began. And
I say, that if such a system could not begin in the present
day, and claim to be founded on miracles, without the most
convincing evidence being given, because of the critical
acumen of the people now living, neither could it have arisen
in that age, for we see that, in regard to powers of reasoning,
in regard to keen sightedness as to things that were ludicrous
and absurd, that age will bear favourable comparison with the
age in which we live. I say that if my friend asserts the


contrary, he manifests that he has insufficiently read the his-
tory of those times.
He says that Christianity rests on incredible history.
TV hy ? Simply because it declares that miracles were wrought.
How, why is it incredible? Simply because miracles have not
been wrought before his eyes. But because miracles are not
wrought in my presence, does that prove that miracles have
not heen wrought, and never can be? Do you not see my
friend’s process of reasoning ? While it is the reasoning of
that “ modern man of God,” whom my friend appears to
admire—i avid Hume—it is certainly not reasoning that will
commend itself to the judgment of those who think that
unless we can comprehend the entire scheme of the Universe,
unless we can know the working of the Divine Being in all
things, we cannot say that the working of miracles is contrary
to all experience. It may be contrary to mine, but it may not
be to that of other persons. I would say here, that if wehave
miracles presented to us upon credible testimony, as being
wrought in the presence of a number of individuals; if those
miracles were such as were cognisable by the senses ; if in
connection with those miracles, institutions were established
which have continued down to the present day ; and, if the
record of those miracles was written by those who saw them,
then I challenge anyone to say that the miracles in support of
which this testimony is given, can, in the nature of things, be
false. If miracles, proved by such testimony, are not reliable,
then there is no proof that my friend sits at’this table writing
at the present moment, because nothing in the wide Universe
can be demonstrated to man.
How, let me make a remark as to my Christianity differ-
ing from that of other persons. I have nothing to do with
who it may differ from. It is the Christianity of this book —
the Bible —that lam defending. If my friend is opposing
the evils that have crept into so-called Christianity, if he is
opposing its excrescences, and unlawful accretions, I would
say to him over this table, “ Give me your hand, and we are
united to pull down all human additions, and to destroy every-
thing that has not upon it the stamp of Divine authority.” It
is the Christianity that came from Jesus and from His Apostles,
that I am advocating, nothing more and nothing less—and
believing, as I do, that if there is anything true under the
heavens, it is true, I hope to defend it until life shall cease.


Let me just call your attention to another point. He
asks: Why are we to accept the statements of this book?
reply to that: Just as we accept credible history; and as no
sane man would be considered justified in refusing to accept
the facts of history which have been recorded on reliable
testimony, so in connection with this matter, if it can be
proved that those witnesses are reliable, then their evidence is
to be received. How, although my friend has talked about an
infallible book and inspiration (you see he keeps wide of the
point we have before us), and has given us this question of
the definition of Christianity, he evidently feels that that is
a point too warm to touch upon further. But I say that
with regard to the infallibility of this book, I have not said
one word. I am prepared to prove the Divine origin of
Christianity upon the simple fact of the credibility of these
writers as historians. If it were necessary. I would be pre-
pared to establish their inspiration ; but with a freethinker—
with my friend—who does not believe in inspiration, it would
be foolish for me to take that inspiration for granted, which
would need to be proved. How, lam trying to prove Chris-
tianity upon the ground that these accounts are credible
histones, and if my friend denies they are credible, I will be
prepared to give further evidence to establish that point.
With regard to the testimony which we have in this
book, I just wish to say further, that from a.d. 175 or I
might say from MO up to a.d. 202 or 220, there lived’ three
men Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, and Iremeus.
Clement of Alexandria lived in Egypt, and may be said to
speak for the Christians of Egypt and Palestine. Tertullian
wrote at Carthage, and may be said to speak for Horth Africa
and Italy; while Iremeus, who lived at Smyrna, but who
wrote at Lyons, may be said to speak for Asia Minor and
Western Europe. Those three men declared that during their
lifetime, and we may take it to include as far back as their
memories carried them, our four Gospels were accepted as the
productions of Matthew and John, who were apostles, and of
Mark and Luke, the companions of apostles, and that testi-
mony Strauss and Eenan accept. How, we may take this
further position: We have Irenseus, a disciple of Polycarp
who was a disciple of John the apostle. Here is a chain of
three links: Iremeus, Polycarp, and John. How, leaving
the three Gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke, for the pre-
sent, and dealing simply with the Gospel of John, I ask •


Could that Gospel have been fabricated during the lifetime of
Irenseus P Pemember that he proved his sincerity by dying
in attestation of his faith in Christ. If he knew that the
Gospel of John, and the other Gospels, were not in existence
in the early part of his lifetime, and that years later, they
came into existence as forgeries, and not as the result of
Apostolic writing, would he have died in support of their
claim ? Then, supposing you say that they were forged in the
days of Poly carp. But he, too, died as a martyr. Can we
suppose that he would die in support of that which he knew
to be false ? Can we suppose that this Gospel was forged
during John’s lifetime, and that he did not denounce it Plt
is simply preposterous. Now, notice ; No doubt John would
tell Polycarp, his disciple, what were the Scriptures written
by the Apostles, and the other authentic records of Jesus;
Polycarp, teaching Irenseus, would declare to him those
Scriptures which were of authority, and of which he had been
informed by John. 1 ask my friend to break that compact
chain of three links. I say it is unbreakable, and so long as
that chain remains, the basis on which those Scriptures rest,
may be said to be unassailable. I have not said all that may
be said in order to show that these witnesses are credible, but
I wdsh to pass on to another point before I close to-night; and
that is to show the reason why we accept Christianity as being
of Divine origin.
I have proved —and my friend cannot disprove—that the
Divinity of Christ, and the atonement, are parts of Christian-
ity, and I now, therefore, proceed to the second part of my
proposition. But before doing so, let me just mention —
having shown the grounds on which we accept the New Tes-
tament—that, with regard to the Old Testament, we have an
equally reliable foundation. In the work of Josephus,
“ Antiquities of the Jews,” 12th Book, 2nd chapter, you will
see an account there given how Ptolemy Philadelphia, having
heard of the existence of the Jewish records, desired to obtain
them, and wrote to Dleazar, the High Priest of the Jews
asking him to send the manuscripts of their scriptures, and to
select six persons from each of the twelve .tribes, to go to
Egypt to translate those books into the Greek language, that
he might have them in his large and extensive collection.
Now, Josephus declares that this was done, and therefore, we
have clear evidence that, at least 280 years before Christ, the
Old Testament Scriptures, as we now have them, were trans-


lated into the G-reek language, and circulated among the
Hellenist Jews, so long before the things predicted in them
are said to have been fulfilled. And further, in regard to the
Hook of Daniel, which is a hardly contested book, you will find
it stated in the ilth Book of Josephus, 7th and Bth chapters,
that when Alexander was intent upon destroying Jerusalem,
the priests came out in procession to meet the conqueror, and
that Alexander gave up his intention of destroying Jerusalem,
because the high priest pi'oduced the Book of Daniel, and
showed it to him, in which it was predicted that one from the
‘Greeks should conquer Asia, and which he took to have refer-
ence to himself.
Me. Beight : My friend says that my rejection of Chris-
tianity does not prove it to be false. That is no argument
whatever, because a Roman Catholic would say that my
friend’s rejection of the infallibility of the Roman Catholic
Church does not prove that to be false. Of course my rejec-
tion of anything does not prove it to be false; but the ques-
tion to be settled in this debate is not the question of my re-
jection, or anyone else’s rejection of alleged facts, but the
proof, or lack of proof, upon which those alleged facts are
based. My friend implies there is the same certainty of the
truth of what he terms Christianity, as there is that if wo step
off this platform into the air, we shall have a fall. The latter
fact, as the French say, may go without saying. Anyone
would know at once, that on stepping off a height into space,
he would have a fall. But it is equally clear that a person
stepping from the ground on which my friend stands —the
ground of the Deity of Jesus, and of his death as an atone-
ment for man’s sin— and trusting entirely to nature and
science, would therefore be subjected to a fall ? Have we seen
no grand lives lived by those who have denied my friend’s
dogmas ? Why, the greater number of the celebrated names
of later times are the names of men —and women too who
have denied these things. Let anyone read the autobiography
of Harriet Martineau, for instance, and see how that brave
woman lived for 21 years under sentence of death, passed
upon her by her doctors, who told her she was suffering from
heart disease and could not call an hour her own. She lived
after that, 21 years of public usefulness and calm happiness
and yet without one vestige of this belief which my friend


says is so necessary. Where shall we look for nobler lives
than those of Channing and Theodore Parker P At this mo-
ment nearly all the great men in the ranks of science and
philosophy are men who do not believe in this Deityship—
men like Darwin, Tyndall, Haeckel, and Huxley. I could
mention nearly all the scientific men of our time as men of
that character. I could refer to Draper, Lewes (who is just
dead, and who was the husband of George Eliot), George Eliot
herself, Walt AVhitman the poet, Froude the historian, Carlyle,
Herbert Spencer, Alfred Russell Wallace the great naturalist,
Crookes, Buchner the German scientist, Swinburne, Gambetta,
Newman, Greg, Lecky, Lord Amberley (now dead, from
whose book I quoted), and scores upon scores of others. I
ask, therefore, is it as certain that those who step from the
belief that my friend holds step from a stronghold into help-
lessness, as it is certain that if you step off this platform you
lose your foothold ? I say it is not a fall to step off: a belief
which is unsupported by rational evidence. On the contrary,
it is an elevation to a higher and purer atmosphere.
1 think that my friend must have been rather attempting
to play upon our credulity, when he said that the events to
which he referred —the events which he is endeavouring to
prove true happened in an age which we may term critical.
Doubtless, in other portions of the world, There were critical
men living—men w r ho would have given the events to which
my friend refers, a very different consideration to that which
they received from the few ignorant people cognizant of
them. We find that these very events which are recorded in
the Bible to have occurred —marvellous events, like a darkness
coming over the face of the earth for at least three hours—
are not chronicled elsewhere. Gibbon, the historian, draws
prominent attention to this point. At that time there were
living the elder Pliny, and Seneca, the philosopher, whose prin-
cipal satisfaction it was to take a note of all marvels then hap-
pening ; and yet this marvel, wEich out-marvels all marvels,
and that other marvel of the graveyards giving up their dead,
found no record in the writings of these men. Therefore, I
say, so far as the testimony of the men of experience as
critics in that age goes, it tells strongly against the allegations
put forward, and not in their favour. Moreover, the historian
Josephus, who is regarded as in the main a credible chroni-
cler, and who absolutely writes concerning that very
neighbourhood and period, taking a note of some of the mi-


nutest events said to have occurred, positively takes no notice
of those marvels which my friend alleges to have happened.
Doubtless, there is one paragraph in his large history which
does speak of Jesus Christ, and says of him : “If it be lawful to
call him a man.” But that paragraph is so evidently one
interpolated at a later day, that there are very few people at
this time, however prejudiced they may be in favour of those
alleged facts that my friend is supporting, who will attempt to
hold that this paragraph is a part of the true and original
writing of Josephus. Therefore, I say that all the testimony,
so far as criticism at that period is adducible, tells immensely
against the position which my friend occupies. But even, as I
said before, if there were far more evidence in those writings
than can be found in them, favourable to such a marvellous
phenomenon as that of a man being the Deity, still we are
entitled to use our reason upon them. Are we, at this day,
to be placed in a different position towards those alleged
occurrences to that occupied by the very men who are put
forward as contemporaries of Jesus himself? Are we not to
exercise our judgment upon them, when we are told that one
of his own apostles declined to believe merely in the resurrec-
tion of him whom we are now assured was the Deity ? One
of his closest followers declined to believe in that resurrection
unless he had an opportunity of touching and seeing. Are we
—those amongst us who think for ourselves —now to believe
on the evidence of remote and unknown witnesses, simply
because these marvels have for so long passed current as truth?
All religious marvels and doctrines are believed until they
come to be critically examined, and the age of free and
critical examination of these alleged Christian truths is only
just now commencing, (Expressions of dissent.) I assert —
and defy contradiction—that the time is only now arriving
when, for instance, such a fundamental debate as this would
be patiently listened to by an audience like that I see before
me.
Me. G-eeeit : I would like to ask my friend what Harriet
Martineau’s dying peacefully has to do with evidence against
the Divine Origin of Christianity ? I would ask also : Is he,
who is the denouncer of all authority, now to ask us to bow
down before this august assembly of names that he has re-
peated in our hearing ? Can we not, on the other side, men-


tion Sir Francis Bacon, who believed in Christianity; Sir Isaac
Newton, and numbers of others —the highest ornaments in
the constellation of the literary world ? I do dot care to
mention those names, because I do not accept the authority of
names. I believe in the use of reason in thoroughly sifting
evidence which may be presented to the mind. But when, by
the use of reason, I am convinced that the Divine Being is
speaking, then I say that I must accept the statements of
the Divine Being, even where, as in some cases it may be, Ido
not understand the reason of them, and while I may know the
fact that is stated, I cannot explain how the things that are
mentioned can really be. I say there is a province for reason
and a province for faith.
My friend again says that Christianity was not born in a
critical age. I have simply to reiterate what I said before.
Does my friend mean to say that even in Judea, where those
events took place, there were not critical men ? Was not
Philo, who has written one of the most learned treatises on
philosophy, a Jew? Was not Josephus, one of the most
able —indeed, w r e may say, the most able —historians of that
time, a Jew ? I ask, were not the miracles of the apostles
wrought in learned Greece, in Ephesus, in Corinth, and in the
various cities of those parts ? I say again, my friend is
manifesting that he has not taken sufficiently into account the
evidence presented, or he could not affirm that it was not the
very highest period of the critical age, that existed prior to
these modern days,
I will just call your attention in my concluding time to
one or two thoughts in connection with the Divine Origin of
Christianity. I would ask you : Supposing that we conceived
it possible that the Divine Being would communicate a religion
for the guidance of man, can any man say it is not possible ?
And when we conceive the relationship of the Creator to the
creature, and the need of that creature to be guided; when
we conceive the love which the great Universal Father must
have for his children, does it not amount to a certainty that
he would not leave them in the midst of the quicksands and
shoals of life without some guide in order to direct them, and
save them from misguided reason, inflamed by passion, self-
interest, and all the other influences so powerfully operating
around us on every side ?
Now, admitting the possibility of a system of religion
being made known to man, then the question arises as to how


it would be possible to prore to man that such a religion was
Divine. You and I, as reasonable persons, must admit that a
religion which professes to be of Divine origin must have
testimonials which could not be expected in the case of one
which merely claimed to be human. If we are called upon to
accept as an emanation from the Deity anything whatever, we
must have evidence in harmony with the nature of that Deity,
to prove that this system is not one which could have originated
with man, but must have originated with the Divine Being
Himself. Is not this really undoubted ? Can any person
say it is contrary to reason ? I would ask further : What
line of proof could God give to us that this system of religion
He had presented was really from Himself ? There are two
ways in which it might be done. One would be by predict-
ing the coming of this system hundreds of years before the
event, and by describing the nature and general character of
the person by whom the system was to be brought into
operation, so that when the event took place, those living at
the time of the fulfilment would be clearly enabled to see
that the predictions had reference thereto. That is one
way.
Further, if God was pleased to commission some person
to make known this system of religion to the world, is it not
reasonable that that person who claims to be the Divine
messenger should give us credentials proving that he possessed
powers such as we do not possess ? If I came to any of you
and said : “ My friend, I am inspired by God to speak to you
as I do,” would my saying so be proof of my inspiration ?
Suppose a number of men came to you, and said they were
commissioned by the Almighty, would their statement make
that an actual fact F We would naturally say : “If God sent
a messenger, He would give him credentials ; those credentials
must be of a nature that a man could not manifest without
the aid of God ; and therefore we ask you for your credentials.”
Seeing that it is beyond the power of mortal man to foresee a
long concatenation of events, and to predict them, exactly as
to time and general circumstances, I ask : When we find such
a large body of predictions uttered hundreds of years before
the event, and when we find that those predictions are actually
fulfilled, is not that evidence of the Divine origin of the
system that was predicted in them P But if. in addition to
this, we have the person who Himself introduced it, giving us
His credentials by working miracles, is it not just what would


have been expected nnder the circumstances P If I can
prove that these two lines of evidence were found in connec-
tion with Christianity, have I not established that it is of
Divine Origin in a sense in which no other religion in the
world can be said to be Divine, unless it will produce this-
same credentials —which, I affirm, no other religion in the
w-orld can at all produce ? I will not enter to-night upon
details, but will reserve them till to-morrow night. I will say,
however, that these two points are w'ell wmrthy of your con-
sideration. I say again, it is a possibility, as we must admit,
that God not only might, but ■would, communicate to His off-
spring some lesson for their guidance —some religion w'hereby
they might know' how to act. I say, in opposition to my
friend, that the ancient philosophers wanted authority —they
had reason , and were sick of it. If my friend reads the
dialogue between Socrates and Alcibiades, he wall see how
that wise sage dissuaded Alcibiades from going to offer prayer
to the Deity, because they needed someone to declare to them
the character of the Deity, and how they might offer
acceptable prayer. We see that the ancients w r ere pining for
someone w’ho could speak as from God. Their reason led
them into quagmires. They felt that their reason could give
them no certain knowledge as to their past history, their
present position, or their future destiny : and hence they
pleaded for authority. This intuition of their nature,
we say, seems to point to the reasonableness of that w'hich is
presented in the religion of Christ.


THIRD EVENING.
SHE CHAIRMAN: Ladies and G-entlemen—Before the
debate is re-commenced, I wish to announce that Mr.
Green has exercised his right to ask for a fourth night,
-as he thinks it necessary for the completion of his argument.
Before the debate was opened it was agreed that either of the
disputants should be entitled to claim a fourth night’s debate.
The debate will, therefore, be continued and concluded on
next Saturday night.
Mr. Greek : Mr. Chairman and respected hearers; Be-
fore resuming the thread of the argument at the point at
which I left off last night, I think it right to advert to one or
two things that have been mentioned by Mr. Bright during
the course of the debate thus far. You will remember that
on the first evening, in his opening address, my friend ap-
pealed to you for sympathy, because he regarded himself as
coming before an audience, under circumstances such as the
present, for the first time ; and feeling that a tremendous
amount of responsibility rested upon him, he claimed, on that
account, your indulgence and sympathy. Now, since that
statement was made, I have revolved it over and over in my
mind; and I would just suggest to my friend, with all defer-
ence, that the “ tremendous responsibility” which rested upon
him, came at the time when he set himself to oppose that
which he is here to-night—and has been for the last two
nights —for the purpose of endeavouring to destroy. And
when I remember the statement that I have repeatedly heard
since I came to your city, how he.has for the past year been
challenging all the ministers of Dunedin to defend their
position, I must confess I am at a loss to understand that ad
misericordiavi appeal with which my friend began his address
on the first evening.


Last evening, also, he seemed to be in the same strain,
Now, I know not who are sympathisers, or who are not. I
believe this audience is set to a critical frame of mind, to
judge of the arguments, and I thought last night, that it was-
hardly wise or fair for my friend to suggest, when he saw the
argument had produced a certain impression, that it was
because the chief part of the audience were sympathisers with
the views I was presenting. Now, certainly it is not the
interest of the audience to believe in that which is untrue ;
and if my friend can present arguments which will undermine
the foundations of Christianity, 1 think he need have no'
trouble whatever as to sympathy. I do not trouble about
sympathy. All I ask is a fair field and no favour. We, as
Christians, want no favour. We say : Only examine the evi-
dence we present for your consideration, and then we have all
that we desire.
Another matter which also struck me as very remarkable,
was that which occurred last night, and to which I briefly
referred, namely, the presentation of a long list of names by
my friend as a justification for his believing in the theory of
Evolution. Now, it appears to me that my friend plays fast
and loose with reason. At one time, he says : “ I am not
going to accept any authority ; but I will simply accept that
which is in harmony with my own reason.” Then at another
time —as last night—he seems to advert to authority. Now,
I wish to remind him to-night that there is really no authority
upon those matters —that in connection with the theory of
Evolution, if he is to follow authority, even the authority of
its great exponents, he must change very much, and very fre-
quently. 1 know that my friend does not trouble about con-
sistency ; that he affirms he is progressing, and that he may
take a different position to-morrow from that which he
occupies to-day. I would say that that being the case, it
places him in this position; That he is clearly not a reliable
instructor for those who are seeking for truth, seeing that
those changes ought not to take place so rapidly, if he were
guided by true reason, as apparently they are likely to do
with him. I have in my hand a work by Professor Dawson,,
one of the leaders in the scientific world, and his work is
entitled, “The Story of the Earth and Man.” I commend it
to your perusal. In this work Professor Dawson shows the
various theories that have been suggested in connection with,
the doctrine of Evolution. He points out that Parsons and


Owen, who form one of the schools holding the theory of
Evolution, affirm that there is an innate tendency in every
species to change in the course of time, although they can
give no evidence, nor yet any reason for it. Mivart and
Eerris, again, believe in exceptional births, either in the course
of ordinary generation, or by the mode of parthenogenesis.
Again, Hyatt and Cope believe, or rather suppose, that the
known facts of reproduction, acceleration, or retardation
observed in some humble creatures, are evidences of this
theory of Evolution. Lamarck and others say, that “new
forms, arising in any of these ways, or fortuitously, may, it is
supposed, be perpetuated, and increased, and further im-
proved by favouring external circumstances, and the efforts
of the organism to avail itself of these,” while Darwin, to
whom my friend appears generally to look, holds to “ the
struggle for existence, and the survival of the fittest.” I do
not know whether my friend is aware of the fact that even
Darwin has changed his views since he wrote his work, and has
stated that had he been aware of certain facts which another
scientist has brought forth in connection with this matter, his
own work would not have been written, or if written, that his
statements would have been largely modified. That being
the case, away goes my friend’s authority for holding this
theory of Evolution, in connection with which there are so
many other theories, so many suppositions and suggestions
that are hardly worth a moment’s consideration.
Another point to which I would like to advert is, that
when I again urged the necessity of my friend showing why
he did not accept the definition of Christianity which 1 gave,
and which I supported from the Scriptures, from the early
writers of Christianity, from its enemies, from profane his-
torians, and from Strauss himself, he said that was not his
duty, but that if this was a debate between a Unitarian and a
Trinitarian, that would come in very properly. Now, I must
confess that I do not quite understand what my friend is, be-
cause —and I say it without desiring to be personally offen-
sive—Freethinkers seem to be eithernothing,or everything. You
cannot tell what they are, for you find one man holding cer-
tain views, and he is a “Freethinker;” and another man
holding other views, which are diametrically opposed to
those of the other, and he, too, calls himself a “ Freethinker.’ *
But laying aside that question, I say that when my friend
positively affirmed that those two items, the Divinity of Christ


and His death as an atonement, were not a part of Christi*
anity, it certainly devolved upon him to show, either that I
misapprehended the statements I quoted, or, that those state-
ments were really not made. I say that whether he be Uni-
tarian, Trinitarian, or no Arian at all, his duty was clear in
connection with this matter.
But my friend led you to the myths, and read passages in
connection with certain supposed manifestations of the Deity
in human form. I have fortunately given a little considera-
tion to this matter, and I wish to point out that the highest
authority who has written upon this subject, Max Muller,
declares that in those ancient writings there were no such
ideas as my friend and others suppose. Those ancient writ-
ings are in the poetic form, and poetry cannot be construed as
prose. The mistake has been caused through taking their
concrete form of speech, and understanding it as we do our
abstract use of words. Professor Muller illustrates the matter
thus :
“ Where we speak of the sun following the dawn, the
ancient poets could only think and speak of the sun loving
and embracing the dawn. What is with us a sunset, was to
them the sun growing old, decaying, or dying. Our sunrise
was to them the night giving birth to a brilliant child, and in
the spring, they really saw the sun and the sky embracing the
earth with a warm embrace, and showering treasures into the
lap of Nature.
Then he gives instances where those ancient writers use
the words night, day, &c., personifying them, and where our
modern translators, taking those names which have simply
reference to night, day, dawn, and so on, as if they were per-
sons, have taken out of the ancient writings a meaning that
never was in them. I hold in my hand a report of a debate
which I had in Melbourne last year with Mr. Walker, the
Spiritist. If you will excuse me making such a reference
here, you will find in this report that Mr. Walker, in a very
able manner, took up this question of mythology! I would
therefore, recommend any person who wishes to be acquainted
with what can be said on that matter, and who wishes also to
get within the arcana of that terrible delusion of modern
days —Spiritualism —to obtain this book.
Although my friend last evening eulogised so very highly
those Hindoo writings, it was evidently because he had not
* Lecture on Vedas, in “ Chips from a German Workshop. 5 ’


gone to original sources for his information. This copy of
the debate which I hold in my hand, contains many extracts
which I have personally taken from works in the Mel-
bourne Public Library. I can verify them, because I have
copied them from their original sources, and know what they
are. This is what Max Muller says in regard to the matter
to’which my friend referred; —“According to the orthodox
views of Indian theologians, not a single line of the Vedas
was the work of human authors. The whole Veda was in
some way or other the work of the Deity.” “The human
element, called paurusheyata in Sanscrit, is driven out of
every corner or hiding place, and as the \ eda is held to have
existed in the mind of the deity before the beginning of time,
every allusion to historical events, of which there are not a
few.'is explained away with a zeal and ingenuity worthy of a
better cause. But let me state at once that there is nothing in
the hymns themselves to warrant such extravagant theories. In
many a hymn the author says plainly that he or his friends
made it to please the gods ; that he made it as a carpenter
makes a chariot.”*
Milller says:—“ The historical importance of the Veda
can hardly be exaggerated, but its intrinsic merit, and par-
ticularly the beauty or elevation of its sentiments, have by
many been rated far too high.” “ Large numbers of the Vedic
hymns are childish in the extreme; tedious , low, common-place.
The gods are constantly invoked to protect their worshippers,
to grant them food, large flocks, large families, and a long life ;
for all which benefits they are to be rewarded by the praises
and sacrifices offered day by day, or at certain seasons of the
year.” — Ibid.
My friend wishes you to believe that those writings con-
veyed the most elevated conceptions of the Deity. Muller
says that; —“ Hidden in this rubbish there are precious stones;
only, in order to appreciate them justly, we must try to divest
ourselves of the common notions about polytheism so repug-
nant, not only to our feelings, but also to our understanding.”
“ With regard to the style and character of these hymns on
which so much labour has been expended, it may be remarked
that they centain very little poetry of an agreeable or elevated
order. Nothing whatever that could be compared for a moment
with the Psalms of David. As mere literary productions,
apart from their Archaic value, we doubt if any man could be
found to read them.”— lbid.
* Lectuie on Vedas, in “ Chips from a German Workshop.”


Quoting again from this work which I previously re-
ferred, Muller, in giving his estimate of the Hindoo writings
as compared with Christianity, says : —“ That by a compara-
tive study of them we shall learn to appreciate better than
ever what we have in our own. Ho one, who has not
examined, patiently and honestly, the other religions of the
world, can know what Christianity really is, or can join with
such truth or sincerity in the words of St. Paul, £ I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.’ ” Again he says : —“ Many
are the advantages to be derived from a careful study of other
religious, but the greatest of all is, that it teaches us to ap-
preciate more highly what we possess in our own. Let us see
what other nations have had, and still have, in the place of
religion. Let us examine the prayers, the worship, the theo-
logy, even of the most highly civilised races, the Greeks, the
Homans, the Hindoos, the Persians, and we shall then under-
stand more thoroughly what blessings are vouchsafed to us
in being allowed to breathe, from the first breath of life, the
pure air of a land of Christian light and knowledge. We
have done so little to gain our religion, we have suffered so
little in the cause of truth, that, however highly we prize our
Christianity, we never prize it highly enough until we have
compared it with the religions of the rest of the world.” *
So much for my friend’s statement with regard to mytho-
logy. Ido not think it is needful for me to trouble more in
regard to it. No one stands higher than Professor Max
Muller in the scientific world in connection with philological
researches ; and with reference to those ancient mythologies,
if we are to take authority at all, his judgment is worthy of
all respect.
Now let me just resume the argument which I began
last night. But as I see I have only two or three minutes, I
must be content with simply recapitulating, in order to pre-
pare you for the argument. In the preface which I gave last
night to this portion of my subject, you will remember that
I called your attention to the question of the possibility of a
revelation coming from God, and no one, I said, could deny
the possibility ; and that, when we reason from the relationship
of the Creator to the creature, the extreme probability of a
revelation seemed to be proved. But when we reason further
from man’s helplessness, and the sympathy of the Great
Strong One for that helpless being, the power of the argument
* Lecture on the Yedas, in “ Chips from a German Workshop.”


gains additional force, that God would, out of His own deep
yearning for the welfare of man, give him some teacher to
guide him. I showed—and I hope m} 7- friend will try to
refute my statement if he can —that those ancients, before
Christ, were sick and weary of this “ reason” that is being
dinned into our ears at present by my friend ; that they
yearned for authority ; that they wanted someone who could
teach them from Heaven, and that it is repeatedly found that
those ancients entertained a conviction that someone from
Heaven would come to instruct them in all that was necessary
for their well-being.
Me. Height : Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen —I
shall pass over the remarks of my friend personal to myself
almost without comment, for they have no bearing on the sub-
ject oE debate. He has to prove a certain proposition, and
that is what lam anxiously waiting for him to prove. He
says that it was strange for me to make the appeal I did in
my opening address the other evening, but when I am stand-
ing up to try and show an audience which is certainly Christian,
and to a large extent orthodox Christian, that they may
be wrong in their theological belief, surely it must be the
merest afEectation to assume that mine was an unnecessary
appeal. Suppose any of you were to enter a Mahommedan
country, and were to argue against the orthodox Mahommedan
faith before a large mass of believers in the doctrines and
theology of Mahomet, would you not deem it necessary at
the outset to endeavour to allay their prejudices, and enlist
their forbearance and sympathies ? I do not say it ofEensively
to any portion of the audience, but there must be prejudices
among men and women who have been trained from infancy
to a particular form of assumption. I am told by my friend
that humanity yearns for authority—that this much vaunted
reason is not sufficient. Now' I ask, has not that been the
statement put forward by priesthoods in all ages—deprecating
anything of the nature of doubt or scepticism, and con-
demning heresy? In every age we have been told that it is
for authority humanity craves —that reason is not sufficient.
Why, that is the cry of the Homan Catholic Church, the
leading church even yet of Christendom; that is the state-
ment put forward by those who, from the Protestant Church,
are now re-joining that ancient ecclesiastical body —that it is


authority they want. In a late copy of the weekly edition of
the London Times (November 29th, 1878) I find a letter from
a reverend gentleman who has just joined the Eoman Catholic
Church —the Eev. Orby Shipley. The remarks contained in
that letter would very fairly represent, as it appears to me, the
stand which my friend is now taking on behalf of authority
against reason. Mr. Shipley speaks of the religious dogmas
he has been previously teaching as a Protestant clergyman,
and goes on to say :
“ All this I have held and done, as I now perceive, on a
wrong principle—viz., on private judgment. When I became
convinced that the right principle of failh and practice in
religion was authority ; when I saw r clearly that it is of less
moment what one believes and does than why one accepts and
practices, then I had no choice as to my course. The only
spiritual body which I could realise that actually claimed to
teach truth upon authority, and that visibly exercised the
authority w'hich she claimed, w r as the Church of Pome. Por
the last time, 1 exercised my private judgment, as every per-
son must exercise that gift of God in some w r ay and to some
extent, and I humbly sought admission into the communion of
the Catholic Church.”
I say that if authority is to override reason, the Eev. Mr.
Shipley is acting consistently in seeking re-admission to the
fold of the authoritative church. In his concluding remarks,
Mr. Shipley recommends the same proceeding to the rest of
the Protestant clergymen in these w T ords ; —“ They have
only to exchange ■— though the change indeed is great,
and is not made without cost —the principle of private judg-
ment for the revealed basis of faith, which is authority.” And
if authority is to override reason, that is the course that all
dogmatists w r ho would be logical, are bound to take.
You cannot too carefully carry in remembrance the
precise subject that we are debating. My friend keeps on
asserting that he is proving that the Deity of Jesus and his
death as an atonement are a part of Christianity. lam not
here to deny that. lam here simply —(Hisses). Surely you
are showdng you have not confidence in your advocate if you
hiss. I say 1 am not here to deny that these are part of
Christian doctrine as popularly understood ; but lam here to
deny, assuming these are a part of Christian doctrine, that
such Christianity is of Divine origin, and that all other
religious inspirations are, by comparison, of human origin.


forth became not a burden perhaps, hut at any rate an aimless
life, bereft of the aspirations which are essential to human
happiness. Therefore I mentioned the names of some of the
grandest of our race, as showing that, without that particular
faith they were yet enabled to live noble, useful, and even
happy lives. That was the object of my introduction of those
names.
Now, with regard to this question of the revelation that
my friend says must be obtained, if anyjreligion is to be valu-
able to us. I think it is Greg, in his “ Creed of Christendom,’
who says,—“ there are some people who cannot trust God un-
less they have His promises in black and white.” To me it
seems that by the study of nature, by the teachings of Science,
by the deductions of Philosophy, and by a free interpretation
of all the religious teachings of the past, be they in the
Bible or other sacred books, we can discover the signification
of God’s dealing with the human race—sufficiently at all
events to be enabled to say that if we wish to be happy m
this life, and to have the prospect of happiness beyond, we
must “ make for righteousness.” That is the object of all
religion, and my denial of the Divine origin of this particular
faith, in a special sense, is simply because it is a revelation to
a select few. I am pleading for a revelation to the whole
race. I say God has not left any portion of His children
without divine witnesses, and that, therefore this particular
revelation is not of Divine origin if all the others are of
purely human origin. The mere fact that certain portions of
those other sacred books may appear silly or foolish when
read by one not trained to regard them with sanctity, is one
which should not be unexpected by rational men. ” On this
subject I will just quote the words of my friend’s authority
this evening—Max Muller. In the book I hold in my hand
by Moncure Conway, entitled “The Sacred Anthology,” and
in the preface to this, the 4th edition, Mr. Conway quotes the
following words of Max Muller, contained in a review
Muller wrote of this book in The Academy , the well-known
critical journal, on Oct. 81st, 1874. Max Muller says, and
his opinion on this subject is well deserving of our attention :
—“ The fact is, that what we call the beauty or charm of any
of the sacred books, can be appreciated by those only whose
language has been fashioned, whose very thoughts have been
nurtured by them. The words of our own Bible cause in-
numerable strings of our hearts to vibrate till they make a


That is the subject of debate—not what is Christian Doctrine
even in the opinion of my friend. I take his interpretation of
it as it is stated in the subject put forward for discussion. It
is evident what he conceives to be Christian doctrine, and it is
also evident to everyone that that is the popular belief—that
an immense majority of people in Christendom will share the
conviction of my friend. But the question is: Taking all
that as demonstrated, taking that as part of Christian doc-
trine is this Christian theology, thus stated, of Divine origin ?
i call upon my friend again to advance his proofs that this
particular theology is of Divine origin, and that all other in-
spirations of other races of mankind are to be regarded as
simply of human origin.
My friend has quoted the opinion of Max Muller that
the Christian religion is superior to the other religions, and
that the better you become acquainted with the other religions
the more readily will you admit the fact. As cordially as he
can I would endorse that assertion in respect to the Christian
philosophy. My argument is that jt is a question of degree
in all these religions, not a question of signification. That
the Christian religion, broadly considered, may be the highest
thus far developed, lam not here to deny. lam here simply
to assert that the Universal Father of the race has not left
the rest of His family as spiritual orphans; that they too have
inspirations fitted for them ; and that the Christian inspiration
is only higher in degree, not totally different in sense and
origin. But as my friend appears to think highly of the
opinion of Max Muller on a question of this sort as he
conceives that Muller’s opinion is to have great weight on the
subject of religion I would draw his attention to Max
Muller s sentiments as stated in his lectures recently deli-
vered in Westminster Abbey, and panted in the Contemporary
Review, on “ The Origin and Growth of Religion.” My friend
the other evening, put forward, and rather ungraciously it
seemed to me, as a sort of taunt, that some of my friends were
Atheists. Doubtless that may be true. I am happy to say
that I have friends of various descriptions of belief, very many
of them being orthodox Christians ; for there are some ortho-
dox Christians, I am rejoiced to assert, who regard conduct
as above opinion. When he advanced it as a sort of taunt
that there were some of my friends who were Atheists, did ho
mean to imply that they were not good men—that they did
not do their duty to society ?
The Divine Origin of Christianity.


Me. Geeen: ]STo.
Me. Bright : What then does he mean F I£ thei
reason, feeely exercised, leads them to conceive that there
cannot be known to the human mind any object of worship—
not that there is no such object —surely they are not to be
blamed for stating the fact fer the sake of complete truthful-
ness. By those who see in every movement of nature a
Divine Mind operating, they must be regarded much as men
who are colour-blind —who simply cannot see that which the
majority of .the race see clearly. I allude to this matter
principally, however, because I want to direct attention to
what Max Muller says on this subject of Atheism. In the
lectures to which I have referred, he says of Atheism that it
is “ the power of giving up what, in our best, in our most
honest moments, we know to be no longer true ; it is the
readiness to replace the less perfect, however dear it may have
been to us, by the more perfect, however much it may be
detested, as yet, by others. It is the true self-surrender, the
true self-sacrifice, the truest trust in truth, the truest faith.
Without that Atheism, no new religion, no reformation, no
resuscitation, would ever have been possible; without that
Atheism, no new life is possible to any one of us. In the eyes
of the Brahmins, Buddha was an Atheist; in the eyes of the
Athenians, Socrates was an Atheist; in the eyes of the
Pharisees, St. Paul was an Atheist; in the eyes of the Swiss
Judges, Servetus was an Atheist.” Thus we find that if Max
Muller praises Christianity highly, he also praises Atheism
highly, and his opinion on the one must be taken to be just as
valuable as on the other. For my part Ido not advance any
writer’s opinion as a matter of authority. It is advanced
because it agrees with the conclusions of my own reasoning
faculties, and is a good statement of the case as I would
desire it to be stated. And here, I -would refer, in passing, to
my friend’s allusion to the eminent names introduced by me
last night. My friend has entirely misrepresented, doubtless
unintentionally, the reason of that introduction. I did not
bring in those names as authority on behalf of the doctrine of
Evolution. Surely the names of Channing, Parker, and
Harriet Martineau, who say little or nothing about Evolution,
would not be so introduced. I advanced those names in reply
to an illustration given by my friend tending to show that
those who surrendered this particular Christian faith he is
advocating, lost something tremendous—that their life hence-
The Divine Origin of Christianity.


music of memories that passes all description. The same in-
audible music accompanies all sacred books, but it cam never
be rendered in any translation. To the Arab, there is nothing
equal to the cadence of the Koran ; to us even the best trans-
lation of Mohammed’s visions sounds often dull and dreary.
This cannot be helped, but it is but fair that it should be
borne in mind as a caution against declaring too emphatically
that nobody else’s mother can be so fair and dear as our own.”
As the time allotted me has expired, I would just say before I
sit down, that all of you have been nurtured on the Bible,
and therefore when you come to try and realize what other
peoples think of their sacred books, you must necessarily be
prejudiced, and apt to conceive that they cannot have the
same Divine origin as your own.
Mr. G-reen" : May I say that, taking Professor Max
Muller’s definition of Atheism, and not that which would now
be the definition of Atheism by many persons, viz., the denial
of the existence of a Supreme Being, I do not know that I
would be very far from echoing his eulogy, seeing that the
spirit of Atheism, in Muller’s judgment, seems simply to be
the spirit of investigation.
I was sorry that my friend should speak of my having
said anything that had the appearance of being offensive, for
I think he must, and ought, to distinguish between things
which are in themselves offensive, and can only be spoken
with an offensive purpose, and those which legitimately arise
out of the argument. My friend has not taken an affirmative
proposition covering his ground, and I must, therefore, when-
ever I can, as my argument will allow, show how inadequate
to the requirements of man, his principle of the sufficiency of
reason is ; so that the other night, I adduced the fact that a
number of those who are delighted listeners to my friend, are
Atheists, while he is a Deist, in order to point out that evi-
dently “ reason” is not a safe guide, seeing that it leads both
of those parties to diametrically opposite conclusions. My
friend styles them colour-blind. Well, if they are content to
be considered colour-blind by him, and as not having suffi-
cient “ reason” to see what to others appears reasonable, lam
content. But I cannot see that it is in harmony with his own
principle, “ that whatever appears to a man to be true, is true
to that man j” for, according to his principle, if a man believes


there is no God, then it is true to him that there is no God ;
but i£ a man believes there is a God, then, however contradic-
tory, the fact of his believing it, makes the existence of a God
to be a fact to him. I had no intention personally to reflect
on character, but the argument was strictly legitimate under
the premises.
Now my friend brings up authority, and says this is just
what priests have always been crying out for. What do I
care what priests have been crying out for ? lam a “ Free-
thinker ” in the true sense of that designation, and I say that
while I bow to the authority of the Supreme Being, I refuse
to call any man master in spiritual things ; and hence I would
kick authority, whether that of priests, parsons, or any other
persons, to the winds. I want no one to take my word for
granted merely because lam what is called a minister. I re-
fuse to accept any authority but that which comes from God,
save and except the civil authority of the land, and that which
has been appointed by God in connection with religious govern-
ment. My friend’s argument upon that matter does not affect
me at all.. I will go with him hand and heart in pulling down
all unrighteous authority, for all authority over the human
intellect, imposed by man, is unrighteous. God, who has
formed the mind and knows its capacities, is the only one who
has a right to have authority, and to say what we shall believe
for our good, and what we ought not to believe; or what if we
do believe, will be to our injury or otherwise.
I think my friend was hardly fair in that statement which
he again made about his denial of the Divinity of Christ, and
the Atonement being parts of Christianity. He says : “I am
not here to deny that these are a part of Christianity as pop-
ularly understood.” Now, I can hardly clear my friend from
the charge of endeavouring by words to impose upon you. He
knows quite well that he is denying, in this proposition, that
the Divinity of Christ and His death as an Atonement, are
parts of the Christianity taught by Christ. We have nothing
to do with what is “popularly” understood. He is here
denying that it was taught by Jesus, and by His apostles, and
the early Christians, and to say therefore that he is not here
denying that it is part of “popular” Christianity, is simply
to play upon words, and really, whether he intends it or not
by his words to lead you astray.
With regard to the proposition as to the Divine Origin of
Christianity, I have pointed out that it was utterly impossible


for human beings to predict events hundreds of years before
they occurred, and as we may suppose a revelation from God.
to be possible and reasonable, and as a communication coming
from Him must have credentials, we therefore should expect,
■either that these incidents would be predicted beforehand, or
that at the time the communication appeared, miracles would
be wrought as evidencing Divine origin, and that if we had
both those lines of evidence, then that which came to us with
those claims would have proved its position as having come
from God, How, in regard to the Old Testament Scriptures,
let me repeat that they existed in the Greek translation 280
years before Christ came, and let me further intimate, that
those Scriptures have been preserved to the human race by a
people directly and bitterly opposed to Christianity. My
friend may object to this view, but so far as I am concerned,
I believe that as a Providential arrangement, God designed
that even by this to-be-regretted circumstance of the opposi-
tion of the Jews, there should be one of the strongest and
most irrefragable evidences in favour of Christianity adduced
in subsequent times. For had the Jews all received Christ
-and become Christians, do you not think that it would be at
once urged : “Of course, there is harmony between the Old
nnd Hew Testaments. Why, the whole thing has been in the
hands of one people, who have made them to fit in one to the
other ?” But as the Old Testament has been in the hands of
the bitter opponents of Christianity, and as by that Testament
we prove a long chain of prophecy, clearly indicating the
coming of Christ and his religion, which prophecies are clearly
fulfilled in the Hew Testament, we have in this a testimony
which no power on earth can overturn, until it utterly oblite-
rates from the page of history the last eighteen centuries of
bitter, fierce, and oftentimes vindictive opposition on the part
<of the Jews to the religion of Christ. lam not here speaking
against the Jews. I would regard it as the highest honour to
be a Jew, if that had been the will of God; but I say it is a
fact that they have been bitterly opposed to Christianity, and
that they persecuted its advocates in that early age. But,
notwithstanding all this, their own Scriptures are the most
■valuable testimony to the Divinity of its origin.
In Jeremiah, chap, xxxi., v. 31, God is represented as
-finding fault with the Jews, and saying that a time would
•come when he would make a new covenant with the house of
Israel, and with the house of Judah. There is a prediction


>uttered 600 or 700 years before tbe event occurred, that a
new covenant, differing from the Mosaic economy, would be
-made with the Jews. In the Book of Daniel, we have an ac-
count of four Empires identical with the Babylonian, Medo-
Persian, Grecian, and Eoman Empires. And it is declared :
■“ In the days of these kings (evidently referring to the last
of the Empires, from the particular details there given) shall
the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be
'destroyed ; and the Kingdom shall not be left to other people,
but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms,
and it shall stand forever.” “Kingdom” means “reign;”
-we have God’s laws thus reigning in our hearts which will
never be destroyed. I thank God for the faith which 1 have;
that, notwithstanding all opposition, that “ kingdom ” or
“ reign ” never will be destroyed, while this condition of things
-endures.
Then, again, we have that prediction uttered by Jacob :
"“The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver
from between his feet, until Shiloh come ; and unto Him shall
the gathering of the people be.” How, the Shiloh, the set-
ting up of the Kingdom, and the statement made by Jeremiah,
were all understood by the Jews prior to Christ, to have refer-
ence to the Messiah, and to‘what he would do. Well, we are
able to trace Judahas an independentand self-governing people,
until nearly the 12th year of our Saviour’s life, when Archelaus
was deprived of the government, and Judea became a Eoman
province. Never till then did the government go utterly
from the hands of Judah, except during those brief periods of
captivity which they suffered in punishment for their sins;
but from that date the government has gone ; the Shiloh
came, and the sceptre was taken from Judah, and has been
kept from then until the present day (unless, by the way,
there is truth in the theory that the Queen of England is the
lineal descendant of David), but of that matter I am not here
to speak.
I would say further in connection with these things, that
we have the declaration in the Old Testament that this coming
Messiah was to be a Divine personage. In the 9th chapter of
Isaiah, we find it is said: “Unto us a child is born.” The
present tense is used, indicating the absolute certainty of the
event, and assuring them that it was as certain of fulfilment as
if it already were an existing fact. It is said ; “ Unto us a
son is given ; and the government shall be upon his shoulders.


and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.”
Not only so, but in the 13th of Zechariah we have the
same intimation as to the Divine nature of the coming
Messiah, when it said: “ Awake, O sword, against my Shep-
herd, and against the man that is my fellow, saith the Lord of
Hosts: smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered ”
which was quoted by the Saviour in connection with His own
sufferings. Again, we find that he was to be born in Bethlehem,
and we have its fulfilment in the Gospel narrative of Matthew,
chap. ii. He was to be born of a Virgin Mother. In the
Garden of Eden it was said, “ of the seed of the woman ” God
would raise up one to bruise the serpent’s head. “ Seed of
the woman,” mark you ; not of the man. In Isaiah, chap. vii.
y. 14, we read : —“ Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a
son, and shall call his name Immanuel.” And in Jeremiah,
chap. xxxi.—the very chapter where the new covenant is pre-
dicted—this same fact is stated, only in different words : that
God would manifest a wonder —“ A woman shall compass a
man.” Probably my friend will challenge this prophecy in
Isaiah, and will say that it refers to the birth of Maher-shal-
al-hash-baz, the sou of the prophet; but lam prepared to show
by clear evidence from the book itself, that no such position
is sustainable. The son of the prophet is never termed
“ Immanuel,” as this person is. The land is never said to be
his, as it is said to be the land of “ Immanuel; ” and the whole
circumstances clearly prove that this prediction was not
spoken to Ahab the King; but, because Ahab refused to listen
to the words of the prophet, the prophet turned to the people
and said to them that God would give them a sign—that a
virgin would conceive and bring forth a son, and that they
would call his name Immanuel.
Mr. Beight : My friend claims to be a Freethinker, and
yet he expects that there shall be a uniformity of opinion.
Mr. Geeeh: No.
Mr. Beight : He has been ridiculing the Freethinkers,
because some of them are Deists and some Atheists. He
therefore expects uniformity of opinion.
Mr. Geeeh : No.
Mr. Beight : So it seems to me. At any rate that would
be the idea one would glean from the words of my friend.


Now, the very essence of freedom of thought is, that there
shall be freedom, and consequent diversity of opinion ; that we
shall look to conduct, not to opinion, in forming our estimate
of others ; that those who conduct themselves well shall be
enabled to associate together cordially, although some of them
may have Atheistic opinions, and others may have Deistic
opinions. Ido not know from what particular source my
friend has gained his information about Atheists forming a part
of those who attend my Sunday evening lectures; but at all
events he has asserted it. It appears to be regarded by him
as something in the nature of a taunt, by his bringing it
forward so frequently. Now, Freethinkers do not anticipate
that they shall agree with one another in opinion—above all
in theological opinion. They expect that there shall be evi-
dence that each is desirous of doing what good he can in the
world ; but, beyond that, they do not look for uniformity of
opinion as a necessary precedent to united action. Each one
is his own priest, and looks to no one but himself for absolu-
tion. His authority is the individual mind which is exercised
in believing or disbelieving.
My friend, in the same breath, said that he was averse to
authority imposed by man. My contention is, that the
theology he advocates is imposed by human authority, where
it contravenes nationalism. He is bringing forward now, as
against that view, the predictions pointing directly, he alleges,
to Jesus of Nazareth as the Messiah, and argues that there-
fore—l presume that is what the deduction would come to—
he must be the Deity, and that his death must be an atone-
ment for man’s sin. Why, even granting that he were the
Messiah in the sense of being the messenger of the Divine
Power, does it follow that those assertions which my friend
undertakes to prove must have a foundation in fact ? He
himself admits that the very people to whom those pro-
phecies were given—among whom the Messiah was alleged to
have come —rejected him and declared that he was not the
fulfilment of those prophecies, given in their own language,
and, it is to be presumed, best understood by them. And
really, it seems to me that to an enlightened mind, looking at
this question fairly, and accepting the records as they stand,
there was good reason for declining to receive him as the
fulfilment of those prophecies. One of the foremost facts in
connection with those prophecies was that the coming Messiah
was to be a Prince of the House of David, a Lion of the


tribe o£ Judah. A lengthy genealogy is given in the Gospels
according to Mattew, and according to Luke, of Jesus of
Nazareth, to show that he fulfilled those predictions. But
when we look at these extraordinary genealogies do we find
that they bear out the statement they are supposed to sub-
stantiate P On the contrary, do we not discover in the-
genealogy as shown in the Gospel according to Matthew that
Joseph is declared to be descended from David, to be of the
tribe of Judah, through David’s son Solomon ? and then follow
a number of names —given in the Old Testament, and capable
of verification there—of the various progenitors of Joseph.
But there is this extraordinary fact to be remembered : That
after bringing this genealogy down to Joseph, Joseph is de-
clared not to be the father of Jesus. Now, taking my friend’s-
illustration, suppose it were deemed necessary to show, as is
alleged by some, that Victoria, our present gracious queen,,
is a descendant of King David, and suppose her genealogy
were elaborately traced back from the Duke of Kent, her
father, to King David himself. But if, after it was thus
traced, it was asserted that the Duke of Kent was not the
father of Queen Victoria, -would anything be gained by the
previous genealogy ? Moreover, we must not forget that in
the other genealogy, given in the Gospel according to Luke,
this same Joseph is again traced back to David, and found to-
be of the tribe of Judah, but this time he is traced back to-
another son of David —not to Solomon, but to Nathan—and
the whole of the names, with one or tw r o exceptions, arc-
different in the genealogy given by Luke to those in the
genealogy given by Matthew. Now I ask you if this occurred
concerning anything in which your feelings w r ere not enlisted—
to which you had not been early trained to give reverence and
worship—if it were found in any of the ancient books of the
Hindoos or Buddhists —would not that be convincing evidence
to you that those genealogies could not truly fulfil the
prophecies which said that the Messiah was to be of the
House of David —a Lion of the tribe of Judah ? Why, the
Jews above all nations have held that descent must be through
the male line. Through the father the descent must come. The
Jews never thought anything whatever of the women in
tracing descent. In olden times they did not even allow the
women to worship ; and up to this day in the synagogues the
women are not permitted to tread the floor of the place of
worship, but are seated in a gallery apart. Women among.


the Jews are not confirmed in religion on arriving at years of
discretion the same as the males. Therefore, even yet this
strong inclination prevails to make the male the be-all and
end-all in the family and especially in the tribal life. We do
not even know the name of Noah’s wife, the mother of
humanity. The woman from whom the whole human race is
said to have sprung is not even mentioned in the Jewish
Scriptures, but is simply spoken of as Noah’s wife. So with
the mother of David—we do not know who she was. The
names of women are deemed to form no part of genealogy
among the Jews. There could be no fulfilment of the prophecy,
then, that the Messiah was to be of the tribe of Judah,
excepting through male descent. These genealogies show
that an attempt was made to trace it in the male line —k>
bring it down to Joseph —but then after all they are value-
less, as Joseph is declared not to be the father of the Messiah
I say, therefore, that in a rational view, the Jews were
justified in assuming that those prophecies of theirs, always
regarding the Messiah as a Prince of the House of David,
were not fulfilled in Jesus of Nazareth. And although in
after times it came to be asserted that they were fulfilled by
the Christians who doubtless believed that they were fulfilled,
still it remains for us to look at the question ourselves and see
if this were truly and really any fulfilment of those prophe-
cies which declared that the Messiah should be of the tribe
of Judah—of the House of David.
But, as I have said, this is a side issue. It has nothing
to do with this debate, for even assuming that Jesus was the
Messiah prophesied of—even granting that those prophecies
pointed directly to him—still, for all that, he may have been
but a spiritually-minded man —a man of the most advanced
character you may please to assume —but still not Deity. It
does not prove, or go to prove in the slightest degree, that
this assumption of the Deity of Jesus is of Divine origin ;
and that is the affirmation my friend has undertaken to prove.
The position taken by the majority of those who freely en-
quire into these subjects—who do not and cannot regard them
as too sacred for their reason to be exercised upon —is, that
these old records come to us in a form similar to other
traditions —that they cannot be regarded as historically
accurate. Even at this our day, it is most difficult to get
historical accuracy about any of the subjects that come
prominently before the world. I was reading the other day


of a transaction in which Ex-President Grant, of the United
States, was interested. It was stated as a historical fact,
that, on assuming command of the Eederal army, General
Grant had an interview with President Lincoln and Secretary
Seward, at which President Lincoln directed him to conduct
his campaign in a special way, and that Grant replied : “ I
can do it, but it will cause the loss of 100,000 more men than
would otherwise be required.” That was affirmed by a
trustworthy chronicler, writing a history of the Civil War, to
be a fact. Lincoln was dead; Seward was dead ; and had
Grant, the only other person present at the interview, been
dead, that statement would have gone before the world to all
time as a historical fact. Ex-President Grant, however, was
himself appealed to and requested to say whether it was true
or not. He declared emphatically that he was never
interfered with in the slightest degree either by President
Lincoln or Secretary Seward, but that the whole conduct of
the campaign was left to himself. So that promising historical
fallacy was nipped in the bud. We need not, however, look
further than our comparatively small proceedings —even at
this debate—for evidence of the fact of how easily contem-
porary records may be mistaken. I find in a telegram sent to
a Wellington newspaper last week, that it was stated a debate
was about to take place between the liev. Mr. Green and Mr.
Charles Bright, and the subject was declared to be “The
Divine Origin of Christchurch !” At some future day —a
century or so hence —if the subject be deemed of sufficient
importance, possibly some antiquarian investigator might
discover that telegram, might see that it had never been con-
tradicted, and might adduce it as showing what an extra-
ordinarily important and even miraculous place Christchurch
was fancied to be at that epoch. If in our own day, then,
we find such mistakes arising, can we suppose for one moment
that in remote ages and countries, when printing was un-
known, when even manuscript was a mysterious thing which
onty one here and there was taught to decipher, the events
transpiring would be placed on record with infallible and
uniform accuracy ?
Me. Geeen : I would just like to say in regard to the
statement of my friend —that I believed there ought to be
uniformity of opinion, and which I thought it right to


contradict at the time, that whether he may be able at
present to understand it or not, this is the position which I
hold.: Uniformity of faith, but diversity of opinion ; faith,
resting on credible testimony —that is, testimony which by all
the laws of evidence is found to be credible.
Now, in connection with this statement that I have made
about Atheism , I am very sorry that my friend will bring in
the personality. Let me then say, what I would not have
said otherwise : That I believe the Atheist is more reasonable
than the Deist, And for this reason—and hence you will see
there was no taunt —if a man believes there is agreat Uni-
versal Father, who has love in his heart—(if we may use this
expression anthropomorphically—and it is necessary thus to
speak when speaking of (rod, for the Divine Being has affec-
tion towards his offspring) aud yet has left his offspring with-
out instruction aud guidance, is to be guilty of that which is
utterly unreasonable. I believe myself that God has left no
part of humanity without a directory, and that he will judge
them according to the directory he has given them. And I
say that the position of the Atheist, who denies a Deity alto-
gether—though in my judgment not at all in accordance with
reason aud observed facts—is far more reasonable than that
of the Deist; for it is far more reasonable to deny the exis-
tence of a great universal and loving Father, than that that
Father should exist, and yet leave his offspring without a reve-
lation of himself. I simply mention this to show that there
was no thought of a taunt. lam forced to say these things,
and Ido hold that they come legitimately within the sphere
of my argument in this debate.
My friend says the Jews best understood their own
prophets, aud yet they rejected Christ. Now, I do not
wonder at their rejecting him. Any person who studies this
Bible, or who would study it before the coming of Christ,
would be perplexed, because in connection with the Messiah
there predicted, there were certain things indicating a position
of humiliation and suffering, aud others indicating a position
of exaltation which it was difficult to understand could apply
to a human being. This peculiarity could not be understood
except by the revelation contained in the New Testament;
and hence no wonder the Jews before Christ were divided
into two sects ;—The Palestinian Jews and the Alexandrian
Jews. The Jews of Palestine took those Scriptures that
referred to the manhood of Christ, and regarded him as a


man, a hero, and a soldier; whereas the Alexandrian .Tews
laid those aside, and said they could not be true if the others
referring to divine attributes were true, and as they could not
conceive those statements which indicated Deity to belong to
a man, they therefore regarded the Messiah "as merely an
ideal. Hence the existence of these two sects before Christ
came, and, from the points of view' at which they looked at
these matters, it -was reasonable that they should not under-
stand. Prophecy can only be understood fully as it is ful-
filled. When all the indications that have been outlined in
prophecy are seen to converge to one focus, and centre in one
individual, they are understood and clearly seen to be true. I
do not think, taking what I have said into account, that it is
any wmnder the Jews rejected Christ and crucified Him, be-
lieving He was an impostor, and thus without intending it,
fulfilled the very predictions that were found in their law.
But my friend says that, even admitting all those prophecies
referred to the Messiah, they will not prove the deduction I
wish to draw from them, namely, His divinity and death as an
atonement. I draw issue here, and affirm, that if the predic-
tions declare the Messiah was to be Divine—that, as Isaiah
predicts, he was to be called “the Wonderful, the Counsellor,
the Everlasting Eather,” and so on—if all those predictions
in regard to his manhood and divinity, converge, coalesce, and
harmonise in him ; and if it is stated that the Messiah would
suffer for the sins of others, then, beyond doubt, they do
establish those points. As human foresight could not lead to
the prediction of events hundreds of years beforehand, those
prophecies prove that the Divine Mind must have been guid-
ing, controlling, and regulating, and thus preparing evidence,
whereby we who live now r , and those who lived at the time of*
and subsequent to, our Saviour’s coming, might see the invul-
nerability of the foundation on which his claims to our
acceptance rested.
Now, I am glad to be able to congratulate my friend on
his coming to the point, although he says it is a side issue.
His reference to the genealogy—to the statement that the
Messiah was to be of the House of David—a Lion of the tribe
of Judah—is really to the point; and for once during the
course of this debate, I will say my friend shows that he has
really—though perhaps unconsciously —apprehended the real
point. Let me say that if my friend could prove what he has
asserted —namely, that Christ did not descend from the House


of David, and the tribe of Judah, then I would admit readily—
for 1 am ready to admit anything that is capable of being
established —that the claims of Christ fall utterly to the
ground. Let me say that all those genealogies of the Jews,
through the captivity, had fallen into some degree of confusion,,
although not so great but that they understood them. The
very fact that for several hundreds of years after the com-
mencement of Christianity, no Jew is found urging genea-
logical inconsistencies as against the claims of Christ, proves
that in their judgment, those apparent , but not real, discre-
pancies, were only on the surface. Let me say further, that
during the life of Jesus it was not known by the Jews but
that Joseph was really the father of Christ, and therefore, so-
far as that is concerned, there was no justification —from any
knowledge they are said to have had that Joseph was not His
father—for their rejection of Christ. But let me point out in
reference to the genealogy in the Gospels that it was neces-
sarj7 to prove, in the first place, that Christ descended accord-
ing to the flesh from David—that he had the very blood of
David coijrsiug through His veins by being descended from
one of his posterity. And I say that if you take the state-
ment made in the Gospel by Luke ; “ Being (as was supposed)
the son of Joseph,” and refer the words, as I think they may
be, both to Jesus and Joseph, you will see that, as some trans-
lators of our Scriptures, efficient scholars in the Greek lan-
guage say, this statement is, “Being as was accounted by law,
the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli,” and we have at
once this fact : That just as men sometimes marry ladies
whose parents have had no sons to perpetuate their name, and
at the request of the parents of the lady take her name in
order to perpetuate it; so among the Jews, for the purpose
of tribal arrangements, and the perpetuation of names in
families where the parents had no sons, the man who married
the eldest daughter, or only daughter, took the name of her
father, and was really, and legitimately in the eye of the law,
the son of that person whose daughter he had married. Now
we see that the genealogy by Luke is properly the genealogy
of Mary ; but because, as my friend correctly said, the Jews
took no account of women, Mary is ignored, and Joseph her
husband is placed in her position. But do you not see that
Mary’s genealogy was absolutely necessary in order to prove
that Christ had descended from David by blood? Mary was
His mother, and he had no earthly Bather, so that un-


doubtedly her genealogy was necessary to be given to estab-
lish the fact of blood descent from that notable King of
Israe
Now, taking Luke, as establishing the descent by blood
from David, it may be asked ; Why was it that the genealogy by
Matthew was given ? Let me again remind you that the
Jews, when Christ was living, were not aware of what we now
know. But suppose it happened —please bear with me in
making this reference —that persons have offspring soon after
they have entered into the matrimonial state, and prior to the
time, when, according to those arrangements which are right,
and in harmony with Divine laws, progeny should result, do
we not know that if the child is born but one day after the
marriage ceremony is performed, that child is legitimate, has
a legal title to property, to the name of the father, and to all
the immunities that a child, born under proper legal require-
ments, would have ? Now, as we have seen, Christ descended
from David, by blood, through Mary, but it may be asked,
how is the claim to the throne of David established, seeing
that the throne came, not through the line of Nathan (from
whom Mary was descended), but through the line of Solomon?
Does not this show us the necessity of Joseph’s genealogy
being given by Matthew, to prove that, as Jesus was born in
wedlock, and took the name of Joseph, His reputed father,
He legitimately inherited the throne to which Joseph, the li-
neal descendant of Solomon, had a legitimate and inalienable
right ? Thus, two genealogies were absolutely necessary to
establish blood descent and a legal right to the throne of
David.
I have just two minutes left, and let me say further in
connection with my proofs, that we have the statement made
by the prophet Haggai that the Messiah was to come when
He was generally expected ; and if those predictions existed
before Christ came, we naturally would expect that there
would be a looking forward to the coming of some personage
at that time. Now, I will read from three historians, none
of whom are acceptors of Christianity. Suetonius says : —-
There had been for a long time, all over the East, a pre-
vailing opinion that it was in the fates (the decrees or prophe-
sies) that at that time some one from Judea should obtain the
empire of the world. The Jews, applying it to themselves,
went into a rebellion.” If these prophecies did not exist how
could that expectation have been entertained? Tacitus, in


Ms history, b. 5, c. 13, says:—“ Many were persuaded that it
was contained in the old writings of the priests, that at that
very time the East should prevail, and the Jews should have
the dominion.” Josephus, who had taken up the Alexan
drian philosophy, and did not believe in a real and tangible
Messiah, in his Antiquities, b. 6, c. 5, sec. 4, says :—“ But
now what did the most elevate them in undertaking this war,
was an ambiguous oracle that was found in their sacred writ-
ings, how, ‘ about that time one from their country should be-
come governor of the habitable earth.’ The Jews took this
prediction to themselves in particular, and many of their wise
onen were thereby deceived in their determination.” These
extracts show that there was just such an expectation as we
would suppose to have existed.
Mr. Bright : Notwithstanding what has fallen from my
friend, I again assert that we are now debating a side issue,
because, even if he could prove his case, in regard to those
genealogies, he would be as far as ever from proving that
Jesus was the Deity. Therefore, he is debating a side issue.
But, taking that side issue for what it is worth, I find my
friend says that those genealogies had fallen into a degree o£
confusion. I think most of you must admit that if this be a
part of my friend’s case, it may be taken as proved. They
had certainly fallen into some degree of confusion, if it be
true, as he says, that one of them was intended to apply to
Joseph, and that the other one, although purporting, the same
as the first, to apply to Joseph, was intended to apply to Mary :
Eirst, I ask how it is that under these circumstances the two
genealogies are not given by one evangelist P How is it that
it is two different writers who give these two different and
strangely conflicting accounts ? Surely, if this important
point had to be proved that one of these genealogies applied
to Joseph, and the other to Mary, notwithstanding that in
both Joseph is named, it would have been given by one writer,
and not left to be suspected, as, in spite of what my friend
says, it must now be assumed, that there was a great discre-
pancy between these writers, and that as both could not be
true, later commentators have conceived this explanation as a
loophole of escape. That appears to me to be the rational
view. Eurthermore, we have a strange element introduced
into these two genealogies—and you must pardon me if I


appear to be pressing this view o£ tbe case. I know very
well —I feel it strongly, and regret to feel it—that lam hurt-
ing the emotional faculties of many here in speaking thus
plainly of what they regard as a sacred subject; but with me
•one thing alone is sacred, and that is Truth. Eeverence for
truth impels me to point out that in these two genealogies
examined a little closer, we find this most remarkable discre-
pancy : That, whereas in Matthew there are 25 generations
given as from David to Joseph, on the other hand, in Luke—
even taking that enormous jump which my friend we are
to take, and assuming that the genealogy by Luke applies to
Mary —we have no less than 41 generations as from David to
Mary, represented by Joseph. That is a difference between
the husband and wife of a period of time amounting to from
400 to 450 years. The difference between 25 generations and
41 generations, at the lowest computation, would amount to
400 or 450 years. What would we suppose now if in English
history we had a genealogy traced down to a man who lived
at the time of the battle of Agincourt, and another genealogy
bringing us down to a woman in our own day, and if those
two people were declared to be married P
My friend says, in reference to the suggested substitution
of the name of Mary for Joseph, that the Jews were not
aware of what we now know' on this subject relative to Jesus’
birth. If I did not feel this distrust of trespassing on fields
which, though not sacred to me, are sacred to others, I might
if I chose, be somewhat severe on this allegation of my friend.
But I will not press this point further than saying it seems to
me the Jews were unaware, not of what we now know, but of
what, through the traditions of that time, and through ad-
ditions to this old story by later writers, we have come to as-
sume to be knowledge. That is the real case. In all these
questions it appears to me it is assumption that is put forward
instead of knowledge, and Eationalists are expected to enter-
tain these assumptions in the same way as they would enter-
tain facts of science, and to admit them as proved, when, to
their minds, they appear to be the wildest speculations.
My friend said at the outset of his remarks that what he
advocated was uniformity of faith and diversity of opinion.
To me this is a mere juggle on words, I cannot understand
what it means. What is covered by faith, and what by
opinion? Eor a long time faith was supposed to include
belief in the idea that the human race was created only 5,000


or 6,000 years ago. Now that is obliterated by the facts of
geology. Lyell, iu bis work, “ The Antiquity of Man,” shows
that man has probably inhabited this earth for something like
250,000 years. That question involved formerly a matter of
faith. Was it not also a matter of opinion ? How has it changed
since ? How is it that no intelligent man now believes that
this globe is only 6,000 years old ? Has not this opinion
changed through the facts of science advanced, and proved
by the true hand-writing of God which cannot lie and which
is recorded in the strata of the rocks ? In the hand-writing
said to be God’s, and copied in a printed book, there is
always a difficulty in ascertaining how much of it may have
been inspiration, and how much may have been added by ob-
vious human means. I do not deny inspiration ; I do not
know in fact what inspiration is. lam ready to consider the
explanation of anyone who knows, but I really do not know
what is meant by inspiration in the sense that certain ancient
books were inspired, and that all books which came after-
wards are uninspired. I can .nderstand an inspiration work-
ing iu the remote past and working now —an inspiration, even
from the Divine source, illuminating every great and superior
man, and upholding him in efforts put forth for the benefit of
the race. But I cannot understand an inspiration which
dried up some 2,000 years ago, and has never operated
since.
But if, as my friend asserts, what he desires to see is
uniformity of faith and diversity of opinion, in which category
would he place this hypothesis of evolution to which he has
alluded ? My friend says that he would regard this as a
question of opinion j and yet it is this very hypothesis of
evolution that is proving itself so troublesome to so many
theologians. Ido not say that it is troublesome to my friend,
although he has shown himself so strongly disinclined to
entertain it in any shape. It appears to him, I fear, iu some
way to interfere with his faith, judging by the number of
times he has introduced it and attempted to turn it into
ridicule in this debate, in which it has little relevancy. So
far as I can see, whether it be a question of opinion or a
question of faith, it is precisely the same thing, because the
faith of one day becomes the mere opinion of the day after-
wards. I here are a number of those who call themselves
orthodox Christians who would regard this very question of
evolution as trenching upon their faith. Ido not say that it is


binding on my friend, but I know one theologian here has
declared in his lectures that this theory of evolution cannot
be true, or that if it is true Christianity must be false. Ido
not pin my friend to the opinion of any theologian, but this
hypothesis of evolution seems to me to be always received
with such an amount of chagrin by theologians of all characters
as would lead us to think that it trespasses upon faith as well
as opinion.
However, I will dwell on that point no farther, but will
endeavour, if I possibly can, to bring my friend back to the
question we are debating. I assert again that all these
deductions, based on what may be found in a particular book,
do not go in any shape or way to prove the case of the Divine
origin of what my friend calls Christianity. To do that he
has to show the divine origin absolutely of those very records
that he is quoting. Has he attempted for one moment to do
that ? He is simply showing that certain things are in his
opinion doctrinal Christianity as found in that book. But
has he adduced any evidence in this debate that that book
from which he quotes is to be regarded as of Divine authority
in a different sense to the'sacred books of other religionists ?
In regard to the matter contained in the sacred books of other
religionists, we do not need to ask the opinion entertained by
Max Muller or any body else, regarding their goodness. We
can judge for ourselves. I could quote passage after passage
if time allowed of the most exquisite morality contained in
those books. We need no authority to tell us whether it is
morality or not to love our neighbours as ourselves, or to show
our love to God by acts of kindness and love to men. There-
fore I say we can discover for ourselves that there is much
beautiful moral teaching within those books.
To touch upon another question that my friend has intro-
duced, viz., that God could, if He chose, give a verbal revela-
tion to His human family. Ido not say for a moment that we
can tell what God can do, or cannot do. All we know regard-
ing God is what we are enabled to learn through studying
His works ; but this I say; That if a God, whom we are to
term the Infinite Father, did give a revelation to His human
family—a revelation that was to be binding and infallible, so
that when you saw it written in a certain way you need inquire
no farther, but bow down before it and worship—then it seems
to me the revelation would be to the whole human family. In-
stead of that being the case, however, this revelation only


came to one particular race —the Jews—and was framed in
such a shape that, even according to the admission of my
friend, those very Jews to whom the revelation was given, en-
tirely misinterpreted it, and are, to this day, the victims of
that misinterpretation. Hence, we stand in this extraordinary
position : —That we have here a revelation from God to one
particular race, which has proved to be baneful instead of
beneficial to that race, while, if no other religion is of Divine
origin, all the rest of the vast human family is left without
any revelation whatever.
Mb Gbeekt : My friend appears to feel that the question
of evolution is rather a delicate one. I do not wish to press
it, but if he will say that certain things we believe in are ab-
surd and do violence to reason, I must again persist in bring-
ing up that, iu my judgment, utterly absurd theory, that the
finite produced the infinite, and that from the monkey came
the man. Now, I say I may believe in a theory of evolution,
and yet not in that theory which my friend holds, and which
I regard as utterly irrational.
Let me show you the difference betw r een opinion and
faith. “ Faith comes by hearing.” In other words, belief,
for faith and belief are synonymous, is produced by testimony - 7
while opinion may be but a conception of the mind without
any real or tangible foundation. If lam to believe anything,
I must have testimony. If I am to believe in evolution, as
my friend holds, I must either see the monkey transformed
into the man, or have that fact testified to, by witnesses who
saw it and are trustworthy ; or I must have some evidence,
from the geological strata of our earth showing that this pro-
cess did take place, iu order that from those rocks I may have
the testimony. Now*, until I have testimony to produce faith,
or belief, the theory must remain, if I hold it at all, in the
region of opinion. There is the difference between faith and
opinion.
But my friend quotes Lyell, and says he has proved that
the race of man is 250,000 years old. Allow me to say that
my friend is evidently behind the age. Just as a friend said
to me in Melbourne, when he asked me what newspaper I
read, I replied, “ Ihe Aqef and he remarked, “ Oh ! you’re
behind the age.” So, if my friend is not aware that Lyell haa


been proved to be in error in many o£ his conclusions, he is
»simply behind the age.
Now, in connection with this matter o£ the genealogy, I
still say I am very glad my friend has taken it up, because it
is the nearest approach to grappling with the proposition that
he has yet made. In connection with this question he asked
why Matthew did not give both accounts, if both accounts
were necessary ? He also referred to the statement that the
persons living in those days were not aware of the circum-
stances in connection with the birth of Christ, and further, as
to the discrepancy in the number of generations in the two
genealogies. Now, a little suggestioufwill show you how easily
explainable those apparently difficult matters are. If my
friend would ask the question from history; For whom did
Matthew write ? he would find that Matthew wrote for the
Jewish Christians, who were well acquainted with the genealo-
gical tables. Now, when Matthew wrote for the large num-
ber of Christians in Palestine, he knew that if he gave the
broad outlines of the genealogical table, those men —every
one of whom could run up the table on his fingers’ ends from
the living generation up to David —would know that those
persons who were left out were not left out through ignorance
on the part of the writer, but simply because the writer was
writing to those as well acquainted with the whole genealogi-
cal table —and which is supplied fully in the Old Testament—
as he was himself. Matthew knew, that to establish the claim
■of Jesus to the throne of David, it was only necessary to
; prove that He was, bylaw, the son of Joseph, legitimately
5 taking his name and claiming his rights, because they were all
aware that He was the son of Mary. In one place it is said :
“Is not this the son of Mary ?” And in another place: “ Thy
mother and Thy brethren without seek for Thee.” The Jews
' knew that Mary was His mother; but it was necessary, when
Hhe matter of His claim to the throne of David was under
consideration, that it should be seen that He was legally en-
titled to the claims which were Joseph’s as the descendant of
David, through Solomon. Now, in the case of Luke, we have
a difference. Luke is writing for Gentile hearers. He wrote
to one Theophilus—evidently a Greek, for he had a Greek
name; and the whole circumstances indicate that he was a
Grecian. Now, suppose Luke made the jumps Matthew had
made, what would be the result P This Greek would have
said : “ I cannot understand how there can only have been so


few generations between Mary, the mother of Jesus, and
David, her ancestor.” And hence, because he was writing to
Greeks, and because it was necessary to enter into detail, he
gives the whole of the names, showing also, as was necessary,
that Jesus was, through Mary, descended lineally from David,
the King of Israel. Now, this is just the explanation 1 have
to offer. And in regard to their not knowing the circum-
stances connected with the birth of Christ, at the time of our
Saviour’s life, we are to bear in mind that the apostles did not
know it probably, until the momentous events connected with
His life and death were over. We do not know at what time
they obtained the information. We know the promise of the
Holy Spirit was given to them to guide them unto all truth.
We have no intimation as to when the truth was revealed ; but
that it was revealed, those men declared, and proved that they
believed their declaration to be true, by being willing to lay
down their lives in attestation thereof.
Let me now point out further in connection with the
Christian evidences, that Isaiah predicts, in the 53rd chapter,
that Christ was to be born in a poor and mean condition.
What could more fully fulfil this prediction than His being
born of Mary, a family so far removed from the Royal line,
and at the same time in such poor circumstances —“ a root out
of a dry ground,” as Isaiah calls it —and that then by the
marriage of Joseph and Mary, He should have a claim to the
throne of David ?
It is also predicted in Isaiah that the Messiah would
come while the temple stood. Now, if Jesus had come fifty
years later than He did, He would not have come while the
Temple stood, because it was razed to the ground forty years
after His death, and has never yet been restored. Although
Julian tried to falsify the prophecy by rebuilding the Temple,
the operations of the workmen were put an end to by tire
coming from the foundations. Again, it is predicted that the
Messiah would not be a soldier but a prophet —that He ■would
not come as ordinary persons did, and that although not
descended from the Levitical tribe, He w r ould yet come as a
priest to atone. This is predicted clearly in the 110th Psalm.
Then there is the prediction in Zochariah ix. 9, which was ful-
filled by Christ riding into Jerusalem on an ass, and the peo-
ple saying to Him, “ Hosanna to the Son of David —Blessed
is He that cometh in the name of the Lord : Hosanna in the
highest.”


Mr. Bright : Still debating this side issue and avoidings
the main question, I take up my friend once more on the
question of the genealogies. He has explained that there wa»
no need for Matthew to give the whole of the names of the
pedigree between David and Joseph in his account because
they were well known to the Jews, and were to be found in
their own Scriptures. But my friend has forgotten to men-
tion that there are only four more names to be found in the
Jewish Scriptures than are to be found in the genealogy of
Matthew, and that, even if those four names were introduced;,
there would still be a discrepancy of twelve generations, or at least
three centuries between the husband and wife, always assum-
ing that Luke’s genealogy can be made to apply to Mary. T
believe lam right in making that assertion. I have not at
this moment the means of verifying it; but I have not the
slightest doubt, speaking from memory, that I am perfectly
correct in saying there are only four more names in the
Jewish Scriptures than are mentioned in Matthew. Therefore
there is still that tremendous discrepancy.
I am told by my friend, and it appears to be ad-
vanced as if it were proof of the Deity of Jesus, that
the Apostles were ready to die for him. Surely this
is a strange conclusion to reach. Surely we know r well
that loyal followers of a great man have been ready to
die for their commander without that commander being
elevated to a Divine station. We have instances both
in ancient and modern times, of men dying readily on behalf
of capable and superior men to whom they were linked by
ties of fellowship. Even in our own day we need not go far
to discover instances of that kind. Although, therefore, the
Apostles proved they were ready to die for their opinion of
Jesus’ divine mission, that does not show that he w r as the
Deity, which is the point my friend has got to prove.
My friend seems to think that I somewdiat shirk this sub-
ject of evolution —that I do not like it —and evolution seems
in the opinion of my friend, to consist of one circumstance—
that of a monkey becoming a man. How evolution deals
with something more than that. It asserts that all formations
from the remotest ages up to the present time, have gone on
without any breach of continuity —that throughout the abyss
of time everything has been gradually developing, just as the
acorn, when planted in the ground, grows up in the course of
a century to be a grand and beautiful oak tree. Will anyone


assert that the fact of the oak tree growing up iu a hundred
years from an acorn within the ground, having in it the promise
and potency of that tree, is less glorious than if the tree shot
up in a night and was formed there by a miracle ? Is it not,
as it develops, miracle enough P And surely in this grand
universe there is miracle enough in the idea of its natural
growth. Moreover, we have this joyous fact before us : If it
be true, as Evolution teaches, that out of the remote past we
kave advanced by natural development to what the earth and
the human race have now become, what a glorious promise we
have for the future —the past being the foundation from
which that future is to spring, not by a miracle, not by
magical conversion, but by natural force, and the race being
impelled to make for that righteousness which the Divine
Spirit seems to engender. It appears to me that the theory
of Evolution is at all events grander than the scheme of
occasional interferences on the part of some outside Creator.
My friend makes merry over this transfer as he calls it,
between the monkey and the man, and asks for a monkey to
be brought before him and changed into a man. I cannot
myself accommodate him in that capacity. lam as I am.
Monkey or man, lam here. And really, if I were in a position
to make my choice, I would just as soon have ascended from
the animal kingdom by gradual development, with all the
rational promise therein implied, as to have at any past time
descended from a perfect position, and been degraded to a
lower scale in creation. Looking at this question of evolution
in the light of reason, it seems to me to be at least as capable
of rational reception, and far more capable of rational proof,
than the idea that there have been miraculous interferences
with the universe at any time in the past. The inspiration I
believe in is perpetual, and its outcome is beginning to be
recognized in Evolution.
My friend talks of miracles. I cannot see why, if there
were miracles two thousand years ago, there should not be
miracles now. Surely we need miracles now just as much as
in the past. There is now as much confusion in the matter of
religion as in the past —as much difficulty in obtaining an
authoritative faith. The world is now as much in doubt as
-ever on these questions. We stand then in urgent need of
miracle, if miracle is to he the attestation for faith. To me
.none is needed, for there is one gigantic miracle ever present.
We know more of the working of God in nature than we


knew in the past, and that knowledge seems to me to present
the grandest miracle possible to be conceived. To think that
this great globe 24,000 miles in circumference, has spun round
2.000 miles on its axis while we have been sitting in this
theatre, —to think that it has sped during the same time, some
150.000 miles in its swift course through space ! Can any con-
ception of miracle exceed that ? And must not the know-
ledge of miracles like these lead us to form a grander ideal of
the Deity than if we believe that 2,000 years ago some magical
intervention took place which has failed to gain the end it was
represented to aim at —the salvation of the race? People sin
now, as then ; and now, as then, only require more knowledge
of God’s natural laws to become less sinful. As knowledge
grows—as a thorough education progresses —sinfulness will
decrease. I see nothing that has been achieved by those ex-
traordinary interventions that my friend speaks of. Ido not
see why our faith should be called upon to swallow those
ancient miracles, while all the grand present miracles of na-
ture challenge recognition around us.


FOURTH EVENING.
R. BRIGHT : Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen,—
My friend the other evening adopted a common argu-
ment when he tried to persuade you that those who.
gave up the authority of revelation, to be logical, were bound:
to be Atheists. Now the profound and extended view which,
science takes at this day more than at any time past —for
science is advancing with gigantic strides every year —almost
necessitates the assumption of a Divine Power overruling the
universe. Rather than trust to any words of mine in this,
connection, I will read a few lines from a volume just issued
from the London Press, written by the Rev. H. R. Haweis, an,
eminent believer in Evolution. He says: —“We may try
and construct the universe without having recourse to a guid-.
ing mind, —we may place mind at the end, and call it man,
instead of placing it at the beginning, and calling it God.,
We may put aside the old argument from design as unsound,
and call for one speck of living jelly, which is to take the
place of God. and which contains within it the promise and;
potency of all terrestrial life; but as soon as our thoughts
begin to dwell on this original speck of jelly, we ask, Whence
hath it life and motion ? Life, we are told, is a property of
organised matter. We ask, What is it that organises matter?
It gets organised by the play of forces in certain directions.
And then comes the last inquiry, which, as it were, throws us
straight into the arms of that God from whom we are vainly
endeavouring to escape —What directs those forces in one
way for order and creation, rather than in another way for
confusion and chaos ? There is no answer but this : mind,.
Divine mind, God. Sometimes we think, and sometimes we
don’t think ; but in either case, God is the one ark of rest to
which we return again and again, the one stable thing out
upon the great flood.” That is the position which the great
majority of Rationalists assume at this day, and from that
position they are not readily to be dislodged.


When last evening I said that I did not stand here to
deny that the Deity of Jesus and his death as an atonement
for man’s sin were a part of Christianity, I was encountered
from many among the audience by what seemed like cries of
derision. I was not surprised at that, because the audience
are not supposed to make themselves carefully acquainted
with the subject of debate ; but I was astonished that my
friend seemed to endorse those cries. He appeared to con-
ceive that I teas here to maintain the negative of that propo-
sition. I must therefore again call attention to the sub ject
of debate, which was carefully considered by myself and'my
friend before adoption. We are met to discuss the Divine
Origin of Christianity, accepting (not denying) the following
definition of terras :
“ That by Divine Origin it is understood to be of Divine
origin in the sense in which no other religion is,” and that in
the term Christianity, it is understood there are included the
Deity of Jesus and His death as an atonement for man’s
sin.”
For the purposes of this debate, then, I stand here and
accept this definition of terms, but accepting this definition of
terms, I deny that such Christianity is of Divine origin. That
is the position in which the debate stands. To make this
matter clear, let me have recourse to an illustration. Suppose
my friend were to maintain that this city of Dunedin was now
in the location which it was intended to occupy by those who
left England to settle this portion of New Zealand ; and de-
fined Dunedin as including the inhabitants of the Peninsula.
I accept that definition for the purpose of debate, but then
maintain that the city, so defined, was not the Dunedin in-
tended by the original settlers. What would my friend have
to do F Surely he would have to go to the documents ori-
ginating from those settlers to discover what was their in-
tention, and one of his very first steps would have lo be to
prove that the documents which he produced did originate
from those who came to effect this settlement. Bear in mind
I do not stand here even to deny the Biblical origin of Chris-
tianity. I stand here to deny the Divine origin of Christianity,
in the terms specified by my friend, and accepted by me.
Therefore you see, just the same as in the debate regarding
Dunedin in the way I have put it, he would have to show that
the documents he produced had really emanated from the men
he stated they did emanate from ; so when he goes to the


lext o£ Scripture in order to show what he supposes Chris-
tianity to be, there is a prior step, which he has never yet
taken, and that is to show that those texts o£ Scripture are o£
Divine origin. Moreover, my friend even goes farther than
this would indicate, for he stands in the same position as if he
should assert that this settlement of Dunedin is the only
settlement in New Zealand which took place under the autho-
rity of the British Crown. He asserts that this religion, and
this only, is of Divine origin, and, by implication, maintains
xhat the others are of human origin. My contention, in de-
nying this proposition of my friend, is that the Divine Mind
has inspired in a more or less supreme degree, and is still in-
spiring messengers and messages to all portions of our race.
I have already drawn attention to the enormous pre-
ponderance of other religions in the world. In the latest
statistics I have been able to procure —those contained in the
article on “ Religion,” in the edition just published of
Chambers’s Cyclopaedia —it is shown that the total population
of the world amounts to about 1,291 millions. Of that number,
483 millions are Buddhists: 139 millions are Hindoos; 103
millions are Mahommedans ; and 198 millions are of other
religious ; making a total of 923 millions. This leaves only
371 millions of Christians. I assert that it is more in accor-
dance with Divine laws as we observe them in the universe,
and, therefore, to my thinking, more likely to be true, that
all other races should have had their inspirations, than that
they should have been left forsaken by the Infinite mind,
I do not mean to say that those inspirations are equal in
degree, but in signification of “ divine origin,” they are iden-
tically the same. Therefore it is on that account, too, that I
deny the Divine origin—in the sense in which my friend has
explained, and I have accepted —of Christianity. Hence I
once more assert —and I think you will admit that I have
made good my position —that in this debate, and for its pur-
pose, I do not stand hei’e to deny that the Deity of Jesus is
part of Christianity.
But assuming, as I have done previously, that we had
agreed to debate the Biblical origin of Christianity, and not
its Divine origin, then it seems to me it would be more
rational, in order to discern what Christianity should be, to
endeavour to discover what was the mind of Jesus. For this
purpose I would not take the fourth Gfospel, which, in my
belief, gives us the mind of Plato, the great Greek philosopher.


and not the mind of Jesus. In the first place, it is written in
the language of Plato, and not in the language of Jesus. In
the next place, the Greek in which it is written- —we are told
by the foremost Greek scholars—is of a pure and cultured
character, such as we could not expect from an unlearned
fisherman of Judea —Greek far superior to the Greek of the-
Apostle Paul, who was, by comparison with John, a learned
Jew. Moreover, we have this fact: That a school for the
cultivation of the philosophy of Plato was established in the
East about the time that Christianity originated. We have
here a perfect concatenation of facts, showing the probability
that this Gospel of John, which was admittedly of compara-
tively late composition, gives us rather the mind of Plato than
the mind of Jesus. But to discover the mind of Jesus, it
seems to me we must go to the synoptical Gospels ; we must
look at his own utterances given there, and above all we must
look at his utterances on important occasions. Now, if we
study the whole of that magnificent body of morality and
spirituality contained in the Sermon on the Mount, where
shall we find anything to justify the Christianity put forward
by my friend? If, further, we appeal to the occasion, when
Jesus was absolutely asked by an anxious inquirer:—“ Good
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life ?”—we find he
first reproves the inquirer for calling him “ good,” saying
there is none good but one —God. Then he goes on to tell
him that he is to keep the moral commandments, specifying
them, and adding, according to Matthew, that he is to love his
neighbour as himself. He gives those moral commandments—
not even mentioning the ceremonial commandment of the
Sabbath —as the formula which will enable the inquirer to
earn eternal life. Then he says further, when the young man
tells him that he has kept those commandments : “If thou
Avilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the
poor . . and come and follow me.” Follow him, mark,
Avho at that time was standing in opposition to the orthodox
priesthood, and denouncing the dignitaries of the day. He
Avas struggling against a lower form of religion, the heritage
of the past, and Avas pointing his finger to the higher ideal —
the inner heart-worship which, he desired, might be the
religion of the future. One more illustration of the mind of
Jesus. On that other most important occasion, when he pre-
sented the remarkable allegory regarding the good who were
to be blessed, and the Avicked who were to be accursed—the


allegory of the goats and the sheep—what was it that he
specified as causing the distinction between the two P Was it
any point of doctrine P Was it an} r question of belief in him
as the Deity, or in his coming act of atonement? Not in the
least degree. On the contrary, all that is specified by him as
comprehending the difference between the wicked and the
good is, that the wicked neglected their poorer fellow-beings—
worked for selfish ends, and not for their fellow humanity;
while the good are shown working for the benefit of their
fellow-creatures. That is the cause of the division —the good
on one side and the wicked on the other. It is not on account
of such doctrine as my friend is advancing, but entirely on
account of that grand religion of Humanity, which I maintain
is of Divine Origin, and will be eternal.
If we take the religion put forward by my friend, and if
it should be discovered at any future time that the whole of
that Book upon which he relies —the whole of those Gospels—
were a concoction of dishonest men, where would be his-
system of theology ? But even supposing that it were dis-
covered that those Gospels were a concoction and not histori-
cally true, still this Divine religion to which I am alluding —•
the religion of active goodness, the religion of doing to others
as we would have others do to us —would stand its ground,
showing that it is based on God’s eternal laws, and not on the
mere authority of any printed volume.
Mr. Green : Mr. Chairman and respected hearers : I am
sorry that I cannot compliment my friend, either on his
powers of argumentation, or upon his ingenuousness. In the
first place he appears to have wasted both his first speech to-
night, and his last speech on the last occasion, on matters alto-
gether irrelevant to the question.
Now, in regard to John’s Gospel, I was upon that matter
on Wednesday night, and my friend did not assail the argu-
ment ; but on this, the last night of the debate, having re-
freshed his memory with what I cannot but term stale
arguments against John’s Gospel, he enters upon a kind of
guerilla warfare, picking off a straggler here and there, for
the purpose of detaching me from the main object of my
argument.
As to his definition of Christianity, my friend distinctly
stated that he believed in the Divine Origin of Christianity,


leaving out the Divinity of Christ and the Atonement. If
taat is not a denial, and if it does not place upon me the
responsibility of proving that these are essential parts of
Christianity, then I must confess that I have yet to learn what
reason does teach. I have yet to learn what the denial that
certain things belong to something else, involves on the part
of one who affirms they do belong to it. I shall not waste
time on these matters, but shall pass on to other points of
much greater moment.
Noticing the remark with which my friend began, I shall
have to speak on this question of Evolution again, because he
wasted the latter part of last evening’s time upon it, and has
also taken up part of to>night. I am sorry to have again to
say that my friend does not appear to be fully read on these
matters, and evidently shows that he is not quite competent to
speak with “authority” upon them. He has to-night stated
that the latest science teaches that the theory of Evolution
necessarily leads to the acceptance of a Deity/ Now, I have
to draw issue here, and to assert that Herbert Spencer, the
highest exponent of the theory of Evolution, affirms, that this
theory drives the very idea of a Deity out of the universe—
“ that God is unknowable, and Creation unthinkable.” My
friend is evidently too “ credulous ” when he reads from a
falsely-called “ Eeverend,” who asserts what he has read. If
my friend would read more generally, and not give us mere
scraps, we should then have a greater body of truth. In
regard to the waste of time on Thursday night, and the eulogy
pronounced upon this theory of eternal progression from little
germs, which advanced onward to man, and that contains
future glories that are now hardly imaginable, it appears to
me that when my friend looks at this matter fairly, and allows
unbiassed reason to have her w r ay, he must be convinced—
and probably a blush will suffuse his face that he has not seen
it sooner —that he has been ignoring his own true reason.
My friend, in stating that there has been eternal progression
without any break, shows that he has not sufficiently con-
sidered facts which geology reveals—and when I use those
expressions, Ido so because I desire to be candid. Ido not
wish to pass reflections upon my friend; but when he comes for-
ward as the assailant of Christianity, and presumes to challenge
right and left, I say his erudition, his general information,
must bear scrutiny; and I affirm, that wffien he states there
has been eternal progression, steady and continuous develop-


merit from lower to higher forms, he manifests an apparent
ignorance of facts, which is culpable in a person occupying
such a position as that which he has taken. If we take the
Paleozoic or primary period of the world’s formation, we find
certain organizations during that period; but when we step
from that to the mesozoic or secondary period, what do we
find? Why, we find something that would make a person
stepping from the one to the other feel that, like Eip Yan
Winkle, he had been sleeping one hundred years, so great and
remarkable is the change that has taken place. In the pale-
ozoic age we find nothing at all like what we see in the
mesozoic age. In the mesozoic age, instead of finding dwarfed
animals—as would be the case if my friend’s theory of steady
and continuous progression were correct —we find monstrous
reptiles, some of which were no less than 20 feet high. I give
you as my authority Professor Dawson, in his work on the
“History of the Earth and Man,” and I believe his state-
ments are unchallengeable. There is the ceteosaurus, or
“ Whale-Laurian,” supposed at one time to have been an im-
mense aquatic creature ; but since demonstrated by scientists
to be something like the hippopotamus, living in water and on
land, and subsisting on herbs. It was more than fifty feet
long, and ten feet high. And I ask : If there has not been
this steady progression in size, but this tremendous leap from
the smaller forms of the paleozoic to the monsters of the
mesozoic, and then back from these to the smaller forms of the
Neozoic or tertiary, how can my friend’s theory hold water?
When these facts are borne in mind, we see that between
those ages, there are chasms that cannot be crossed, and as
far as at present appears, it is utterly impossible for them
to be.
But more, I say that this theory does violence to reason,
because Spencer and others affirm, that all things have come
from inert matter —this speck of jelly being a more advanced
development. But until we see a stone before our eyes be-
coming an organised being, there is not the slightest reason
for supposing that inert, lifeless matter, can become a living
organisation. I challenge the world to find anything that
caps the absurd so much as the assertion that the character of
the Lord Jesus Christ—which you have heard my friend
eulogise in such glowing terras to-night—has, through this
steady progression in harmony with irreversible law, such as
he has attempted to describe, arisen from a little particle of


inert lifeless matter —that all those delightful teachings, those
pure moral sentiments, found in the G-ospels, have really been
developed from lifeless matter. And yet, while we are re-
quired to believe this, we are not told how this immense
chasm between this small beginning and transcendent ending
has been bridged ! I say that when my friend professes to be
rational, and yet holds such views as these, it shocks my sense
ef right to hear him make such a profession.
Further, if we take this idea of progress and view it in
the light of the history of man, where is the evidence ?He
said, on Lyell’s authority, that man has existed for 250,000
years. I have only to say in regard to Lyell’s hypotheses —
for they are but such —that they are not worthy of much
reliance, inasmuch as later science has shown that his state-
ments as to deposits in rivers, &c., were thousands of years in
error. But if we admit that man has been on the earth
250,000 years, we should expect, according to my friend’s
theory, that the remains of the first man found would be of a
very low type. Yet what is the case? The brain of the
earliest found man is fully equal in size to the brain of man
in the present day. If you go back to ancient times, and ask
where is this progression—is it in physical man ? —you find
that the men in ancient times were equal in stature, if not
greater, than at the present time ; or if it is in the intellectual
sphere of man’s being, you find that the ancients were equally
subtle with the men of these days. Specimens of their elo-
quence, and of their reasoning, have each been handed down
to us, and can hardly be surpassed. And, moreover, this
monstrous theory of Evolution held by my friend, instead of
being a modern discovery, is simply a resuscitation of a theory
held by the ancients, and found in the earliest poetry and
philosophy, when people were not only not crilical, but were
in a state of childhood and infancy. 1 affirm—and I ask my
friend to contradict it if he can —that this theory of Evolution
as at present held, is found in the earliest poetry and philo-
sophy of those ancient heathens, and thus, instead of being an
original discovery of the present day, it is but a resuscitation
—as are all those theories that oppose Christianity —of old
ideas long since exploded.
Now, let me pass on to this matter of the genealogies.
My friend made a great deal of the point that there are only
32 names in Matthew —admitting the four that should be
supplied from the Old Testament —whereas there are 42


in the genealogy by Luke ; and he pointed out that it was
something like a man living 400 or 450 years ago, marrying a
woman living in the present day. Let me say that lam in-
debted to my friend for his emphasis on this point; and let
me affirm also that when every objection that can be urged
against the Bible and Christianity is fairly examined, it amazes
me how that objection is turned into one of the strongest
possible proofs that mankind could conceive, of the truthful-
ness of that revelation. I affirm that the genealogy of Mat-
thew covers the same number of years as that of Luke, and I
invite my friend to attempt to controvert it. Ido not know
Avho may have written on this matter; but I like to obtain,
when possible, inforrftation at first hand, and as my friend
emphasised this point, I have taken the trouble to go through
the historical record of the Kings.
Let me premise that royal families are subject to greater
vicissitudes than private families ; and that the list of the
royal family given by Matthew would therefore be more sub-
ject to changes thau the private family recorded by Luke. If
I were to say that between the persons named in Matthew,
there were much longer periods —even a generation or two in
some cases —than those named by Luke ; unless I could give
proof of my assertion, you would think it a hard case indeed
which needed to rest upon such a supposition. Now it is ac-
tually the case that there are these long intervals. For in-
stance, in connection with the history in the Book of Kings ;
if we take David and Solomon, we find that David’s oldest
son did not reign, hut Solomon, one of the youngest. Solomon
was a young man when he began to reign, and was probably
born when David was about fifty years old; and as David,
after a reign of forty years, died at the age of seventy,
Solomon would thus be twenty jmars of age when he began
to reign. Now here, in the case of the first two names in
the descent, those of David and Solomon, we have a gap
where we can save twenty-five years, which will go towards
filling up the apparent difference between the two genealogies,
I have not time to present all the evidence I have prepared,
but I may mention in connection with King Jehoram, that the
fact is stated in 2 Chronicles xxi. 17, that his family were all
slain with the exception of his youngest child, and this
youngest child succeeded him on the throne. We find fur-
ther, that as the children of Ahaziah were all slain, except
the youngest, by Athaliah, his wicked and cruel mother,


another irregularity occurred in the succession, and conse-
quently in the genealogy also. There was an interregnum
o£ a few years, and then Joash, the son of Ahaziah, who had
been hidden six years, and was then seven years of age,
began to reign, and continued forty years. Another thing to
be noticed is, that when Jehoiachim was taken captive to
Babylon he was thirty-six years of age, and was thirty-seven
years in prison at Babylon. At the end of that time he was
taken out; his prison clothes taken off, and he was exalted
above the other subject kings in Babylon. At that time he
was seventy-three years of age. Salathiel, his son, w r as born
in Babylon, and doubtless after that captivity was over, and
thus we have another fifty years more gained towards filling
up this gap. 1 have gone carefully through the chronological
history of every one of those kings, and leaving out the
fourteen names from Salathiel down to Joseph, regarding
whom w r e have no chronological data, I have found that
Matthew’s genealogy covers 1,035 years, reckoning the
generation at twenty-five years; while Luke’s genealogy
reckoning the generation at the same rate of twenty-five
years, covers 1,050 years. Thus we have a discrepancy of
only fifteen years. If we had the chronological data of those
other fourteen names, do you not think we could fill up that
gap ? 1 affirm that this is simple fact, and can be supported
beyond all cavil. Under these circumstances it was utterly
impossible for Matthew to have manufactured that genealogy,
and it becomes one of the strongest evidences of the authen-
ticity of the book he has written. Those apparent contradic-
tions, when examined, prove that the man who wrote the gos-
pel was none other than a man of truth, a man who knew of
what he spoke, a man who may be relied upon. But another
argument is to be drawn from this fact. I say that Matthew’s
list having been based on a genealogical table of the Kings,
which, on comparison with the historical record, is proved to
be true, and as those genealogies were all lost at the destruc-
tion of Jerusalem, and have never since been recovered, the
fact that Matthew wrote that genealogy proves that he had
the record before him. As those records were lost at the
destruction of Jerusalem he must have written before that
event, and must have consequently written within forty years
of the death of our blessed Lord. We thus see how strong
is the confirmation which this genealogy gives to the Grospel
of Matthew. I will now pass on to my affirmative argument.


Mr. Bright has asserted that I have not attempted to
show the Divine character of Jesus in any sense, and I am re-
minded of the remark, that I must prove the Divine origin of
the Scriptures before I can prove my proposition. Now, if I
prove, as I have done, that those Scriptures existed hundreds
of before the events narrated in the Grospel took place,
and that the predictions, which could not have been uttered
by man, were literally fulfilled, does not that prove that the
predictions were given under Divine direction ? If my friend
is a Rationalist, using his reason, surely I need not emphasize
that any more. But he says, even if all those prophecies
were admitted, they would not prove the Divine origin of
Christ, and I suppose he would say in the same way with re-
gard to miracles, that if admitted, they would not prove the
Divine origin of Christianity. Now let me ask: If those
prophecies were uttered hundreds of years before the event,
and were all literally fulfilled, saying that a certain person
was to come, that he was to be of Divine nature but in human,
form, and that he was to atone for man; and if that person
comes, and works miracles in attestation of his claims, such as
no mortal could work —can the human mind demand stronger
proof than this ? I ask my friend, if he does demand stronger
proof, to tell us of what kind it is.
Mr. Bright : My friend asked if it were not an essen-
tial part of his mission in this debate to prove Christianity
from the documents. It is no doubt an essential part of
what he has to prove, but it is not the most important part.
He has further to prove that those documents are of Divio©
origin. Suppose that instead of discussing with my friend I
were discussing with a Buddhist; and that this Buddhist
asserted to me that Buddha was divinely born of Maia—that
being a virgin she had that child, Buddha, who was the man-
G-od. I ask how he knows that. He quotes from his sacred
books in proof of his assertion. Would I not then come with,
this further demand : You say that the texts you quote are of
remote antiquity. Ido not doubt it, because it is generally
from remote antiquity that such stories emanate. But now
will you please demonstrate that those texts are of Divine
origin P I say that is the crux my friend has to tackle. The
thing he has to do after, or before, proving Christianity from
the documents, is to prove the Divine origin of those documents.


My friend affirmed that Evolution left no opening, as it
were, for a Deity, and he asserted that scientific men denied
the existence of any divine power.
Mb. Geeeh : I only cited Herbert Spencer,
Me. Height : He referred especially to Herbert
Spencer. How Herbert Spencer —I recollect as well as if I
were reading the book now —uses in more than one place the
words, “The Power that controls the Universe.”
Mb. Geeeh : What is it ?
Me. Height : Herbert Spencer does not pretend to say
what that power is, and to do that, I think, will take a far
greater man than my friend on the platform. With regard to
the question of Evolution, if it w r ere part of the theme we
have met to debate, I would be happy to discuss it with my
friend, and try to prove to him that, rationally regarded,
it does not for one moment exclude the Divine Mind
from the Universe—nay, rather that it insists upon a Dhine
Mind not inspiring the world 2,000 years ago or more,
and then retiring, but a Divine Mind inspiring the
world now, still regulating the world in all directions,
and controlling its affairs—a living God, not a God
of the remote past. My friend spoke of lifeless matter.
Evolution would never sanction the use of the term. There
is no such thing as lifeless matter. We do not know, as all
Evolutionists say, the promise and potentiality of matter. We
do not know what each atom of matter contains. The Evo-
lutionist sees reason to believe that every atom of matter is
inspired by the Divine mind —that God is universal and
infinite. Let those who believe that God is not infinite and not
universal conceive of an atom of matter without His power in it.
fff it be true, as asserted in the Christian Scriptures, that not
a sparrow falls to the ground without the Eather —if it be
true, as Paul declares, that God is beyond all, above all, and
dn all, surely there cannot be an atom of matter anywhere
that is not a manifestation of God.
I pass over what my friend said with regard to Lyell’s
hypothesis. I believe that book of Lyell’s —the Antiquity of
Man —can very well take care of itself. It has been criticised
over and over again, and numbers have endeavoured to show
that it is not based on sound scientific knowledge, but they
have failed most notably. And even those who argued that
Lyell was wrong, have never for one moment pretended to
assert that Genesis was right.


I come now once more to this question of the genealogy
of Jesus. It has been re-introduced by my friend ; and I
think I might almost leave it to my audience to judge whether
in going to the Scriptures to put this and that passage to-
gether, and to make this Mosaic work in order to discover
what is true religion, and in avoiding all reference to what I
spoke of as that which Jesus himself declared was necessary
to salvation, my friend does not stand self-condemned. If we
have to go and piece this and that together—if we have to
obliterate the name of Joseph in the genealogy and insert that
of Mary —if we have laboriously to make up for large
spaces of missing time—and all this in order to justify the
truth of a particular doctrine—surely it is more in accordance
with rational Christianity to go to the fountain-head and see
what Jesus himself affirmed when asked what was necessary
in order to obtain eternal life. With respect to the genealogy;
my friend acknowledges that there Are only four more names
which can be introduced into Matthew’s account in order to
dll the large gap between it and the genealogy by Luke.
iNow, I do not want to charge my friend with what he did not
hesitate to charge against me, namely, a lack of ingenuousness
hut I do not think he should have calmly stated the other
evening that if the names in the Old Testament were intro-
duced into the genealogy by Matthew, they would make up
for this alarming gap of 400 or 4-50 years, without at the
same time telling you that there were only four names that
■could be so introduced. However, my friend insists now there
are four names to be introduced into the genealogy by
Matthew far the period that elapsed between David and
Joseph. If this be so, I would ask him to account for that
■verse in Matthew, which says that there are fourteen genera-
tions from David to the carrying into Babylon, and fourteen
generations from the carrying into Babylon to the time of
Jesus ? If those four names are introduced, this statement of
Matthew’s is wrong, and there are more than fourteen genera-
tions. But if the four names are not introduced, we have the
lapse of time I have pointed out. But even with the intro-
duction of those four names there is still this bungling pro-
• cess to be performed by which my friend endeavoured to show
that one king lived to 70 years of age, and did not have a son
until he was nearly dying, and so on.
I will now pass to what my friend said in answer to my
■ demand that he would prove the Divine origin of the Scrip-


tures, from which he quoted. He pointed out that there-
were predictions concerning them, and he alleged that those
predictions could not have been uttered by man. How, I ask
again how does my friend know what can he uttered by man r
and what cannot? I have here a volume, entitled “Predic-
tions Realised in Modern Times,” published in London. This
volume is filled with latter-day prophecies, very many of them
of a most extraordinary character, a large part of which were
verified in quite as strange a fashion as that verification which
my friend desires you to believe in. Therefore, even suppos-
ing that there were such predictions, they do not prove that
they required more than the human mind, assisted by that
inspiration which I conceive to be universal—that inspiration
which is operating now as in the past. We have no proof
that the human mind is incapable of originating those Tire-
dictions.
Then my attention is directed towards miracles. Well, I
assert that the miracles of antiquity —those of my friend the
same as others —must stand or fall entirety by the rules of
historical evidence. For the proof of a miracle, we require
testimony of a most overwhelming kind. You have seen in
our own day what sort of testimony is required to prove a
miracle. You know the reception which the alleged miracles
of one Christian Church encounter from the rest of Christen-
dom. I have read accounts of some of these miracles —
especially of two in France, one being the alleged apparition
of the Virgin Mary in the mountains of La Salette—and I
must say that if anything could prove so remarkable and mar-
vellous an occurrence, the proofs contained in a book published
on the subject seem to be altogether irrefutable. The
examiners into the proofs on that occasion were not priests of
the Roman Catholic Church itself, but included a vast number
of freethinking magistrates ; and the testimony they elicited
from the two children, examined apart, and from the various
persons living in the neighbourhood, was of the most astonish-
ing character. If alleged miracles can be proved by historical
testimony, then it seems to me that these apparitions would
stand a better chance of being demonstrated than any similar
incident in the remote past. For if you examine the Scrip-
ture miracles as historians, what evidence realty have you ?
Have you the testimony of any one person upon whom you
can place your finger as a reliable historical character? Can
you point to one of them as you can point to Josephus, and


«ay where lie was born, give the names of his parents, give an
account of his life ? Not one witness of those miracles can
be produced who stands in the same relation to them as
Josephus stands to that period of history. I say, therefore,
that with regard to the testimony of miracles historical
methods have to be pursued, and before you can argue from
them that any book is of Divine Origin, you have to bring
historical tests to bear, and discover if you can whether those
miracles really occurred ; and when you have so substantiated
them, you have further to learn whether they are of a
■character demanding Divine intercession, or whether they are
merely due to unexplained laws in nature.
Me. Greejt : My friend tells us no one knows what is
in matter, or what matter is; yet strange to say, we have this
paradox: while nobody can tell what is in matter, he affirms
that a part of the Divine mind is in every particle of matter,
and that there is no such thing as dead matter ; although our
■senses would say that if “inert” means “lifeless,” there is
an immense amount of lifeless matter indeed. I leave the
paradox with him.
With regard to the saying of the young Euler to Christ,
Good Master,” &c , it is not needful that I should trouble
about it, as I think no one using his reason, is at all likely to
misunderstand it. As to modern prophecies, I can only say :
Produce them; show that they have the same credentials as
those we say are recorded in this Book, and then they will be
worthy of consideration. Further, in regard to the miracles
said to be performed among the Eoman Catholics, I am not
here at all to question anything about the Eoman Catholics,
or any other body; but I say : Let us have evidence such as
can be presented in favour of the miracles of the New
Testament, and whether my friend will believe them or not, I
will believe them; for if they have the same kind of evidence,
they must be true.
Now, let me resume my affirmative argument. I may
say that I am sorry I have not had time to go all through the
predictions ; I can only now simply state that they have
reference to the whole of our Saviour’s life, His sufferings,
His death as an atonement for man, His resurrection, and
His ascension. All* these things are predicted, and they
were literally fulfilled. But there is one special prediction in


the 9th chapter of the Book of Daniel worthy of special and',
emphatic notice, and which I regret I cannot now dwell upon,
where the very year of our Lord’s coming is predicted; and
I affirm, that according to the testimony of Josephus, he came
exactly at that time when those seventy weeks of years were
fulfilled. I ask you to study that prophecy for yourselves, as
time fails me to more fully refer to it to-night. Not only
were the seventy weeks of years fulfilled, but also the very
things that were predicted would be accomplished when he'
came. Again I repeat, that as it is beyond the power of the
human mind to foresee events hundreds of years before they
take place, and especially such along concatenation of events,,
beyond all doubt, the book in which those predictions are
found, proves itself to be from the Divine Mind, and from no
other source.
Now, taking those things as I have stated, and passing,
onto this question of miracles which my friend has referred
to —thereby rather anticipating my argument —I would just
say that he takes the position that all miracles are impossible,,
inasmuch as it is more likely that all testimony would be
false, than that a miracle would be true ; and in this he fol-
lows in the path of that “ modern man of God,” David Hume
—whom he characterises by that expression. Let me call
attention to this: My friend denies the possibility of any
testimony to prove a miracle. I really must again bring up
that Eastern prince, and the formation of ice. My friend,
affirms that miracles are against ail human experience. That
Eastern prince was told by men from colder climates that
water, under certain atmospheric influences, congealed. The
Prince exclaims: “I will not believe it! It is contrary to
all human experience.” He is told : “ Here are men prepared
to testify.” They say: “We come from that country; we
have seen it with our eyes ; we have handled the congealed
water with our hands; we know it to be true.” “ But, sirs,”
he would say, “ I believe it is more likely that your testimony
should be false than that a miracle should be true ; and, there-
fore, as this which you tell me is contrary to all human
experience (meaning simply his experience), I refuse to-
believe it.” And David Hume’s and my friend Mr. Bright’s
statement, that “It is contrary to all human experience,”
simply means that it is contrary to the experience of David
Hume and Mr. Charles Bright, and those who think it well
to regard the matter in that light.


I wish to say in regard to miracles, that of course they
are uncommon. I would define a miracle as an event whose
only antecedent is the Divine will and power. Miracles, in
their very nature, must be uncommon. We have miracles
really all around us —in the sense of things the modus operandi
of which we do not understand—in fact myriads of miracles—
hut because they are common, and are in harmony with certain
supposed laws by which they are governed, we do not style
them miracles. We therefore say, that miraculous inter-
ventions of the Divine Being —acts simply resulting from His
will —must in their very nature be uncommon. Hence, when
any friend asks: “ Why are there not miracles now equally
as in the past? ” I reply: They would no longer be miracles
if they were as common as you would like them to be. But I
ask : Are not miracles possible ? Is there a human being in
the world who can venture to say they are impossible P Pro-
bably my friend will, because he appears to be a Pantheist,
according to his last statement about every particle of matter
having in it a part of the Divine essence, and Pantheism is
simply Atheism, the denial of the existence of a personal
Deity ; therefore, if my friend is to be understood to be an
Atheist in this sense, as his words would seem to imply, he of
course will say that miracles are impossible. The only ques-
tion for us to consider is: May miracles be reasonably ex-
pected in the presentation of a new religion which has im-
perative claims upon the attention of man, and the rejection
of which involves sorrow to those so rejecting it? Certainly,
if Giod chose to impose a religion upon man, the rejection of
which must be calamitous to him, he must, in all reason,
make the evidences by which that religion presents itself to.
man, so clear and convincing, that no reasonable and impartial
man could reject them. Hence, we think Nationally, that
miracles must have been wrought to attest the Divine origin
of the religion of Jesus. Now, we need only ask; Have we
testimony that miracles were wrought, and was that testimony
reliable ? Passing that by for the moment, I wish you to
notice the miracle of our Saviour’s own life and teachings
and I say that in this itself, we have a greater miracle than
anything that can be found throughout the world. On this
point let me read from Rousseau, one of those who take a
position similar to that of my friend : “Is it possible,” says
he, “ that the sacred personage whose history it (the Bible),
contains should be himself a mere man ? What sweetness*


what purity in his manner ! What an affecting gracefulness
in his instructions ! What sublimity in his maxims ! AFhat
profound wisdom in his discourses ! What presence of mind,
what subtlity, what fitness in his replies ! How great the
command over his passions! AVhere is the man, where the
philosopher, who could so live and so die, without weakness
and without ostentation P The death of Socrates peacefully
philosophizing-among his friends, appears the most agreeable
that one could wish ; that of Jesus, expiring in agonies, abused,
insulted, and accused by a whole nation, is the most horrible
that one could fear. Socrates, indeed, in receiving the cup of
poison, blessed the weeping executioner who administered it;
but Jesus, amidst excruciating tortures, prayed for his merci-
less tormenters. Yes, if the life and death of Socrates were
those of a sage, the life and death of Jesus are those of a
<xod.” *
Now, let me read the words of Napoleon the First, a man
whose utterances are worthy of being heard :
“In every other life,” says Napoleon, “than that of
Christ, what imperfections, what inconsistencies ! Where is
the character that no opposition is sufficient to overwhelm ?
Where is the individual whose conduct is never modified by
■event or circumstance, who never yields to the influences of
the time, never accommodates himself to manners or passions
that he cannot prevail to alter ?
“I defy you to cite another life like that of Christ, exempt
from the least vacillation of this kind, untainted by any such
hlots or wavering purpose. From first to last he is the same;
always the same, majestic and simple, infinitely severe, and
infinitely gentle; throughout a life that may be said to have
been lived under the public eye, Jesus never gives occasion to
find fault; the prudence of his conduct compels our admira-
tion by its union of force and gentleness. Alike in speech
■and action, Jesus is enlightened, consistent, and calm. Sub-
limity is said to be an attribute of Divinity; what name, then,
shall we give to him in whose character were united every
attribute of the sublime ?
“ I know men, and I tell you that Jesus is not a man.
“ In Lycurgus, Numa, Confucius, and Mahomet, I see
only legislators who, having attained to the first place in the
State, have sought the best solution of the social problem ; I
* Emile ou de VEducation, lect. iv., quoted in Dr. Schaff’s Person of
Christ, p. 340, 341;


see nothing in them that reveals divinity; they themselves
have not pitched their claims so high.
“ It is evident that it is only posterity that has deified the
world’s first despots,—heroes, the princes of the nations, and
the founders of the earliest republics. Eor my part, 1 see in
the heathen gods and those great men, beings of the same
nature with myself. Their intelligence, after all, differs from
mine only in form. They burst upon the world, played a
great part in their day, as 1 have done in mine. Nothing in
them proclaims divinity; on the contrary, I see numerous
resemblances between them and me. Common weaknesses and
error-!. Their faculties are such as 1 myself possess ; there is
no difference save in the use that we have made of them, in
accordance with the different ends we have in view, our differ-
ent countries and the circumstances of our times.
“It is not so with Christ. Everything in Him amazes
me’; His spirit outreaches mine, and His will confounds me.
Comparison is impossible between Him and any other being
in the world. He is truly a being by himself ; His ideas and
His sentiments, the truth that He announces, His manner of
convincing, are all beyond humanity and the natural order of
things.
“ His birth, and the story of His life, the profoundness
of His doctrine which overturns all difficulties and is their
most complete solution, His Grospel, the singularity of this
mysterious being, His appearance, His empire, His progress
through all countries and kingdoms, —all this is to me a
prodigy, an unfathomable mystery, which plunges me into a
reverie from which there is no escape, a mystery which is ever
within my view, a permanent mystery which I can neither
deny nor explain.
“ I see nothing here of man. Near as I approach,
closely as I may examine, all remains above my comprehen-
sion, great with a greatness that crushes me; it is in vain
that I reflect—all remains unaccountable.” *
Now let me read an extract from John Stewart Mill, who
says: —
“Above all, the most valuable part of the effect on the
•character which Christianity has produced by holding up in
a divine person a standard of excellence and a model for
imitation, is available even to the absolute unbeliever, and
* Sentiments de Napoleon sur le Christianisme par le Chevalier De
JBeauterne, quoted from Hanna’s Life of Christ, p. 254 —256.


can never be lost to humanity. It is the God incarnate, more
than the God of the Jew or nature, who, being idealised, has
taken so great and salutary a hold on the human mind. And
whatever else may be taken away from us by rational criticism,
Christ is still left, a unique figure, not more unlike all his
precursors than all his followers, even those who had the
direct benefit of his personal teaching. It is of no use to say
that Christ, as exhibited in the Gospels, is not historical, and
that we know not how much of what is admirable has been
superadded by the tradition of his followers. The tradition
of followers suffices to insert any number of marvels, and may
have inserted all the miracles which he is reported to have
wrought. But, who, among his disciples, or among their
proselytes, was capable of inventing the sayings ascribed to
Jesus, or of imagining the life and character revealed in the
Gospel ? Certainly not the fishermen of Galilee ; as certainly
not St. Paul, whose character and idiosyncrasies were of a
totally different sort. Still less the early Christian writers,
in whom nothing is more evident than that the good which
was in them was all derived from the higher source.” *
If, then, neither the fishermen of Galilee, nor St. Paul
nor the early Christians, were capable of inventing these
early records, whence did they come ?
If my friend can explain a life like that on any other
basis than that given in the Scriptures, we shall thank him for
the explanation.
Mk. Bright : I am certainly rather surprised that my
friend, after complaining of the pressure of time, should go on
quoting those long opinions of other people regarding the
character of Jesus. If it comes to a question of opinion on
the Deity of Jesus, against Rosseau’s I would be inclined to*
stake that of Voltaire, against Napoleon I would pit Frederick
of Prussia, and as to the opinion of John Stewart Mill, I, for
one, cordially say “Amen” to it. But my friend, although-
finding time to read these long extracts, declined to answer
my arguments respecting the teachings of Jesus when
addressed as “ Good Master.” Surely that quotation of mine
deserved a word of comment, It must be tolerably palpable
that there, at all events, Jesus himself seems in so many
Essays on “ Nature, Eeligion, and Theism.” p. 253.


works to rebuke anyone who would attempt to apply to him
the epithet which he says is omy to be applied to God.
Surely that must be the signification of the quotation if we
take the fair meaning of it. I would again ask my friend
if he will condescend to answer those arguments which in the
early part of the debate he said he was waiting for ? I ask
him too, if he can give any explanation of that heart-rending
exclamation which came from the lips of the crucified Jesus,,
and manifested, if anything could, the depths of human
suffering :—My God! my God! why hast thou forsaken me r’*
Will he explain in accordance with his theory of the Deity of
Jesus, whence that cry arose, and to whom it was addressed ?
I call attention again to the fact that we are now away from
our proper theme- We are debating the Biblical origin of
Christianity which is not, in this discussion, denied; but waiving
that, 1 ask : What is his explanation of this heart-rending
appeal, as well as of the quotations to which he has avoided
reference.
Moreover, on the question of the fulfilment of predic-
tions being necessary to show the Divine origin of any Scrip-
ture, I would refer to the prediction stated to be made by
Jesus, that he would remain three days and three nights in
the grave ; whereas, according to the account itself, he was
only one day and two nights therein. I would ask my friend
to explain the failure of that prediction,if by the success of
predictions we are to judge whether or not Christianity is of
Divine origin. My friend misstated altogether the argument
of Hume, and therefore, of course, the position I take up as
endorsing the argument contained in Hume’s celebrated essay.
My friend stated that Hume asserted, and that I asserted
with him —and I am greatly indebted to my friend for coup-
ling the two names together —that it was more likely that all-
testimony was untrue than that miracles were true. How,
that is not at all the argument taken up by David Hume in
connection with miracles. His assertion is that we only know
of the natural —of what occurs in nature —by testimony, that
we can only ground our opinion upon testimony, and, in sta-
ting “ such is the course of nature,” we mean that “ such is
the testimony of observed facts.” Therefore, when any one
person, or two or three persons, or even a hundred persons,,
come and tell us something opposed to the general testimony
of observed facts, it is more likely that those men lie, or are
mistaken, than that the testimony of the rest of the race


should fail us. He contends, moreover, that when we get suffi-
cient testimony to prove a miracle, as against the overwhelming
testimony by which we prove natural events, then the miracle
ceases to be a miracle, and becomes a natural event. It is
proved by such a mass of testimony that it is no longer a mi-
racle, but takes its place in nature, and is discovered to have
been before but an unexplained and misapprehended fact of
nature. Thus, in the past / we have those who were ignorant
of the way in which eclipses were produced, regarding them
as miracles. Nor can we be astonished that when the ancients
saw the face of the sun or moon darkened, they should have
supposed, with the little knowledge they then had of the Uni-
verse, that some offended Deity was hiding the face of the
luminary, and that it was a miraculous portent ? So the rain-
bow was also regarded as a miraculous portent, as w r ere innu-
merable phenomena we now know to be natural. The argu-
ment of Hume is, that if it comes to pass, through frequent
occurxmice, that any wonderful thing regarded in the past as
a miracle is recognized as a fact through sufficient testimony,
then we come to know that it was not miraculous, but a natu-
ral event. That is precisely what is now occurring with many
of the incidents that were believed in Bible times to be mira-
culous. Why, Materialists like Lewes, Clifford, and H. G.
Atkinson, are admitting that there are many strange occult
phenomena in mesmerism and clairvoyance, before deemed
-either untrue or miraculous, but regarding which, such a suffi-
ciency of evidence is being obtained as to show that they have
to take their place in a domain of nature not previously in-
vestigated. That is the view I take of many so-called miracles.
The time will come —nay, it is rapidly approaching—when
nearly all those marvels of the past will be seen to belong to
•a portion of nature not yet fully explored ; but, if proved to
be true, they will take their place as natural events, and will
cease to be regarded as miraculous. Hume’s statement re-
mains unanswered and unanswerable, that when you get testi-
mony sufficient to prove an apparent miracle it ceases to be a
miracle, and is recognized as a natural event. That disposes
altogether of our persistent friend, the Eastern prince.
Furthermore, I am asked if I can say how the Divine
Power could operate, and assign limits to such operation ? I
■do not presume to say; but Ido say that we only know the
Divine Power by his manifestations. It is what we see in
nature that teaches us how God inspires and acts; and when


we say that a thing is not possible, or that it is opposed to
nature, we simply mean that God has not taught us that he
acts in that way. He teaches us day by day the method of
his action in nature. We bow to that teaching, and if we
discover in the remote past any event that seems to fly in the
face of observed facts, we await further evidence. We do not
even rashly pronounce it impossible; because as the French
philosopher Arago says: “ Out of the sphere of mathematics
it is presumptuous to use the word impossible.” My friend
thinks that occurrences happening in occult directions, such
as the spheres of Mesmerism and Clairvoyance are impossible;
but I simply say we know of God’s action merely by the
observed mode of that action. We investigate nature to dis-
cover what natural laws are; and when we speak of natural
laws, we simply mean the way in which observed phenomena
operate. We do not mean that there is some external law-
giver who fulminates those laws. By the law of gravitation
is meant the mode in which bodies in space tend towards each
other. By the law of evolution is meant the way in which
matter gradually changes, unfolds, and develops. Thus when
we speak of a law of nature we simply mean the way in
which phenomena operate, and hence the way in which the
Divine Mind causes them to operate. Therefore when we
read of a fact in nature termed a miracle, and said to attest
Divine power, we say that the Divine power is known only
through nature, that the alleged occurrence is opposed to the
observed method in which the Divine power operates, and
that we do not see sufficient evidence to convince us that the
miracle ever happened.
Moreover, we must not forget this : My friend in answer
to my question why miracles did not happen now, said that if
they happened frequently they would become common. All I
can say is that they did happen frequently, if we can
accept the testimony which proved satisfactory in those olden
times. They were always happening, at the genesis of every
nation. We find miracles at the commencement of the
Greek history, and we have the miraculous preservation of
Bomulus and Bemus at the foundation of the Homan nation.
At the initiation of the Hindoo dispensation there is nothing
but miracle. The Buddhist religion is all based on miracles.
The same is the case with the Mahommedan. "We find
Mahomet having interviews with the angel Gabriel, and we
have still, if we choose to believe it, Mahomet’s coffin


miraculously suspended between.heaven and earth. Miracles
in the olden times were almost as common as natural facts are
now, and people were prepared as readily to believe in them.
My friend has twitted me with being a Pantheist. If I
am a Pantheist, surely Paul, who said God is above all, beyond
all, and in you all, must also have been a Pantheist. It seems
to me that whatever may be true or false in religion, Pantheism
must be true when it declares the infinitude of God, when
it affirms that God is everywhere, that there is no escape from
Him, —that He is universal. Whatever else may be true or
false, to my mind that declaration of Pantheism must be
true. But if it be true it does not follow that the love of
God is incapable of making itself felt in response to the love
of His human family ; it does not put that love beyond our
reach. I say we are still enabled to receive that love, and
enabled to feel that we are nurtured within the arms of the
Infinite. It is this very supremacy of law, this absence of
miracles and magic that enables men who study nature to rely
on the Divine Soul, to feel the utmost confidence in Him; to
rest assured that no irresponsible power can cast us into eter-
nal torment if we do not believe in one direction, and eter-
nally favour us if we only believe in what seems to us to be
incapable of proof. We know, as Paul said, that as a man
sows so he shall reap ; and are aware that we may rely on the
Divine law in every direction. It is this very reliance on law
that enables scientific men in our day to discern that even in
morality and in sociology—that is, the science of society—we
may still rely on law, and therein discern Divine principles at
work, assuring us that here too, precisely as we sow, so we
shall reap, that just as we are enabled to act now, so we shall
gain the bane or benefit of those actions in this world, and in
all worlds beyond.
Mb- Green : As my friend quotes the apostle Paul to
•contradict his (Mr. Bright’s) own statement, I think I may
very well leave the matter in its present position. In one
breath he said that persons are condemned merely because
they do not believe, and that they are saved merely because
they believe ; and in the next breath contradicted it by quoting
Pauls words, that “ as a man sows, so shall he reap,” (which
is the real teaching of the Gospel.) I think I may leave that
matter to answer itself.


In connection with Pantheism, let me say that Paul was
not writing o£ such as my friend Mr, Bright—good, upright,
and moral a man as he may be—but writing of Christianity
and of this Christian doctrine, that the Spirit of God dwells
in the heart of every Christ-loving man who is sincerely seek-
ing to do God’s will; and therefore, “ God is in you all,” not
in every human being, which is the sense in which my friend
uses it. My friend says I misrepresented Hume. Well, I
will come to that when I mention miracles again.
He asks me to favour him with an explanation of the
passage “ Good Master,” and to give him the meaning of the
exclamation “My God! My God ! why hast Thou forsaken
Me ! He also refers to the Saviour not being three days and
three nights in the grave. Some have said —I do not know if
it be true —that my friend is of Jewish birth. (Hisses.)
When I tell you that I would regard it as the highest honour
on earth if 1 were a descendant of Abraham, why do you act
thus ? There are a large number of Hebrew gentlemen on
the platform, and they all well know that there are what are
called Special Sabbaths —that is, days of rest —under the
Jewish dispensation ; and in the Gospel narrative it will be
seen that that day was a “ high day ” —a special Sabbath—for
which the day on which Jesus was.put to death was the prepa-
ration. How, I have simply to call upon my friend to prove
that that Sabbath day, on the day preceding which Christ was
crucified, was the legal seventh-day Sabbath, and was not one
of those special Sabbaths that are so often spoken of in the
Old Testament Scriptures. Then, in regard to that statement
about “ Good Master.” Now, I have to put a question to my
friend. Jesus said to the Jews : “ What think ye of Christ ?
Whose son is He ?” I would put the same question to Mr.
Bright. They replied, “ The son of David.” “ How then,”
said Jesus, “ did David call Him Lord ?” I ask my friend to
explain how the Messiah could be David’s son, and yet David’s
Lord ? Now, just as the Saviour presents His Divinity in
that question, so He presents another thought in this expres-
sion “ Why callest thou Me good ?” That young man who
came to Him looked upon Jesus merely as a man, and because
evidently he was a self-righteous man, because he prided him-
self upon having observed the perfect law of God, the
Saviour wanted to infix in that man’s mind the fact that there
was no earthly being good, that is, no merely human being ;
therefore Jesus, in speaking to this young ruler, who looked


upon Him simply as a man, and saying “ "Why callest thou Me
good ?” really meant to impress upon him this fact: That no
man on earth is good, and that consequently neither was he
(the young man) good. The Saviour is not there speaking in
the sense my friend would imply, but is seeking to impress on
this young man the fact that there is no mortal on earth good;
that goodness belongs only to the Divine Being, in its true
and essential sense.
My friend asks why the expression: “My God! My
God ! why hast Thou forsaken Me!” was used? I reply,
simply because of that which to my friend is so absurd—be-
cause Jesus was perfect man and yet perfect Deity, manifest
in human form, and was dying in man’s form and on man’s
behalf. It was because He was our substitute, dying on our
behalf that the Divine Being, looking upon Him as such, and
as having resting upon Him the accumulated sins of the
world, did not give Him aid in that hour of His extremity;
therefore, as He was in man’s form, so, in our stead, bereft of
all support, as a culprit dying on account of wrong, but at
the same time realising His own close relationship to G-od, He
exclaimed, “My God! My God ! why hast Thou forsaken
Me,” and with a broken heart He gave up His Spirit. That
appears to be the reason why.
How, in regard to miracles, my friend says I misrepre-
sented Hume. Well, lam quite content to leave my repre-
sentation as it stands, and when the debate is published you
will see that I have just stated, only in other words, what my
friend asserted. He says, speaking of phenomena unexplain-
able to the ancients, but since found to be in harmony with
natural laws, “ these were once miracles, but are not now.”
But suppose that a man in that day came and said : “ You
think these are all miracles, but I am able to explain the whole
phenomena in connection with these matters, and to show you
they are simply the working out of the laws of the Divine
Being.” Would not that person show a knowledge beyond
and above all that portion of the race then living, which would
prove that he had a revelation, that must have come, not from
human consciousness, but from the Divine Being, and would
not that have been a miracle ? But what do we see in con-
nection with the miracles of Christ ? If we have dead men
raised to life, if we have disease dispersed at a word—the
blind made to see, the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak—done
simply by the power within Himself —I ask my friend to deal


with those matters and show how they can be resolved into
operations merely of certain laws P And even when he does
this, I shall simply affirm that it only proves that the Lord
Jesus Christ had a knowledge of those laws which no mortal
could have, and it therefore truly demonstrates His Deity.
Let me ask you to notice that all His miracles were cog-
nisable by the senses, done in the open day, and in the pre-
sence of large numbers of witnesses, and that the Gospel
writers who give the accounts of them, saw the miracles with
their own eyes. If you can find miracles wrought in these
days which can present such reliable testimony, I say by all
means believe them. It is a peculiar characteristic of Christ’s
miracles that they displayed no vindictiveness, and that they
were purely works of benevolence. See Him raising the
daughter of Jairus to life ; giving back a living son to the
widowed and previously sorrowing mother; behold Lazarus
given back to his distressed and dejected sisters ; see Him
feeding thousands with bread miraculously increased. These
are all deeds of a character indicating that the Being who
manifested this power was animated, not by “ human ” sym-
pathy merely, but by a spirit such as was never before seen
in man.
Then take the miracle of the resurrection, predicted by
the Saviour himself before it took place. His death he pre-
dicted, and, as my friend himself has said, his resurrection
also. The disciples, notwithstanding that they had been told
over and over again, did not expect it; and when they heard
of it, they would not believe it, except upon ocular demon-
stration, and those men were only convinced when that de-
monstration was given. It was given to eleven witnesses,,
and afterwards to five hundred, more than half of whom, Paul
says, were alive when he wrote that letter to the Corinthian
Church, which even Strauss admits was written within thirty
years of our Saviour’s death. I ask how can these things be
untrue ? Then, if we take into account the character of those
men who were witnesses —fishermen whose keen eyes were
well suited to detect such things—men who for three and a,
half years had been companions of the Lord. They saw him
after he was risen : they heard him speak; they saw him eat,
and ate with him; touched his body; saw the prints of
the nails and the spear; and, I ask, Could these men have
been mistaken in connection with such matters as these?
It may be said they might have been deceivers, or they might


ihave been deceived. What I have'stated proves that they could
not have been deceived ; deception was utterly impossible, be-
cause of the vast number of witnesses, which are given as five
hundred and twelve, Paul himself being included. That
those witnesses were not deceivers is, I think, very clear
from the fact that there could be no reason whatever for any
deception on their part. The G-ospel narrative is such that
it could never have been conceived by them. A spiritual
system such as that developed in Christianity was beyond the
capacities of any men such as those. I have pointed out by
the quotations from Mill, and others, that those men were
incapable of giving expression to a system so unique, so com-
plicated, and yet so simple and perfect in all its parts, as the
Christian system. Then, friends, let me ask you further,
what object could those men have in thus acting as impostors?
They were disinterested, were they not ? What was it that
they gained p What could men like these have for their ob-
ject in propounding a morality such as that in the New Testa-
ment record? Was it to make money? Priests in these
-days oftentimes play upon the credulity of people in order to
get money ; but in this blessed volume the very opposite of
that spirit is seen. Had they no self-interest whatever ?
Tes, they had ; but it was an interest not of the pocket, but
•of the soul, referring not to time but to eternity, and to secure
their interest they were terribly in earnest. Animated by a
purified spirit, they followed Christ in all his teachings, and
in thus carrying out all that he had pointed out to them, they
realised that their highest spiritual interests were secured.
They had now found that after which the ardent souls of the
whole human race had been yearning for century after cen-
tury, and which they had been privileged now to see. I say
that, when we look at all these things, and consider that those
men died in attestation of their testimony, the evidence is
■overwhelming.
My friend asked the other evening what proof it was of
the veracity of those writers that they were willing to die for
their Master, and said that many persons had been found who
were willing to die for their noble masters, and that this case
■of the Apostles was one of a similar nature. Now, it is true
the Apostles were willing to lay down their lives for Christ in
the manner suggested, for we find that on one occasion, when
Jesus was going to Jerusalem into the midst of the enemies
who were thirsting for his life, Thomas said to the other


disciples, “Let us also go that we may die with him.” But
in the present instance there is no parallel between the cases.
Those men died, not for their Master, but in attestation of the
truth of the things which they asserted in regard to him, and of
which they declared they had actual knowledge. They died, if
my friend’s theory is true, in favour of what they knew to be
a lie ; and I say, that for men to give up all that is dear to
humanity, everything that is regarded as pleasant and agree-
able, and to their worldly interests, and to die for what they
knew to be untrue, is a greater miracle than the world has yet
been called upon to receive.
Mr. Bright : It would seem to mo just as impossible as
I believe it seems to my friend, that any man should yield up
his life for what he knew to be a lie. Men do not die on be-
half of known lies. The Apostles died for their faith in a
glorious commander. Jesus was a peaceful and willing
sacrifice, —one who died for them and all mankind in one sense
—the sense in which all great martyrs die, in order that by
their death they may show the better way—the way of
righteousness, to the race. I say there is nothing astonishing
in the fact of the apostles being willing to die for their faith
in a man like that. But does their death for him prove that
he was the Deity P Is there an atom of proof in that death
of theirs of the truth of my friend’s theology? On the con-
trary, must we not be surprised to see that men should, like
the Apostles, live throughout a considerable time with a man
who is declared to be the Deity, and that yet they should not
know it? If they did not know it, living through a portion of
his life with him, can we possibly know it on written testimony p
If they did not know it, and were so astonished when they
heard of his resurrection (the very event that might be
anticipated of a Deity) that they took it at first to be an “idle
tale,” can those who now elect to think clearly on the subject
be blamed if they disbelieve this theology to be true ? Those
men might die on behalf of the spiritual hero, and the
system they wished to uphold. I believe thoroughly that
they were completely earnest men, but earnest men are not
infallible; they are not always capable of distinguishing pre-
cisely truth from error.
My friend, at the commencement of his last address,
took an opportunity of stating that I was of Jewish descent.


"Well, I do not know for what purpose he introduced that
statement. lam sure he was communicating very little news
to the majority of the people of Dunedin. It is a fact I have
never attempted to conceal. I am not ashamed of being
descended from the same race as Jesus of Nazareth, and if
my friend thinks that is a taunt he used towards me —and I
cannot see any other reason—(Cries of “ No.”) Then why
was it needlessly introduced ? I have endeavoured through-
out this debate not even to make use of a satirical observation
at the expense of my friend. When, the other evening, I
indulged in a slight joke about men and monkeys, I made it
at my own expense rather than at the expense of my friend.
I have at every stage of this debate stopped myself when on
the eve of making use of a satirical or severe observation
against my friend. Even when I might have pressed home
what seemed a tremendous advantage in argument I did not do
so. For instance, on the evening when 1 spoke of the
genealogies, I might, if I had chosen, have driven home a
very strong case, but I’declined to do so. And this is the
first time 1 have had to seriously complain of my friend in-
troducing any observation into this debate which I think he
should have avoided. With regard to what he advanced
touching a special Sabbath, all 1 can say is that, being of
J ewish descent, Ido not know of it. lam not aware of it,
or of the alleged preparation for this special Sabbath. And
I say again that seeing this system of theology has to be up-
held by these continual changes in the meaning of words, by
this perpetual introduction of new interpretations of obvious
expressions, we should rather, in order to get a rational ex-
planation of what Christianity should be, go to the mind of
Jesus himself. Let us refer to his direct teachings when he
was asked: “What am I to do to obtain eternal life?” and
when he set before that. “ anxious enquirer ” the formula he
deemed necessary in order to secure that eternal life the en-
quirer was seeking.
The whole of this question, it seems to me, is based upon
the one important fact: Do we or do we not receive every
word in a certain book as the infallible word of God ? Do we
regard it as a book upon which we are not to exercise our
reason, but before which we are to bow down and worship ?
And if it be a revelation of God to such an extent, then I
say it is unlike all the rest of His works. It is not made so
clear and plain that a rational understand it, the


■same as a rational mind is capable of understanding the other
works of nature. Surely if it were such a revelation, every
word in it ought to have had supernatural care accorded it.
Every time it was translated from one tongue into another we
have a right to expect that it would have received the same
Divine superintendence. Yet we find this book treated
precisely as a human work ; looked at by numbers in that
light; criticised on all hands; certain portions of it obliterated,
they not being supposed to be the genuine word ; and certain
other portions mistranslated, as we now learn from superior
scholarship. All this occurs with this alleged word of Grod.
More than that, if it be a revelation in the sense in which my
friend sa}'s it is, how comes it that a small portion only of
Grod’s immense family has become aware of it ? And even
among that portion, at this day, it is still held to be doubtful
by a vast number whether it is a true verbal revelation or
not.
I -have not been attempting in this debate to gain a
momentary victory over my friend, nor have I expected,
among my audience,, to make any sudden conversions. Sud-
den conversions are of very little value in the eyes of
Rationalists ; and they do not much believe in them. My
whole and sole object has been to sow some seeds of thought;
and I anticipate—nay, I know —that I have sown seeds
of thought that will sprout and blossom and bear fruit in
years to come. I thank the audience for the quiet hearing I
have received each evening of this debate, and —notwith-
standing the complaint I felt compelled to prefer a few
moments ago—with the friendliest feeling towards the gentle-
man whose views I have been opposing, I must, in conclusion,
respectfully but firmly assert that the Divine Origin of
Christianity, as specified and defined by my friend, remains
.still unproved.
Me. GtEEEN : I rise at the present time with sadder
feelings than I have experienced at any other period during
this debate, because when I see a man aggrieved, I feel
.grieved if I have in any way been the cause of it. As my
friend appears to be deeply grieved, lam sorry; but I cannot
recall what I have said. I do think that my friend stands
self-condemned. He says that he never hid from the people
hat he is of Hebrew birth and that it is a fact well known.


Then why this indignation because I referred to it ? Did I
not say that I would regard it as the highest honour if I were
in the same position ? Did I not make the reference in order
to appeal to his own consciousness, and the consciousness of
the Hebrew gentlemen around me, as to the truth of the fact
which I stated F It is a known fact that there are many
Hebrews in Dunedin, and they need not be ashamed of their
presence here to-night. Did I not simply appeal to their
consciousness on this question of special Sabbaths P Where
then is the reflection 4 ? My friend has tried to bring home to
me personal remarks when there was no necessity. I arn
sorry he is offended ; but I say it is either from a misunder-
standing, or from some other reason that I shall not attempt
to define. How, in connection with this matter, I would say
that if he does not know of special Sabbaths, then he is not
sufficiently acquainted with his ancestral writings ; because
the Jews of this day know that there are many, even now, of
such Sabbaths, which they are taught to observe, and on which,
if the} r keep their law, they will not do a particle of w r ork, or
anything else that w-ould be unlawful on the ordinary Sabbath.
Now, a point in connection with the genealogy, which I
overlooked in my last speech. My friend said that I had
stated that all those names omitted, and which the Old Testa-
ment supplied, would fill up the vacuum in the genealogy by
Matthew. Now, may I tell you that it is a remarkable cir-
cumstance that those names do fill up the major portion of the
vacuum. In connection with the first of the three omitted
names in verse 8, there was the murder of Ahaziah’s children
by their unnatural grandmother ; then an interregnum, during
which the murdress, Athaliah,reigned ; and after her deposi-
tion, the crown w r as given to Joash, a child of seven years,
the youngest son of Ahaziah, and the only one who escaped
the murderous hand |of Athaliah. Also, where the fourth
name is omitted, that of Jehoiachim, it is in connection with
the birth of Salathiel in Babylon, and when his father tvas 73
years of age. So that my statement was actually in accordance
with fact.
My friend says in regard to the death of the Apostles,
that their dying for Christ does not prove that the things they
taught were true. I never urged the fact for such a purpose-
I did not perpetrate such an illogical statement as that. But
I say, that if I die for my attestation of anything, no matter
■what it may be, it proves, not that the thing I died in attesta-


tion of is true, but that I believed it to be true. Is not that
clear ? Then, if I have actual knowledge of the truth of th©
thing for which I die ; if I declare that I saw, or felt, or
heard that of which I affirm, and if my evidence is confirmed
by ten others who also saw, and felt, and heard, and who are
likewise willing to attest their declaration with their lives, is
not that evidence, clear and unquestionable, of the truthful-
ness of that for which I and they were willing to die ? Cer-
tainly none could be more so. I would like to say in connec-
tion with my friend’s last remarks, that I fully sympathise
with him in his desire to give expression to the truth. No
one has heard me suggest any other thought than that as his
motive. Ido not believe in imputing motives. While I must,
say, in all candour, that I think my friend has been deficient
in argument, at the same time, I am ready to acknowledge-
that he has not been deficient in courtesy. I will say that for
him with the utmost readiness.
In regard to Christianity, I would like to say, during the
last few minutes that remain to me, that it appears to me,
that apart from all these things which I have mentioned,,
there are other and even more convincing proofs of its Divine
origin can be presented. We know that no human govern-
ment can at the same time display infinite justice, infinite
mercy, holiness, and love, or even any of these characteristics.
If justice is to be heard, mercy is shut out; and if mercy has
its way, justice is shut out. If mercy is to be shown to the
culprit, we have no holiness, in the sense of maintaining
purity, and the integrity of law; while if mercy is not shown,
love of the governed by the governing cannot be manifested.
In observing human laws, we see that no such system as that
which we find in the Gospel of Christ could ever be thought
of. In Christianity we find as the underlying basis that sin is
the transgression of law, and that man, having transgressed
the law, is a sinner. If my friend believes in a personal Deity
—of which lam doubtful, owing to his last statements —he
must believe the Deity is a moral governor, as well as the
governor of the merely physical universe. If He is a moral
governor, then He must have moral laws ; and as we know
that men break physical laws, there is hence a probability of
their breaking those moral laws. Now, seeing that the laws
of the Infinite are immutable, and cannot be broken with im-
punity, there must be either the death of the criminal who
breaks them, or some means of harmonising the manifestation


of mercy with the Divine justice. Now, the Gospel repre-
sents God as an infinitely just governor, who cannot forgive
sin unless all the requirements of justice are met. And as
the requirements of justice could not be met by human beings,
Heaven itself supplies the victim whose one sacrificial offering,
because of His Divine nature, is ample to satisfy all the re-
quirements of Divine justice, and to open the way for the be-
stowment of mercy upon the whole of the human race. Thus
wo have in the Gospel an exhibition of infinite justice such as
could never have been suggested by the human mind ; and, at
the same time, we have infinite mercy shown to the sinner ;
for -while justice is amply satisfied, mercy is shown to the
fullest extent; for we receive a free and full pardon, without
anything being done on our part. I say that such a scheme
manifests infinite wisdom; that it is beyond the capacity of
the human mind to compass it; and that it bears upon it the
impress of its Divine author. It is just what we might expect
a father to do for his children. Will not a father and a
mother die readily for their children ? Will they not do any-
thing they possibly can to relieve their children from calamity?
Therefore is it not reasonable that the Infinite Father should
devise a plan whereby His own law should be vindicated, His
government upheld, and yet mercy shown to His children ?
And see how it affects the matter. As an illustration of this
I may mention, that Joseph Cook, in his Boston lectures, tells
of a schoolmaster, well known to his auditors, who had taken,
the Gospel plan, and carried it out in his school. He had
certain rules in his school, and for the violation of those rules
there was a penalty. A scholar having transgressed, was
brought before the master. The master read the rules, and
Laving expatiated upon the necessity of those rules being ob-
served for the well-being of the scholars themselves, he said :
“Now, the punishment must be inflicted ; but I am willing to
bear it for you in order to show you that I take no pleasure
in punishing you, and that all I want is that my laws for your
good should be upheld.” Putting the rod into the scholar’s
Land, and holding out his own, he said, “Strike my hand.”
The scholar takes the rod, but stares with astonishment at
such an unknown proceeding. When he hears the master
persisting, he does strike, but very gently ; and then—and you
might have seen the red flush mounting to his face—he lets
the rod fall, at the same time bursting into tears. He cannot
strike. Why ? Because the schoolmaster had followed the


Divine philosophy, and by bearing the punishment of the
wrong-doer, he killed the seeds of rebellion in the boy’s heart.
In that school, when the principle in operation was under-
stood, there were never any more breaches of the law.
As my time has expired, I must now conclude with this
final statement, that in the illustration I have presented, we
have a practical application of the principle of that Divine
philosophy seen in the scheme of redemption, and by means
of which, God is seeking to bring the Universe into harmony
with His will.
The Hon. Robert Stout (the Attorney-General) moved,
and Mr. Thomas Fergus seconded, a vote of thanks to
Messrs. Green and Bright for the able and courteous manner
in which they had conducted the debate. This was carried
amidst loud applause, and having been duly acknowledged, a
vote of thanks to the Chairman concluded the proceedings.
Coulls & Culling, Printers and Stationers, Eattray street, Dunedin.


BOTANIC DISPENSARY, GEORGE STREET.
JAMES NEIL,
Wholesale and Retail Dealer in Botanic, Homoeopathic, and
Patent Medicines, Druggists' Sundries,
Pure Chemicals, fyc.
Grower, Preserver, Manufacturer, and Importer of Serial
Medicines, Extracts, Oils , Tinctures,.Botanic
and Medicinal Rooks, and all
Medicinal Appliances.
Ccetfjr carefully dFxtracteh, Stopprt), anti (SJeansU.
Note the Address: No. 96, GEORGE STREET, DUNEDIN,
Between St. Andrew and Hanover Streets.
Agent for the Green Sf IValker Dehate, “ Christianity v. Spiritualism.'
Dandelion Coffee.— Highly prized for its virtues, -jib. Tins,.
1/6 ; 11b. Tins, 2/6; sent by Post for 6d. per lb. extra.
Dandelion Pills.— Superior to either Cockle’s or Holloways.
One Box, post paid, for Is in stamps, to any part of the Colonies.
Herbs and Advice sent to any part of the Colonies.
Leicester Boot & Shoe Warehouse.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.
DIRECT IMPORTATIONS RECEIVED MONTHLY
Erom the most approved English and Erench Makers.
MANUFACTURER OF BOOTS & SHOES
OF EVERT DESCRIPTION,
AT LOWEST POSSIBLE CASE PRICES.
J. G. GREEN,
Leicester Boot & Shoe Warehouse*
NEAR THE OCTAGON,
GEORGE STREET, DUNEDIN.


island look & Jliatioiierj)loar£lwtt!ii{
m&. T. GLMLK%
PUBLISHER;
BOOKSELLER & STATIONER,
WHOLESALE ANE RETAIL,
73, George Street, Dunedin
IMPORTER OF ENGLISH, FOREIGN, & COLONIAL NEWS-
PAPERS AND MAGAZINES.
CONTRACTOR FOR SUPPLYING PUBLIC LIBRARIES WITH
NEWSPAPERS, BOOKS, MAGAZINES, &c.
DIRECT IMPORTER OF LITERATURE
COMPRISING
Agriculture, Architecture, Astronomy, Art, Biography, Botany,
Chemistry, Divinity, Education, Fiction, Geology and Mineralogy,
History, Languages, Law, Mechanics, Naval and Military, Political,
Poetry, Philosophy, &c., &c., &c.
Special Terms to Public Libraries, Schools, Sfc.
STATIONERY.
Plain, Fancy, and Commercial Stationery forwarded to any part of
the Colony. Lowest prices always adhered to.
GEO. T. CLARKE,
sa m bmo km
GEORGE STREET, DUNEDIN.
Colonial flair ®laiss (fompanir, fimii^d.
riIHIS COMPANY is prepared to issue Policies]'of Insurance
against Loss arising from Accidental Breakage of PLATE.
GLASS WINDOWS, MIRRORS, SHOW CASES, CARBOYS
SPECIE JARS, &c.j at moderate rates, through their Agent,
GEO. T. CLARKE,
73, GEORGE STREET, DUNEDIN.
Terms of Proposals and all other particulars on application.


The Greatest Wonder of the Age
IS NOW AN ESTABLISHED FACT, THAT
SLESINGER’S
aasraiTie balsam
Is. the only legitimate article for a Spedey and Effectual
Cure for Pain of any kind, of a muscular or nervous affec-
tion, be it acute or chronic, recent or of long standing; be
it a Sprain, Bheumatics, Grout, Lumbago, or Pain in the
Shoulder, Legs, Chest, Back, Loins, Hip, Foot, &c., &c.
One Bottle is sufficient in most cases . Brice, 7/6
Slmnpr’s (Pouglj iSgrup,
Eor Infants or Adults suffering from Sore Throat, Colds,
Coughs, Pain in the Chest, Laryngitis, Bronchitis, or Af-
fection of the Lungs. Price, 2/6 per bottle.
S/esinger’s Horse Medicine,
Or any’of the above, may be had wholesale of all the lead-
ing houses in Dunedin, and retail of all chemists and
medicine vendors in Hew Zealand, or the Proprietor,
S. SLESINGrER, Y.S., --j
HOPE STREET, £ DUNEDIN.


SALT-GLAZED STONEWARE
Sanitary Pipe Factory,
DTJNEDI IST.
Price List, wholesale, delivered
in Railway Trucks
s. d.
4 inch, per foot ... ... 0 6
6 inch, per foot ... ... 0 8
9 inch, per foot ... ... 1 3
12 inch, per foot ... ... 2 0
15 inch,'per foot ... ... 4 3
18 inch, per foot ... ... 6 6
Double Junctions equal to three Pipes
Single Junctions, Elbows, and Bends, equal to
two Pipes.
Tariff of Charges for 1879 :
Class N., Pipes charged as Minerals, up to 50 miles,
2d. per ton per mile; over 50 miles, Id. per ton per mile
for a full truck of 4 tons.


KEE It’S
READI-MADE CLOTHING
km MM>MI SSTiBLISHMSHT,
Corner or George and Hanover Streets,
DUNEDIN.
Known as the Cheapest House in Town.
A LARGE STOCK of Men’s and Boys’ Overcoats; Men’s
ijad Boys’ Waterproof Coats ; Sac Coats ; Paget Coats ; Oxford
•Coats ; Walking Coats ; Men’s and Boys’ Trousers ; Men’s and
Boys’ Trousers and Vests ; Silk and Alpaca Umbrellas ; Men’s
and Boys’ Hosiery, Hats, Caps, Braces, Ties, &c.
100 Boys’ Overcoats, from 12s 6d.
Boys’ Knickerbocker Suit, from 8s 6d.
SIGN WRITER,
Opposite’ SnglisJh ( WJiurclh ;
STUART STREET, DUNEDIN.
HOUSE, land,
feta it and feudal AuM
OTAGO CHAMBERS,
EAWM7 StTKEEl 1 , KKJBIIH.
Authorised Canvasser for Australian Mutual 'Provident Lfe Insurance.


CLIFFORD & MORRIS,
ARTIST
PttOTOGfHAPttEBS,
ROYAL ARCADE,
Carte de Yisites and Cabinet Photos
taken and printed in the most artistic Styles,
and finished in as short a time as possible con-
sistent with good work.
Portraits enlarged from small Photos to
any size, and painted in Oil, Crayon, or Water-
color.
N. B. Views, Private [Residences, and
Groups outside, only taken hy special appoint-
ment.


6/Gt-fo
WE have in Stock and for Sale all kinds of American Wood-
working and Mill Machinery.
Organs and Pianos of celebrated Makers,
American Stoves. American Belting, all sizes.
Doors, Window Sashes, Window Glass.
Plaster of Paris. Putty.
Tan Bark.
Fancy Goods, Lamps, Ironmongery, Crockery, Glassware.
Brooms and Brushes, English and American.
We direct especial attention to our Organs and Pianos, they
being of less price and equal to any imported into Hew Zealand
Indents received for American and European Goods on fa-
vourable terms.
GIBBS & CLAYTON,
BOND STREET, DUNEDIN.
OTAGO
OEGAN
PIANOEOETE
MANU-
AND
EACTOET.
Opposite St. Paul's Church,
ST XT A, TAT STEEET, DTITTEDIIsT
Pianofortes, Harmoniums, &P Organs
Ma7iufaciured, Tuned, Regu-
lated, Repaired.
NONE BUT RESPONSIBLE WORKMEN EMPLOYED.


THE HANSEATIC
im (iumpimu
OF HAMBUEG.
CAPITAL - - - £BO,OOO
Guaranteed dy Five Allied Companies £500.000
SVot being bound by any Sariff ; wo are, prepayed
to accept Sire MisTcs at Slowest
Current Mates.
JJI lromjjtlg in ihij djolong.
FENWICK & KENNEDY,
Custom House Agents and Brokers,
SB ©IC IS*
DUNEDIN.


Vr '/ |r //
mland ditsuranq {jynptiji,
Al \T J J
FIEB AJSTI3 MARINE
Capital - -
Reserve: Funds - £,^35,000.
OFFICE OF OTAGO BRANCH;
Corner of High and Rattray Streets,
DUNEDIN.
UTRIE DEPARTMENT:
Insurances granted at Loudest Current Rates
on Buildings, Mills, Breiveries, Stocks,
Furniture, Farm Broduce, N
J - y
Stacks, SfC., Sfc,
The above Company being the FIRST INSUR-
ANCE COMPANY established in New Zealand, has
prior claims to the patronage of New Zealand Colo-
nists, and being a LOCAL INSTITUTION, the whole
of the Funds are invested in the Colony.
M.oney Advanced upon Good Security.
GEORGE W. ELIOTT,
Manager for Otago.
