

THE CO-OPERATIVE UNION LTD.
The Co-operative
Movement and
Trades Unionism
A Paper prepared by
P. J. AGNEW
(for the Scottish Sectional Board of the
Co-operative Union).
MANCHESTER:
THE CO-OPERATIVE UNION LIMITED, HOLOYOAKE HOUSE,
HANOVER STREET.
1926


The Co-operative Movement and
Trades Unionism
THE relationship of the Co-operative and Trade Union
Movements is a subject of recurring interest and discussion
in the annual congresses of both movements, where, not-
withstanding occasional asperities and differences, emphatic
declarations are made to indicate their common purpose and fraternal
fellowship. Despite misunderstandings, arising chiefly from human
weaknesses, these annual expressions of friendship between both
movements are a strong proof of their mutuality and kinship.
The history of the Co-operative and Trade Union movements
is the record of the straggle of the workers in the last century for
economic emancipation, and to the student of industrial history
there are no pages more entrancing than those which relate the
story of their development and achievements. The heroic age
which witnessed the birth of both movements will always be re-
garded as the epic period of the British working-class, and its record
will remain an inspiration to the workers of all lands. Born in days
of adversity, cradled in poverty, they have grown to lusty manhood
within the same domestic circle. Brothers in a common struggle,
who have battled together against the same hostile forces, both
movements have emerged to-day with unimpaired vitality, and are
universally recognized as the most powerful instruments yet
moulded by the workers. Inspired in the past by mutual confidence,
trust, and understanding, they have overcome all barriers in
attaining to their present position of irresistible strength and
power. Linked by a thousand ties forged on the anvil of past
experience, they have been compelled to recognize these bonds of
brotherhood. The most studious examination of their growth
and development confirms the view that they are members of the
same body. It is with this knowledge of, and belief in, the affinity
of both movements that I venture to examine briefly the position


they occupy in their relationship to one another to-day, and with
a view to the maintenance of that spirit of mutual aid and helpful-
ness upon which will depend much of their future strength and
success.
The purpose of this paper is to inquire into the causes of such
discord as has been disclosed by recent experience and to stimulate
a healthier feeling based on the enduring principles of an unbiased
judgment and a wiser understanding of each other’s difficulties
and responsibilities. The guiding principle in our consideration of
this question should be candour without rancour, and it is in this
spirit I undertake this task.
Between the Co-operative and Trade Union movements
generally, the most harmonious relationship continues to exist,
and whatever difficulties have arisen are not to be regarded as
widespread; indeed, it may be stated frankly that out of about
forty Trade Unions having employees within the Co-operative
movement, disputes and strikes have occurred with not more than
three or four in recent years. Such disputes, however, are a serious
reflection on both sides, and infinite harm may yet result unless
wiser counsels prevail in the future. To delay an examination into
the causes of such disputes because they are isolated would
display a lack of courage that may lead to more deep-seated
troubles with far-reaching consequences to both movements. That
no quarrels are more to be avoided than domestic quarrels, and no
war more to be dreaded than internal war, is, in some measure,
the justification for the investigation into the causes of the troubles
referred to.
WAGES AND CONDITIONS OF LABOUR.
The adjustment of wages and conditions of labour has in recent
years been the most frequent cause of disputes between Co-operative
Societies and certain Unions, and this is rendered increasingly
difficult by an unparalleled industrial depression. Since 1918 these
disputes, with the subsequent irritation created, have been a
disturbing factor in negotiations. The feeling thus generated is a
serious handicap to both movements, and has led on several
occasions to regrettable outbreaks and strikes. The attitude of the
Societies in the period referred to is influenced by the belief, briefly
stated; —
(1) That Co-operative Societies are paying higher wages and


have better conditions of Labour than their competitors
in the distributive trades.
(2) That, notwithstanding this higher standard of wages and
conditions, still further increases of wages and improve-
ment in conditions are imposed on Co-operative Societies
while no corresponding demand is made so far as the
distributive trades outside the movement are concerned,
a fact which relieves the business rivals of the movement
of their legitimate obligation to bear similar overhead
charges in respect of their employees.
(3) That certain Unions concentrate the greater part of their
energies in organizing the employees within the movement
while the employees in competitive capitalist firms to a
vast extent remain untouched, unorganized, and under-
paid.
It is suggested that the foregoing points state the standpoint
of the Co-operative Societies, and, on the assumption that they are
accepted, I submit the case for the Societies and their evidence,
trusting it will lead to such an understanding as will prevent
conflicts between the two movements.
The first point will readily be admitted, but should it be doubted
then the late Fred Bramley, Secretary to the British Trades Union
Congress General Council, whose recent death we all deeply deplore,
will be accepted as an unfailing judge and guide. In his excellent
and ably written pamphlet —“ Why Trade Unionists should be
Co-operators ”* —he states on page 4 ; “ Every section of the
“ employees is guaranteed by National Agreement and Co-operative
“ Congress resolutions, Trade Union rates and conditions of employ-
“ ment. The Co-operative employee is better paid, more humanely
“ treated, has greater security and more continuous employment
“ than any other class of worker engaged in commercial production
“or distribution.” And again, on page 5, he emphasizes this: “My
“ own experience has been, as directly representing workers in
“ productive undertakings, that Co-operative employment means
“ Union conditions, greater facilities for organization, less danger
“ of immediate dismissal during periods of depression and more
“ humane consideration in every respect for the employee. I am
“ also convinced that as Co-operative control is increased and we
*Published by the Co-operative Union, Ltd., Manchester, price 2d.


“ get nearer to complete possession of production and distribution,
“ the easier it will be for Co-operative Societies to apply the ideals
“ of the movement to the elevation of the employee in it.”
With such a vindication of the Co-operative Movement from
so unimpeachable an authority I feel it is unnecessary to labour
the point further.
One of the most difficult tasks in dealing with the second point
is presented when an endeavour is made to obtain exact knowledge
of the wages and conditions outside the movement, as there is no
fully recognized wage rate in the private trade. With many of the
multiple firms it is stated that an allowance is made to each shop
manager for management expenses, and he is free to employ
whatever assistance is required in accordance with such allocation.
The result of this system is shown in the employment of a large
proportion of juniors and girls. To take isolated cases, however,
of certain business firms would not be convincing, even where it
was shown that the standard was very low in respect of wages paid
and the conditions of their employees.
In these circumstances perhaps the fairest evidence in support
of the Societies would be to cite the experience of the Co-operative
representatives on the Grocery Trade Boards, and especially the
Co-operative representatives on the Scottish Grocery Trade Board,
who have had a stiff conflict with the employers’ representatives.
The employers’ side has shown intense hostility to the representa-
tion of the movement, even although the Co-operators sit on the
employers’ side. One of the objections of the employers to Co-
operative representatives was their sympathetic consideration of the
claims of the employees. A crisis was reached when the employers
submitted scales of wages for the distributive trades which were
opposed by the Co-operative representatives. The opposition of the
Co-operative representatives will be readily understood when it is
realized what the proposed scales were.


HOURS AND WAGES OF WORKERS EMPLOYED IN THE
GROCERY TRADES.
Scales and Hours Proposed at
Scottish Grocery Trade Board
by Private Traders.
Co-operative Scales and Hours.
(Fixed by Agreement.)
At 25, after 10 years’ service, for
54 hour week.
At 25, after 10 years’ service, for
48 hour week.
SCALE A. Cities of Gla
Male Assistants .. .. 507-
Female Assistants .. 30/-
sgow and Edinburgh.
Glasgow, 63/6
Edinburgh, 62/6 (65/- after 12
years’ service).
Glasgow, 43/-; Edinburgh, 40/-
SCALE B. Towns ove
Male Assistants .. .. 47/6
Female Assistants .. 28/6
r 30,000 population.
Scottish: Male Assistants 60/1
Female Assistants 40/1
SCALE C. Towns between 3
Male Assistants . . .. 457-
Female Assistants .. 27/-
0,000 and 6,000 population.
Scottish; Male Assistants 60/1
Female Assistants 40/1
SCALE D. Under
Male Assistants .. . . 42/6
Female Assistants . . 26/-
6,000 population.
Scottish: Male Assistants 60/1
Female Assistants 40/1
The Scottish Grocery Trade Board regulations were amended as
a result of the disagreement on the private employers’ proposed
scale of wages and hours, and under the regulations framed by the
Ministry of Labour, the Co-operative representatives were requested
to conform to the principle of side-voting, which prevented them
from voting with the employees’ side when their sympathies were
with the employees. The Board has been moribund since 1924
as a result of the rupture on the above proposed scale of wages
and hours.


These proposed scales and hours are a definite indication of
the attitude of the private employers on the question of rates of
wages for the distributive trades, and may reasonably be placed in
contrast to the scales of wages operating in Co-operative Societies
as a result of collective bargaining.
If further proof is desired of the superiority of co-operative
wages and conditions of labour, it is provided by the experience of
thousands of Co-operators and their families earning their wages in the
distributive trades outside the movement, who eloquently testify to
the advantages enjoyed by “certain privileged Co-operative
employees.’’ That there are firms paying equal wages with good
conditions of labour is true, but they are the exception in the
private trade.
The third point presents no difficulty, and my statement,
I trust, will be admitted as a fair and reasonable one. It is computed
that there are 60,000 employees engaged in the distributive trades
in Scotland. Two Unions are mainly engaged in the work of
organizing such employees. The membership of these Unions is
approximately 20,000, of whom, roughly, 15,000 are engaged in
Co-operative Societies. It will be noted, therefore, that fully 40,000
employees mainly engaged in private trade are unorganized. It will
be agreed that, with such a vast mass of unorganized and sweated
workers in the private trade, the Co-operative movement must have
a great difficulty in maintaining higher wages and better conditions
of labour.
A solution of the problem presented in this contrast of
wages, conditions, and Trade Union membership in the Co-operative
Societies and the private trade is necessary to the future progress
of the movement. That the Co-operative movement should give
a lead as an employer no one will seek to deny, but it must be obvious
that the intention of such an example is that it should be followed ;
in fact, that the Unions should be better able to secure a similar
standard of wages and conditions for the workers in capitalist
firms. For many years the movement has been giving a lead in
shorter hours, higher wages, sick pay, holidays, and all-round
better conditions, which the private trader is permitted to ignore,
merely contenting himself with the financial advantage it gives him
in his fight against the Co-operative Societies. The private trader
undoubtedly appreciates the lead of the Societies because of the
gain it conveys. He certainly has shown no disposition to follow
their heroic example! Meantime the Societies continue trading
under a handicap for which it is questionable if they receive any
credit or additional support.
We are perpetuating a system of sweating conditions for
two-thirds of the workers engaged in the distributive trades, and


incidentally maintaining a lower standard for the movement than
might otherwise obtain, so long as we admit the right of the private
trader to lower standards of wages and conditions for his employees.
The spectacle of the co-operatively organized workers behind the
counter fighting like “ Hal o’ the Wynd” for their own hand, while
their fellow-workers in capitalist firms have to seek the ineffective
aid of a Trade Board is not a stimulating experience. The system
of organization which isolates the sweated workers in the private
trade reduces their level of wages and conditions and weakens
not only their fighting power, but reacts against the stronger
section, retarding its progress towards a higher level. There can
he no further advance for the co-operatively organized employees so
long as they permit a vast mass of sweated workers to remain in the
capitalist firms, thus enabling them to compete against the movement,
in some cases, successfully.
When these capitalist firms are compelled to give the same wages
and conditions as Co-operative Societies, the battle of the movement
will be made easier, and its victory will he within measurable distance.
Under existing conditions the dice are loaded against the movement
by the present system of Trade Union organization in the dis-
tributive trades with its one scale for Co-operative Societies and
another for the private trader. When wages and conditions are
determined by each industry, which all employers have to honour,
the Co-operative movement will have no reason to complain.
Its influence in maintaining standards would be a powerful aid to
the employees in each industry and would be a factor in the direction
of higher standards. Given a system of industrial organization
for the distributive trades such as obtains for the Building Trades
operatives, the movement would have an opportunity of attaining
to the ideal of peace in industry which cannot be realized by the
present lop-sided method of organization. The employee in capitalist
firms is a member of the working-class, and it is the function of the
Trade Unions to raise the mass of the workers in the distributive
trades and not merely a section of them.
These reflections are submitted as a result of my experience
as a member and chairman of the Labour Adviser’s Committee for
the past five years. The responsibility for the position it is not my
province to determine.
The movement is the greatest bulwark the worker has as
a consumer. The victory he wins as a producer can, as the experience
of the war proved, be lost easily as a consumer. The strength of
his strong right arm must be used to aid his left arm in fighting
against the powerful foe of capitalism. Both arms must be used
with the skilful direction of his brain. If used independently without
intelligence, the blow intended for the common enemy may re-
bound against himself.


COMPULSORY TRADE UNIONISM FOR CO-OPERATIVE
EMPLOYEES.
It is with trepidation that I submit this question to Co-operators
and Trade Unionists, but I am influenced to do so because within
recent years the tendency in the direction of compulsory member-
ship of a Trade Union as a condition of employment in Co-operative
Societies has been developing. The attitude on this question is
undoubtedly dictated with a view to consolidating the position of
the workers as producers and to give an example to capitalist
employers.
Recently the Labour Department of the Co-operative Union
issued a questionnaire to the Societies within the Union on this
subject, and replies were received from 388 Societies, of which 254
state definitely that all persons employed by the Society are required
to be members of a Trade Union as a condition of employment.
This number includes 23 out of 26 productive societies. Of the
remaining 134 Societies a majority stated that almost all their
employees were actually members of a Trade Union, although no
steps were taken to compel membership. Employees were en-
couraged to join a Trade Union. In Scotland 38 Societies have
adopted compulsory membership of a Trade Union as a condition
of employment in the Society.
In seeking to examine the implications and possibilities of this
development it would be unwise to dogmatize, but there can be
no doubt it raises issues worthy of the earnest consideration of
Co-operators and Trade Unionists. It has always been recognized that
the voluntary principle is fundamental to the movement, and one
upon which its development is based. Compulsory membership of a
Trade Union for its employees as a condition of service would seem
to challenge the voluntary principle. Is the position of the Co-
operative Movement strengthened by this abrogation of the
voluntary principle in the interest of the Trade Union ? Assuming
that this development is extended, what is to be the reciprocal or
complementary attitude of the Trade Unions ? The natural corollary
is compulsory membership of a Co-operative Society for all Trade
Unionists, or, at least, for all Trade Unionists employed by the
movement. Is the movement prepared to compel membership of
a Society as well as membership of a Trade Union for all its
employees ?
To examine the matter further : If the principle was adopted
by both movements and membership of a Co-operative Society
and Trade Union for all workers was compulsory, are we quite sure
the workers would respond ? What would be the position of the
large body of workers whose wages are earned under private
enterprise, and who may quite easily be victims of a policy of reprisals


which might develop as a result of the adoption of the principle of
compulsion ? Can we morally compel the worker to conform to the
principle of compulsion, not only as to how he shall earn his wages
but also as to how he shall spend his income ? This question
presents difficulties which cannot be overlooked or denied, and,
before definite adoption of a policy, it should be examined by the
leaders of both movements.
If your minds are stimulated to examine this subject further,
I am amply rewarded for submitting it for your investigation.
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS.
Having stated the position from the standpoint of the Co-
operative Societies, and with a sympathetic understanding of the
difficulties of our Trade Union friends, I have no desire to leave
the subject without offering suggestions whereby both movements
may overcome the complexities of mutual adjustment and regain
the spirit of comradeship which would make them invincible. The
tendency towards independence in policy and action, which has
become marked as both movements have developed in influence
and strength, should give way to one of practical co-operation in
harmony with the great object they have in view—the Co-operative
Commonwealth. The time has arrived for definite steps towards
the pooling of the resources of both movements;
(1) By the investment of the surplus funds of the Trade
Unions in the Co-operative Movement.
(2) By the further development of banking facilities by the
Co-operative Movement (and especially by the Scottish
Co-operative Wholesale Society).
The Federation of British Industries is an example of the
pooling of organization and money in the interest of private enter-
prise, which it should be possible for the Trade Union and Co-
operative Movements to equal if not surpass.
In this connection I advise a forward policy in the creation and
development of the schemes (already endorsed by the Southport
Congress) of;
(a) Joint Advisory Councils.
( b ) Welfare Schemes.
Joint Advisory Councils can be regarded only as the first
step towards the larger idea of workers’ control of industry, but
their success would effectively demonstrate the superiority of Co-
operative methods and principles. With the investment of Trade
Union funds in the Co-operative movement, there would arise the


need for a closer working arrangement between both movements
with reference to trading policy, co-operative production, and other
questions of mutual interest.
To consolidate both movements it should be possible—although
there may be difficulties at the moment —to arrange for a Joint
Trade Union and Co-operative Congress to consider and discuss :
(a) Investment of Trade Union Funds.
(b) Development of Co-operative production.
(c) Methods of stimulating and securing loyal support
for all Co-operative productions.
(d) Plans for taking such steps as would harmonize the
interests of the workers as producers and consumers.
( e ) Arrangements for propaganda within the Trade Unions
in support of the Co-operative Movement.
(/) Proposals for devising and establishing machinery for
fixing wages and conditions and the settlement of all
disputes within the movement.
This may seem to many Co-operators rather fanciful and imprac-
ticable, but it seems to me the line of approach which is dictated by
the modern trend of events. It is, in addition, the antidote to the
idea, so prevalent at present, that capitalism can be smashed by
revolutionary methods. To destroy the competitive system the
workers must demonstrate the efficacy of Co-operative principles,
and the constructive method outlined would succeed where force
would fail.
The rapidity of development in the industrial and political
field, with its dramatic and ever-changing situations during the
last twenty years, has, to a very great extent, overshadowed the more
deliberate constructive work and achievements of the Co-operative
Movement. The foundations upon which the superstructure of the
future Commonwealth will rest are being firmly and securely laid
by Co-operative men and women through their administrative work
in the board rooms and technical experience and knowledge gained
in the factories and stores of the Co-operative Movement. The
enduring character of the movement’s work has been tested by a
world war unparalleled in history, and an aftermath of national and
international unrest and commercial chaos as tragic as the war
itself. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that the true worth and
value of the movement to the people was never fully realized until
the country experienced its greatest crisis. The co-operator may
build slowly, but he erects his edifice securely, realizing that his
work is for the future and must withstand the storms and ravages
of time and hostile forces. The sublime grandeur of the great
cathedrals, built in an age when speed was an unrecognized virtue.


is to-day an example of the enduring strength of co-operative
effort and of communal service to a lofty ideal.
To the employees the Co-operative movement gives a field of
endeavour and a high purpose. It is a missionary influence. The
co-operative employee is an integral part of the movement, with
its hopes, its aspirations, and its destiny to a great extent in his
hands. As stated by Professor Hall, in his excellent handbook,
“ the whole superstructure of the Co-operative Movement is based
upon the trade in its retail shops. Efficient service means more
trade; additional trade reduces the expenses of distribution;
and the personality of the man behind the counter is a big factor
in securing this service. Civility is often lacking on both sides of
the counter. A gruff and disagreeable member helps to make a
disagreeable staff, and a disagreeable staff drives away trade. It is
probably through a confusion of servility and civility that working-
class organizations fail to produce the highest measure of courtesy.
A person can be civil and courteous without being servile. The
1 tone ’ of the shops can be set by the manager and committee to a
greater extent than they sometimes realize.”
When it is recalled that the movement with its four million
members is doing only about ten per cent, of the total retail trade
of the country, which means that over one-half of our members’
trade is going elsewhere, we are bound to recognize the vast work
that lies before us. In this connection the employee is a most
important unit in the future development of the movement.
The Co-operative Store is the outpost of the new civilization,
and in the national economy of the future its place is assured.
My final appeal to Trade Unionist and Co-operator is : Get
together more closely and more frequently ; review your internal
problems in the light of modem developments and seek by mutual
adjustment to solve them. Map out your plan of advance jointly
and in harmony with your great ideals. Prepare for the great
responsibilities that lie before you, remembering that your labours
will be judged by future generations by the character and quality
of the structure you hand over to their keeping. To give of our
best to the movement, making it more efficient in the service
of the people, is to repay to the future a part of the great
debt we owe to the past.
“ Men, my brothers, men the workers, ever reaping something
new;
That which they have done but earnest of the things that they
shall do.”


Scottish Grocery Trade Board.
Private Traders' Proposed Scales
for 54 Hour Week.
Co-operative Scales
by Agreement for
48 Hour Week.
Male Assist:
nts.
I Ma
le Assists
nts.
Scale
Scale
Scale
Scale
j Edln-
Age
A.
B.
c.
D.
! burgh.
Glasgow
Scottish
16
10/-
10/-
9/-
9/-
12/-
13/10
13/2
17
13/-
12/-
12/-
12/-
15/-
16/8
15/10
18
17/-
16/-
15/6
15/-
1 18/6
20/10
19/8
19
22/-
21/-
20/-
19/-
23/6
25/2
23/11
20
27/-
25/6
24/-
23/-
27/6
30/-
28/6
21
32/-
30/6
29/-
27/6
1 45/6
46/2
43/11
22
37/-
35/-
33/-
31/-
49/-
50/6
48/-
23
42/-
40/-
38/-
36/-
53/6
54/8
52/-
24
46/-
44/-
41/6
39/-
58/-
58/10
55/11
25
50/-
47/6
45/-
42/6
62/6*
63/6
60/1
Female Assis
tants.
Fem
j
ate Assistants.
16
9/-
9/-
9/-
8/6
12/-
12/10
12/3
17
11/-
11/-
11/-
10/6
14/-
14/8
14/-
18
13/-
13/-
13/-
12/6
17/-
17/6
16/8
19
16/-
15/-
15/-
14/-
20/6
21/2
20/2
20
19/-
18/-
17/-
16/-
28/-
27/2
25/10
21
22/-
21/-
19/-
18/-
30/-
31/10
30/3
22
24/-
23/-
21/-
20/-
32/6
34/2
32/6
23
26/-
25/-
23/-
22/-
35/-
37/4
35/6
24
28/-
27/-
25/-
24/-
37/6
39/10
37/11
25
30/-
28/6
27/-
26/-
40/-
43/-
40/1
APPENDIX.
COMPARISON OF CO-OPERATIVE WAGES SCALES AND HOURS
AND PRIVATE TRADERS’ PROPOSED SCALES
OF WAGES AND HOURS.
*2/6 extra paid to Males, under Scale, after 12 years’ service.
Trade Board Proposed Scales;
A. Edinburgh and Glasgow.
B. Towns over 30,000
C. ~ between 30,000 and 6,000
D. ~ under 6,000
