

GOOD YEAR
1927
1952
ANNIVERSARY


THE FIRST TWENTY- FIVE YEARS
GOOD YEAR
CELEBRATES ITS
S ilver Anniversary
OF MANUFACTURING IN
AUSTRALIA
1927-1952
THE GOODYEAR TYRE AND RUBBER CO. (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED
GRANVILLE - N.S.W.


25 Year of Goodyear-Australia
BY
H. C. STEINER
Vice-Chairman and Managing Director
A
JL JL t the completion of the first twenty-five years of Australian manufacture of
Goodyear Tyres and Tubes, we pause to look back over the achievements of those
years, and face the future with the confidence that the Company is alert to the changing
times and the increasing demands which will be made on our talents and knowledge.
Goodyear products are used almost entirely by the motor transport and mining,
public works and essential secondary industries. For these reasons, and the fact that
Goodyear has provided employment for thousands of Australians over a period of
twenty-five years, we take pride in the contribution the Company has made to the
Australian way of life.
Of the actual events which have transpired during our quarter century of growth
the following pages tell the story, and mention is made of some of the men and women
who had to do with the Company’s progress.
For twenty-five years of support and co-operation we say "Thank you” to the
thousands of Dealers and Distributors, to the hundreds of thousands of users of our
products, and to the faithful employees who have contributed the skills that make our
products a by-word for quality. Without this co-operation the Company could not
have achieved the position it occupies to-day.
For the future—the atomic, the jet propulsion age and whatever else it may bring,
we offer the pledge that we of Goodyear Australia, together with the rest of the
world-wide Goodyear family, will continue to uphold the Goodyear creed: "Every
Goodyear Product, wherever it is made, must be better to-day than it was yesterday,
better to-morrow than it is to-day.”
The progress of the past is the promise for the future . . . the best is yet to come.


A luckey accident...
\
\
N the early part of the last century inventors and chemists without number were
trying all sorts of ways to evolve methods for processing rubber, so that it could be
made of practical value. Among these experimenters was Charles Goodyear, and the
modern story of rubber begins with him. He solved the problem by discovering the
process of vulcanisation.
Like so many of the world’s great inventions and discoveries, it was the result of
a lucky accident, but the kind of mishap that happens only to those who have worked
long years with a problem and who have the eyes to see and the brain to appreciate
when it occurs.
One day in 1839 Charles Goodyear dropped a piece of rubber mixed with sulphur
on the stove in the kitchen of his home. The combination of heat and sulphur changed
the character of the rubber and transformed it into the tough, non-sticky, resilient
product the world had been hunting for. The name "vulcanisation” comes from
Vulcan, the Roman god of fire, because it was the use of heat that solved the problem.
Charles Goodyear patented his discovery in 1844, but the full importance of it was
not then generally recognised, and life was unkind to him. True, he had suffered
many years of poverty in the past, had been to prison for debt, and his circumstances


did not improve. He saw the inside of a debtors’ prison again, this time in France,
where, ironically, he was previously honoured by the French Emperor! He returned
to America in 18 58 and, two years later, died.
It is sad to think that Charles Goodyear probably thought his life a failure as he
lay dying in a dingy hotel bedroom. Yet it is hard to name any other single person
who has done more to advance humanity’s progress.
Without Goodyear, industrially useful rubber would not exist . . . and without
rubber, modern transportation would be impossible.
The motor car can function only because of rubber. Without rubber, electricity
would still be a laboratory curiosity. Railways depend on rubber. Aeroplanes depend
on rubber. Houses depend on rubber. Machinery depends on rubber. Farms depend
on rubber.
Rubber is used in fountain pens, footballs and flooring. Rubber belts transmit
power in factories, and rubber belts carry rock, ore and coal in mines and quarries.
But most important of all is the rubber tyre . . . every phase of modern life, in
peace and even more so in war, depends in countless ways on rubber-tyred transport.
The world seuolver on Rubbers
thank to Charles goodyear


An idea-and and borrouwed capital
ryi
,*A*. his is primarily a record of the growth of Goodyear in Australia since the
making of the first Australian Goodyear Tyre twenty-five years ago. But the record
would not be complete without some reference to the growth of the world-wide
Goodyear Organization.
The year 1898 saw the beginning of a transformation which was to turn the
United States into the industrial colossus she has since become, and in that year one
such industrialist, Frank Sieberling, at 38, had an idea and 3,500 borrowed dollars.
With the idea as his incentive and the borrowed money as capital, he launched the
Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company. Added to the $3,500 cash were $lO,OOO in
promissory notes. The new company was the smallest among some 300 similar concerns
in the rubber business at that time. Yet because of ambition and determination in the
small group which moved into the two abandoned factory buildings in Akron, Ohio,
U.S.A., most of the then powerful competitors are to-day nothing more than forgotten
names in dusty bankruptcy files, while Goodyear has become the largest rubber
manufacturer and tyre producer in the world.
Even in those days, when the world was riding on steel tyres, Goodyear decided
that the real future of the rubber industry was linked with that of transportation. At
the beginning of the present century tyre manufacture for bicycles and carriages became
their speciality . . . including tyres for the "horseless carriages” which were now
chugging, coughing and spluttering about city streets.
Ffowever, the motor car did not become a factor in the tyre
market until 1902, when its increasing power and weight
demanded a tyre far advanced beyond the single tube bicycle
type then available. Goodyear was in the vanguard of rubber
companies willing to take up the challenge, and their inner tube
I and clincher tyre, with a driving range of 2,500 miles, served as


a foundation on which the popularity of the automobile
was built.
By 1908 Goodyear was eighth in size among the tyre
manufacturing companies in the field, and eight years
later took the lead in the tyre industry ... a place of
pride which it has never lost since! By 1926 Goodyear
had risen to be the largest rubber manufacturing company
in the world, which it continues to be.
As the product improved and production increased,
prices were lowered and markets expanded. Goodyear’s
first plant outside the United States was in Canada
started in 1910.
Sales outlets were swiftly established all over the globe,
and in 1927 factories were opened in Australia and
England to be followed by plants in Argentina, Brazil,
Peru, Java, Sweden, South Africa, Luxemborg, and others
in Latin America.
To-day Goodyear has sales representatives in 117
countries to sell the products produced in 42 plants
established right around the world.
I
JL.N 1898 the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company
employed ten men at Akron. To-day, 52,000 employees
are on the payroll in the United States, and 20,000
elsewhere in the world.
Equally impressive is the list of shareholders in the Goodyear family of companies.
They number 45,700 . . . approximately one shareholder to every three employees.
Goodyear is typical of the triumph of democracy at work. The belief of its founders,
the foresight of its management, the support of thousands of small investors, the loyal
co-operation of all employees and many thousands of dealers and distributors and the
outstanding and unvarying quality of all its products, are the factors which have con-
tributed to Goodyear’s gaining undisputed leadership wherever rubber products are used.


The Australian Story
A
lthough Goodyear is now celebrating its Silver Anniversary of manufactur-
ing in Australia, the story of Goodyear in Australia commenced many years earlier.
In 1915, just about the time that Goodyear Tyres became first choice in America,
Howard J. Hunter and H. E. Voseller came to Australia from America to market
Goodyear Tyres. A distributing Company was formed—The Goodyear Tyre and
Rubber Company of Australasia Limited with its headquarters at 231 Clarence Street,
Sydney. Late in 1915 Melbourne Branch was opened and followed by an Adelaide
Branch the following year. Queensland distribution was through Motor Supplies
Limited, of Brisbane, and the Perth Tyre Depot handled sales in Western Australia.
These arrangements continued until 1920, when Elder Smith took over distribution in
New South Wales and Victoria, with Cornell Limited handling sales in South Australia.
Goodyear Tyres were accepted so enthusiastically
by the Australian motoring public that in July, 1925,
Mr. W. G. Kither, formerly manager of Adelaide
Branch, went to Akron to sell the idea of building a
plant and manufacturing the tyres in this country.
P. W. Litchfield sent Mr. M. Moorhead back with
Mr. Kither, who detailed Wallie Firth, a young man
who had joined the Company in 1920, to shepherd him
around in a search for a suitable site.
First office of the Company was
established in 1915 at 231
Clarence Street, Sydney


". . . two gentlemen were one
day sitting on a fence at
Granville”
After looking at sites at Newcastle, Adelaide, Launceston and
Hobart, these two gentlemen were one day sitting on a fence at
Granville, New South Wales. Wallie turned to his companion
and said—" This looks like a good position,” and the first step
was taken towards the making of Goodyear Tyres in this country.
An option was taken with Richardson & Wrench on 22 acres at
Granville, and Messrs. Stillman and Urquhart, who had arrived
from America, closed the deal in January, 1927, the 22 acres
being purchased. It is interesting to note here that R. T. Chatfield,
who joined the Company in 1915 as Chief Clerk and who is now
New South Wales Branch Manager, recalls being asked by Mr. Litchfield his views
on the most suitable location for an Australian plant and, being a Sydneyite, strongly
recommended Sydney.
Mr. Stillman, a Vice-President of Goodyear, Akron, had come
to Australia in 1926 to arrange the financing of the Australian
Company. The name at this stage was changed to its present
form, The Goodyear Tyre and Rubber Co. (Australia) Limited.
Mr. James Kell, then retiring Governor of the Commonwealth
Bank of Australia, was Chairman of Directors at the incorporation
of the Company. W. G. Kither held the position of Managing
Director and W. R. Urquhart was Factory Superintendent.
H. H. Hanna succeeded R. C. Metzler as Secretary-Treasurer in
October, 1927.
The background work and planning and designing went on
This old home, which was on the
Granville site, was used as an
office during construction of the
factory
smoothly and the next outward sign of the preparation to build a factory occurred
on February 24th, 1927, when Mr. Kell turned the first sod. By October sth, the
first Australian-made Goodyear Tyre had been produced and on the 27th of that
month the Factory was officially opened by the then Governor of New South Wales,
Sir Dudley de Chair. The swift construction of the factory is all the more remarkable
when one considers only two of the difficulties
which the engineers had to face. At Easter,
1927, one month after work was started, 17
".. on February 24th,
1927, when Mr. Kell
turned the first sod”


inches of rain fell in five days. The foundations were hopelessly flooded and the pile
driver working on the Goodyear wharf on Parramatta River was carried away by flood
waters and sunk under Gladesville Bridge. To make matters more difficult a fire at
The factory at Granville begins to take shape. This is the stage
reached in June, 1927.
the end of July burned out seven bays
of roofing. Despite these set-backs,
however, the story of Goodyear in
Australia has been one of continuous
and steady growth. Even when the
original factory was in the blue-print
stage it suffered from growing pains.
In March, 1926, the first estimate
was prepared for a 500-Tyre plant covering two acres, yet by November, of that
year, nearly twelve months before the first tyre was completed, an 800-Tyre plant
was being considered, and this is the plant which was built.
In May, 1928, half a year after the opening of the original plant, a large pro-
gramme of expansion was commenced to cope with the ever-increasing demand for
Goodyear products. Before a year had passed still further developments were put in
hand. By now the factory had grown to such an extent that it covered 8 acres. In
July, 1930, plant was installed for the manufacture of Industrial Rubber Products,
including Transmission, Conveyor and Elevator Belting and a wide range of Industrial
Hoses and Jointings.
Since then Goodyear has been associated with many impressive achievements in the
industrial uses of rubber, including giant conveyor belts on many mining projects.
To-day production of all Industrial Rubber Products is concentrated in one of the
new buildings. This makes for
more efficient production and
economy of handling. It also
makes available much-needed
floor space for the installation
of even more tyre-making
machinery in the older part of
the factory.
The factory, on com
pletion in 1927


The Factory Superintendent explains
the manufacture of inner tubes to
Sir Dudley de Chair during an inspection
tour following the official opening.
A sports ground was established for employees on the
Company’s land during 1932 and in 1936, the year in
which the Engineering Shop was built, a grandstand was
erected there. The shortage of rubber during the war
years necessitated the building of the Reclaim Plant in
1944 and the present Administrative Block was built in
1945. The extensive additions now housing the Industrial
Rubber Products Plant, the Laboratory and the Amenities
and Welfare accommodation for employees were com-
menced in 1951 and completed this year.
To-day, 25 years after its opening, the factory covers acres, its production has
increased more than ten times and it is still expanding.
Of the three divisions of the Company it is interesting to recall the Directors who
have been associated with control of the Company during the 2 5 years of its growth.
On Mr. Kell’s death in 1932, P. W. Litchfield, the "Grand old man” of Goodyear,
Akron, U.S.A., became Chairman of Directors and occupies that position to-day.
W. G. Kither retired from his duties
as Managing Director in 1944, con-
tinuing as Vice-Chairman until his
death later that year. H. C. Steiner,
who had been appointed Sales Director
in 1930, succeeded Mr. Kither as
Vice-Chairman and Managing Dir-
ector and now holds that responsible
position.
R. B. Howard, Secretary-Treasurer. H. C. Steiner, Sales Director.
W. G. Kither, Managing Director. D. E. Sheahan, Factory Superintenden
On the production side, W. R.
Urquhart was Factory Superintendent from the inception of the plant in 1927 until
he returned to Akron in 1933. D. E. Sheahan filled this position until W. J. Condon
relieved him in May, 1937, and Mr. Condon remained in charge of production until
he returned to Akron in 1949. The job was then taken over by the present Director,
L. D. Hochberg.


By 1932 Goodyear sales had
placed the Australian Company
at the top of the list.
The first Secretary-Treasurer was Mr. R. C. Metzler, who
returned to Akron just prior to the opening of the Granville
plant. H. H. Hanna took control of the operating side from
the day the plant was opened until February, 1928, when
R. B. Howard arrived. Mr. Floward remained as Secretary-
Treasurer until 1939, he in turn being followed by J. F. Bennett
who had arrived in 1937, but was not appointed to the Board
until just prior to Mr. Howard’s departure. B. M. Steele,
Assistant Secretary since July, 1939, was appointed Finance
Director in October, 1942; he was travelling to Akron on
home leave in 1948 when he died at sea. S. J. Young, the
present Finance Director, took up his duties in January, 1949.
The Hon. Sir H. Y. Braddon, K.8.E., M.L.C., joined the Board in 1933 and retired
in 1944 when the Hon. P. C. Spender, Q.C., M.P., was appointed as Director.
Recently knighted, Sir Percy Spender is now on leave of absence from the Board
during his term as Australian Ambassador to the United States.
Mr. Crosby Richards came to Granville as Sales Director in 1938. He was then
transferred to Java during 1946, but two months later was returned to Granville
as Sales Director, a position he held until transferred to South
Africa. Mr. L. V. Winslow, after three years in Australia as
Sales Manager, was recently appointed Sales Director.
At the beginning of manufacturing operations in Australia
J. G. Partridge was Secretary of the Company with P. A. Le Cocq
as Office Manager. B. M. Moorhead who was then Chief Engineer
of the Company is still active in that capacity. R. T. Chatfield
was Sales Manager and now is Manager for New South Wales.
H. C. Windon, the original Accountant, is to-day’s Office
Manager.
The distribution of Goodyear Tyres in 1927 was through
Branches in New South Wales and Victoria. W. M. Firth, who
Miss Gerdes, who joined the
Company as a stenographer at
Clarence Street in 1915, receives
her 20-year pin from Mr. Kither.
is now Manager for Australia of Tyre and Tube Sales, was original Branch Manager in
Sydney, while H. O. Shipway was in charge of the Branch in Melbourne.


Cornell Limited handled sales in Adelaide until the South Australian Branch was opened
in 1930 by W. M. Firth. Until the Western Australian Branch was opened in 1930,
the Perth Tyre Depot was the outlet for Goodyear Tyres in that State. W. M. Firth,
who had opened the Adelaide Branch in 1930, also opened the Brisbane Branch in 193 5.
In 1930 Goodyear Depots were established at Newcastle, Goulburn, Tamworth
and Lismore with other States being served by Depots at Ballarat, Bendigo and
Geelong in Victoria; Rockhampton, Townsville and Cairns in Queensland. Broken
Hill Depot operated under South Australian control and Western Australian needs
were additionally served by a Depot at Kalgoorlie. In Tasmania, Depots operated at
Hobart and Launceston. All of these Depots, except Newcastle and Launceston, were
closed during the war, but most of them have since reopened.
New South Wales Branch had moved from the original office in Clarence Street to
Kent Street, then to Day Street, and moved to its present location in Yurong Street in
1932. During the war New South Wales Branch relinquished its Yurong Street
premises, which were taken over by the Navy, occupying offices in Wentworth
Avenue until the end of the war when the return was made to Yurong Street.
The end of the first quarter century sees the Australia-wide Goodyear organisation
looking with pride over past growth of the Company and forward with eager
anticipation to still greater things in the future.
P. W. Litchfield paid a visit to the Australian Company in
May, 1935. He is shown here with a group of officials who
welcomed him on his arrival on S.S. Aorangi.
L. to R.: E. Eickman, F. S. Reed, A. Goulding, D. E. Sheahan,
W. G. Kither, P. W. Litchfield, A. G. Cameron, R. B. Howard,
H. C. Steiner, G. W. Heathman, N. R. Miller, Dr. Millard.


P. W. Litchfield,
Chairman
Boston-born and educated, Mr.
Litchfield joined Goodyear at
Akron in 1900. Since then he has
played a leading role in the world-
wide expansion of Goodyear to its
present proud position. From
Factory Manager in 1911, he made
a meteoric rise to President and
Chairman of the Board in 1930. Mr.
Litchfield relinquished his post of
President in 1940 because of his
generous belief in the axiom "Age
for Counsel . . . Youth for Action.”
The Board of Directors
H. C. Steiner,
Vice-Chairman and Managing Director
Mr. Steiner joined Goodyear in
1915, then served with the U.S.
Naval Air Force 1917-1919. As
Special Representative in the Far
East, he twice won the annual
world-wide Sales Contest. In 1922
he was Acting Managing Director
of the Philippines. He became
Australian Sales Director in 1930,
Assistant Managing Director in
1935, and Vice-Chairman and
Managing Director in 1944.


P. E. H. Leroy
L. D. Hochberg
of Directors
S. J. Young
L. V. Winslow
Sir Percy Spender, K.B.E., Q.C.


E. J. Withers
Manager, Victoria and Tasmania
R. T. Chatfield
Manager, New South Wales
S. W. Stilwell
Manager, South Australia
T. C. Blue
Manager, Queensland
Branch Managers.... Branch Offices
M. L. Johnstone
Manager, Western Australia


VICTORIA 23-29 Therry Street, Melbourne.
TASMANIA :33 Argyle Street, Hobart.
TASMANIAN DEPOT: 10-14 Cameron Street, Launceston.
.. Branch Offices
SOUTH AUSTRLIA 251-253 North Terrace, Adelaide.
QUEENALAND: Cnr. Wickham and Ballow Streets,
Fortitude Valley, Brisbane.
depots: Dennison Street, Rockhampton.
Sturt Street, Townsville. 29 Wharf Street, Cairns.
NEW SOUTH WALES: 4-16 Yurong Street, Sydney.
DEPOT: 12 Stewart Avenue, Hamilton, Newcastle.
WESATREN AUSTRALIA: 67-71 George Street, Perth,
DEPOT: Rear 49 Brookman Street, Kalgoorlie






Leading the way...
In 1908 Goodyear developed
the first successful tyre-
building machine.
The multiple-ply cord tyre
took Goodyear to leadership
in the tyre industry.
Goodyear proved the prac-
ticability of pneumatic truck
and bus tyres in actual
demonstration.
A.
brief resume covering the growth of Goodyear-
Australia would be incomplete without some reference to the
development of Goodyear Tyres.
The American Company began an impressive series of
"firsts” with the introduction in 1901 of the "straight side”
tyre. This was followed by the development in 1913 of the
Multiple Cord tyre, which was the first Goodyear Tyre sold in
Australia. Goodyear introduced the first cord pneumatic
truck tyre in 1916 and pioneered the first bus tyre. It is
interesting to note, in passing, that the man responsible for these
developments was Mr. P. W. Litchfield, who is to-day world-
wide Chairman of the Goodyear organization. The year 1923
saw the advent of the balloon tyre, and it was at this stage of
development that the Australian factory was opened at
Granville in 1927.
Goodyear built the first rayon cord truck tyres experi-
mentally in 1931. Rayon immediately proved successful and
since has come into wide general use and has to a large extent
replaced cotton cord.
Australian motorists have benefited from Goodyear
research and tyre development, which has in the past kept
Goodyear first in the field with all major changes in design,
caused by the necessity to keep pace with the growth of the
automotive industry.
The latest great development is the Super-Cushion Tyre
by Goodyear, introduced in 1947. This has been recognised as
the greatest improvement in car tyres since Goodyear developed
the balloon tyre. Larger in cross-section and designed for use


Chunks of raw rubber are fed into a
banbury mixer where it is crushed and
mixed.
for on-the-road or off-the-road service, into
it is built all the research, skill and experience
of the world’s tyre leader. That is why it
is true to-day, as it has been every year since
1915, that: "More people ride and more tons
are hauled, the world over, on Goodyear
tyres than on any other make.”
In this calendering operation the tyre
fabric is impregnated with rubber.
on wider based rims than the tyre it replaces, it requires from
four to six pounds less pressure. Its advantages include
improved riding and safer car handling, reduction of driver
fatigue, lower cost of vehicle maintenance due to decreased
vibration and shock, better road stability and increased comfort
for passengers. The Super-Cushion is a major milestone in
tyre development.
Goodyear has been equally active in all fields where
pneumatic tyres are used. Goodyear led the industry in bringing
truck and bus tyres to their present peak of efficiency; in fact,
it was only by Goodyear development of the first pneumatic
truck tyre that the versatility and range of modern transport
was made possible.
In 1931 Goodyear engineers developed the novel idea of
fitting steel wheeled tractors with Goodyear Aeroplane tyres.
It worked, and the first pneumatic tractor tyre was born.
To-day, largely because of Goodyear pioneering, almost all
modern farm machinery rolls on rubber, enabling the farmer
to do his work with far greater ease, speed and efficiency.
In the field of off-the-road and earth-moving tyres
Goodyear again contributed many pioneering achievements.
Valuable contributions have been made to the safety and
efficiency of Aircraft, particularly in respect of landing wheels,
tyres and the famous Goodyear Cross-Wind landing gear.
Whatever the Goodyear Tyre, whether
The plies are built up and the bead
"tied-in” The tread is then carefully
applied.
The built-up tyre is next placed in a
curing mould to be vulcanised.
After curing, the mould is opened and
the tyre passes to inspection.
Super-Cushion Tyres
by Goodyear have been
recognised as the
greatest improvement
since balloon tyres.


For victory and the futur e
T *
mMm he record of Goodyear contri-
butions to civilised living would not be
complete without reference to the war
years. During World War II the world-wide Goodyear organization was switched to
production of goods for the Armed Forces. World War II was a mobile war and every
phase of activity demanded rubber tyres. Aircraft, service trucks, jeeps and motor-
cycles all required rubber tyres. Artillery mounted its guns on them. Tanks rode on
rubber. The finest fighting equipment in the history of the world would have
meant nothing if the rubber industry had failed to provide the necessary equipment.
The contributions of Goodyear did not end with tyres. Planes and
ground vehicles include many parts of rubber and the armed forces
generally needed many items fabricated of rubber. Industry needed
Industrial Rubber Products to make weapons and service equipment.
With the fall of Malaya and the Netherlands Indies the flow of
natural rubber was seriously curtailed and the
need for synthetic rubber became apparent.
Goodyear scientists had long been active in
this field and the Company was able to assume its
responsibility in the synthetic rubber programme
without delay.
Goodyear was leader
in the bullet-seal
tank field.


Goodyear-Australia did an outstanding war production job, almost doubled its
pre-war output, and proved highly useful to the country and the armed forces
stationed here.
In addition to building tyres and tubes of all sizes (twelve new sizes of truck tyres,
up to 18-inch size, were added), the
Industrial Rubber Products plant
turned out large quantities of armoured
hose, oil hose, V-belts, tank linings,
bogie tyres for tanks and self-sealing
fuel tanks for aircraft. The manu-
facture of bullet-seal fuel tanks and
aircraft tyres, both vital items, was
pioneered in Australia by Goodyear,
who also made aircraft wheels and
brakes.
A small reclaim plant which had
been built before the war came in very
handy with the critical rubber shortage,
and was doubled in size.
Many types and sizes of tyres were built for armed forces.
Despite labour shortages, Goodyear-Australia grew
from a pre-war force of 800 or 900 people to 1,500.
This included some 3 50 women, mostly in the fuel tank
division, whereas not more than 3 5 women had worked
in the factory previously.
Enlistments from the ranks of Goodyear employees
were high. Many of these rejoined the Company after
discharge, but there were some who made the supreme
sacrifice for the cause of freedom. After the war
Goodyear employed many ex-servicemen and played its
part in their rehabilitation.
The lessons learned in the war years are now applied
for the production of goods for peace. The record of
what Goodyear contributed to help win the war is the
symbol of what Goodyear hopes to contribute to the
future.


Goodyears Products serve the Nation
T is a good thing now and then to look back on the basic principles that make a
person or a company great. It was in 1916, for example, that Goodyear was first able
to say with pardonable pride "more people ride on Goodyear Tyres than on any other
make.” This is still true to-day and one of the reasons is because, down through the
years, Goodyear experience, research and manufacturing integrity have combined to
CONVEYOR AND ELEVATOR BELTS
FLAT TRANSMISSION BELTS
produce the very finest products money can buy. While
Goodyear is probably best known for the manufacture of
tyres, it has also played a leading role in the manufacture
of a wide variety of other products. The Australian plant,
first with tyres and tubes, and later with a wide range of
industrial rubber products, has served the nation’s needs in
peace and war, needs that have been widely spread over the
fields of transport, industry and agriculture.
Goodyear Car and Motorcycle Tyres and Tubes to-day
represent the ultimate in safety, comfort and long mileage.
Goodyear continues as the world leader in the Truck and
Bus Tyre field. Much of our way of life depends on the
transportation of all manner of materials by modern motor
V TRANSMISSION BELTS
HOSE


CAR AND CYCLE TYRES AND TUBES
ACCESSORIES
TRUCK AND BUS TYRES AND TUBES
vehicles, and Goodyear produces a size and type of tyre for
every need.
Agriculture is well served by Goodyear, who pioneered in
putting farm equipment on rubber. No manufacturer has
succeeded in producing a tyre that surpasses in performance
the famous Goodyear "Sure-Grip” Tractor Tyre.
The operators of the heavy equipment used in construction
work look to Goodyear to provide the huge tyres for the many
types of service involved.
Goodyear produces a complete line of Repair Materials for
Tyre Retreaders and Repairers and many accessories for the
motorist.
Among the many other products marketed by Goodyear
in Australia are Batteries, Automotive Cables, Pliobond
Adhesive and Pliofilm for moisture-proof packaging.
In the industrial field Goodyear Industrial Rubber Products
enjoy unchallenged preference won by leadership in design,
engineering and performance. Products include Conveyor,
Elevator and Transmission Belting, Industrial and Garden Hose,
Jointing, Rubber to Metal Work and moulded goods.
BATTERIES.AND AUTOMOTIVE CABLES
FARM TYRES AND TUBES
OFF-THE-ROAD TYRES AND TUBES
AEROPLANE TYRES AND TUBES
REPAIR AND RETREAD MATERIALS


Le adership
in guality springs
from leadership in Research
ill T is because Goodyear pioneered in research that tyres cost one-quarter as much
to-day as they did twenty-five years ago, and give ten times as much service. Not only
in the field of tyres, but in all branches of the rubber industry, Goodyear research has
paid dividends not merely dividends to the shareholders of the Company but far
greater dividends to the public, in the form of improved merchandise at lower prices.
To understand the importance of scientific research in the rubber industry one must
keep in mind the difference between a bale of crude rubber and the finished product,
whether that be a tyre, a transmission belt or a garden hose.
The art of manufacturing rubber products can be compared, simply, to the
baking of a cake. The basic material, in the latter case, is flour, and out of the one
bag the skilful housewife can make a wide variety of foods, from simple damper to
the most delicious cakes and pastries. The result is determined by what she adds to
the basic element, flour, and for how long and in what manner she cooks it.


The same applies to rubber products.
The basic material is raw rubber. The result,
whether it be rubber as hard as iron, or
rubber as pliant as silk, depends on the com-
pounding of the rubber with any one or
more of as many as 200 materials, and on
the method of "cooking.” These additional
materials often behave in the most mystifying
manner. For instance, a zinc oxide from one
part of the country may give entirely different
results from zinc oxide of the same chemical
properties from another part of the country.
This is where research comes in. Actually
the rubber industry is part of the chemical industry. That is why the Goodyear research
laboratory employs almost 200 skilled scientists, chemists and physicists.
Although the Goodyear Research Laboratory is located at Akron, Ohio, U.S.A., it is
of vital importance to Goodyear in Australia. Knowledge gained in this laboratory is
passed to all Goodyear plants throughout the world. All suggested improvements are
thoroughly tested there whether they originate in the laboratory or in any of the 42
Goodyear factories. In addition, standard
samples are regularly sent from all Goodyear
factories for testing on the equipment there.
Thus Goodyear makes sure that there is never
any deviation from the high standard laid
down. It means that whether Goodyear
Tyres are bought in Australia, America,
England or South Africa, the same unrivalled
quality is built in.
However, while this laboratory is the
"nerve centre” of Goodyear development
and research, the chemist also plays a vital role
at the Granville factory. All materials are
carefully tested, and if any
variations from speci-
fication are revealed the
material is rejected.
Tests illustrated on this
page are typical of the
constant striving for
higher quality.


H ow goodyear sells its products
E
qually important with Goodyear experience, research and manufacturing
integrity, is the method by which Goodyear products are marketed.
It has always been Goodyear policy in Australia to market its products through the
Independent Tyre Dealer because of the belief he will expand and improve the business
he has built and has the respect and trust of the people in his community. The
nationwide family of Goodyear Dealers is made up of such independent businessmen.
Indeed, throughout the world, Goodyear is justly proud of its record with Dealers and
close relationships that exist, which will continue the benefit the user in terms of a
superlatively fine product and honest, conscientious service.
In passing, it is interesting to note that 211 Dealers and 4 Distributors have been
operating under the Goodyear Flag for 25 years or more.
On this occasion Goodyear expresses thanks for
the loyalty and competence with which Goodyear
Dealers have served both Goodyear and the public.
MODERN MERCHANDISING
Goodyear, from its vast world-wide
experience, has much to offer Dealers in the
way of modern merchandising assistance and
real selling help. Probably the most important
way in which this assistance operates is through
the Store Planning and Display Department. This department brings to Dealers the
latest and best methods of store planning and display. Detailed plans are prepared free
of charge when necessary for complete building or reconstruction of premises according
to the location and type of business. Goodyear also makes available to Dealers modern
prefabricated streamlined fittings and display tables for interior store use. Many
Dealers in all States have been eager to use the tried and proved plans offered, and
reports from these Dealers confirm the increased business that has resulted.


Modern streamlined fittings and display tables give attractive display to all lines. Customers are able to move about in comfort
and select their requirements under excellent lighting.
Goodyear also sets out to assist Dealers with many other proved merchandising
ideas. A comprehensive Dealer Advertising Plan operates and a complete Identification
programme is available. In addition, regular calls from Goodyear Sales Representatives
enables practical assistance and advice to be offered on the spot.
CREATING A PREFERENCE
Ever since Goodyear introduced the straight-side
tyre in 1901 it has been Goodyear policy to back its
products with a vigorous advertising programme. Even
before Goodyear commenced manufacturing in
Australia wide-spread advertising was used in this
country to tell the public the merits of Goodyear
products. For many years Goodyear has been one of
the leading national advertisers in Australia, in fact,
throughout the world. This, in addition to the inherent
quality of the products themselves, has contributed
much to the truth of the fact, true now, as it has been
every year for 37 years—"more people, the world over,
ride on Goodyear Tyres than on any other make.”
The advertisements shown
above appeared at the time
of the commencement of
Tyre manufacture in
Australia. At left are
shown samples of recent
advertising material.


R. T. Chatfield
7th July, 1915
Manager for N.S.W
B. M. Moorhead
20th July, 1915
Chief Engineer—Granville
Veterans
of 25 year
or more
Goodyear believes it is significant
that so many employees have been
with the Company for twenty-five
years or more. Of the present
members of the Company who have
served for a quarter century many
were with Goodyear before the
commencement of Australian manu-
facture. Such long associations help
to bind Goodyear employees together
as a family.
A. Last
1st September, 1915
Warehouse Manager— N.S.W.
H. C. Steiner
2nd November, 1915
Managing Director
S. J. Young
15 th December, 1919
Finance Director
N. E. Bagshaw
1st January, 1925
Asst. Manager for S.A.
E. E. Kerr
6th March, 1926
Traffic Manager—Granville


S. Lagden
23rd September, 1923
Credit Manager— N.S.W.
L. H. Simms
16th October, 1922
Manager Specialty Products Sales
A. L. Lawes
1st February, 1922
Divisional Foreman —Granville
W. M. Firth
4th June, 1920
Manager Tyre & Tube Sales,
Granville
C. Vidler
16th February, 1926
Cashier—Granville
R. M. Walker
1st February, 1926
Cashier— N.S.W. BRANCH
L. D. Hochberg
26th October, 1925
Production Director
H. F. Tyler
1st June, 1925
Service Manager —Granville
K. B. James
28th September, 1926
Technical Superintendent—Granville
L. E. Byrne
3rd May, 1926
Assistant to Secretary—Granville
C. W. White
2nd May, 1926
Office Manager— N.S.W.
S. E. Woodward
29 th March, 1926
General Lines Salesman— N.S.W.


H. C. Windon
2nd May, 1927
Office Manager—Granville
B. Gates
1st May, 1927
Shipping Department —Granville
K. S. Bayley
22nd March, 1927
Assistant Office Manager—Granville
Miss V. E. Walker
24th October, 1926
Stenographer—N.S.W.
G. Pratt
28th June, 1927
Crane Driver—Granville
L. W. St. Hill
27th June, 1927
Master Mechanic—Granville
J. H. Hall
11th May, 1927
Production Engineer—Granville
L. W. Dukes
9th May, 1927
Chief Electrical Engineer —Granville
W. H. Bartlett
Ist August, 1927
Department Foreman—Granville
J. Porter
25th july, 1927
Engineering Department —Granville
A. E. Bowie
11th July, 1927
Purchasing Officer —Granville
F. X. Lehner
11th July, 1927
Asst. Master Mechanic—Granville
W. H. Hyland
12th September, 1927
Department Supervisor—Granville
W. Meadows
8th September, 1927
Airbags Department—Granville
R. Redmayne
26th August, 1927
Tube Room —Granville


A. Duncum
11th July, 1927
Production Costs —Granville
I. J. Dodd
11th July, 1927
Manager Cost Department —Granville
A. Matheson
5th July, 1927
welder—Granville
H.C. Evans
1st July, 1927
Accounts Department—Granville
C. Williams
16th August, 1927
Shipping Department—Granville
R. R. Hillier
11th August, 1927
Department Foreman —Granville
W. Robertson
8th August, 1927
Powerhouse—Granville
T. E. G. Moon
6th August, 1927
Merchandise Dist. Dept.—Granville
A. R. E. Challinor
4th October, 1927
Chief Chemist—Granville
w. k. Thompson
1st October, 1927
General Office —Granville
B. S. Lea
25th September, 1927
Cost Department—Granville
T. H. Richardson
12th September, 1927
Department Foreman—Granville
C. A. Nelson
24th October, 1927
Department Supervisor—Granville
D. K. Meek
10th October, 1927
Compounding Department —Granville


A good place to work
The large, airy cafeteria pro-
vides a wide range of meals
and light refreshments at
nominal cost
WORKING AMENITIES . . .
Employee welfare is an important function of manage-
ment, and Goodyear prides itself on the amenities it has
provided. When work resumed after the Christmas break
this year the new amenities block was ready for use. It is
one of the finest in Australia with its air-conditioned clothes
lockers, its completely equipped and staffed medical section,
its spacious shower and washrooms and airy cafeteria.
Casualty room is
equipped for regu-
lar and emergency
needs of employees
Wash room has most modern washing facilities, and
large changing room has air-conditioned lockers.


No employee welfare programme would be complete
without management support for social activities. Goodyear
employees find common ground in play as well as work.
Teams participate in various sports. Picnics, Christmas
parties, dances, theatrical entertainment all provide the means
for social contact, and contribute to a happy spirit amongst
employees.
AND THE SOCIAL SIDE


The best
is yet
to came
Walking was a satisfactory means of transport for primitive
man. But his restless mind yearned for something better. He developed the wheel
and, centuries later, a motor to turn it. When he learned to equip this wheel with a
pneumatic tyre the miracle of modern transportation was here. Because motor vehicles
move faster and smoother on inflated tyres the standard of living in every civilized
country has been raised. Through the years human progress has always paralleled the
advances in transportation and few companies have contributed more to the improve-
ment of world-wide transportation than Goodyear. Goodyear, in 1952, is dedicated to
the task of helping to make better transportation available to everyone, everywhere—
to develop other new and better products that will help to make the adventure of living
mean still more, for generations to come. II 111 111 i |j||| 11
PRINTED BY
JOHN SANDS PTY. LTD.
SYDNEY




