

THE MUTINY OF THE BOUNTY AND THE
PICTAIRN ISLANDERS.
Down in the loneliness o£ the Southern Seas lies Pitcairn Island, a
picturesque spot in the open ocean, with a history whose freshness
is ever green. Who the Pitcairn Islanders are few really know.
To most, indeed, the island is only a name, at all events it is not
generally known how interesting and romantic is the tale of the
origin and career of those lonely dwellers on that rock-bound isle,
far removed from intercourse with their fellow-beings, and visited
O 7
even to the present day at rare intervals only by trading or mission-
ary vessels. Like a dream of the past is the Mutiny of the Bounty.
The mutineers have all passed away long years ago, and Lieutenant
Bligh has gone to his account; but the descendants of these
mutineers now inhabit Pitcairn Island, and form an interesting
o
relic of one of the most eventful chapters of colonisation. The
history of Pitcairn Island is, indeed, like a tale of Utopia, gentle
as Ponce de Leon’s romance of the fountains of perpetual youth,
and more authentic than those pictured islands of the blest which
the mediaeval seamen were fabled to have sighted in the “ region of
the sunset.”
A little less than 100 years ago, soon after the South Sea Islands
were discovered, it was thought that it would be advantageous to
naturalise the bread-fruit and other plants in the West Indies, and
Lieutenant Bligh was despatched in the Bounty to collect these.
The vessel appears to have touched at Otaheite, where the seamen
seem to have become greatly demoralised. They were chiefly
the off-scourings of the English seaport towns, and almost at any
time were ready for desperate deeds, and Lieutenant Bligh by his
treatment of them hastened the outbreak of a mutiny that had
been long smouldering. There is little doubt that he was sullen
and cruel, not at all an inapt prototype of that captain of the
Poet Laureate’s creation, who was punished by his men in the
Vol. V.—No. 29. 6 L


face of the enemy by their refusing to fire a gun, and so
sacrificing the lives of all. The ringleader of the mutiny
was Fletcher Christian, an acting lieutenant, while of the crew
eighteen remained faithful to the captain, the other twenty-five
following Christian’s fortunes. The vessel was secured without
bloodshed, and Bligh and his eighteen companions were cast adrift
in an open boat with instruments and provisions. The Bounty
headed back to Otaheite, and Bligh, who was unquestionably a
skilful seaman and a brave man, compassed 3600 nautical miles, and
finally reached Timor. The hardships of such a voyage in an open
boat will be readily understood, and yet, singularly enough, no one
perished. The voyage lasted forty-one days, and though discontent
was frequently observable, Bligh succeeded in preventing an open
outbreak, a feat highly creditable to his foresight and care.
Bligh was subsequently put in command of another vessel, and
successfully carried out his original intention, so that to him
must be accorded the credit of having introduced the bread-
fruit and other South Sea Island plants into the West Indies. He
afterwards distinguished himself in the mutiny at the Nore, fought
in the battles of Copenhagen and Camperdown, and rose to the
rank of vice-admiral. He commanded a ship of the line in the
French revolutionary war, but again by his harshness he goaded
his crew into mutiny, and they ran the ship into a French harbour.
He was for some time Governor of New South Wales, but the then
colonists and he did not agree, and he was removed by force from
the country.
I now come back to the mutineers themselves. They took the
Bounty safely to Otaheite, and the majority there gave themselves
up to the sensual enjoyments spread so profusely around them. In
Malavai Bay they married native women, and ate and drank plen-
tifully. But there was a Nemesis on the seas that was fast bringing
them their well-earned punishment. The Admiralty had fitted out
the Pandora, which in due time reached Otaheite, and several of
the crew of the Bounty were secured. Of these ten only reached
England, where a court-martial was held. Three of the offenders
O 7
were pardoned, four were acquitted, and three were executed.
But there were still nine of the mutineers to be accounted for, and
their fate long remained a mystery, until, in 1808, the news suddenly
reached England that the remnant of them and their descendants
had been discovered on Pitcairn Island, in the Pacific. It was not,
however, till 1814, when a British warship called at the island, that


the history of this remnant of the officers and crew of the Bounty be-
came known. Fletcher Christian, it would seem, never abandoned
himself to any day-dream at Otaheite, He knew that would not
be a safe retreat for him, and so with eight seamen, six Otaheitan
men, and twelve Otaheitan women, he set sail for a rocky islet in the
Pacific he had often heard spoken of, and there formed the nucleus of
the little colony of Pitcairn Islanders, One of the first acts of
Christian on reaching the island was to burn the ship, and so cut
off the means of escape. In ten years the greater number of the
colonists had died, for the most part, a violent death. The Otaheitan
men, provoked by the ill-treatment of the seamen, murdered several
of them, and in revenge the dead men’s widows slew their husbands’
assassins. Of the survivors, one died of asthma, a second com-
mitted suicide, mad with some intoxicating liquor which he had
contrived to distil from the roots of native plants, and a third was
put to death in self-defence.
When the British warship visited the island there was only a
single member of the mutinous crew remaining, viz., Alexander
Smith, who had changed his name to John Adams, and who re-
tained many of the old tars’ characteristics. Smith or Adams was
reported, or reported himself, to be a changed character, endeavouring
to make amends for his' former life by training up the young
generation in the ways of virtue and learning. All of them spoke
the English language, and nearly all had some education and a
fair knowledge of the truths of Christianity.
There is a mystery attached to Christian’s death. The usual
account given is that he was murdered by the Otaheitans, but
Adams himself informed some of the visitors that he threw himself
over the cliffs, and was drowned. There are, however, a few who
think that Christian escaped from the island, and, curiously enough
a few years after the mutiny an opinion was prevalent in the Lake
District of Cumberland and Westmoreland that Christian had
reached England, and had visited an aunt who lived in that part of
the country. Again, Captain Heywood, a midshipman of the
Bounty, who had been tried as a mutineer and pardoned, was under
the very strong impression that he had seen Christian in Plymouth,
and he remained so to the end of his life, though for obvious
reasons he did not think it desirable to make his opinion public.
There is a section of the little colony on Norfolk Island. The
migration was necessitated by the smallness of the original retreat.
6 L 2


At first they went to Otaheite, but they were shocked at the im-
morality of their relatives there, and in 1855 were removed to
Norfolk Island, but a number of families subsequently returned
to Pitcairn Island.
Adams died in 1829. His name is still revered as the patriarch
of the little colony, but Adams’s step-daughter, who was living a
year or two ago, avers that he was a bad man, and that it was
Young, a midshipman, who did all the good. Be that as it may,
the Pitcairn Islanders are distinguished for piety, virtue, and
industry, and on no coast, perhaps, in the world is a shipwrecked
mariner better treated. The inhabitants number about 100, and
they are engaged in cultivating various tropical crops, particularly
arrowroot, yams, sweet-potatoes, maize, fruits, and vegetables;
they are generally prosperous, and greatly attached to their
island. The oldest man on the Island is Thursday October
Christian, a grandson of the veritable Christian, who occupies
the position of schoolmaster and pastor. The magistrate is
James M'Koy, also a grandson of one of the mutineers, who is
assisted by two councillors, while the heads of families are con-
vened for consultation in cases of emergency, any very grave
cases being left for the decision of the first war-ship that
arrives. Family prayers are said in every house, morning and
evening. The community at first was an anarchy, then a kind of
patriarchal dictatorship, with John Adams as absolute ruler; and
now it is the simplest form of Republic, every one over seventeen
years of age, females included, having a vote in the election of the
President. Their greatest pride is to be thought British subjects,
and they are, altogether a healthy, handsome race of people, con-
sumption, contracted from their Otheitan mothers, being their only
scourge.
There are other Crusoe settlements of Britons in the Pacific and
Atlantic oceans, but none of them equal in picturesqueness that of
the Pitcairn Islanders, whose oft-told story is ever fresh.
W. H. Dick.
