

THE PLENARY
f : Z,.
P /}[4D I^EpCY.
By REV. GEORGE GRIMM, M.A.
of New South Wales,
AUTHOR OP:
INSPffiATION OP THEBIBLE;
Being a Discourse delivered in St. Stephens Presbyterian
Church , Sydney , on the Assembly Sabbath, the
11 th of March, 1894,-
Tutor in Hebrew and Systematic Theology to the Presbyterian Church
“ The Australian Explorers,” “ The Sabbath,” “ The Memory
and How to Improve it,” “ A Concise History of Australia,”
“The Unveiling of Africa,” “Twelve Lectures on the Im-
mortality of the Soul and the Life Everlasting,” and “The
Bulwarks of our Faith.”
Jssned 6tj a Committee of ttie Jfndience.
SYDNEY:
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON, 89 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
STATIONERS’ HALL COMPANY, 385 & 387 GEORGE STREET.
1894.
Price, THREE PENCE.
I^^




THE PLENARY
INSPIRATION OF THE BIBLE
H DEFENSE PND I^EpCV.
Being a Discourse delivered in St, Stephen 1 s Presbyterian
Church , Sydney, on the Assembly Sabbath, the
11 t/i of March , 1894,
By REV. GEORGE GRIMM, M.A.
Tutor in Hebrew and Systematic Theology to the Presbyterian Church
of New South Wales,
OF z
“The Australian Explorers,” “ The Sabbath,” “The Memory
and How to Improve it,” “ A Concise History of Australia,”
“The Unveiling of Africa,” “Twelve Lectures on the Im-
mortality of the Soul and the Life Everlasting,” and “The
Bulwarks of our Faith.”
"Issued stj a Committee of tfe jfudience.
SYDNEY:
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON, 89 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
STATIONERS’ HALL COMPANY, 385 & 387 GEORGE STREET.
1 88*.
Price, THREE PENCE.




(VI IF IVI
5. €. "77
PEEFACE.
The design of the following discourse is twofold, general
and special. In the earlier portion I have had in view
those who reject Inspiration altogether ; and in the
latter, those who admit it only in part. The whole
subject has acquired a fresh interest in consequence of
the very pronounced and somewhat defiant deliverance
of the Eight Eev. the Moderator of the Presbyterian
Assembly of 1894, which calls for some reply from
the other side lest silence should imply consent. It
has been said that those members of the Assembly
who do not agree with the Moderator, should either
keep quiet or libel him. Put surely the latter is not
the proper alternative. There are more ways of
dealing with an erring child than by whipping it. In
the meantime we are in the stage of open and, let us
hope, of fair and honorable discussion. The address
which has caused so profound a surprise, is in this
part clearer in its denials than its affirmations.
Inspiration is driven out of the words of Scripture,
and the reader is left to discover for himself where
else it has taken refuge. This being so, it has seemed
desirable to pass under review the whole of this subject.
For the Eev. George Maclnnes personally, with his
many excellent qualities of head and heart, 1 have no
other feelings but those of sincere esteem and
admiration. To know him, is to love him. His
friendship I have valued very highly, and hope to
retain it; as, lam sure, he will see that I have steered
well clear of the bitterness of controversy. But these
considerations only render it all the more to be
regretted, that he should, by an error of judgment, '
have misused a high position of trust, and by has
ill-advised address wounded the sensibilities of many , ■
to whom the word of God is dearer than life itself.




In the present age, there appears to be a growing
desire to have the Bible accepted and explained, on
precisely the same principles as any other book. By
many it is deemed sufficient, that the writers were
honest witnesses and well-meaning men, doing their
best, according to the light that was in them, to
instruct their generation, as well as the ages to come,
in so far as they might stand in need of such teaching
and find it profitable. To agree to this view of the
case, would he a surrender of the whole question at
issue ; for if the Bible be the work of men only, were
they never so good and wise, it can have nothing more
than human authority and, therefore, no ruling place
in the religious life. God alone is the Lord of the
conscience; to Him only is religion due; and unless
the Scriptures have in them something divine they
can have no claim to he the supreme authority in
faith and practice. If, therefore, inspiration cannot be
retained, the Bible fails in the very purpose for which
it professes to have been given.
Those persons who advocate the opinion which has j ust
been noticed, must surely admit that a very unhappy
choice of writers was made, if their qualifications
were to consist in mental culture and intellectual


attainments. Had such been the case, one would
have supposed, that for the preparation of a hook
which was meant to rule the world for all time, its
authors, being left to their own resources, would have
been brought from the most renowned halls of
learning and the best schools of philosophy. But
instead of so necessary a precaution, it is found that
the chosen writers were mostly uneducated men who
followed their Hocks in the wilderness, or fishermen
who had come from their boats on the Lake of Galilee.
Manifestly these were of all men the most unlikely to
succeed in the work that lay before them. Here,
however, there is no difficulty for anyone who believes
in the Divine inspiration of the Scriptures; there is,
in fact, a very good reason why it should have been
so, —it was putting the treasure in earthen vessels,
that the excellency of the power might be of God,
and not of men.
But if the difficulty is great when the qualifications
of the men are considered, it appears overwhelming
when regard is had to the nature of the materials with
which they had to deal. The truths to be communicated
to the world were of such a kind as lay far beyond
the ken of the most gifted intellect, not to mention
the poor comprehension of unfettered men. They
were to deal with matters which eye had not seen nor
ear heard. At one time, they were required to describe
an action or event which, perhaps unknown to
themselves, was to serve as a type of the profoundest
of all mysteries; at another, in the character of
prophets, they had to foretell a leading event which
was to find its fulfilment, in some distant land, many
centuries after they went down to the grave. When
it is considered how dull the minds of men usually are
in comparing spiritual things with spiritual, and how
egregionsly the wisest err in forecasting even the things
of to-morrow, one may well marvel at the bare idea of
such persons being the authors of a book which,
incomparably more than any other, still rules the
world.


To those that believe in a supernatural revelation,
in any sense, it need not seem a strange thing that God
should have efficaciously guided chosen men in the
act of communicating the same to the world. The
twin actions are but the two sides of the one purpose —
the manifestation of the Divine will to men. He
who thought fit to vouchsafe the greater blessing of
revelation, need not surely he supposed to withhold
its necessary complement in granting inspiration to
those who were enjoined to commit it to a permanent
record. There was more of the marvellous element in
the former act than there could be in the latter.
One other presumption which points directly to the
doctrine of plenary inspiration, is the promise of the
guidance of the Spirit which Christ made to His
disciples on the eve of His departure. “ But the
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my name, He shall teach you all things,
and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever
I have said unto you. . . He will guide you into all
truth. . . and will show you things to come.” How far
this guidance was to extend, may be understood from
the following words of Christ which were spoken in
another connection :—But take heed to yourselves;
for they shall deliver you up to councils; and in the
synagogues ye shall be beaten ; and ye shall be brought
before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony
against them. . . But when they shall lead you and
deliver you up, take no thought beforehand what ye
shall speak, neither do ye premeditate ; but whatsoever
shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye; for it
is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost.” Here,
then, is the promise of inspiration made to the apostles
in its fullest and most unqualified sense, and that, too,
during an occurrence of secondary importance. If it
was given in the less, would it be likely to be withheld
in the greater emergency ? Are we foolish enough to
believe that Christ gave the Spirit to the apostles to
speak by them and for them, in such a way as almost
to sink their personality, when it became a question of


their temporal security, and withdrew that Spirit just
as they addressed themselves to the task of writing
the oracles of our faith ?
After these preliminary observations, the way is
now cleared for an exhibition of the more direct proofs
for the inspiration of the Scriptures. Let us look, in
the first place, at those unique truths which the Bible
contains, in their hearing on the wants of humanity,
as evidence of a Divine source. The existence of God
is justly argued from the marks of design which are
displayed throughout His work of creation ; and may
it not be concluded, by parity of reasoning, that the
Scriptures are of Divine origin, if they contain a
similar adaptation of truths and principles to the
requirements of man’s spiritual nature ? That there
is such a correspondence, it will not be difficult to
prove. Wherever individuals and communities have
surrendered themselves to the authority of the Bible,
there have followed the development of all that is good
in humanity, and the suppression of its corruptions.
Personal purity, moral culture, civil freedom, and
national prosperity, have all flourished under its
benign shadow; whilst the corruption of morals, and
the bondage of the human spirit have been the
inevitable result, where priestcraft or any other
spiritual authority has been set up in its stead. This
argument will appear with all the greater force, if
regard is had to the almost total failure of the
wise men of antiquity to make provision for the
higher wants of humanity. A code of naked
morality was nearly all that they produced in this
direction. Philosophy achieved wonders in the
intellectual domain, but next to nothing for man’s
spiritual nature. It gave the most vague and futile
answers to the great questions concerning his
origin, object, and end. How different is it with the
Bible I It amply supplies the knowledge of salvation
which could be found nowhere else, and answers well
the mystery of man’s existence. The Scriptures alone
furnish a proper object for his affections in proposing


God for his chief end. If the Bible were permitted
to rule supreme in every heart, and if the whole
conduct were fashioned according to its principles,
there would at last he produced, what has been long
sought but never found—a perfect man. We can
account for such a book, wielding so mighty an
influence, only on the principle set forth in its own
words: “ Holy men of God spake as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost.”
Another very important branch of this evidence is
to be found in the consistent system of doctrine and
the organic unity which pervade the whole of the
Sacred Scriptures. There are really two facts
mentioned here, and they deserve separate treatment.
The series of books extending from Genesis to
Revelation embrace a period of something like 1500
years in the course of publication, according to the
prevailing belief in the Church. The writers
consisted of men of every class and condition, from
the king upon the throne to the lowly herdsman of
the wilderness. The books were written in the most
diverse situations and distant places, in Jerusalem, in
Babylon, in Ephesus, in Corinth, and in Rome;
sometimes in palaces, and sometimes in prisons.
These unparalleled circumstances of time and place
rendered concert, confederacy, or collusion altogether
out of the question Had such a motley array of
writers, extending over so long a period and scattered
in almost every land, been left individually to their
own wit and wisdom, it is inconceivable how repugnant
and contradictory their productions must have been.
But instead of “a mighty maze without a plan, 1 '
there emerges a perfectly harmonious and complete
system of doctrine. Ho one ever gave forth a dogma
which another repudiated, or which did not form an
integral member of the scheme of revelation. The
perfect holiness of God, the original innocence of man,
the fall into sin, the deliverance by means of an
incarnate and suffering Saviour, the resurrection of
the body, and the life everlasting, form the warp and


woof of the whole texture of Scripture; nor is there
to he found a single line from a solitary writer which
reverses any one of them. But not only is there a
consistent system —a system so complete that divines
have had no difficulty in compiling what they have very
properly called a “body” of divinity; there is, at
the same time / a gradual development of doctrine
running through the whole series of the books of
Scripture. As the full-grown oak is but the unfolding
of what was virtually contained in the acorn ; so in
Scripture there is a development, from first to last, of
a preconceived plan, more particularly of the scheme
of redemption, which was virtually involved in the
promise made in the Garden of Eden respecting the
seed of the woman. Scarcely was there a writer who
did not contribute something towards this development,
and yet he probably knew little or nothing of the
relation which his particular work bore to the general
plan. Can we account for such facts as these on
merely human grounds ? Surely it could have been
nothing else but the Spirit of God who guided these
men in the execution of a work for which in themselves
they were altogether incompetent.
The fulfilment of the prophecies contained in the
Scriptures is another convincing evidence of their
inspiration. These prophecies stand forth in bold
contrast to the vague guesses and ambiguous surmises of
the heathen oracles of antiquity. Here the predictions
were definite, even to the most minute particulars, and
most of them related to events which then lay in the
far distant future. Had the prophets confined
themselves to such as were beginning to forecast their
shadows upon the existing times, the predictions might
in most cases be explained on natural principles. But
all the facts are of an opposite character. The causes
which eventually brought about the fulfilment of the
prophecies were not in existence at the time of the
predictions, at any rate were not discernible to the
mind of man, and consequently could not be foreseen.
The fulfilment of the prophecy upon Tyre, for example,


was effected by the influence of Alexandria, which
took away its trade ; and yet the prophecy was made
public several generations before the city of Alexander
the Great was founded. A stronger instance may yet
be seen in the present state of the Jewish people.
The dispersion which has so long existed without
destroying their distinctness as a race, was fully
described by Moses three thousand years ago, with as
much accuracy as if he had been an eye-witness. Such
facts as these are inexplicable on any supposition
which denies the plenary inspiration of the sacred
books.
The influence which the Bible has exerted upon the
world ever since its appearance, is also worthy of
serious consideration in this connection. Whether
regard be had to the individual or to the community,
one is struck with the power which it never fails to
wield over its subjects. In the case of any man who
submits to its influence, there is soon observed a
marked change in the character, such as could not be
produced by any other book, or by all books together.
It possesses an unparalleled power of penetration,
which goes straight to the sources of what is good and
evil in the heart of man: “ For the word of God is
quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul
and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.”
It is the self-evidencing light of the Scriptures that
carries home the most convincing persuasion to the
mind of those who surrender themselves to their
guidance; but this arises from an experimental
acquaintance with the word, and cannot be expected
to have much weight with those to whom it is
still a strange book. It is remarkable that the
Reformers and succeeding divines, who were
“ mighty in the Scriptures,” gave the foremost place
to this internal evidence, considering all others as
secondary and subordinate. So will it always be in
like circumstances. Those who have experienced


the true spiritual power of the Bihle on the heart
which is “ deceitful above all things and desperately
wicked,” will set supreme value on this kind of
evidence, and not doubt that it is “ given by
inspiration of God.” Again, let the effect which
the Bible has had on society he considered for a
moment. No other hook, as every one knows, is in
so direct antagonism to all that is evil in man, and
consequently it has to an unprecedented degree been
opposed and suppressed. Bor ages the persecuting
heathen powers put forth every effort to destroy it
utterly. The martyrs often had their choice of
delivering up the Scriptures or laying down their
lives. On special occasions, a persecution arose for
the express and avowed purpose of exterminating
the Word of God. Had it been anything else than
what it professes to he, it is impossible to understand
how it could have survived so many and so
determined elf orts for its extinction. Over and over
again, it was the hush burning hut not consumed.
It is remarkable how few ancient hooks have come
down to the present time, even with great efforts
made, not to destroy, hut to preserve them. The
mass of the literature of antiquity has perished
notwithstanding. But how differently has it fared
with Sacred Scriptures ! To them may he applied
the words of the historian referring to the persecution
of Israel in Egypt : —The more they were afflicted,
the more they multiplied and grew; and for the
same reason also, —Israel was God’s people, and the
Bihle is God’s word. And not only has it survived
every fiery ordeal; it is at the present time
incomparably the hook of hooks. It is now
translated into not less than two hundred and fifty
tongues, and is more read and studied than the most
noble work of genius which the pen of man has ever
produced.
There is something, moreover, in the manner and
expression of the writers, which can he explained
in no other way than by a belief in their inspiration.


Every reader must have noticed how truthful they
are in relation to the facts they have to communicate
even when these involve an acknowledgment of
their personal failings. Moses records his own
infirmities at the rock of Rephidim with their
merited consequences ; David, without reserve,
pours forth his confession of blood-guiltiness in the
fifty-first psalm; and Mark the evangelist, who is
known to have written specially under the direction
of Peter, gives a detailed account of the fall of that
impetuous apostle. How are these exposures of
personal failings to be explained ? Certainly it is
not the manner of men to write hooks in which
they publish their faults to the world. This is done
only in one book—the Bible. Josephus wrote a
history of the wars of the Jews and the part he
played in them; but he keeps silence regarding his
own faults, and never loses an opportunity of
sounding the trumpet of his own fame. Julius
Caesar compiled a narrative of his Gallic campaigns;
but the reader knows that he claims every victory
to himself and throws the blame of all miscarriages
upon his lieutenants. So it is always. Human
nature will not suffer it to be otherwise. AY hen the
case stands so different, then, with the writers of the
Bible, we must plainly infer that they were moved
by another spirit than their own.
Let us now see what answer can be given to the
important question of the mode or manner of
inspiration. Of course there is a mystery here as
in all the other operations of the Divine Spirit. It
is vain for us to expect to understand how the Holy
Ghost acted upon the human agents in guiding them
to write infallibly the AYord of God for our salvation.
AYe cannot even comprehend His agency upon our
own spirits in the ordinary operation of His grace :
“ The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou
hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence
it cometh and whither it goeth. So is every one
that is born of the Spirit.” But whilst we cannot


hope to learn what this action is in itself, it may he
possible, perhaps, to get to understand something
of its manner and circumstances. The most
important consideration here is the degree or extent
in which the holy men were used as agents of the
Spirit. As to the mode of operation, there can be
no doubt that a view altogether too mechanical has
long prevailed in the church. It should never he
forgotten, that when God employs any of His
creatures as His agents, He does so after a manner
which is agreeable to their own nature: —“ He uses
angels as angels, men as men, and the elements as
elements.” This fact has often been forgotten by
well-meaning writers on inspiration, for they have
spoken of inspired men as if they had been mere
machines in the hand of the Spirit, such as
a modern type-writer. This mistake has been
made when they have been compared to a
harp, or some other musical instrument to be
touched in an absolutely passive condition; or when
they have been described as mere penmen, scribes,
or secretaries of the Spirit, little more than their
hands being used in the mechanical operation of
writing; or, when the whole theory of inspiration
has been reduced to a process of verbal dictation.
All these narrow views are happily being now
abandoned for a much more liberal, and not less
accurate principle of inspiration. Let it not he
forgotten, therefore, that when God uses a man for
His agent, He will use him as a man and not as a
machine. It was not the mere hands, or the memory,
or any single and isolated faculty that was called
into requisition when the sacred writers were
inspired to indite the Holy Scriptures; hut the whole
man with all his endowments of head and heart,
which w r ould have been employed in any ordinary
writing, were brought into action for this special
purpose. Instead of the Divine Will being
communicated through the mere hand, as the
mechanical view w ould imply, it came, so to speak,


through the whole man, in the exercise of his
memory, his understanding, his imagination, and
every other faculty which would have been employed
had there been no inspiration at all. But at the
same time, let it he observed, that no human
infirmity, and no alloy of sin were permitted to
escape from the writer to the writing. The very
fact of inspiration, or divine guidance, was a
sufficient safeguard against the possibility of such
an occurrence. It thus appears that the Scriptures,
in one sense, are wholly of God, because all came bv
the Spirit’s guidance; and, in another sense, they
are wholly of men, because the man was entirely
and consciously active when engaged in the act of
writing them. Hence has arisen that admirable
blending of the human and the divine elements in
the composition of the Scriptures which invests
them with an indescribable charm. The heavenly
things have in this way received an earthly form and
aspect, which make them more intelligible to the
human mind and bring them nearer to the devout
heart.
The advantages of this view of inspiration should
be apparent at a glance, as it accounts for, and
renders possible, that endless variety of style and
manner of expression which run through the whole
Bible. We find that every writer retains his
peculiar way of writing, just because the whole man,
with all his sinless idiosyncrasies, was employed as
the agent of the Spirit. Ho we find in Isaiah a man
whose sentiment of the sublime was the predominant
characteristic of his mind; then this faculty of
the sublime was sanctified and turned to account
by the Spirit in the composition of his magnificent
book of prophecy. Or do we find in Paul a dialectic
habit of mind which casts every truth that passes
through it into a stately logical form; then this
endowment is brought into requisition by the
inspiring Spirit. Or, once more, do we find in John
an intuitive order of mind which is ever bent on


contemplation; then the Spirit makes use of this
peculiarity, also, in conveying the truth in a most
inviting and delightful form. Thus it will he seen
that, whilst all the writers were filled with the
self-same Spirit, who guided them into all truth, the
Holy Ghost destroyed nothing that was genuinely
human. The consequence is seen in that admirable
variety of style and composition which distinguishes
the Bible above all other hooks. As when a
traveller is passing through a strange country, he
finds a new aspect of the scenery greeting his eyes
at every turn of the road ; and it is this never-ending
variety which constitutes the bewitching charm of
travel in foreign lands. In like manner, lie who
reads through the Word of God finds a new style in
every one of its many writers, and his interest is
thus kept awake till the close of the volume is
reached. Those who have attempted to plod their
way through the History of Josephus or the Koran
of Mahomet, will not he slow to appreciate this
advantage ; nor should they fail to thank God that
all the hooks of the Sacred Scriptures have not been
cast in one and the same iron mould. In the two works
referred to, there are found the same dull monotony
and dead uniformity filling them from beginning to
end, which makes the task of reading them through
as irksome as a penal sentence. In the Scriptures
this infliction has been happily avoided, whilst a
captivating charm of style has taken its place,
through the exquisite blending of the human and
the divine in its composition.
Having thus passed under review a series of
independent arguments in favour of inspiration, it
will now be a legitimate proceeding to inquire how
this question appeared to the writers themselves and
whether or not they claimed to have the guidance
of the Spirit of God. This question is easily
answered. In the case of the Old Testament
writers, it is brought to a practical issue by
the manner in which their successors, under


the New Testament, made their quotations from
the previously existing Scriptures. Whatever the
writers of the former dispensation are quoted as
saying, the Holy Ghost is declared to have uttered.
Christ Himself said that David, by the Spirit, called
the Messiah Lord. In the ninety-fifth psalm the
writer himself thus exhorts : “ To-day, if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts.” But the
quotation of the same in the Hebrews runs thus:
“ Wherefore as the Holy Ghost saith, To-day, if ye
will hear his voice.” Again in the same epistle the
writer says: “ Wherefore the Holy Ghost is a
witness to us, for after that He had said before, this
is the covenant that I will make with them after
those days, saith the Lord.” The words are
Jeremiah’s ; nevertheless it is not the prophet, but
the Holy Ghost that is said to bear this testimony.
So, also, we read of the assembled apostles with one
accord lifting up their voice and saying, “ Lord,
Thou art God, who by the mouth of thy servant
David hast said, “ Why do the heathen rage ?” And
not less to the purpose are those words of Paul
addressed to the Jews : “ Well spake the Holy Ghost
by Esaiasthe prophet unto our fathers.” That the
writers spoke through the infallible guidance of the
Spirit, is a claim made or implied throughout the
epistles of the New Testament, and for the other
Scriptures as well. The opening words of the
Epistle to the Hebrews assert inspiration in the
widest sense: “ God, who at sundry times and divers
manners, spake in time past unto the fathers by the
prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by
His Son.” Paul writing to his beloved Timothy
instructs him in this truth that, “ All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
for instruction in righteousness; that the man of
God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all
good works.” The apostle Peter is not less emphatic
in his affirmation that, “ The prophecy came not in


old time by the will of man; but holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.”
One other important inquiry regarding this claim
to inspiration concerns its extent and limits. In
the opinion of the writers themselves, was it meant
to reach the words of* Scripture or to be confined to
the thoughts and ideas only, in so far as they lay in
their own minds ? For the proof, a return must be
made to their own statements, which indeed are both
copious and clear. David said on a very important
occasion in which his statement lias been embodied
in the Scripture record : “ The Spirit of the Lord
spake by me, and His word was in my tongue.” Still
more express, if possible, is the assurance given by
Paul to the Corinthians, when he says: “ Which
things we also speak, not in the words which man’s
wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost
teacheth.” But how strongly must this belief be
impressed upon our minds, if it shall appear that our
Lord and His apostles sometimes constructed an
elaborate argument upon the very forms of expression
which were employed by the Old Testament writers ?
Let the following cases be carefully considered from
this point of view. The author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews reasons from the exact phraseology of
the prophet Haggai when he predicted the shaking
and removing of things which were not to remain:—
“ Whose voice then shook the earth; but now he
hath promised saying, Yet once more I shake
not the earth only, but also heaven. And
this word, Yet once more —” Paul in the Epistle
to the Galatians, grounds a fundamental argument
on the distinction between the singular and the plural
of a noun: “ Now to Abraham and his seed were
the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as
of many ; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is
Christ.” In like manner, our Saviour argues from
the tense of a verb to the doctrine of the resurrection
of the dead. Moses recorded this saying from the
bush: “I am the the God of Abraham, of Isaac,


and of Jacob.” These patriarchs had been dead
for centuries; and had the writer been uninspired,
he would probably have written, “ I was the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob.” But the Spirit
guided him to make the statement not in the
past, but in the present tense. See now what use
Christ made of this distinction, and how he founded the
argument on the precise form of the expression. “And
as touching the dead that they rise ; have ye not read
in the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto
him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob ? He is not the God
of the dead, but the God of the living.” But what
will the opponents of verbal inspiration answer, if it
can be shown that it is extended not only to words but
even to the letters and to the parts of a letter, and that,
too, by our Lord Himself ? For a proof that it was
really so, let a reference be made to the Sermon on the
Mount which contains this statement: “Think not
that lam come to destroy the law, or the prophets; I
am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily
I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass,
one jot or tittle shall in no wise pass from the
law, till all be fulfilled.” What is meant by
“jot” and “tittle?” Very little things indeed.
Jot stands for yod, which is the smallest
letter in the Hebrew alphabet, the language in
which the Old Testament was written; but not
even it shall perish or be lost out of sight. Tittle,
again, was the name applied to a small mark, or to
the turn of the shape of a letter which served to
distinguish one similar consonant from another;
and yet not even this hardly discernible point shall
fail till all be accomplished. Is it possible to
conceive a stronger argument for the verbal
inspiration of the Scriptures ?
For my part, I have never been able to see how
any kind of inspiration which fails to reach the
words of Scripture could meet the necessities of the
case, or be logically maintained for any length of


time. This divorce of thought and the expression
of thought, is both unnatural and unphilosophical:
—unnatural, for it is a forced expedient to which
recourse has been had to escape from acknowledged
difficulties that lie in the path of verbal inspiration :
and unphilosophical because it overlooks the
relative connection between ideas as conceived
and expressed, as also their action and re-action
upon each other. This is cutting the knot rather
than untying it: this is avoiding Scylla to fall into
Charyhdis. It is better to acknowledge these
difficulties and to wait for further light than to rush
upon an expedient which is so repugnant to the
sensibilities of Christians. Professor Moses Stuart
of Andover, who, in the department of Biblical
Criticism, stood a giant among giants, has left the
following upon record as touching his own
experience, in the matter of Scripture difficulties:—
“My experience has taught me something in
relation to such subjects. In the early part of my
Biblical studies, some thirty or thirty-five years ago,
when I first began the critical investigation of the
Scriptures, doubts and difficulties started up on
every side, like the armed men whom Cadmus is
fabled to have raised up. Time, patience, continued
study, a better acquaintance with the original
Scripture languages, and the countries where the
books were written, have scattered to the winds
nearly all those doubts. I meet indeed with
difficulties still which I cannot solve at once ; with
some, where even repeated efforts have not solved
them. But I quiet myself by calling to mind, that
hosts of other difficulties, once apparently to me as
formidable as these, have been removed, and have
disappeared from the circle of my troubled vision.
Why may I not hope, then, as to the difficulties
that remain ? Every year is now casting some new
light on the Bible, and making plain some things
which aforetime were not understood, or were
misunderstood. Why may not my difficulties be


reached hy some future progressive increase of
light P ”
It has been objected, and the objection has been
emphasized hy the Right Rev. the Moderator of
the Presbyterian General Assembly of 1891, that as
amanuenses were sometimes employed hy the sacred
writers, verbal inspiration, had it been a fact, would
have had to be extended to these scribes also. It is
certain, however, that this was a very exceptional
practice. The really notable case was that of the
apostle Paul, and it may not have been the rule with
him. When he did employ an amanuensis, it must
have been careful dictation to one who had the pen
of a ready writer. With the utmost care it is
possible, of course, that a word might have been
misunderstood as it fell on the ear of the listener.
Rut the epistle was not to pass direct from the
scribe to the church for which it was written. As
soon as the document was finished, it was taken into
Paul’s own hands to he attested, as correct, by his
signature. Is it to be supposed that he would have
done so without reading over what he was signing ?
No prudent business man in our city would deal in
this way with a paper which involved the risk of a
few shillings; and yet the objection derives all its
force from the assumption, that the apostle would
have treated in this way an epistle which he vouched
for as being written, “ not in the words which man’s
wisdom teacheth, hut which the Holy Ghost
teacheth.”
It is further objected that it would have been no
advantage to have the words originally inspired,
unless they had been preserved intact to the latest
posterity hy a standing miracle: which is in effect
to say, that it would he no gain to have a river pure
in its source, unless it could he kept free from all
contamination during its passage to the sea. It
should count for something, surely, to have the
stream started in absolute purity ; and, for the rest,
there are human appliances which are competent to


minimise subsequent pollution, or perhaps remove it
altogether. Like the noble river, Avelling forth in
virgin purity from its fountain-head in the
everlasting hills, the stream of revelation, coming
from God through inspired men, started upon its
course free from every taint of pollution. But it
was not handed over to the guardianship of miracles,
even in the days when they were wrought in the
earth. The Old Testament Scriptures were entrusted
to the keeping of the Jewish church; “to them
were committed the oracles of God;” nor did our
Saviour ever charge them with unfaithfulness to
this duty. In like manner, the New Testament
Scriptures have been committed to the Christian
church, nor is it too much to assert that great
faithfulness has also been exercised here. It was
not possible for human infirmity to keep on
transcribing the sacred books during so many
centuries without falling into occasional mistakes;
but it is admitted, on all hands, that the various
readings do not seriously affect any doctrine of
Scripture, nor any precept or rule pertaining to the
religious life. And, after all, the time of danger could
last only for a limited period. It could not survive
the invention of printing. Since the close of that
era, there has been growing up a new science under
the name of Biblical Criticism, which has proved
itself amply competent to detect and expunge the
errors of transcription. The objection that it
would have been useless to have received a verbally
inspired book at the first, unless the very words had
been preserved by miracle, has been annihilated by
the admission that the labours of WestcottandHort
have succeeded in “ restoring to the church in the
nineteenth century the text of the New Testament
ip almost pristine perfection.”
It will hardly be regarded as a very serious charge
that the theory of verbal inspiration leads to the belief
all parts of the Bible are inspired in the same
degree and are often received as of equal importance


—that “It puts Esther on a level with John,
Ecclesiastes with Paul, and the Song of Songs with
the words of Jesus.” Verily it would be a serious
and a saddening task for individual Christians to be
debarred from the practical use of the Bible until they
had apportioned the proper amount of inspiration to
each book, and settled the relative importance of ore
passage to another. In this case, God’s Word might
still remain a boon to biblical scholars possessing the
skill and acumen for such investigations; but its
popular use would be for ever destroyed, unless the
people were to give up the right of private judgment,
and become blind followers of leaderswho would never
agree among themselves. All experience shows that
it would have been quite impossible for scholarship
to have pointed out beforehand those passages of
Scripture which have been actually blessed to the
simple and believing heart. The able and accom-
plished Dr. E. W. Newman, although not a believer
in the inspiration of the Bible, at any rate in those
parts which he considered of little importance and
therefore not needing it, has yet been candid enough
to leave on record an instance that makes altogether
for the other side of the question. He gives an
interesting notice of one of his friends who stood at
the opposite pole from scepticism. 'This humble and
devout man, who had given himself to the work of a
home missionary, held fast to the old-fashioned notion
that the Bible is verbally inspired throughout, and that
there is no part of it which the Spoil it might not bless
to a God-fearing man. Newman resolved to test the
practical effect of his friend’s belief, and for this
purpose selected the most extreme instance on which
he could lay his finger. The passage which best
suited his design, he found in II Timothy IV., 13 :
“ The cloak which I loft at Troas with Carpus, when
thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, but
especially the parchments ” The question was now put,
what need there was for inspiration in a notice of this
kind; or what conceivable use these words could be


to ainy one except to Paul and Timothy who were
immediately concerned. “ They have been blessed
to me,” was the reply of the pious missionary, “for
it was just this verse that kept me from selling my
library when I was in a pecuniary difficulty.” This
devout man was in the habit of searching the
Scriptures for direction in all the emergencies of life;
and he did so on that particular occasion. He found
that Paul, in all his wanderings and his poverty, kept
hold of his books; and by following his example, this
humble believer in God’s Word was saved from the
error which is so often committed—the mistake of
sacrificing one’s library for a trifle when the pinch of
poverty begins to he felt. Cases of this kind, which
come only accidentally to light, should put us on our
guard against limiting the inspiration of Scripture,
and may well keep us from regarding any part of
God’s Word as too trivial to he important.
Another charge which has been hurled against
verbal inspiration, is the strange one that it turns the
Bible into a code of rules. How disingenuous the
impeachment is, will be evident to any one who
considers for a moment how differently every church
uses its code of rules and the Holy Scriptures. There
is no part of the Bible which could be used as a code
of rules except the regulations of the Mosaic ritual;
and every denomination lias made it a first point to
declare that all these were abolished in the death of
Christ. Among those sections of Christendom which
have been most loyal to the Bible, nothing is more
remarkable than the fact, that they have disclaimed
its use as a directory of mechanical rules, and urged
its adoption as a repository of spiritual principles which
address themselves to the enlightened Christian
conscience, and are to be applied as in the sight of God
to whom an account has to be given. But while this
charge is to be repudiated in the offensive form in
which it has been advanced, far be it from us to deny
that we use the Bible as the rule and guide of life,
after the manner of the saintly king of Israel who


declared it to be a lamp unto his feet and a light unto
his path. That the Scriptures might be available for
this purpose and find their way into every cottage, was
the life-principle of the Reformation; and the Bible in
this sense is still the chief bulwark of Protestantism.
The man who limits its inspiration, and by consequence
lessens its authority, is destroying the liberties for
which our fathers shed their blood, and does his best
to hand over the keeping of men’s consciences to a so-
called infallible church.
If the Bible has hitherto been misunderstood and
misapplied, the question presses for answer: What
is its proper and legitimate function? The reply is
to hand : —The object and end of the Scriptures are to
give “sufficient witness to the self-evidencing Christ.” So
far as the language is concerned, this statement of the
case cannot surely be considered a happy one; for
what is self-evident does not need testimony, and
what needs testimony cannot be self-evident. When
the sun rises, there is no occasion for the light of the
moon and the stars to testify to the fact, for
it is self-evidencing, inasmuch as it shines by
its own light. It is by the sun that we see the
sun. Being itself an object which is self-evidencing, it
would be simply absurd to speak of any thing else as
giving “ sufficient witness” to the sun. The Bible
would thus be superfluous, or else futile. We are
sent to an uncertainty to find a certainty; as if the
proof itself could be more sure than the means of proof.
It is unnecessary to say, that in a less exclusive and some-
what more rational sense, the chjirch has always held
that the Bible bears witness to Christ. To have done
otherwise, would have been unfaithfulness to His
own command who said : u Search the Scriptures ” (the
old rendering cannot be disproved), “ for in them ye
think ye have eternal life ; and they are they which
testify of me.” The advanced school, therefore, have
shown nothing new in bringing forward this doctrine.
The only novelty is the implied argument, that because
the Scriptures testify of Christ, they do not need to be


Verbally inspired ; just as if tins were not the very
subject for which it was required out of comparison
with all others. Christ was the end of the law, which
was in itself a shadow of good things to come. The
ancient ritual, as a whole and in all its parts, was
designed to foreshadow the Redeemer in his person, His
work, and his death, even to the minutest details. His
innocence was prefigured by a lamb without spot or
blemish, His perfection by the choice of the flocks and
herds being laid on the altar, and the atoning
character of His sacrifice by the shedding of their
blood. Even the incidental circumstance that the
Roman soldiers forbore from breaking His legs on the
cross, was typified in the institution of the
paschal lamb; the type itself being not less
carefully guarded by the injunction : “Hot a
bone of it shall be broken.” So, too, Christ was
the spirit of prophecy: to Him gave all the prophets
witness. At one time, they set forth His humiliation;
as in the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah which reads
more like history than prophecy; at another, they
descanted on His exaltation, as in the magnificent
seventy-second psalm. The portraiture of the Messiah
was perfectly drawn in every shade and lineament
centuries before He appeared. Yet, though it had
been drawn piecemeal and the contributions made by
an amazing variety of hands, the whole when brought
together proved to be a perfect facsimile of the great
reality. The reader of the narratives of the African
pioneers, Livingstone and Stanley, on several occasions
has his attention drawn to a long train of the dusky
savages who are each carrying a fragment of a steamer,
all of which are to be pieced together at the end of
the journey for the navigation of an inland lake.
For the time being, the mind is held on the stretch
lest some part should be lost or carried off by a
deserter thereby making void the whole enterprise ;
and not till the vessel at last appears, to the mental
vision, complete in all its parts and afloat on the
bosom of the waters, does the tension give way.


Very similar might have been the anxiety of the
godly men who lived during the interval between the
Old Testament and the New. The coming Messiah
had been predicted in a multitude of details, scattered
here and there over the whole record. When the full-
ness of the time drew on would they all come together
and form a perfect skeleton like the bones in Ezekiel’s
Valley ? The event only could determine; and it did so
triumphantly. When Christ appeared, He gathered up,
into a perfect whole, all the types and prophecies
which concerned himself. There was nothing wanting,
nor anything superfluous. What, then, is the inference,
from considerations so surprising and so unique, to be
drawn by a well-constituted and dispassionate mind ?
Inspiration, of course ; but surely inspiration in the
highest degree and of the most efficacious character. It
is an insult to the intelligence of the age to ask it to
believe, that in order to give such testimony to the
Christ who was to come, it sufficed for the men of old
to have their minds filled with Messianic ideas, and be
left to express, or fail to express them, as might seem
best to their own wisdom. Taking all the facts
together, and viewing this subject from every point of
view, it should fully appear that the Sacred Scriptures—
be they a library or a literature—are justly entitled,in
the strictest sense, to their time-honoured name, the
WO El) OF GOD; and it may Avell be said of the
Bible, with an eminent Continental divine, that u a
book which has had such a past will also have a future. n




e ZS9BOOSO sos i- e


