



A FORGOTTEN EXPEDITION is limited to five
hundred numbered copies of which the first
ten are bound in full morocco.
Copy No: J o




ERNEST GILES


THE JOURNAL OF A
FORGOTTEN
IN 1875
BY ERNEST GILES
EDITED BY JAMES BOSANQUET
SULLIVAN’S COVE
1 979


Printed and bound at Griffin Press Limited
Netley, South Australia 5037
Published by Sullivan’s Cove
GPO Box 1932, Adelaide
South Australia 5001


This journal of my third exploring expedition
in Australia I dedicate to The Hon. Sir Thomas
Elder, of South Australia, the greatest patron
of exploration that Australia has ever known,
and under whose auspices and expense this and
two subsequent exploring expeditions with
camels were conducted by me.
Ernest Giles,
Adelaide.


CONTENTS
Editor’s Note xi
Giles’s Journal i
Harry Tietkens’s Account 47
Jesse Young’s Account 49
Alec Ross’s Account 53
VII




PLATES
1. Ernest Giles frontispiece
2. First edition title-page facing page xiv
3. The Expedition Members between pages 38
and 39
MAP
Expedition map by Giles between pages 6
and 7




EDITOR’S NOTE
The first edition of Giles’s Journal of a Forgotten Expedition , printed in
Adelaide in 1880 in mustard coloured wrappers under the imprint
of W. K. Thomas & Co., is a physically slight work, a mere twenty-six
pages of double-column, run off from the small type set up for its
printing in the Adelaide Observer during the first four months of the year,
with a map added. The earliest located copy of it is the dedication
one, inscribed to Thomas Elder by Giles at Pt. Augusta on 10 June
and now in the rich collection of the Royal Geographical Society in
Adelaide. Other copies were presented by Giles during the ’eighties
when and where he felt it appropriate: one to the Duke of Manchester
in July 1884 (now in the National Library of Australia via the Petherick
Collection), another to his “very excellent friend” Joseph Josephs in
April 1886 (State Library of Victoria) and two to Henniker Heaton
as late as June and July 1889 (Mitchell Library), among others:
almost all known copies have been inscribed by him.
As the Heaton copies show, Giles himself still had the journal nine
years after printing —earlier in the same year that his collected journals,
Australia Twice Traversed ,* were published. But despite this long
possession by its author, it even then was and ever since has remained
a rarity; for whereas he had copies at his disposal nobody else did.
The booksellers were never offered it for sale and it was not advertised
or even noticed in the newspapers belonging to its putative publisher,
Thomas. It is significant also that when Giles came to list the earlier
printings of his various journals for recording in Australia Twice Traversed
he was to overlook completely that it ever had been issued as a separate
work, and such an omission could hardly have been accidental.
It may be wondered how many copies of the journal were likely to
have been printed. Forty or fifty perhaps? Or as many as a hundred?
Whatever the number they were all for Giles.
* The copy of Australia Twice Traversed that Giles presented from London to his sister
Jane, now in the State Library of South Australia, is dated 5 December 1889, and
the work was reviewed in the Athenaeum on 14 December, so there is little doubt as
to the month of its publication.
XI


His earlier book, Geographic Travels in Central Australia , when pub-
lished in Melbourne in 1875 had been “distributed mostly to the
patrons” who had subscribed to the fund for his second expedition,
and a good proportion of the edition was inscribed by either Giles
or his promoter von Mueller. Relatively few copies of it were offered
commercially and it has become a scarce volume, but compared to
the Forgotten Expedition it is a commonplace. Both of them are now
sought after in the antiquarian book world, with perhaps a few copies
of the one changing hands each year but the other appearing only
each decade or each blue moon. The present editor remembers with
regret his inability to purchase copies of the two works, bound together,
when offered them for £4O by the Sydney bookseller Tyrrell some
years ago, and supposes that today he would be asked ten times
that sum or more.
The first chapter of the Forgotten Expedition was published in the
first number of the Adelaide Observer for 1880, on 3 January. Robert
Kyffin Thomas, that weekly’s editor, and with his father its joint
proprietor since 1877, late in 1879 had advertised that with this number
it would be in “an entirely new and greatly improved form”, with
new and important features and “contributions on political, social,
literary, and scientific subjects” being specially written. As new
machinery was to be imported, this decision to refashion the paper
would need to have been made much earlier, perhaps very early in
the year, but although Giles could have agreed upon publication
with Thomas at any time, most likely he did so during the second
half of 1879, so it is possible that these earliest segments of his 1875
expedition were written up four years after its event, whereas his
account of the latter part of it, culminating in the triumphant arrival
at Perth, had been published so long ago as 1876;* hence, as Giles
was to say, his use of the term forgotten.
Any journal kept by him during the expedition seems no longer to
exist and comparison of it with his Observer narrative therefore cannot
be made, but from the deserts in 1875 he had sent long and detailed
accounts to his patron Elder in Adelaide and perhaps these were the
substance from which his published version was composed. The first
of these reports had reached Elder by telegraph on 17 April, as is
shown later, and Giles sent him more during July in the form of
narrative letters, the last of them being despatched on the twenty-
sixth from the Youldeh depdt. There were at least two and perhaps
more such letters,! each of them necessarily reaching Adelaide by
way of Fowler’s Bay, with Elder receiving them early in September
and a resume of them appearing in the Register by the courtesy of
that gentleman.!
The full 1880 text of the Forgotten Expedition has never been reprinted
previously but a polished version of it (in which “from here” became
* S.A. Parliamentary Paper No. 22, 1876.
t S.A. Parliamentary Paper No. 22, 1876, page 1: “in my last letter”.
J South Australian Register , 9 September 1875.
XII


“from hence”, “having got” was turned into “having secured”,
Mr. Elder became Sir Thomas Elder, and the like) was prepared by
Mrs. Cashel Hoey, the “well-known authoress and Australian corres-
pondent”, and published in Australia Twice Traversed with Giles’s
approval. Unfortunately Mrs. Hoey’s work for this London edition
went even further, substituting, for example, for “the thermometer
that morning had stood at 28 0 ”, the arch “that morning Herr Gabriel
Daniel Fahrenheit had fallen to 28 0 ”, making seventeen lines of verse
into prose (and thus misleading a later poet)*, and so on. Who would
prefer to read of “the howling waste in which we were almost
entombed” rather than Giles’s original “the howling wilderness by
which we were surrounded”, or have him quote “a poet” rather
than “the deep but witty poet, Bon Gaultier”, or never record in
any form, of his preliminary excursion from Fowler’s Bay to Beltana,
that “this journey I suppose I must not entirely consider an explora-
tion, as many points at which I touched had been visited previously,
and I only performed this journey to take command of and fit out a
thorough exploring expedition for Perth; but considering the whole
three of us nearly perished, I think I may put this trip down as a
very close approximation to real exploration’ ’ ?
In his journal Giles ranges from the lyrical to the simply conversa-
tional, but is always engaging. His text as originally given to Observer
readers has now been restored, incorporating a dozen or so typo-
graphical or other minor corrections that he made in manuscript in
later copies of the journal. With it are given the accounts of the
expedition, brief though they are, recorded by his companions
Tietkens, Young and Ross. And his map, prepared for and printed
with the Forgotten Expedition in its pamphlet form, is also included.
Both the magnificent portrait of the leader now used as a frontis-
piece, and the better-known (and perhaps slightly earlier) group
photograph of the expedition, are given by the courtesy of the
Archives Department of the State Library of South Australia, as is
the extract from Tietkens’s reminiscences. For Elder’s letters to Young
the editor is grateful to the Trustees of the Mitchell Library.
The editor is grateful also for information given by the librarians
of the Mitchell Library, the La Trobe Library and the Battye Library.
J. B.,
November 1978
* Geoffrey Dutton: Australia's Last Explorer, Ernest Giles, page 109: “his strange
mixture of verse and prose’ ’.
XIII


THE JOUR
THE JOURNAL
OF A
Forgotten Expedition.
By ERNEST GILES,
KNIGHT CHEVALIER OF THE CROWN OF ITALY j
F.R.G.S., LONDON; AND GOLD MEDALLIST OF
THE R.G.S FOR THE YEAR 1880 ;
AND
HONORARY F.R.G.S.’s OF VIENNA AND HALLE SAALE.
ALSO OF THE
ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF HAMBURG.
Reprinted from the “ Adelaide Observer,”
JJ.i*laifce:
W. K. Thomas & Co., Grenfell Street.
1880.
TITLE-PAGE OF THE FIRST EDITION


JOURNAL OF A
FORGOTTEN EXPEDITION
Having conducted two former exploring expeditions into Central
Western Australia, and having published in a small volume called
Geographic Travels in Central Australia * the journals of my two preceding
expeditions, it will not be very astonishing that I should now become
the leader of a third. The wild charm and exciting desire that first
induce an individual to commence the ardous existence of an explorer,
and the pleasure and delight of visiting new and unknown lands, are
only whetted the more by his first attempt, the more especially when
he is constrained to admit that those first attempts had not resulted in
carrying out the objects for which they were undertaken.
My two first expeditions were conducted entirely with horses; all my
subsequent ones —and which have been eminently successful —were
conducted with camels —those wonderful “ships of the desert,”
without which the travels and adventures which are here and sub-
sequently recorded could not possibly have been performed; but before
I plunge entirely into the occurrences of my travels with camels I will
give a slight resume of my two former ones with horses.
In both those expeditions the object I had in view was to push across
the continent from different starting-points upon the South Australian
transcontinental telegraph line to the settled districts of Western
Australia. My first expedition was a very small one, it being fitted-
out entirely at the expense of Baron von Mueller, my brother-in-law
(Mr. G. D. Gill), and myself. I was joined in this enterprise by a young
gentleman I met in Melbourne named Samuel Carmichael, who also
contributed his share towards the undertaking. When we had been
in the field a little over three months through the defection of
Carmichael this first expedition ended all too soon, and the party
returned to the telegraph line. The furthest point reached on this
expedition being nearly 500 miles from my starting point. Upon my
reaching the Charlotte Waters Telegraph Station, in latitude 25 0 55'
* Melbourne, 1875.


and longitude 135 0 , I met Major Warburton and his son (whom I had
known before), who, to my great astonishment, informed me they were
about to undertake an exploring expedition to Western Australia for
two well-known capitalists of South Australia, viz., the Hon. Thomas
Elder and Captain Hughes. Major Warburton also informed me that
a South Australian Government expedition was just in advance of him
for the same purpose under the command of Mr. William C. Gosse.
This information took me greatly by surprise, as I had just returned
from an attempt of the same kind —beaten and disappointed. I felt if
ever I took the field again against two such formidable rivals as were
now about to attempt what I had failed in—both supplied as they were
with camels by Mr. Elder —my chances of competing with them would
be very small, as I could only get horses. I was not then known to Mr.
Elder at all, who was the only gentleman in Australia who possessed
such animals as camels.
The fact of two expeditions starting away simultaneously almost as
soon as I had turned my back upon civilization showed me at once
that my attempt —I being considered a Victorian —had roused the
people and Government of South Australia to the importance of the
question which I was the first to endeavour to solve, namely, the
exploration of the unknown interior and the possibility of discovering
an overland route for stock through Central Australia to the settle-
ments upon the western coast. And this, I may remark, had been the
dream of all Australian explorers from the time of Eyre and Leichhardt
down to my time. It also showed that South Australia had no desire to
be beaten in her own territory by “worthless Melbourne’s puling
child,” and hence the two new expeditions under Gosse and Warburton
started. Immediately my failure and return were made known by
telegram to my friend Baron Mueller he set to work, and with un-
wearied exertions on my behalf soon obtained a limited fund from a
few wealthy gentlemen in the rival colony of Victoria, and which fund,
in consideration of the information I had afforded by my first effort at
exploration, the Government of South Australia supplemented by a
subsidy of £250 provided I again took the field and expended the
money in fresh exploration, and provided I supplied to the Govern-
ment at the termination of my projected journey a copy of the map and
journal of the expedition. As a new though very limited fund of £6OO
was now placed at my disposal I had no inclination to decline a fresh
attempt, and thus my second expedition was undertaken, and such
dispatch was used by Baron Mueller and myself that I was again in the
field (with horses only) not many weeks later than my two formidable
rivals —Gosse and Warburton.
On this expedition I was accompanied and seconded by Mr. William
Henry Tietkens. He and I had both been scholars at Christ’s Hospital
in London, though many years apart. Of the adventures and labours of
that second expedition the readers of my journal can form their own
opinion, and though I was again unsuccessful in carrying out my
object, and though the expedition ended in the death of one member,


and misfortune to the others, still by a few partial friends I have been
told that it was really a splendid failure. On that expedition I explored
a line of nearly 700 miles of previously unknown country in a straight
line from my starting-point. During my absence upon this expedition,
which occupied a year, Major Warburton got across to the De Grey
River, upon the north-west coast, the route of his expedition having
been mainly along the 20th parallel of latitude, while my last journey
had been confined to the country intervening between the 24th and
27th parallels.
Immediately after Major Warburton’s arrival in Western Australia
Mr. John Forrest started in command of an exploring expedition from
that colony, with the intention of travelling eastwards from Mount
Hale, on the Murchison River, in latitude 26°. On this journey Mr.
Forrest succeeded in crossing to the end of my southern line, near the
26th parallel, some little distance to the west of a range of hills I called
the Warburton Range, which was 600 miles west from the telegraph
line; and I may here remark that the credit and honour of the explora-
tion of the whole of this line has somehow or other been given entirely
to Mr. Forrest, while the reality of the case is that of the whole distance
across of 1,000 miles I completed 600 miles the year before he com-
menced his journey. Thus two lines of exploration were completed,
but neither Forrest nor Warburton traversed a country of any pastoral
or commercial value, and it was evident there was still a space of
enormous extent, from the 26th parallel (where my last travels were
prosecuted, and where Forrest’s track joined on to mine) to the shores
of the Great Australian Bight, averaging over 400 miles in width, that
might repay the toils, dangers, and expense of exploration by the
discovery of some new and valuable tracts of watered pastoral lands.
In both my former expeditions I had been most fortunate in the
discovery of large areas of mountain country, permanently watered
and beautifully grassed.*
* These preliminary recollections mostly comprehend those made by Giles on a
former occasion, the banquet given for his expedition at Perth in December 1875,
as reported in the Perth Enquirer and the South Australian Register. Because the earlier
account gives further biographical detail, in his own words, and because it perhaps
was the more spontaneously made, it is now quoted from.
Many years ago I was an outside bushman, taking up runs in New South Wales and Queensland,
making a few hundred pounds now and then by anything I could sell. While thus engaged, I
naturally acquired a desire to push into more remote and unknown regions. This desire so worked
upon my imagination and feelings that for many years I attempted to organize an expedition to
cross over to Western Australia. I was a long time before I succeeded in bringing the smallest of
parties into the field, and my desire was at last accomplished by the united efforts of my brother-in-
law, and Baron Mueller. I was on that occasion only supported by the most slender means, and
our party consisting of myself, my brother-in-law, and another, only penetrated some 250 miles
from the Transcontinental Telegraph line. The whole affair collapsed in consequence of dis-
affection among the party, and we returned to South Australia. In the meantime, the enthusiastic
ardour periodically manifested for territorial explorations —but which at the time I started on my
first expedition (that just alluded to) seemed to have faded away —was kindled anew, for, in my
[Continues overleaf]


As my late travels had been almost in the centre of the continent, I
now turned my eyes to that unknown portion above mentioned lying
back from the south coast, and which it was reasonable to suppose
might prove to be of a useful and valuable pastoral nature. On my
return from my second expedition I first met the Hon. Thomas Elder,
who had already done so much for Australian exploration by sending
out Warburton’s expedition, furnishing Gosse’s expedition with
camels, and also dispatching another under Mr. [John] Ross, which
ended very abruptly, Mr. Ross returning without having penetrated
any distance from civilization. From my first interview with Mr. Elder
he appeared most willing to send me into the field again, and it was
soon decided that he would equip me with camels and send me in
command of a thoroughly efficient expedition. Upon this occasion I was
to traverse the country lying under the 29th parallel of lattitude as near
as possible, and I was to force my way through the southern interior to
the city of Perth, in Western Australia, by a new and unknown route.
But previous to commencing the new expedition Mr. Elder desired me
to execute a commission for a gentleman in England of a squatting
absence, ere I had regained the settlements, some colonists —notably Messrs. Elder and Hughes—
had organized two other exploring parties, both provided with camels, with the object of proceeding
from central stations on the Overland Telegraph line in a westerly direction. I was somewhat sur-
prised at this sudden manifestation of ardourfor exploration, looking at the great want of sympathy I
had experienced a few months previously when endeavouring to organize an expedition. However,
the journal of my trip met with a very favourable reception in South Australia, to which colony,
by-the-by, I do not belong. I and other members of our family emigrated to Melbourne many years
ago, and at present reside there. Perhaps for that very reason I, a Victorian, did not meet with
more ready sympathy in the sister colony when first endeavouring to organize an exploring
expedition. I being first in the field, they may then have been jealous of my wresting the laurels
from their own explorers. Be that as it may, I was anxious to re-enter the arena, and though the
two other exploring parties were on their way —that of the South Australian Government, under
Mr. Gosse, and that of Messrs. Elder and Hughes, under Colonel Warburton —I was enabled
through the instrumentality of my friend Baron Mueller, and the aid of a number of generous
Victorians, whose assistance was supplemented by a grant from the Government of South Australia
—within whose territories all my first discoveries were made —to start more amply equipped on a
second expedition. I should here mention that my friend Mr. Tietkens was with me on that
occasion, as on many a previous unreported trip in South Australia. We have often suffered
hardships together, but never such as we did on that occasion. Our last journey was a pleasure trip
compared to that. On one occasion I and another member of the party left the camp on an excursion
to attempt to penetrate some sandhills to the west, when my companion, to whom I had given my
horse, was lost, and I had to walk back with an empty water-keg on my back a distance of some-
thing over a hundred miles, in the heat of summer, during which all I had to eat was eleven sticks
of smoked horseflesh, averaging about an ounce and a half each, and which I ate raw, having no
water to boil them. My position at that time was certainly a precarious one. I was sixty miles
from water and eighty from food, with the thermometer at go° in the shade. What made matters
worse, the ground I had to travel over was all stones, and as my feet were very sore, I could only
go at a snail’s pace over them. On that occasion I picked up a small dying wallaby, whose mother
had thrown it from her pouch. It weighed about two ounces, and was scarcely furnished yet with
fur. The instant I saw it I pounced upon it like an eagle, and ate it raw, dying as it was, fur,
skin, and all. At last, owing to a combination of adverse circumstances, our party was compelled
to retreat, and at that time your own explorer Mr. Forrest was in the field, and almost on the
identical spot whence we had been obliged to retreat —at least, on the longitude of that spot.
4


nature in the neighbourhood of Fowler’s Bay, on the western coast of
South Australia, and near the head of the Great Australian Bight. This
work was done entirely with horses, though I had two camels, or rather
dromedaries —a bull, a cow, and a young calf. There being no pack-
saddle for the bull, and the cow being very poor, I had not yet made
use of them. After I had completed my surveys near Fowler’s Bay and
visited the remote locality of Eucla harbour, at the boundary of the
two colonies of South and Western Australia, I had to proceed to
Mr. Elder’s station and camel depot , at Beltana to fit-out for the new
expedition for Perth. Beltana station lies about 300 miles nearly north
from the City of Adelaide, while Fowler’s Bay lies nearly 450 miles
about west-north-west from that city; and though Beltana is only 370
or 380 miles in a straight line from Fowler’s Bay upon the map, yet the
intervening country being unknown, and the great salt depression
Lake Torrens lying in the way, I had to travel 700 miles to reach it,
and as this was my first attempt with camels I shall now give an
account of my journey there with them and three horses.
Two of the three horses were the pick of a mob I had with me at the
Bay, and were most excellent and favourite animals. While at Fowler’s
Bay I had heard of a native watering place called Youldeh that was
known to one or two white people, and I found that it lay about
130 miles inland from the Bay in a north-north-westerly direction. On
leaving Fowler’s Bay on Saturday, March 13, 1875, I had a strong
party with me as far as Youldeh —my second in command Mr. Ghas.
Roberts, Mr. Thomas Richards, police-trooper stationed at Fowler’s
Bay, who having previously visited Youldeh was going, by permission
of Geo. Hamilton, Esq., Commissioner of Police, to show me its
whereabouts, and Mr. George Murray; I had also with me another
white man, Peter Nicholls who was my cook, one old blackfellow and
three young ones. Two of them led the camels, as they knew where
Youldeh was. I sent them on one day in advance of the party, as we all
rode horses, and had several pack-horses to carry our provisions and
other camp necessaries. The weather was exceedingly hot, and though
the previous summer months had been remarkably cool Nature
seemed inclined to concentrate all the usual heat of an Australian
summer into the two remaining months that were left to her. The
thermometer usually stood for several hours of each day at 104°, 105°,
and 106 0 in the shade.
After leaving Colona, an out sheep station belonging to Fowler’s Bay,
and lying some thirty-five miles about north-west from it, and where
Mr. Murray, mentioned above, resided, we traversed a country
alternating between belts of scrub and open grassy flats or small plains,
until at twenty miles from Colona we reached the edge of a plain that
stretched away to the north, and being evidently of a very great extent.
The soil was very loose and yielding, and of a very poor quality.
Although this plain was covered with vegetation there was no grass
whatever upon it but a growth of a kind of broom, two to three feet
high, waving in the heated breezes as far as the eye could reach, which
5


gave it a billowy and extraordinary appearance.* At fifty miles from
Colona, and eighty-five from the Bay, we reached a salt kind of lagoon,
and which, though several miles long, and perhaps a mile wide, Mr.
Murray’s black boy informed us was the footmark (or track) of a
monstrous animal or snake that used to haunt the neighbourhood of
the big plain, and which had once been driven by the Cockata blacks
out of the mountains to the north (the Musgrave Ranges of my last
expedition), and that the creature had crawled down to the coast, and
now lived in the sea. We had often heard tales from the blacks about
this wonderful animal when sitting round the camp-fires at night, and
whenever any native spoke of it it was always in a mysterious under-
tone. What the name of this monster was I cannot now remember, but
there were syllables enough in it to make a word as long as the lagoon
itself. The tales that were told of it, the number of natives it had
devoured, how such and such a blackfellow’s father had encountered
and speared it, and how it had occasionally created floods all over the
country when it was angry, would have made an excellent novel,
which might be produced under the title of a “Black Romance.”
When we laughed at or joked this young blackfellow, who now
accompanied us, on the absurdity of his notions, he became very
serious, as to him and his co-religionists it was evidently no laughing
matter. Another thing was rather strange, and that was how these
coast natives should know there were any mountains to the north of
them. I knew it because I had been there and found them, but that
they should know it was rather curious, for they have no intercourse
with the tribes of natives that exist in the country to the north of them.
Indeed, it required a good deal of persuasion to induce the young
blacks who accompanied my party to go out to Youldeh at all; and if it
had not been that an old man called Jimmy had been induced by
Mr. Richards to go with the camels in advance, I am quite sure the
young ones would not have gone at all.
After crossing the salt lagoon (or animal’s track) and going five miles
further about north-north-east, we arrived at some granite rocks
amongst some low hills which rose up out of the plain, and where some
rock waterholes existed, at which we found the two blacks that had
preceded us, encamped with the camels. This place was called Pidinga,
and was rather a pretty little place. The eye was charmed with
flowering shrubs about the rocks and green grass. As the day was very
hot we erected tarpaulins with sticks, which was the only shade we
could get to sit under. There were a few hundred acres of good country
round about these rocks, though the supply of water was limited to
perhaps a couple of thousand gallons altogether.
From Pidinga our route to Youldeh lay about north-north-west,
distant 33 miles. For 25 or 26 miles we traversed an entirely open plain,
similar to that just described, it being mostly covered with waving
broom-bushes; but now upon our right hand and to the north of us,
* Later identified by Giles as Eremophila Scoparia.
6


EXPEDITION MAP


GILES’S MAP PUBLISHED 1880


and stretching also to the west, was a dark line of higher ground
formed of sandhills and fringed with low scrub and timber of various
kinds, such as cypress pines (Callistris), black oak (Casuarina), stunted
mallee (Eucalyptus) and a kind of myall (Acacia). This new feature (of
higher ground) formed the edge of the plain, and is the southern bank
of a vast bed of sandhill country that lies between here and the
Musgrave Ranges, which lie nearly 300 miles to the north.
Having reached the northern edge of the plain we had been traversing,
we now entered the bed of sandhills and scrub which lay before us, and
following the tracks of the two blackfellows with the camels (as there
was no road whatever from Colona to Youldeh) we came in five miles
to a spot where without the slightest indication to point out such a thing,
except that we descended into lower ground, there existed a shallow
native well in the sandy ground of a small hollow between the red sand-
hills, and this spot the blacks said was Youldeh. The whole region was
glowing with intense heat, and the sand was so hot that neither the
camels nor horses could endure to remain standing in the sun, but as
soon as they were unpacked and unsaddled sought the shade of the
large and numerous leguminous bushes which grow all around the
place. As there were five whites and four blacks, we had plenty of hands
to set about the different kinds of work which had to be performed. In
the first place we had to dig out the old well, which some volunteered
to do while others erected an awning with tarpaulins, got firewood, and
otherwise turned the wild and bushy spot into a locality suitable for a
white man’s encampment. Water was easily procured at a depth of
between three and four feet, and all the animals being watered with
buckets drank as much as they desired, the camels appearing as
though they never would be satisfied.
With regard to the horses, it was only their parching thirst that
induced them to remain anywhere near the camels, and immediately
they got sufficient water, though short-hobbled, they decamped at a
gallop over the high red sandhills from whence we had come, my riding
horse —Chester —being the worst in the mob, always going nearly mad
at the approach of the camels. There was not a sign of a blade of grass
or anything else that horses could eat, except a few yellow immortelles
of a large coarse description, and which they did not care very much
for, while the camels, on the contrary, could take large and evidently
agreeable mouthfuls of the leaves of the great bushes of the Leguminosae,
which grew all round us. The conduct of the two kinds of animals was
so distinctly different as to engage the curiosity of all of us, as the
camels fed in peaceful content in the shade of the great bushes from
which they ate, and never went out of sight, seeming to take great
interest in all we did and evidently thoroughly enjoying themselves,
while the horses were plunging about in hobbles over the sandhills,
snorting and fretting nearly to death with fright and exertion, and
neither having nor apparently desiring to get anything to eat. All they
seemed desirous of doing was to get away as far as possible from the
camels. The supply of water here seemed to be unlimited, but the


sandy sides of the well kept falling in; therefore we had to get some
stakes of mallee and native poplar (Godonocarpus, Cotinifolius, of the
order of Phytolaccoe) saplings, and thoroughly slabbed it, at least
sufficiently so for our time.
This place, as I said before, was exceedingly hot, it lying at the
bottom of a hollow amongst the sandhills, and all we could see from the
tops of any of them near us was a mass of higher, darker, and more
forbidding undulations of a similar kind to those we were amongst.
These undulations existed to the east, north, and west, while to the
south we could but dimly see the mirage upon the plain we had but
lately traversed. The water we got here was fresh and sweet, and if the
temperature had not been quite so hot we might have enjoyed our en-
campment here; but there was no air, and we seemed to be at the
bottom of a funnel. The old blackfellow, Jimmy, that Mr. Richards
had obtained as a guide for me to show me some waters in the country
to the eastwards from here, through the interpretation of Mr. Murray,
informed us that he knew of only one water in any direction towards
the west, and which he said was a small rock-waterhole, called Paring.
The day following Mr. Murray and I rode there with old Jimmy, and
found it to be a wretched little hole, lying nearly west-north-west, and
about fourteen miles away. It contained only a few gallons of water,
which was almost putrid from the number of dead and decaying birds,
rats, lizards, and rotten leaves and sticks that were in it. Had the hole
been full it would have been of no earthly use to me.
Old Jimmy was not accustomed to riding, and got out of his latitude
once or twice before we reached the place. He was, however, rather
proud of finding himself in the novel position (albeit rather late in life)
of riding on horse-back, and, if I remember rightly, did not tumble off
more than three or four times during the whole day. This old black-
fellow was a very agreeable old chap, though I could not keep up a
conversation with him, as I knew so few words of his language, and he
knew only about twenty of mine; but it was quite evident he was a
man of very superior abilities to most of his race; indeed, he looked
like a thoroughbred, and had always been known to Mr. Richards as
a proud and honourable old fellow. He was, moreover, the father of a
large family, all of whom he had left behind, as well as his wife, to
oblige me, and many a time he regretted it before he saw them again,
not from any unkindness on my part, as my readers will see we were
the best of friends the whole time we were together. On this little
excursion it was very amusing to watch old Jimmy on horseback, and to
notice the look of blank amazement on his face when he found himself
at fault amongst the sandhills, and the way in which he excused him-
self for not going straight to this little spot was very ingenuous. In the
first place, he would say —“jVo/ mine young fellow now. Not mine like um
pony (the name for horses at Fowler’s Bay). Not mine see um Paring long
time , only when lam boyf which being interpreted meant —“I am not
able to manage a horse like a young fellow; and not having been
accustomed to horses when I was young, I am not quite so fond of
8


them, as I might otherwise be; and I have not been at this place,
Paring, since I was a child.” So some allowance must be made for my
not going perfectly straight to the place.
However, we got there all right, and as I said before a very poor
place it was. Old Jimmy knew of no other water or watering-place
anywhere else about here. When asked concerning the country to the
north, he declared it was Cockata —the country to the west was also
Cockata , the dreaded name of Cockata always appearing to carry a
kind of nameless undefined horror with it. The term Cockata Blacks is
applied by the Fowler’s Bay tribe to all the other tribes of natives which
exist in the country inland from the coast, and it seems (although when
Fowler’s Bay country was first settled by whites these natives attacked
and killed several white people) they always lived in terror of the other
tribes that resided to the north of them, and any atrocity that was
committed, either cannibalism, theft, or murder, was always put down
to the account of the Cockatas. Occasionally a mob of these wilder
aboriginals would make a descent upon the quieter coast blacks, and
carry off women and other spoils, such as opossum rugs, spears, shields,
coolamins (vessels of wood like small canoes for carrying water), after a
fight, when they usually killed several of the conquered nation.
After having remained at this Paring for about an hour, we re-
mounted our horses, and returned to the camp at Youldeh. The party
remained at this place for a few days, hoping for a change in the
weather, as the heat was now very great, and the country in the
neighbourhood of the most forbidding and formidable nature to
penetrate. It consisted of very high and scrubby red sandhills, and it
was altogether so unpleasing a locality that I abandoned the idea for
the present of pushing to the north to discover if any other waters could
be found in that direction, and postponed the attempt until I should
return to this depot en route for Perth with the whole of my new
expedition, intending now to make my way to the eastwards, to reach
Beltana by a route previously untravelled. Upon the morning after I
returned from Paring all the horses were away; indeed, as I said
before, there was nothing whatever for horses to eat at this place, and
they always rambled as far as they could possibly go from the camp, to
get away from the camels, though those more sensible animals were, so
to say, in clover. We had three young blackfellows and old Jimmy, and
it was the young ones’ duty to look after and get the horses, while old
Jimmy had the easier employment of taking care of the camels. On
this morning two of the young blacks were sent out very early in the
morning to get the horses, whilst the other and old Jimmy remained to
do anything that might be required at the camp. The morning was very
hot and oppressive, and by twelve o’clock no sign of black boys or
horses had made their appearance. About one o’clock we had some
dinner, and gave old Jimmy and his mate theirs, and I noticed the
younger black left the camp with a bit of a bundle under his shirt, and
a canvas water-bag, so I and some of the others watched where he
went, and to our surprise we found that he was taking food and water
9


to the two other black boys, who should have been away after the
horses, but who were quietly encamped under a big bush within a
quarter of a mile of us, and who had never been away after the horses
at all. Of course we were very indignant, and were going to punish
them with a good thrashing, when one of them informed us that it was
no use our hammering them, as they could not go for the horses,
because they were too much frightened of the Cockata Blacks, and unless
we sent old Jimmy or a whitefellow they wouldn’t go out of sight of the
camp. This showed the state of superstition and fear in which these
people live. Indeed, I believe if the whole Fowler Bay tribes were all
encamped together in one mob round their own fires, in their own
country, and any one ran into the camp and shouted Cockata , it would
cause a stampede amongst them immediately. It was very annoying to
think that the horses had got so many hours’ start away from the camp,
and the only thing I could do was to send a white man and old Jimmy
with these boys to get the absent animals. Mr. Roberts volunteered to
go, and had to camp out away from water, not returning until late the
following day, with only about a third of the mob. The next day they
were all got but three, one of which was a police horse of Mr. Richards’,
which was never seen after, and two colts of mine, which found their
way back to, and were eventually recovered at, Fowler’s Bay by Mr.
Roberts.
While encamped here we found Youldeh to be a most fearful place,
the flies, ants, and heat being each intolerable. We were at the bottom
of a sandy funnel, into which the fiery beams of the sun were poured in
burning rays, and the radiation of heat from the sandy country around
made it all the hotter. Not a breath of air could be got as we lay or sat
panting in the shade we had erected with our tarpaulins. No view
could be got for more than a hundred yards anywhere, unless one
climbed to the top of a sandhill, and then all that could be seen were
other sandhills all round. The position of this place I found to be in
latitude 30° 24' 10", and approximate longitude 13 1 0 46' o". On the
23rd March Mr. Murray, old Jimmy, and I went to the top of a sand-
hill overlooking the camp, and had a long confabulation with old
Jimmy —at least Mr. Murray had —and he interpreted the old fellow’s
remarks to me. It appeared that this old gentleman knew the country,
and some watering-places in it, for some little distance to the eastwards,
and on making a kind of map on the sand he put down several places,
which he called by the following names, viz.—Chimpering, Mowling,
Pylebung, Whitegin, and Wynbring, of which he said Pylebung and
Wynbring were the best waters. By his account they all lay due east
from here, and appeared to be the most wonderful places in the world.
He said he had not visited any of these places since he was a little boy
with his mother, and it appeared his mother was a widow, and that
these places belonged to her country, but that she had subsequently
become the wife of a Fowler’s Bay native, who had taken her and her
little Jimmy away out of that part of the country; therefore he had not
been there since. He said that Pylebung was a water that stood up high ,
10


and that Cockata blackfellows had made it with wooden shovels. This
certainly excited my curiosity, as I had never seen anything which
could approximate to old Jimmy’s description. He also said it was
mucka piccaninny water, only big one, which meant that it was by no means
a small water, but a large one. Chimpering and Whitegin, he said,
were rock-holes, but Wynbring, the furthest place, he knew, according
to his account was something astounding. He said it was a mountain , a
water hole, a lake , a spring, and a well, all in one, and that it was distant
about six sleeps from Youldeh, which, according to our rendering (as
Jimmy declared also that it was mucka close up, only long way), we
considered to be about 120 miles. Beyond Wynbring Jimmy knew
nothing whatever of the country, and I think he had a latent idea in
his mind that there really was nothing beyond it.
The result of our interview was that I determined to send back to
Fowler’s Bay all the party except one white man and old Jimmy, and
all the horses except three, and to start with this small party and the
camels on the following day to the eastward. I selected Peter Nicholls
to accompany me. I found the boiling-point of water at the camp was
211 0 , making its altitude above the sea 509 feet; the sandhills were
about 100 feet high on the average.
The two camels and the calf were sent to me whilst at Fowler’s Bay
by Mr. Elder from Adelaide. There was only a riding saddle for the
cow, the bull not having one at all, and he came to me barebacked. I
therefore had to set to work to invent a pack or baggage saddle for him,
and I will venture to assert that nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand
nine hundred and ninety-nine people out of every million would rather
be excused the honour. Mr. Armstrong, one of the owners and manager
of the Fowler’s Bay Station, supplied me with every requisite I required;
but unfortunately the iron of which I made the saddletrees was not
stout enough, and though in other respects the saddle was a brilliant
success (though made upon a totally different principal to that of an
Afghan’s saddle), yet when the animal was loaded, through the weak-
ness of the iron it kept continually widening, and in consequence the
iron pressed down on the much-enduring creature’s body and hurt him
severely. We continually had to stop, take his load and saddle off, and
bend the iron closer together again so as to preserve some semblance
of an arch or rather two arches over his back, one before and one
behind his hump. Every time Nicholls and I went through this
operation we were afraid the iron would give and snap in half with our
pressure, and so it would only the fiery rays of the sun kept it almost at
a glowing heat. This and the nose-ropes getting continually broken,
together with making new buttons with pieces of stick, caused us many
harassing delays.
On the 24th March, 1875, we bade good-by to the friends that had
accompanied us to this place, and who all started to return to Fowler’s
Bay the same day. With Peter Nicholls, old Jimmy as guide, and the
two camels and three horses, late in the day I turned my back upon
the Youldeh camp. We carried as much water as we could upon one
11


camel and one horse, Nicholls riding the cow camel and old Jimmy and
I riding a horse each. The horses were still terribly frightened at the
camels, and it was almost impossible to sit my horse Chester when the
camels came near him behind; the horse carrying the load of water
followed the two riding horses, but towards dusk he got frightened and
bolted away into the scrub, load of water and all. We had only come
seven miles that afternoon, and it was our first real practical acquaint-
ance with camels. Jimmy and I had continually to wait till Nicholls and
the camels made their appearance, and whenever Nicholls came up to
us he was in a most fearful rage with them. The old cow that he was
riding would scarcely budge for him at all. If he beat her she would lie
down and yell and squall and spit and roll over on her saddle, and
behave in such an extraordinary manner that, neither of us knowing
anything about camels, thought she was going to die. The sandhills
were most oppressively steep, and the old wretch perspired to such a
degree, and altogether became such an unmanageable nuisance, that I
began to think camels were not half the wonderful animals I had
fondly imagined them to be. The bull camel, Mustara, behaved much
better. He had a good heavy load, but he followed the cow without
being fastened in any way. The calf, with great cunning, not relishing
the idea of leaving Youldeh, would persistently stay behind and try
and induce its mother not to go on, in which it partially succeeded, for
by dusk, just as I found I had lost the packhorse with the water —and
waited till Nicholls, who was following our horsetracks, came up to
us —we had only come about seven miles, having travelled at no greater
speed than about a mile an hour since we left the camp. The two
remaining horses were so restless that I was compelled to stand and
hold them while waiting for Nicholls, and old Jimmy walked off in the
darkness to try and find the missing one. By the time Nicholls arrived
(guided by the glare of a large fire) with the camels, the horse had
been gone about two hours. Thus our first night’s bivouac was not a
very pleasant one. There was nothing whatever for the two horses to
eat, and if they had been let go even in hobbles in all probability we
should never have seen them again. Old Jimmy returned after a
useless search for the absent horse. The camels wouldn’t feed, but lay
down in a sulky fit, the two horses continually snorting and endeavour-
ing to break away; and thus the night was passing away, when we
heard the tinkle of a bell (the horse we had lost having a bell on his
neck), and Jimmy and Nicholls went away through the darkness and
scrubs and sandhills in the direction it appeared to proceed from. I
kept up a large fire to guide them, and in about an hour they returned
with the missing horse. When this animal took it into his head to bolt
off he was out of earshot in no time, but it seems he must have thought
better of his proceedings and returned of his own accord to where he
had left his mates. We were glad enough to get him again, and the
water he carried.
The next morning we were under weigh very early, and following
the old guide Jimmy we went in a south-east direction towards the first
12


watering-place that he knew, and which he said was called Chimpering.
Many times before we reached it the old fellow seemed very uncertain
of his whereabouts; but by dodging about amongst the sandhills (for
the country was all rolling hummocks of red sand, covered with dense
scrubs and spinifex) he managed to drop down upon it after we had
travelled about thirty miles from Youldeh. Chimpering consisted of a
small acacia hollow —or, as we say, a mulga hollow, the mulga being
the acacia aneura —in which a few bare red granite rocks were exposed
to view; and in a crevice between two of these Jimmy showed us a
small orifice which, upon baling out, we found to contain only three
buckets of a most filthy black fluid that old Jimmy declared was water,
and we annoyed him fearfully by pretending we did not know what it
was. Poor old chap, he couldn’t explain how angry he was at us, but
he managed to stammer out, “Whitefellow —fool; pony drink ’em.”
The day was excessively hot —the thermometer stood at io6° in the
shade —the horses, or ponies as Jimmy and all the Fowler’s Bay
natives call them, drank the dirty water with avidity. It was early in the
day when we arrived here, and as soon as the water was drunk we pushed
on towards the next place, which was Pylebung, and which our guide
had at Youldeh so excited our curiosity about that I was most anxious
to reach it. Jimmy said it was not very far off.
On the night of the 26th March, just as it was getting dark, and
having left Chimpering about twenty-five miles behind us, we entered
a piece of bushy mulga country, the bushes being so thick that we had
very great difficulty in forcing our way through it in the dark. Our
guide seemed very much in the dark also, as his movements were
exceedingly uncertain, and I could see by the stars that we were
winding about to all points of the compass. At last old Jimmy stopped,
and said we had reached the place where Pylebung ought to be, but
it was not; and here he said, pointing to the ground, was to be our
wurley (or camp) for the night. But when I questioned him, and asked
him which way water, he only replied —which way? This question I
was altogether unable to answer, and was not in a very amiable frame
of mind, for we had been traversing the most frightful country all day,
in dense scrub, in parching thirst, and unpitying heat, so I told
Nicholls to unpack the camels while I unsaddled the horses. All the
animals seemed overpowered with lassitude and exhaustion. The
camels immediately lay down, and the horses stood disconsolately,
standing close to them, now no longer terrified at their proximity.
Nicholls and I extended our rugs upon the ground, and lay down on
them, and then we discovered that old Jimmy had left the camp, and
we thought he had given us the slip in the dark. We had been lying
down some time when the old chap returned, and in the most voluble
and excited language told us he had found the water —it was (he said)
big one waiter , mucka piccaninny , and in his delight at his success he began
to describe it, or try to do so in the firelight on the ground; he kept
saying —big one waiter , big one waiter —watter go that way —watter go
this way —watter go that way and watter go that way —turning him-
13


self round and round, so that I thought it must be a lake or a swamp
he was trying to describe. However, we got the horses and camels
resaddled and packed, and took them down where old Jimmy led us.
The moon had now risen above the high sandhills which surrounded
us, and we soon emerged upon a piece of open ground, where there was
a large white clay-pan (a bare patch of white clay soil) glistening in the
moon’s rays, and upon which there appeared a most astonishing object,
something like the wall of an old house or a ruined chimney. On
arriving at it we saw that it was a circular wall or dam of clay, nearly
five feet high, with a segment open to the south, to admit and retain
the rain water that occasionally flows over the flat into this artificial
receptacle. In spite of old Jimmy’s asseverations there was only
sufficient water to last one or two days, and what there was, was very
thick and whitish-coloured. The six animals being excessively thirsty,
we could see the volume of the fluid gradually diminishing in the
moonlight before our eyes. This wall or dam, constructed by the
aboriginals, is the first piece of work of art or usefulness that I had ever
seen in all my travels in Australia, and if I had only heard of it, I should
seriously have reflected upon the credibility of my informant, because
attempts of skill or ingenuity on the part of Australian natives in any
way applied to building or the storing of water have previously never
been met with, and I was very much astonished at beholding it now.
This piece of work was two feet thick on the top of the wall; twenty
yards in the length of its sweep, and at the bottom, where the water
lodged, the embankment was nearly five feet thick. The clay of which
this dam was built had been dug out of the hole in which the water
lay, with small native wooden shovels, and piled up to its present
dimensions. Immediately around this singular monument of native
industry there are a few hundred acres of very pretty country, beauti-
fully grassed and ornamented with a few mulga acacia trees, standing
picturesquely apart. The spot lies in a basin or hollow, and is sur-
rounded by scrubs and rolling sandhills in all directions. How we got
to it I can scarcely tell, as our guide kept constantly changing his
course, so that the compass was of little or no use, and it was only by
the sextant I could discover our whereabouts; by it I found we had
come 58 miles from Youldeh on a bearing of south 68° east, being now
in latitude 30° 43', and longitude 132 0 44'.
There being so little water here I was unable to remain more than
one day, the thermometer during which indicated 104° in the shade.
To the eastward of this dam there was a sandhill with a few black oaks
(or casuarinas) growing upon it, about a quarter of a mile away. It had
a number of stones of a calcareous nature scattered about on it. On
going up this hill the day we rested the animals here, I was surprised
to find a broad path had been cleared amongst the stones for some
dozens of yards, an oaktree at each end being the terminal points. At
the foot of each tree, at the end of the path, the largest stones were
heaped. The path was indented by the tramplings of many natives’
feet, and I felt sure it was one of those places where the men of this
14


region perform inhuman mutilations upon the youths and maidens
of their tribe. I questioned old Jimmy about these matters, but like all
others of his race, who, while admitting the facts, protest that they
individually have never officiated at such doings.
Upon leaving this place (Pylebung) Jimmy informed me that
Mowling was the next watering-place, and he said it lay nearly east
from here; but I found we went nearly north-east to reach it —which
we did in 17 miles, the country through which we passed being as usual
all sandhills and scrub. Mowling consisted of a small acacia hollow,
where there were a few boulders of granite, in which were found two
small holes, both being as dry as the surface of the rocks in their
vicinity. On our route from Pylebung, we had seen the tracks of a
single bullock, he also had found his way to Mowling; but it must have
been some time since his visit. From here old Jimmy led us a good deal
to the south of east, and we arrived at another exposure of granite
rocks in the dense scrub. This place Jimmy called Whitegin. It was ten
or eleven miles from Mowling. There was a small crevice between the
rounded boulders of rock, which held barely sufficient water for the
three horses, the camels getting none, though they persisted in bother-
ing us all the afternoon, and they appeared very thirsty. They kept
coming up to the camp perpetually, pulling our canvas bucket and
tin utensils about with their lips, and I found the cunning of a camel
in endeavouring to get water at the camp far exceeded that of any
horse. There were a few dozen acres of pretty ground here, with good
grass and herbage on it. We had a great deal of trouble today in getting
the camels along, and the foal or calf belonging to the old riding cow
got itself entangled in its mother’s nose-rope, and we, not then under-
standing the management of camels, and how their nose-ropes and
saddles ought to be adjusted (particulars of which I shall mention by
and by) could not prevent the little brute from tearing the nose-
button clean through the cartilage of the poor old cow’s nose, which
not only caused the animal frightful pain, but made her more obstinate
and stubborn, and worse to get along than before. The agony this poor
animal suffered from flies must have been excruciating, as after this
accident they would get into her nostrils in such numbers that we often
saw her hang back, and cough and snort until she would eject nearly
half a pint of blood and flies out of her nose.
For the last few miles we had not been annoyed by quite so much
spinifex as usual, but the vast amount of dead wood and underbush
that existed was very detrimental to the progress of the camels, who
are not by nature formed for continually lifting their feet; therefore
their toes got constantly entangled with the dead sticks, and became
very sore.
The scrub here —at Youldeh —and all the way we had come,
consisted mostly of mallee (eucalyptus dumosa), mulga (acacia aneura),
prickly bushes (hakea), grevillea trees, and a few oaks (casuarinas).
This place (Whitegin) was 85 miles straight from Youldeh, though we
had travelled about 100 to reach it, as Jimmy kept always turning and
15


twisting about in the scrub in all directions. On leaving Whitegin we
travelled a good deal to the north of east, the thermometer in the shade,
while we rested there, going up to 103°. Jimmy said the next place
we should get water at was Wynbring, and from what we could make
out of his jargon, he seemed to imply that Wynbring was a large water-
course, descending from a mountain, and having a stony bed. He also
said that we were now close to it, and that it was only a piccaninny
way (meaning only a small or short distance). However the shades of
night descended upon us once more in the scrubs of this desert, and we
were again compelled to encamp in a place lonely and without water,
amidst the desolations of this scrub-enthroned tract. Choking with
thirst and sleepless with anxiety the hours of night pass on; no dews
descend upon this heated place, and though towards dawn a slightly
cooler temperature is felt, it is so near the reappearance of the sun that
there has been no time for either earth or man to be benefitted by it,
as long before the sun itself appears, the avant couriers of his fiery might
in the form of heated glow and feverish breeze come rustling through
the foliage of the mallee trees, giving out the semblance of a mournful
sigh, as if they too suffered from the intensity of the heat and thirst of
this desolate region, in which they are doomed by fate to dwell, and as
if they wished to let the wanderers that were passing amongst them
know that they also felt and were sorry for their woes.
The morning of March 3 1 was exceedingly hot, the thermometer at
dawn standing at 86°. We were up and after the camels and horses
long before daylight, tracking them by the light of burning torches of
great bunches and boughs of the mallee trees (which burn almost as
well green as dry, from the quantity of the aromatic eucalyptic oil
which is contained in them), and enormous bushes of spinifex, which
we lighted as we passed. Having got all the animals we started early,
and were moving onwards again before sunrise. From Whitegin I
found we had come on a nearly north-east course, and at 28 miles from
there, the scrub fell off a trifle in height and density. This morning old
Jimmy travelled much straighter than was usual with him, and it was
evident he had now no doubt that he was going in the right direction.
At about 10 o’clock in the morning, after we had travelled about 13 or
14 miles, Jimmy made an exclamation, and pointed out something to
us, and declared that it was Wynbring, when I could at once perceive
how excessively inaccurate the old gentleman’s account of Wynbring
had been, for instead of its being a mountain , I could see that it was
simply a round bare mass of stone, standing in the centre of an open
piece of country, surrounded on all sides by the dense scrub as usual.
When we arrived at the rock we found the large creek channel promised
by Jimmy had microscopicated itself down to a mere rock hole, whose
dimensions were not very great. The rock itself was a bare expanse of
granite, an acre or two in extent, and was, perhaps, 50 feet high, while
the only receptacle for water upon it was a crevice 40 feet long by
4 feet wide, with a depth of about 6 feet in its deepest part. It was not
full, but it held an ample supply for all our present requirements.
16


There were a few low sandhills near, which were ornamented with
occasional mulga trees, and they made the place look very pretty and
picturesque. There were several old and new native gunyahs (or
houses, if such a term can be applied to such insignificant structures)
constructed of branches and boughs of trees. Australian aborigines are
a race of people who do not live in houses at all; but still the common
instincts of humanity induces all men to try and secure some spot of
earth for a time at least we may call our home, and though the
nomadic inhabitants or owners of these Australian wilds do not, as a
rule, remain for long in any one particular place (in consequence of
the game becoming for the time either too wild or else all destroyed,
or the water being used up or evaporated), yet wherever they are
located every man or head of a family has his home and his house, to
which in after seasons he returns. The natives in this, as in most other
parts of Australia, seldom hunt without making perpetual grass or
spinifex fires, and the traveller in these wilds may be always sure that
natives are in the neighbourhood when he can see the smokes, but it
by no means follows that because there are smokes there must be water.
An inversion of the terms might be considered far more correct, and
you might safely declare that because there is water there are sure to
be smokes, and because there are smokes there are sure to be fires, and
because there are fires there are sure to be natives; and the present
case was no exception to the rule, as several columns of smoke appeared
in various directions. Old Jimmy’s native name, by-the-way, was
Nanthona, on account of which most white people at Fowler’s Bay
called him Anthony, which annoyed him horridly. I at first also called
him Anthony, but one day at Youldeh he said to me —“Master,
nothing, you call em mine Anthony —nothing Nanthona. Nanthona no
good; you call em mine Jimmy. Jimmy all right —Jimmy whitefellow
name.” So, of course, I always called him Jimmy after that. When at
Youldeh the old fellow had mentioned this spot (Wynbring) as the
furthest water he knew of to the eastwards, and now that we had
arrived at it he declared that beyond it there was nothing —nothing.
It was the ultima thule of all his geographical ideas —he had never seen,
or heard, or thought of anything beyond it. I must say that it was a
most agreeable little oasis, and an excellent spot for an explorer to
come to in such a frightful region as that which surrounds it, as here
were the three requisites that constitute an explorer’s happiness —that
is to say, there were wood, water, and grass, there being splendid
green-feed and herbage on the few thousand acres of the open ground
around. The old black guide had certainly brought us to this romantic
and peculiar spot with, I suppose I may say, unerring precision;
albeit, he wound about so much in the scrubs and made the distance
far greater than it really should have been; but when I came to
consider the matter I was certainly struck with admiration at his
having done it at all, and how he or any other human being (not having
the advantages of science at his command to teach him by the uses of
the heavenly bodies how to find the position of any locality) could
17


possibly return to any of the places we had visited in such a wilderness
as this, especially as it was done by the recollection of spots which have
no special features and no guiding points, was really very marvellous.*
We had travelled at least 120 miles eastward from Youldeh, and when
there this old fellow had told us that he had not visited any of the
places he was going to take me to since his boyhood, which at the very
least calculation must have been over forty years ago, for Jimmy was
at least fifty, if not seventy, years old. The knowledge possessed by
these children of the desert is preserved owing to the fact that they have
their imaginations untrammelled, the denizens of the wilderness having
their mental faculties put to but few uses, and all are concentrated to
the object of obtaining food for themselves and their offspring. What-
ever ideas they possess (and they are by no means dull or backward in
learning new ones) are ever keen and young, and nature has endowed
them —in whatever intellectual gifts she has afforded them —with an
undying mental youth until their career on earth is ended. As says the
deep but witty poet, Bon Gaultier, speaking of savages or men in a
state of nature —
“ There the passions may revel unfettered,
And the heart never speak but in truth:
And the intellect, wholly unlettered,
Be bright with the freedom of youth.”
Assuredly man in a savage state is by no means the unhappiest of
mortals. Old Jimmy’s faculties of memory were several times put to the
test during the eight days we were travelling from Youldeh to this
place. Sometimes when leading us through the scrubs, and perhaps for
some miles having travelled nearly east, he would notice a tree or a
sandhill, or something that he remembered, and would from that point
turn suddenly in a direction entirely different, towards some high and
severe sandhill, where he would perhaps climb a tree, when, after a
few minutes’ gazing about, he would descend, mount his horse, and go
off on some new line, and in the course of a mile or so he would stop at
some tree and tell us that when a little boy he got a ’possum out of a
hole which existed in the tree. At another place he said his mother was
4
* In May 1875, after news of the murder at the Herbert River of an old bushman,
Conn, had reached Adelaide, an unnamed correspondent in the South Australian
Register stated the following.
The first journey into the bush made by Mr. Giles was under Mr. W. G. Conn's guidance, who
was considered in his day to have been a brave and clever bushman and explorer ... At an
interview at an office which took place a short time since in this city, there were present Mr. W. G.
Conn, Mr. Giles, and his fellow-explorer Mr. Tietkens. A gentleman who formed one of the
party [Elder?] recollects Mr. Conn addressing himself to Mr. Giles in the following words : —
“ Now, my boy Ernest, whatever part of the country you go to, treat the blacks kindly; you will
find in cases of extreme need they can render you great service .”
It is irrelevant to Giles’s history, but Conn had in fact been killed (and partly eaten)
by those whose kind treatment he had urged, and the Register added, “What a
melancholy termination for a man with such humane ideas, for he was one of
nature’s gentlemen . .
18


bitten by a wild dog which she was digging out of a hole in the ground.
And thus we came to Wynbring at last.
A conspicuous mountain —indeed, the only object upon which the
eye could rest above the dense scrub that surrounded us —bore south
52 ° east from Wynbring Rock, and I supposed it was Mount Finke.
Our advent here disturbed a number of natives, as their fresh foot-
prints were everywhere about the place; and our guide, not being at
all easy in his mind as to what sort of reception he might get from the
owners of this demesne, told me if I would let him have a gun he would
go and hunt them up, and try and induce some of them to come to the
camp. The old chap had but a very limited experience with firearms,
so I gave him a gun unloaded, as he might have shot himself or any
other of the natives he might meet, without intending to do any harm.
Away he went, and eventually returned with five captives, namely an
antiquated one-eyed gentleman, with his three wives and one baby,
which belonged to the second eldest wife, who had been a woman of
considerable beauty, but now was rather past her prime, and had been
somewhat rudely touched by the hand of that inexorable tyrant Time,
that delves the parallels upon fair beauty’s brow. What the oldest wife
could have ever been like, it was impossible to guess, as now she
seemed more like an old she-monkey than anything else. The youngest
was in the first flush of youth and grace. The new old man was very
tall, and had been very big and powerful, but he now was shrunk and
grey with age. He ordered his wives to sit down in the shade of a bush
near our camp, which they did. I walked towards the old man, when
he immediately threw his aged arms round me, and clasped me
rapturously to his ebony breast. Then his most ancient wife followed
his example, clasping me in the same manner. The second wife was
rather incommoded in her embrace by the baby she had in her arms,
and which squalled horribly the nearer its mother put it to me. The
third and youngest wife, who was really very pretty, appeared most
enchantingly bashful; but what was her bashfulness compared to mine
when compelled to enfold in my arms a beautiful and naked young
woman? It was really a most distressing ordeal. She showed her
appreciation of our company by the glances of her black and flashing
eyes, and the exposure of two rows of most beautifully even and pearly
teeth. However charming woman may look in a nude and native state,
with all her natural and youthful graces about her, still, the poetic
line, that beauty unadorned adorned the most, is not entirely true.
Woman never appears so thoroughly charming as when her graces are
enveloped in a becoming dress. These natives all seemed anxious that
I should give them names, and I took upon myself the responsibility of
christening them. The young beauty I called Polly, the mother Mary,
the baby Kitty, the oldest woman Judy, and to the old man I gave the
name of Wynbring Tommy, it being an easy one for him to pronounce
and remember. There exists amongst the natives of this part of the
continent an ancient and Oriental custom which either compels or
induces the wife or wives of a man, if he is in any way disfigured in
19


form or feature, to show their love or esteem by similarly disfiguring
themselves, on the same principle that Sindbad the Sailor was buried
with his wife. In this case the two elder wives of this old man had each
relinquished an eye, and no doubt the time was soon approaching when
the youngest should also show her conjugal fidelity and love by
becoming similarly deprived, unless the old heathen should happen to
die shortly, and she become espoused to some other rejoicing in the
possession of a full complement of eyes. A consummation devoutly to be
wished.
The position of this rock and watering-place I found to be in latitude
30° 31' o", and longitude 133 0 30' o". The heat still continued very
great, as the thermometer at its highest reading never indicated less
than 104° in the shade while we were here. The flies at this place, and
indeed for weeks before we reached it, were terribly numerous, and
we were troubled also with myriads of the large March flies —those
horrid pests, about twice the size of the blowfly, and which bite men
and horses indiscriminately. These wretches would not allow either
the camels, horses, or ourselves a moment’s respite during the whole
day, from dawn to dusk. They almost ate the poor animals alive, and
the poor creatures were kept in a state of perpetual motion in their
hobbles all the while we were here. In the daytime it was only by
continued use of our hands in waving a handkerchief or bough that we
partially kept them off ourselves, for with all our efforts to drive them
away we were continually bitten and almost stung to madness by them.
I have often been troubled and bitten by these flies in other parts of
Australia during my many wanderings, but I never experienced so
much pain and annoyance from them as at this place. The hideous
droning noise which a multitude of these insects make is quite enough
to destroy one’s peace, but when their incessant bites are added it
makes existence a burden.
Since leaving Youldeh (and while there also) the days had been
frightfully hot, and the nights had been close, cloudy and sultry. The
only currents of air that ever stirred the foliage of the trees in the day-
time were like the breath from a furnace, while at night there was, so to
say none at all. The first of April, the last day we remained here, was
the worst and hottest day we had felt. Life was almost insupportable,
and I determined to depart upon the morrow. There had evidently
been some rain at this rock lately, as the grass and herbage were green
and luxuriant. It was most fortunate for us —as my subsequent
narrative will show —that we had some one to guide us to this spot,
which by observation I found lay almost east of Youldeh, and that it
was distant from that depot no miles in a straight line. Old Jimmy
now knew nothing whatever of the region which lay beyond, and
though I endeavoured to get him to ask the old man and his
wives where any other waters existed, all the information we could
gather from these persons amounted to this: that there was a big
mountain and no water at it. The old man at last found enough
English to say “Big fellow, Poonta,” (stones or hills or mountains), and
20


“mucka carpee,” which means no water. I gave these poor people a
little damper each, and towards night they departed. Old Jimmy now
seemed very unwilling to go any further eastwards, giving me to
understand that it was a far better plan to return to Fowler’s Bay by a
new route, and he would show me some new watering-places if I
would only follow him. To this, of course, I turned a deaf ear. The
nearest permanent water on the route I desired to travel was at Mr.
Elder’s cattle station at the Finniss Springs, which was distant from
this Wynbring Rock about 250 miles in a straight line; but as the
mountain to the south-east looked so conspicuous and inviting from
here I determined to visit it (in spite of what the old blackfellow had
said about there being no water), though it lay considerably out of a
straight road to where I wanted to go. It looked high and rugged, and
I thought to find water in some rock-hole or crevice about it.
On the 2nd of April we departed from this friendly depot at Wynbring
Rock, taking our three horses and the two camels and the calf. The
morning was as hot as fire. At midday we got and watered all our
animals, and having saddled and packed them we left the place
behind. We carried as much water as we had vessels to hold it in, the
quantity being nearly fifty gallons, which we put on the two camels.
The horses now having got on more friendly terms with them, they
could be led by a person riding one of the horses, the three horses
being now ridden. Old Jimmy, no longer a guide, was not now
permitted to take the lead, but rode behind to see that nothing fell off
the camels’ saddles. I rode in advance on my best horse Chester, a
fine well-set chestnut cob —a horse I was very fond of, for he had
proved himself so good. Nicholls rode a strong young grey horse called
Formby, that had also proved himself to my satisfaction to be a good
one. Jimmy was mounted on an old black horse that was a fine ambler,
but he had not stood the journey from Youldeh at all well. He did not
look the thing, but the other two were quite fresh and hearty when we
left Wynbring. By the evening of the 2nd we had got only twenty-two
miles. We found the country to be really terrific; the ground rose into
sandhills so steep and high that all our animals were in a perfect lather
of sweat. The camels could hardly be forced along at all. At night
where we were compelled by darkness to encamp there was nothing
whatever for horses to eat, so that the poor brutes had to be tied up for
fear they would ramble back to Wynbring. There was plenty of food
for the camels, as they could eat the leaves of some of the bushes, but
they were too sulky to eat, as they were tied up. The bull continually
bit his nose-rope through, and made several attempts to get away, the
calf always going in front of him, and leaving his mother, which made
her frantic to get away too. The horses got frightened, and were
snorting and jumping about, trying to get loose, all night. The spot
we were in was a hollow between two high sandhills, and not a breath
of air relieved us from the oppression of the atmosphere. Peter Nicholls
and I were in a state of constant perspiration the whole night running
about after the camels, and keeping the horses from breaking away. I
21


was never more gratified at the appearance of daydawn the next
morning, as it enabled us to move out of this dreadful place. It was
impossible to travel through this region at night, even by moonlight,
as we should have lost our eyes upon the sticks and branches of the
direful scrubs if we had attempted it, besides tearing our clothes and
skin to pieces also. Starting at earliest dawn the following morning, and
traversing the most formidably steep and rolling sandhills, we at length
got to the foot of the mountain we had been striving for in about
twenty-three miles, it being forty-five from Wynbring. On reaching it
I could not help thinking it was the most desolate heap on the face of
the earth, having no water or places that could hold it anywhere about
it. The elevation of this eminence was over 1,000 feet above the
surrounding country and 2,000 feet above the sea. The country visible
from its summit was still enveloped in dense scrubs in every direction,
except on a bearing a few degrees north of east, where some low ridges
appeared. I rode my horse Chester many miles over the wretched stony
slopes at the foot of this mountain and tied him up to trees while I
walked to its summit and into gullies and crevices innumerable. But no
water rewarded my efforts, and it was evident that what the old black-
fellow, Wynbring Tommy, had said about its being waterless was
quite true. After wasting several hours in a fruitless search for water,
we left the wretched mount and steered away for the ridges I had seen
from its summit. They appeared to be about forty-five miles away, but
as it was so late in the day when we left the mountain we got only seven
miles from it before darkness again overtook us, and we had to encamp.
On the following day the old horse Jimmy was riding, through the
heat and thirst and fearful nature of the country we were in, completely
gave in, having come only sixty-five miles from Wynbring. We could
neither lead, ride, nor drive him any further. We had given each
horse some water from the supply the camels carried when we reached
the mountain, and likewise some on the night previous, as the heavy
sandhills had so exhausted them, and this horse had received rather
more than the others. Now he lay down and stretched out his limbs in
the agony of thirst and exhaustion. I was loth to shoot the poor old
creature, and I also did not like the idea of leaving him to die slowly
of thirst; but I thought perhaps if I left him he might sufficiently
recover to travel at night at his own pace, and thus return to Wynbring,
though I also knew from former sad experiences in Gibson’s Desert
that, like Badger and Darkie, it was more than probable he could
never escape. His saddle was hung in the fork of a sandalwood tree
(not the sandalwood of commerce), and leaving him stretched dying
upon the burning sand we moved away, and of course he was never
seen or heard of afterwards.
That night we camped only a few miles from the ridges at a place
where there was a little dry grass, and where both camels and horses
were let go in hobbles. Long before daylight on the following morning
old Jimmy and I were tracking the camels by torchlight, the horse-
bells indicating that those animals were not far off. The camel-bells
22


had gone out of hearing early in the night. Old Jimmy was a splendid
tracker; indeed, no human being in the world but an Australian
aboriginal, and that a half or wholly wild one, could track a camel on
some surfaces, as where there is any clayey soil the creature leaves no
more mark on the ground than an ant, and to follow such marks as
they do leave by firelight seemed to me quite marvellous. Occasionally
where they passed over sandy ground, they would leave some marks
that no one could mistake; but for many hundreds of yards beyond it
would appear as though they must have flown over the ground and
had never put their feet to the earth at all. By the time daylight
appeared old Jimmy had tracked them about three miles; then he
went off apparently quite regardless of any tracks at all, walking at
such a pace that I could not keep up with him without occasionally
running. We came upon the camels at last at about six miles from the
camp, amongst some dry claypans, and they were evidently looking
for water. The old cow, which was the only riding camel, was so poor
and bony that it was too excruciating to ride her without a saddle or
pad of some sort, which now we had not got; so we took it in turns to
ride the bull, and he made many attempts to shake us off, only as he
had so much hair on his hump we could cling on by it as we sat behind
it. It was, however, necessary for whoever was walking to lead him by
his nose-rope, or he would have bolted away and rubbed his en-
cumbrance off against a tree or else rolled on it. In consequence of the
camels having strayed so far, it was late in the day when we again
started, the two horses looking fearfully hollow and bad. The morning,
as usual, was very hot. We had not now a horse apiece to ride, and the
water which one camel had carried had all been drank amongst the
animals. Peter Nicholls now rode the old cow again, both she and the
bull being much more easy to manage and get along now than when
we first started from Youldeh. Our great difficulty was with the
camels’ nose-ropes. The calf persisted in continually getting in front of
its mother and twisting her nose-rope round his neck, also in placing
itself right in between the forelegs of the bull, which would make him
stop, pull back, and break his nose-rope, and cause detention a dozen
times a day; and, as I said before, not understanding how these things
ought to be arranged (though I have had ample experience since), I
was so annoyed with the young animal I could scarcely keep from
shooting it many times. The young creature was evidently suffering
greatly from thirst.
We reached the ridges in seven miles from where we had camped,
and had now come ninety miles from the water at Wynbring. We could
find no water at these rises, as there were no places that could hold it.
Here we may be said to have entered on a piece of open country, and,
as it was a change for the better from the scrubs we had hitherto been
traversing, I was very glad to see it, especially as we hoped to obtain
water in it. Our horses were now in a terrible state of thirst, for the
heat was excessive, and the region we had traversed was dreadfully
severe, and though they had each been given some of the water we
23


brought with us, yet we could not afford them nearly enough to
satisfy them. From the top of the ridge we had ascended, a low mount
or hill bore 20° north of east. Mount Finke, now behind us, bore 20°
south of west. I now pushed on for the low mount in advance of us, as
it was nearly on the route I desired to travel. The country now being
open, we made good progress, and though we could not reach the hill
that night, we were upon its summit early the next morning, it being
about thirty miles from the ridges we had left, a number of dry salt
white lagoons intervening. This hill was as dry and waterless as the
mount and ridges we had left behind us in the scrubs. Dry salt lagoons
lay scattered about in nearly all directions, glittering with their saline
incrustations as the sun’s rays flashed upon them. To the southward
two somewhat inviting isolated hills were seen; in all other directions
the horizon appeared gloomy in the extreme. We had now come 120
miles from water, and the supply we had started with was almost
exhausted. The country we were in could give us none, and we had
but one of two courses to pursue —that is to say, we were compelled
either to advance still further into this terrible region or endeavour to
retreat to Wynbring. It is possible the camels might get back there
alive, but ourselves and the horses could never have recrossed that
frightful bed of rolling sandhills that intervened between us and the
water we had left. My poor old black companion, Jimmy, was aghast
at such a region, and also at what he considered such utter foolery on
my part to penetrate into it all. Peter Nicholls, I was glad to find, was
in good spirits, and was now very gradually changing his opinions with
regard to the powers and value of the camels, as they had received no
water themselves, though they had laboured over the hideous sand-
hills laden with the priceless fluid for the benefit of the horses, and it
was quite evident the latter could not much longer live in such a
region, whilst the former were now far more docile and obedient to us
than when we started. Whenever the horses were given any water we
had to tie the camels up at some distance. The expression in these
animals’ eyes when they saw the horses drinking was so extraordinary
that they seemed as though they were going to speak; and had they
spoken I know well they would have said, “You give those useless httle
pigmies the water that cannot save them, and you deny it to us, who
have carried it, and will yet be your only saviours in the end.” After
we had fruitlessly searched here for water, having wasted several
hours in the effort, we left this wretched hill, and I continued steering
upon the same course we had come on, viz., 20° north of east, as that
bearing would bring me to the north-western extremity of Lake
Torrens, which, however, was yet distant over 120 miles from us. It
was very probable we might get no water when we arrived there, as
no permanent water was known upon its shores where we should touch
upon it. Thus we were, after coming 120 miles from Wynbring, still
nearly 200 miles from the Finniss Springs, the nearest water that I
knew. It was now a matter of life and death. We could neither remain
here, nor should we survive if we attempted a retreat; therefore to
24


advance was our only chance of escape from the howling wilderness by
which we were surrounded. We therefore moved on as fast and as far
as we could.
On the morning following, before dawn, I was lying wakefully
listening for the sounds of the bells upon the animals’ necks, and had
just brightened up the camp fire with fresh wood, when the strange
sound of the quacking of a wild duck smote upon the tympanum of
my ear. The blaze of firelight had evidently attracted the creature,
which probably thought it was the flashing of water, as it flew down
close to my face, and almost precipitated itself into the flames; but,
discovering its error, it wheeled away upon its unimpeded wings, and
left me wondering why this denizen of the air and water should be
sojourning around the waterless encampment of such hapless travellers
as we. The appearance of such a bird raised my hopes, and forced me
to believe that we must be in the neighbourhood of some water, and
that the coming daylight would reveal to us the element which alone
could save us and our unfortunate animals from death. But, alas! how
many human hopes and aspirations are continually doomed to perish
unfulfilled; and were it not that “hope springs eternal in the human
breast,” all faith, all energy, all life, and all success would be at an
end, as then we should know that most of our efforts are futile, whereas
now we hope they may attain complete fruition. We were now again
in a region of scrubs as bad and as dense as those I thought and hoped
I had left behind me. Leaving our waterless encampment we con-
tinued our journey a melancholy, thirsty, silent trio. At 150 miles from
Wynbring my poor horse Chester gave-in and could go no further. For
some miles I had walked, and we had had the greatest difficulty in
forcing him along; but now he was completely exhausted, and rolled
upon the ground in the death agony of thirst and exhaustion. It was
useless to waste time over the unfortunate creature —it was quite
impossible for him ever to rise again from the ground, so in mercy I
fired a revolver bullet at his forehead as he gasped spasmodically on
the desert sand. A shiver only passed throughout his frame, and we left
him dead upon the lonely spot. We had now no object but to keep
pushing on. Our supply of water was all but gone, and we were all in
the last stage of thirst and wretchedness. By the night of that day we
had reached a place 168 miles from Wynbring, and in all that distance
not a drop of water had been found. We had one unfortunate horse
left —the grey, called Formby, and that poor creature held out as long
and on as little water as I am sure it is possible for any horse to do in
such a heated and horrid region. This was the last night poor Formby
lived. On the following morning the poor beast came up to Nicholls
and myself —old Jimmy being after the camels, which were close by —
and commenced smelling us, then stood gazing vacantly at the fire. A
thought then seemed to strike him that it was water, and he put his
mouth down into the flames. This idea seems to actuate all animals
when in the last stage of thirst. We were choking with thirst ourselves,
but we agreed to sacrifice a small billyful of our remaining stock of
25


water for this unfortunate last victim to our enterprise. We gave him
about two quarts —and bitterly we regretted it after —hoping he might
still be able to stagger on to where water might be found; but vain was
the hope and vain was the gift, for the creature that had held up so
long and so well, as he swallowed up the last little draught that we
gave, fell down and rolled and shivered in agony the same as Chester
had done. A singular thing about this horse was that his eyes had sunk
into his head until they were all but hidden. In a few minutes, no
doubt he would have died, but I fired a revolver-bullet into his skull,
and his pains and life were both at an end. Thus had died three fine
horses that under favourable circumstances, and in a country that
could supply them with grass and water, might have carried their
masters for years to come. For my own part, in such a region and in
such a predicament as we were placed, I would not unwillingly have
followed them into the future. The celebrated Sir Thomas Mitchell,
one of Australia’s early explorers, in one of his journeys, after finding a
magnificent country watered by large rivers (and now the long-
settled abodes of civilization), mounted on a splendid horse, bursts into
an old cavalier song which says:
“A steede, a steede of matchless speede,
A sworde of metal keane;
All else to noble minds is drosse;
All else on earthe is meane.”
I don’t know what he would have thought had he been in my case —
with his matchless steed dead, and in the pangs of thirst himself, his
sword of “metal keane” a useless encumbrance, being 168 miles from
the last water, and not knowing where the next might be. He would
have been compelled to admit that the wonderful beasts which now
alone remained to us were not by any means to be accounted “meane,”
for these patient and enduring things, which were still alive, had tasted
no water since leaving Wynbring, and, though the horses were dead
and gone, stood up with undiminished powers, and appeared as able
now to continue on and traverse this wide-spread desert as when they
left the last oasis behind. We had nothing now to depend on but our
two “ships of the desert,” which we were now only just beginning to
understand —not but what I was a firm believer in them from the first
and had many an argument with Nicholls about them. His opinion
of them had now considerably altered. At Youldeh he had called them
ugly, useless, lazy brutes, that were not to be compared to horses for a
moment; but now that the horses were dead they seemed more
agreeable and companionable than ever the horses had been. When
Jimmy brought them to the camp they looked most knowingly at the
prostrate form of the dead horse. They kneeled down close beside it,
and received their loads, which now indeed were light enough, and
we went off again into the scrubs, riding and walking by turns, our
lives now entirely depending upon the camels. Jimmy had informed us
he had found them all calmly feeding upon some of the trees and
26


bushes in the neighbourhood. That they felt the pangs of thirst there
can be no doubt, as whenever they were brought to the camp they
endeavoured to fumble about the empty water-bags, pannikins, and
any other vessel that ever did contain water.
The days of toil and thirst, the nights of agony and feverish unrest
that I spent upon this journey I can never forget. After struggling
through dense scrubs all day we would be compelled perforce to remain
in them all night. It was seldom we now spoke to one another. We
were too thirsty and worn with lassitude to converse, and my reflections
the night after the last horse died, when we had come nearly 200 miles
without water, of a necessity at first assumed a gloomy tinge, as we
know that the tone of the mind is in a great measure sympathetic with
the physical condition of the body. If the body is weak from exhaustion
and fatigue, the brain and mind become dull and sad, and the thoughts
of a wanderer in such a desolate region as this, weary with a march
in heat and thirst from daylight until dark, who at last sinks upon the
heated ground to watch and wait until the blazing sunlight of another
day shall perhaps bring him to some place of rest, cannot be otherwise
than of a mournful kind. The mind is forced, as it were, back upon
itself, and becomes filled with an endless chain of thoughts which
wander through the vastness of the star-bespangled spheres; for here
the only things to see, the only things to love, and upon which the eye
may gaze, and from which the beating heart gathers some feelings of
repose, are the glittering bands of brilliant stars shining in the azure
vault of heaven above. From my heated couch of sandy earth I gazed
helplessly but rapturously upon them, wondering at the enormity of
occupied and unoccupied space —revolving thoughts of past, present,
and future existences, and of how “all that is earthly fadeth away.”
But can that be the case with our world itself; with the sun, from which
it obtains its light; or with the starry splendours of the worlds beyond
the sun ? Will they, can they ever fade ? They are not spiritual. Celestial
still we call them, but they are material all in form and nature. We are
both; yet we must fade and they remain. How is the understanding to
discriminate which can hold the mainspring and thread of life?
Certainly we know that the body decays, and that even “the paths of
glory lead but to the grave;” but we also know the mind as well
becomes enfeebled with the body, and that the aged become almost
idiotic in their second childhood; and if the body is to rise again, how
is poor humanity to distinguish which is the germ of immortality ? The
philosophies and speculations upon the future have been subjects of the
deepest thought for the highest minds of every generation of mankind;
and though creeds have risen and sunk, and old religions and philoso-
phies have passed away, the dubious minds of mortal men still hang
and harp upon the theme of what can be the Great Beyond. The
various creeds of the many different nations of the earth induce them
to believe in as many differing notions of heaven, but all and each
appear agreed upon the point that up into the stars alone their hoped-
for heaven is to be found; and if all do not in this agree, still there are
27


some aspiring minds, high soaring above sublunary things —above the
petty disputes of differing creeds and the vague promises they hold out
to their votaries —who behold in the firmament above, mighty and
mysterious objects for veneration and love. The gorgeous constellations
set thick with starry gems, the revolving orbs of densely crowded
spheres, the systems beyond systems, clusters beyond clusters, and
universes beyond universes, all brilliant and glittering with various-
coloured light, all wheeling and swaying and floating and circling
around some distant unknown motive centre-point in the pauseless
measures of a perpetual dance of joy, keeping time and tune with most
ecstatic harmony, and producing upon the enthralled mind the not
imaginary music of the spheres. Then comes the burning wish to know
how come these mighty, mysterious, and material things about. We
are led to suppose, as with our own minds and bodies from a state of
infancy we progressively improve to a certain point, so it is with all
the things we see in nature; but the method of original production of
life and matter is beyond the powers of man to discover. It is therefore
with feelings of anxiety and suspense, of hope and love and fear, we
look forward to a future time when, having passed through the portals
of the valley of death from this existence, we shall enjoy life, after life
in new body, after new body passing through new sphere, after new
sphere continually arriving nearer and nearer to the fountain-head of
all perfection —the divinely great Almighty source of light and life, of
hope and love. These were some of my reflections throughout that
weary night —the stars that in their constellations occupied the zenith
had passed below the horizon’s verge. Other and fresh glittering bands
now occupied their former places, at last the dawn began to glimmer
in the east, and just as I could now perhaps have fallen into the trance
of sleep, it is time for the race for life, again to wander on as soon as our
animals can be found.
This day was the eighth of continued travel from Wynbring; our
water was now all gone and we were yet more than ioo miles from the
Finniss Springs. I had been compelled to enforce a most rigid and
inadequate economy with our water during the whole march. When
we left the camp where the last horse died, there was very little over
three pints. We were all very bad, and old Jimmy was nearly dead. At
about 4 o’clock in the afternoon we came to a place where there was a
considerable fall into a hollow, where there existed some bare clay —in
fact, it was an enormous claypan or miniature lake bed —but the
surface was perfectly dry, though in a small drain or channel, down
which in times of rain, water would descend to it, by the blessing of
Providence we stumbled on a supply of yellow water. Nicholls had
previously got strangely excited, and at one place where there was no
water threw up his hat and yelled out, “Water, water,” he walking a
little in advance of us. We had really passed by the spot where the
water was, and when Nicholls gave the false information, I, who was
riding, jumped down off the camel I was on, and ran up to him, only to
be grievously disappointed; but as I went along I caught sight of a kind
28


of whitish light through the mulga trees partially behind me, and
without saying a word, for fear of a fresh disappointment, I walked
towards what I had seen, Nicholls and Jimmy in the meantime still
going on with the camels. I could not resist the temptation to drink
before I went after them, and by the time I had drunk they had gone
on several hundred yards; but even when I called to them and flung
up my hat they were now so stupid with thirst and disappointment
that they never moved towards me, but stood staring until I went up
and took the camels’ nose-rope in my hand and pointed to my knees,
which were covered with yellow mud, and simply said, “Water.” Then
when I led the camels to the place, down they fell on their knees in the
mud and water, and drank and drank, and I again joined them and
also drank, and drank, and drank. Ah! dear reader, if you have never
suffered thirst you can form no conception what agony it is. But, talk
about drinking, I couldn’t have believed that even thirsty camels
could have swallowed such enormous quantities of fluid. It was
delightful to watch the poor creatures visibly swelling before our eyes
with the quantities they imbibed. I am sure the big bull camel Mustara
must have taken down fifty gallons of water, for even after the first
drink, when we took their saddles off at the camp, they all three went
back to the claypan and kept drinking for nearly an hour.
We had made an average travelling of twenty-eight miles a day
from Wynbring, until this eighth day we came to the claypan in
twenty-four miles, thus making it 220 miles in all. I could not sufficiently
admire and praise the wonderful powers of these extraordinary and to
me entirely new animals. During the eight days we had been travelling
the weather had kept unceasingly hot and oppressive, the thermometer
usually rising to 104° in the shade when we rested for an hour in the
middle of the day; but that was not the hottest time, from 2.40 to 3 p.m.
being the culminating period. The country we had traversed was the
most frightful desert, yet day after day these noble animals with
undiminished powers kept moving slowly but surely on. Having carried
water on their backs for their unfortunate companions, the horses, and
seeing them drop one by one exhausted and dying of thirst by their
sides, they still marched contentedly on, carrying us by turns and all
the remaining gear of the dead horses, and finally brought us to water
at last. We had yet over eighty miles to travel to reach the Finniss
Springs, and had we not found this water I am sure that the three
human beings of the party could never have got there. The walking in
turns over this dreadful country made us suffer all the more, and it was
dangerous to allow old Jimmy to put his baking lips to a waterbag, for
he would have drunk a couple of gallons at any time with the greatest
ease.
For some miles before we found the water the country had become
of much better quality, the sandhills being much lower and well
grassed, having clay flats between. We also passed a number with
pinetrees growing on them. Rains had evidently visited this region, as
before we found the water we noticed that many of the deeper clay
29


channels (when I say deeper I mean from i to 2 feet, the usual depth
of a claypan channel being generally about as many inches) were only
recently dry. The grass and herbage round the claypan where we
found the water were beautifully green. Our course from the last hill
had been about north 75 0 east. The weather, which for so many weeks
had been oppressive, now culminated in a thunderstorm of dust (or
sand) and wind, while dark nimbus clouds completely eclipsed the sun
and reduced the temperature to an agreeable and bearable state. No
rain fell, but from this change the heats of summer departed, though
the change did not occur until after we had found the water. Thus the
old proverb of it never rains but it pours was partially exemplified, as
in our case all our good things came together —viz., an escape from
death by thirst, a watered and better travelling country, and cooler
weather. Having found this life-restoring water and rested a day at it,
we proceeded again on our journey with all our water vessels re-
plenished. We now found several other places on our route where rain-
water was lying, and it seemed like being translated to a brighter
sphere to be able to indulge in as much waterdrinking as we pleased.
At one place we passed, and where we encamped, there was a cane-
grass flat over a mile long, 50 to 100 yards wide, and having about
4 feet of water in it. It was covered with waterfowl, amongst which a
few swans were gracefully disporting their elegant forms upon the fluid.
Peter Nicholls made some frantic efforts to shoot one, and some ducks,
but only brought into camp one wretchedly small teal. We continued
on our former course until we touched upon and rounded the north-
western extremity of Lake Torrens. I then changed my course for the
Hermit Hill, at the foot of which the Finniss Springs and Mr. Elder’s
cattle station lies. Our course was now nearly north. On the evening
of the third day after leaving the claypan, which had saved us, we fell
in with two blackfellows and their lubras or wives shepherding two
flocks of Mr. Angas’s sheep, and which belonged to his Stuart’s Creek
Station. As they were at a water we encamped with them. They were
very hospitable to us. Our old Jimmy went up to and shook hands with
them, and they became very great friends. These blackfellows could
not comprehend where we and Jimmy could possibly have come from,
Fowler’s Bay being an unknown quantity to them. We had still a good
day’s stage before us to reach the Finniss, but at dusk we arrived, and
were very kindly received and entertained by Mr. Coulthard, who was
in charge, and whose father, it must be remembered, had been an
unfortunate explorer, and who had lost his life by thirst upon the
western shores of the Lake Torrens I have mentioned, and whose tin
pannikin or pint pot was afterwards found with his name and the date
of the last day he lived scratched upon it. Many an unrecorded grave,
many a high and noble mind, many a gallant victim to temerity and
thirst, to murder by relentless native tribes, or else to sad mischance,
are hidden in the wilds of Australia, and not only in the wilds, but in
places also less remote, where the whistle of the shepherd, and the bark
of his dog, the crack of the stockman’s whip, or the gay or grumbling
30


voice of the teamster may now be heard, some unfortunate wanderer
may have died. What says Gray —
“Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid,
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire;
Hands that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstacy the living lyre.”
And if it is with a thought of pity, if it is with a sigh of lament that
we ponder over the fate of the lost, over the deaths, in the long cata-
logue of the victims to the Australian bush, from Cunningham and
Leichhardt, Kennedy and Gilbert, Burke, Wills, Poole, Gurlewis and
Conn down to Coulthard, Panter, and Gibson, it must always be
remembered that they died in a noble cause, and they sleep in an
honourable grave. Nor must it be forgotten that those who return from
confronting the dangers by which these others fell have been tried and
suffered enough to make them often wish that they too, could escape
through the grave from the horrors of the circumstances surrounding
them. I also have often been in such predicaments that I have longed
for death. But having returned alive as yet from deserts and their
thirsts, from hostile natives and their deadly spears, and feeling still —
“The wild pulsation, which in manhood’s dawn I knew,
When my days were all before me, and my years were twenty-two.”
so long as there are new regions to explore, the burning charm to seek
for something new will still possess me, and I am also actuated to aspire
and endeavour, if I cannot make my life sublime, at least to leave
behind me some everlasting “footprints on the sands of time.”*
At the Finniss Springs I also met young Alec Ross,f the son of
another explorer who was to join my party for the new expedition to
Perth. My destination now was Beltana, which was yet 140 miles from
* At Finniss Springs on 15 April Giles composed a long telegram to Elder in Adelaide,
outlining his journey from Fowler’s Bay. This was wired to Elder two days later
from Strangways Springs, when that gentleman “courteously favoured” the Register
with the text of it. Giles had stressed the value of his camels: “They are wonderful,
awe-inspiring, and marvellous creatures. I never praised God so much for anything
before, and for such creatures I thank you and praise Him”: he then concluded
his telegram as follows.
I just touched upon the edge of Lake Torrens. From what I have seen I judge that there exists a
vast desert of scrub of a triangular form, the base of which is at or near the western shores of
Lake Torrens, and the sides running north-westerly from the southern foot, and most probably
west from the northern cone to an apex of no great distance from my starting point Youldeh, and
I think a line north from Youldeh would pass through it in but a short distance. The way I
came was nearly along its greatest length. It consists of two deserts, divided by a strip of open
country about 30 miles broad. The western and denser one I have named Richards’ Desert, in
gratitude to Mr. Richards for his own and his native’s guidance; and the eastern one I have
called Ross’s Desert, as it was that that baffled Mr. John Ross, who got through the eastern
but never entered the larger western one. The mail has just arrived. lam much pleased to hear
of Tietkens joining me. I shall hasten to Beltana, and am quite confident of the successful issue
of the expedition.
t See page 53.
31


here. I got a couple of horses for Nicholls and myself from Mr.
Coulthard, old Jimmy being stuck up on top of the old riding cow
camel, who could travel splendidly on a road. When I reached Beltana
I had travelled 700 miles from Fowler’s Bay. This journey I suppose I
must not entirely consider an exploration, as many points at which I
touched had been visited previously, and I only performed this journey
to take command of and fit out a thorough exploring expedition for
Perth; but, considering the whole three of us nearly perished, I think
I may put this trip down as a very close approximation to real
exploration.
Mr. Elder was desirous that the new expedition for Perth should
start from Beltana by the Ist of May. Camels were to be the only
animals taken; I was detained a few days beyond that time, but was
enabled to leave it on Thursday, May 6. The members of the party
were six in number, namely myself, Mr. William Henry Tietkens*
(who had previously been with me as second on my last expedition
with horses), who had been secured from Melbourne and appointed
second in command for this expedition by Mr. Elder; Mr. Jesse
Young,t a friend of Mr. Elder’s, and lately arrived from England;
Alexander Ross, mentioned above; Peter Nicholls, who had just come
from Fowler’s Bay with me, and who now came as cook; and Saleh,
an Afghan camel man, who had already been with Major Warburton.f
I also took (for a short distance until Alec Ross overtook me) another
Afghan called Coogee Mahomet, and the old guide Jimmy, who was
to return to the bosom of his family as soon as we arrived anywhere
sufficiently near the neighbourhood of his country again. Poor old
Jimmy had been very ill at Beltana, and suffered greatly from colds
and influenza. The Beltana blacks did not treat him quite as well as
he expected, and some of them threatened to kill him for poking his
nose into their country, consequently he did not like the place at all,
and was mighty glad to be taken away from it once more. Thus, as I
said, on the 6th May, 1875, the caravan departed from Beltana but
we did not immediately leave civilization or the settled districts, as I
had to travel 150 miles down the country nearly south to Port Augusta,
at the head of Spencer’s Gulf, where I intended to take in my stores
and loading for the inland voyage, as most of my equipment was to be
forwarded to me by Mr. Elder from Adelaide. Nothing very particular
occurred on the road from Beltana to Port Augusta, except some
continual squabbles between myself and the Afghans, Saleh and
Mahomet, on account of the extraordinary and absurd manner in
which these two men wanted to load and work the camels. In the first
place, we had several young camels or colts in the mob. Some were
bulls and some bullocks. The Afghans have a way when travelling of
* See page 47.
t See page 49.
{ Saleh was with Warburton in 1873, when scorpion poisoning had prompted the
dictation of his will, in Hindustani, to Warburton and the later amputation of a
finger.
32


bringing the camels up to the camp, and making them lay down by
their loads all night, whether they had filled themselves or not. This
system was so revolting to my notions of fair play that I determined to
alter it at once. Another thing that annoyed me was their absurd and
stupid custom of hobbling and unhobbling the animals while they are
lying down. This may be necessary for the first few days that the
creatures are handled, but if they are never accustomed to have their
legs and feet touched while they are standing up of course, like a young
horse, they may paw or strike and kick; and if a camel is known as a
striker he is rather an awkward sort of a brute, but that is only the
case with one in a thousand. The Afghans not only persist in hobbling
and unhobbling while they are lying down, but never think of taking
the hobbles off their legs at all, as they unfasten the hobble from one
foot and put both hobbles on one leg, so that the poor brutes always
have to carry them for ever on one leg. I quickly put a stop to that
system; but Googee Mahomet exclaimed, “Oh, master, you musn’t
take off a hobble! Camel, he keek —he keek —you musn’t!” To which I
replied, “Let him kick, and I hope he will kick you to death first, so
that there’ll be one Afghan less in the world; but every hobble shall
come off every animal every day.” This Googee was a most amusing
though lazy and indolent beggar. He never ceased to brag about what
he could make camels do (as he wished to ingratiate himself with me,
in the hope I would take him with me, but I had already determined
to have only one of his countrymen). He said if he came with me he
could make the camels go two, three, four, five hundred miles with
heavy loads without water by just talking to them in his language. He
used to say, “You know, master, camel he know me, and my country-
men —camel he un’stand my language —he no like Englishman, English-
man he no un’stand riding camel, he no un’stand loading camel, only my
countryman he know camel,” &c., &c., but it so happened with all his
bragging about the camels going so long without water, &c., that when
we had been only four days gone from Beltana, Saleh and Googee had
held a council and decided that I must be remonstrated with in
consequence of my utter ignorance, stupidity, and reckless treatment of
the camels, so on the fourth morning (the weather having been
beautifully cool and the camels not requiring any water), Googee
came to me and said, “Master, when you water camel?” “What,” I
said in feigned astonishment, “water the camels. I never heard of such
a thing; they’ll get no water till they reach Port Augusta.” This
completely upset Mr. Googee, and he replied, “What, no water till
Port Gusta ? Camel he can’t go. Camel he always get water three four
time from Beltana to Port Gusta.” “Well,” I said, “Googee, they’ll get
none now with me till they walk to Port Augusta for it.” So then
Googee said, “Ah, Mr. Gile, you very smart master, you very clever
man, only you don’t know camel; you see, you’ll kill all Mr. Elder
camel; you’ll no get Perth, you and all you party and all you camel
die, you’ll see, you’ll see, you’ll see. You no give poor camel water
camel he die, then where you be ?” I was rather annoyed at him and said,
33


“You stupid ass, it was only yesterday you said you could take camels
three, four, five hundred miles without water with heavy loads, and
now they have no loads, and we have only come about seventy miles,
you say they will die if I don’t give them water. How is it that all your
countrymen continually brag of what camels can do, and yet when
they have been only three days without water you begin to cry out that
they want it? To which he only condescended to reply, “Ah, ah, you
very clever; you’ll see, you’ll see.” Of course, the camels went to Port
Augusta just as well without water as with it. I got rid of Mr. Coogee
just before we arrived at Port Augusta. We remained at the Port a
little over a week, as all the loads had to be arranged for proper
carriage, and all the camels’ packsaddles required rearranging. Saleh
and another of his countrymen, who happened to be at Port Augusta,
worked hard at this while the rest of the party arranged the loads.
While at Port Augusta, Mr. Charles Roberts who had been with me,
and whom I left with all the horses at Youldeh, arrived out (by the
usual road from Fowler’s Bay to Port Augusta), and brought me a
young black boy —Master Tommy Oldham —with whom I had while
at Fowler’s Bay travelled to Eucla with the three horses that had died
on my journey to Beltana. He was very sorry to hear of the loss of
Chester and Formby, the latter having been his riding horse. Old
Jimmy was immensely delighted to meet with one of his own tribe in
a place he considered such a howling wilderness as Port Augusta or
Beltana. Tommy was a great acquisition to the camp, as he was a very
nice little chap, and soon became a general favourite. Everything being
at length ready, we made a final start from Port Augusta. The equip-
ment of the expedition was most excellent and capable. Mr. Elder had
sent me from Adelaide several pairs of enormous leather bags—one
being slung upon each side of a camel; all our minor, breakable, and
perishable articles were thus secure from wet or damp. In several of
these large bags I had wooden boxes placed at the bottom, so that ail
books, papers, instruments, glass, &c., were safe. At starting the
camel-loads were enormously heavy, the lightest weighted camels
carrying two bags of flour encased in raw hide covers, the two bags
weighing about 450 lb., and a large tarpaulin; about 60 lb. in weight,
on top, or else a couple of empty casks or other gear, which did not
require to be placed inside the leather bags. The way the camels’
loads are placed by the Afghan camelmen is rather different from, and
at first surprising to persons accustomed to packhorse loads. For
instance, the two bags of flour are carried as perpendicularly as
possible. As a general rule, it struck me the way they arranged the
loads was absurd, as the whole weight of the loads comes down on the
unfortunate animal’s loins. They use neither bags nor trunks, but tie
up almost every individual article with pieces of rope. My Afghan
Saleh was horrified at the fearful innovations I made upon his method.
I furnished the leather bags with broad straps to sustain them, and
having large rings and buckles to pass them through and fasten in the
ordinary way of buckle and strap. This had the effect of making
34


whatever loads were carried in the leather trunks lie as horizontally as
possible along the sides of the pads of the camels’ packsaddles. Saleh
still wanted to encumber them with ropes, so that they could not be
opened without untying about a thousand knots. I would not permit
such a violation of my ideas, and told him the loads should be carried
as they stood upon the ground; his argument always was (a la Coogee
Mahomet) “Camel he can’t carry them that way,” to which I in-
variably replied, “Camel he must, and camel he shall;” and the
consequence was that camel he did.
When we left Port Augusta I had fifteen pack or baggage camels and
seven riding ones —the two blacks, old Jimmy, and our new accessory
Tommy Oldham both riding on one animal, while all the others of the
party had a riding camel each. The weight of the loads of the baggage
camels on leaving Port Augusta averaged 550 lb. all round. All the
equipment and loads being in a proper state, and all the men and
camels belonging to the new expedition for Perth being ready, we left
Port Augusta on the 23rd May, 1875; but only travelled about six
miles nearly north-west to a place called Bowman’s Dam, where there
was plenty of surface water and good bushes for the camels. A few
ducks which incautiously floated too near fell victims to our sportsmen,
and here we encamped the first night. The following day we passed
Mr. Bowman’s station and had some dinner with him, and got a fat
sheep from one of his paddocks. On the 25th we encamped close to a
station in the neighbourhood of Euro Bluff —a hill that exists near the
south-western extremity of Lake Torrens. We now travelled up Lake
Torrens upon the opposite or western side to that on which we had
lately travelled down it to Port Augusta, as I wished to reach a water-
course (the Elizabeth), where I heard there was water. On the 28th
May we encamped upon the banks of Pernatty Greek, where we
obtained a few wild ducks. The country here was very good, being open
saltbush country. The next morning we met and passed a Government
survey party, under the command of Mr. Brooks, who was engaged in
a very extensive trigonometrical survey; in an hour or two after we
passed Mr. Bowman’s Pernatty cattle station. There was no one at
home but a dog, and he did not say much to us, the appearance of the
camels seemed to strike him dumb. There were some nice little sheets
of water in the creek bed, but scarcely large enough to be permanent I
fancy. The country now was a sort of stony plateau, having low flat-
topped, tent-shaped tablelands occurring at intervals all over it. The
country was all open, and no timber existed except on the banks of
the watercourses. On the 30th May we reached the Elizabeth. There
was an old hut or two, but no people were now living there. The water
was at a rather low ebb; we got a few ducks the first day we arrived.
As some work had to be done to the watercasks, to enable us to carry
them better, we remained here until the 2nd June. The Elizabeth
comes from the tablelands near the shores of Lake Torrens to the
north-eastward, and runs into the northern end of Pernatty Lagoon.
Here we were almost as far north as when at Beltana, our latitude being


3i° io' 30". The weather was now (and had been for several weeks,
indeed ever since the thunderstorm which occurred the day we
stumbled upon our claypan) very agreeable, but the nights cold though
dewless. At Port Augusta we heard that a Mr. Moseley was out
somewhere to the west of the Elizabeth well-sinking on a piece of
country he had lately taken up, and that he was camped at or near
some rain water, so I was anxious to find out, if possible, where he was.
On the 3 1 st of May I sent Alec Ross on the only track that went west
from here to endeavour to find out if any water existed at a place I had
heard of about twenty-five miles to the west, and towards which the
only road from here led. Alec had not been gone long when he returned
with Mr. Moseley, who just happened to be coming in to the Elizabeth;
he camped with us that night. He informed me his men obtained
water at some claypans called Coondambo, near the edge of Lake
Gairdner (another large salt depression similar to Lake Torrens), and
that by following his horses’ tracks they would lead me first to a well,
where he had just succeeded in obtaining water at a depth of 85 feet,
and thence in seven miles further to the Coondambo claypans. I was
very glad to get this information, as even from Coondambo the only
water to the west beyond it that I knew was Wynbring, and that would
be 160 or 170 miles.
Leaving the Elizabeth, on June 2, we went sixteen miles nearly west
to a small clay water-hole, where we encamped. On the 3rd we went
twenty-five miles nearly west, passing a deserted sheep station belonging
to Mr. Litchfield, about the middle of the day. The country was very
poor, being open, bare, stony ground, with occasional low flat-topped
tablelands covered with very sparse salsolaceous vegetation. We next
arrived at the north-east corner of Lake Hart, and proceeded nearly
west along its northern shore, thence by the south shore of Lakes
Hanson and Younghusband (all salt lakes), where one of the party
must have been taken ill, for he suddenly broke out into a kind of
doggerel rhyme, remarking that —
We went by Lake Hart, which is laid on the chart,
And by the Lake Younghusband too,
We next got a glance on, the little Lake Hanson,
And wished . . .
Goodness only knows what he wished, but all the others conveyed to
him their wish that he should discontinue such an infliction on them.
We arrived, on June 6, at the place where Mr. Moseley had just
finished his well; but his men had deserted the spot, and had gone
somewhere else to put down another shaft a little to the north-east. The
well was between 80 and 90 feet deep, the water whitish but good.
Here we encamped for the night. The next morning we followed some
horse tracks about south-west, and they took us to the claypans called
Coondambo. The water was somewhat yellow and very thick; but
there was plenty of it for all our purposes, though I imagined it would
not last Mr. Moseley or his men very long. Two or three of his horses


were running at the claypans; there were several large shallow cane-
grass clay flats, which are also occasionally filled with rain water, they
and Goondambo being situated very close to the northern shore of
Lake Gairdner. We left Goondambo on the Bth June. On the gth rain
pretended to fall, and we were kept in camp during that day; as a slight
spitting fell, but did no earthly use. On the 11 th we encamped again
near the shore of Lake Gairdner, it being the last we should see of it;
our latitude here was 31 0 5' and long. 135 0 30' 10". We had seen no
water since leaving Goondambo, from which place, we carried a
quantity of the thick yellow fluid, which curdled disagreeably when
made into tea, the sugar having the chemical property of precipitating
the sediment. We were now again in a scrubby country, and had been,
directly after leaving Goondambo. Our course from here was nearly
north-north-west for sixteen or seventeen miles, where we again
camped in scrubs. The following day we got to a low rocky hill, or
rather several hills enveloped in the scrub. There were numerous
small indentations upon the face of the rocks, and we got some water
for the camels, though they had to climb about all over the rocks to
get it, as there was seldom more than three or four gallons in any
indent. We got some pure water for ourselves, and were enabled to
dispense with the yellow clayey fluid we had brought with us from
Goondambo. From these hills we travelled nearly west-north-west,
until, on the 15th, we fell in with my former tracks in April, when
going from Wynbring. Old Jimmy was quite delighted to be again in
country he knew something about. We could now again see the summit
of Mount Finke. The only water I knew in this wretched country was
at Wynbring, and I determined to follow my old tracks to it. On the
1 Gth we passed a place where on formerly coming along this way we
had seen a small portion of a bare rock, and now, in consequence of the
late sprinkling showers on the 9th and 1 oth, there were a few thimblesful
of water on it. This seemed to set old Jimmy into a great state of
excitement, as he gesticulated greatly and talked to Tommy in their
language at a great rate; and Tommy said, “Ah, if you found water
here when you come before, Chester and Formby wouldn’t die.” I
said, “Well, Tommy, I don’t see much water here to keep anything
alive, even if it had been here then.” He only sapiently shook his head
and said, “but if you got plenty water then that’s all right.” I found
Tommy’s arguments were exactly similar to all other black boys I have
ever known —exceedingly comical, but all to their own way of thinking.
Soon after this I was riding in advance along the old track, when old
Jimmy came running up behind my camel in a most excited state, and
said, “Hi, master, me find em, big one watter, plenty watter; mucka
(not) piccaninny (little) this way; watter go this way,” pointing to a
place on our left. So I waited till the caravan appeared through the
scrub; then old Jimmy led us to the spot he had found. There was a
small area of bare rock, but it was too flat to hold any quantity of
water, though some of the fluid was shining on it; there was only a
sufficiency for about two camels, but I decided to encamp there


nevertheless. What little water there was was licked up by some of the
camels in no time, and they went away to feed; they seemed to be
particularly partial to a low pale green foliaged tree, with fringe-like
leaves (something like fennel). I have often gathered specimens of it
in former journeys, generally in the most desert places that I have
explored. The botanical name of this tree is Gyrostemon ramulosus.
After hobbling out the camels and sitting down to dinner we became
aware of the absence of Mr. Jesse Young, and I was rather anxious
as to what had become of him, as a new arrival from England adrift in
these scrubs would be very liable to lose himself, though I had not so
much fear for Mr. Young, as, having been a sailor and carrying a
compass, he might be able to recover us. Immediately after our meal I
was going after him, but before it was finished he came, without his
camel, and said he couldn’t get her on, and so had tied her up to a
tree and walked back, as he had gone a long way along my old track,
not thinking we were likely to stop so early in the day. I sent Tommy
and another riding camel, on which Mr. Young and he rode away,
and in the course of a couple of hours they returned with the other
camel.
The following morning, 17th, much to my distress, one of our young
bull camels was found to be poisoned and could not move. We made
him sick with hot butter and gave him a strong clyster, and both
operations produced the same substance, namely a quantity of the
chewed and digested leaves of the gyrostemon; indeed the animal
apparently had nothing else in his inside. He got a trifle better by
night, but the following morning another camel, my best bull, Old
Mustara, that had brought me through this region before, was
poisoned and couldn’t move. I was now really very sorry I had camped
at this rocky place. We dosed Mustara with butter as an emetic, and
he also threw up nothing but the chewed gyrostemon, and the clyster
produced the same. It was quite evident to me that this plant has a
poisonous effect on the camels, and I was afraid that some of them
might die. I was compelled to remain here another day. The first
camel poisoned had got a little better, and I hoped the other would
escape, but as they all seemed to relish the poison plant so much, and
as they ate nothing else, and as there were great quantities of it growing
on the sandhills, I was in great anxiety during the whole of the day.
The next morning, the 19th, I was glad to find no fresh cases of
poisoning, though the two camels that had suffered were very weak,
and afflicted with spasmodic staggerings. We got them away, though
they were hardly able to carry their loads. We lightened them as much
as possible. Anything was better than remaining here as others might
get affected. On this day’s march we passed the spot where I had put
the horse’s pack saddle in the sandalwood tree, and where my first
horse had given in. The saddle was now of very little use, except that
the two pads being stuffed with horsehair made cushions for parts of
camels’ riding saddles. These we took with us, but left the saddle-frame
up in the tree again. That night we camped about five miles from


THE 1875 EXPEDITION


Giles’s 1875 Expedition
Peter Nicholls, Alec Ross, Saleh
Jesse Young, Giles Harry Tietkens
Tommy Oldham


Mount Finke, and I was glad to find that the two poisoned camels had
greatly recovered. The following day Mr. Young and I ascended
Mount Finke, and put up a small pile of stones upon its highest point.
The weather was now cool and agreeable, so different to that which I
experienced when upon this dreadful mount previously. Upon that
visit the whole region was in an intense glow of heat, but now the
summer heats were past, the desolate region around was enjoying a
slight respite from the usual fiery temperature of the climate of this
part of the world; but even now the nature of the country was so
terrible and severe, the sandhills so high and the scrub so thick, that
all the new members of my party expressed their astonishment at my
ever having got out of it alive. This mountain, as I said before, is 45
miles from Wynbring, and on the 22nd June, just as we got in sight of
Wynbring Rock some heavy showers of rain descended. The rain came
down so fast that the camels could drink the water right at their feet,
and they all got huddled up together in a mob, breaking their nose-
ropes, and some lying down to enable them to drink the easier, as
loaded camels, having a breast-rope from their saddles, cannot always
put their heads down to the ground without hurting themselves. The
rain ceased for a bit, and we made off to my old camp, and got every-
thing under canvas just as another heavy shower came down. Of course
the Rockhole was full to overflowing, and water was lying about in all
directions. During the 23rd several smart showers fell, and we were
confined to our canvas habitations for nearly the whole of the day. As
this spot was so excellent for all kinds of animals, it being suitable alike
for horses or camels, I gave my friends a couple of day’s rest —in the
first place, because they had had but poor feeding-places for several
nights before our arrival here, and I also wished, if possible, to meet
again with the Wynbring natives, and endeavour to find out from
them if any other waters existed in their country. Old Jimmy, when he
discovered through Tommy Oldham, what I wanted the natives for,
seemed rather surprised and annoyed that I should attempt to get
information from them while he was with me, and in his own territories —
so he said —he could take me to several waters between here and
Youldeh by an entirely different route to that we had followed in
coming first to this place. He now said he could take me by a more
northerly route, and that water existed at several places, which he
enumerated on his fingers, their names were —Taloreh, Edoldeh,
Cudyeh, Mobing, Bring, Poothraba, Pondoothy, and Youldeh. I was
very glad to hear of all these places, and I hoped we should find that
they were situated in a more hospitable country than that which
existed the way we had formerly come. On the 25th Mr. Young shot
an emu, and we had fried steaks, which we all relished. Saleh, being a
good Musselman, was only just in time to run up and cut the bird’s
throat before it died, otherwise his religious scruples would have
prevented him from eating any of it. All the food he did eat, which was
smoked beef, had been killed in the orthodox Mohammedan style,
either by himself or one of his co-religionists at Beltana, and we had


cured and carried it with us on purpose. None of the natives I had
formerly seen when here before, or any others, made their appearance,
and the party were disappointed in seeing the charming young Polly,
my description of whom had greatly raised their curiosity.
On the 26th, we departed from the pretty little oasis of Wynbring,
leaving its isolated and water-giving rock in the silence and solitude of
its enveloping scrubs, once again abandoning it to the occupation of
primeval man, a fertile little gem in a desolate waste, where the foot-
steps of the white man had never (until I came) previously been seen,
where the wild emu and the wilder black man, continually return to
its life-sustaining rock, where the aboriginal inhabitants will again and
again indulge in the wild revelries of the midnight corroborree dance,
and where, in an existence totally distinct from ours of civilization —
men and women live and love, and eat and drink, and sleep and die.
But the passions are the same in all phases of the life of the human
family, the two great master motives of love and hunger being the
mainspring of all the actions of mankind.
Wynbring was now behind us, and old Jimmy was once more our
guide, philosopher, and friend. He seemed much gratified at again
becoming an important member of the expedition and he and Tommy
both upon the same riding cow camel, led the way for us to follow
through the scrubs in the direction of about west-north-west. In about
seven or eight miles we came to a little opening in the scrubs, where
old Jimmy showed us some bare flat rocks wherein was a nearly
circular rock hole brimful of water. It was, however, nearly full also
of the debris of ages, as a stick could be poked into the mud or dirt for
several feet below the water, and it was impossible to say what depth
it really was. But at the best it could not contain more than two
hundred gallons of water. This was Taloreh. Proceeding onwards
towards the next watering-place, which old Jimmy said was close up, in
a direction a little more northerly. We found it was getting somewhat
late in the day, as we had not left Wynbring till nearly midday,
therefore we encamped in the scrubs, having come about fifteen miles.
I was annoyed the next morning to find that had we come on a couple
of miles further we should have reached Edoldeh, where there was
more rock water, but not a very great quantity. It is next to impossible
to make an old fool of a blackfellow understand the value of the
economy of time. I wanted to come on to Edoldeh, and so did old
Jimmy, but he made out that Edoldeh was close to Taloreh, and every
mile we went, it was still close up, till, it getting late, I ordered the
party to camp, where there was little or nothing that the camels could
eat. Of course it was useless to try and make Jimmy understand that
having thousands of miles to travel with the camels, it was a great
object with me to endeavour to get them some bushes or other food that
they could eat, so as to keep them in condition for the long and dreary
journey before them. Camels, although exceedingly ravenous animals,
will only eat what they like, and if they can’t get that, will lie down all
night and starve (if they are too short-hobbled to allow them to


wander). It was, therefore, annoying the next morning to find plenty
of good bushes at Edoldeh, two miles and a half from where we had
camped, and where we might have come so easily the night before,
and to think that we had camped so near it in such a wretched place.
However, to-day I determined to keep on until we actually did reach
the next oasis, which Jimmy said was Gudyeh, and which of course
was still close up. We travelled two and a half miles to Edoldeh, and
continued eighteen miles beyond it, and reached Gudyeh early in the
afternoon; this place was like most other of these little oases in the
desert. There were plenty of good bushes for the camels, and it was
a very good place for a camp —one singular feature about it being that
it consisted of a flat bare rock of some area, upon which were several
circular and eliptical holes in various places all over the rock. The rock
lay in the lowest part of the open hollow, and whatever rain fell in the
neighbourhood the water all ran down to it. In consequence of the
recent rains the whole area of rock was nearly two feet under water,
and the extraordinary holes or wells that existed there looked like
antidiluvian cisterns. Getting a long stick and wading through the
water to the mouths of these cisterns, we found that, like most other
reservoirs in a neglected native state, they were almost full of soil and
debris , and the deepest had only about three feet of water below the
surface of the rock. Some of these holes might be very deep, or
they might even be found to be permanent wells if they were cleaned
out.
The following day we passed another little spot and rock water
called Yanderby at ten miles; thence in three more we came to Mobing
—a much better place than any of the others —indeed I thought it
superior to Wynbring. It lies about north, 62° west from Wynbring, and
is fifty miles from it; the latitide of Mobing is 30° 10' 30". At this place
there was a large bare rounded rock very similar to Wynbring, except
here no rock holes existed to hold any surface water; what was obtain-
able here being in large native wells sunk at the foot of the rock, and
which were brimful of water. I believe a good supply might be obtained
here. There were plenty of good bushes in the neighbourhood for the
camels, and we had an excellent camp at Mobing. As usual, it consisted
merely of an open space timbered with the mulga acacia amongst the
sandhills and the scrubs. The following day we were led by old Jimmy
to a small salt-lake bed, which was dry, the direction we had travelled
to it from Mobing being nearly south-west. Round at the southern
shore of this little lake Jimmy showed us a small rock-hole, with a few
dozen gallons of water in it. We had only come nine or ten miles, but
in consequence of Mr. Young not being well we encamped, it being a
very excellent and pretty little camp. Towards evening some light
showers of rain fell, and we had to erect our tarpaulins, tents, &c.,
which we only do in times of rain. More showers fell the next day, and
we did not move our quarters. A very shallow sheet of water now
appeared upon the surface of the lake bed, but it was quite salt. We
made one or two little dams with clay where the water ran down into


the lake, and saved enough water to indulge in a sort of bath, with
the aid of buckets and some waterproof sheeting. This was on the last
day of June. The ist of July broke with a fine and beautiful morning,
and we left Lake Bring none the worse for our compulsory delay at it.
I was now anxious to reach Youldeh with as little delay as possible, as
I had a great deal of work in hand to do when I arrived there. Today
we travelled nearly west seventeen or eighteen miles, and encamped
in the scrubs without an oasis. On the 2nd we passed two rocky hills,
called respectively Pondoothy and Poothraba. Pondoothy was an
indented rock-crowned hill in the scrubs. Standing near its summit I
descried an extraordinary line cut through the scrubs, which ran in
the direction of east by north, probably intended by the natives for a
due-east line. The timber of the scrubs was all cut away, and it looked
like a survey line. Upon asking old Jimmy what it was done for, and
what it meant, he replied as usual —“Cockata blackfellow make em” It
was somewhat similar to the path I had seen cleared at Pylebung in
March last, previously mentioned, and no doubt it is used for a
similar purpose. Leaving this hill and passing Poothraba, which is in
sight of it, we continued our nearly west course, and camped once
more in the scrubs. The country was very difficult for the camels, it
rising into such high ridges or hills of sand that we could only get over
it at a snail’s pace. The country was still covered with scrubs, which
consisted here, as well as all over this region, mostly of the Eucalyptus
dumosa, or mallee-tree, of a stunted habit; occasionally some oaks,
as we call them (properly casuarinas); with patches of mulga in the
hollows between the sandhills, with here and there a stunted cypress
pine (callistris) or two, some hakea bushes, and an occasional so-called
native poplar (Codonocarpus cotinifolius), which is a sister or brother
tree to the poisonous gyrostemon. The native poplar is a favourite and
harmless food for camels, and it being of the same family as the
gyrostemon, my kind friend Baron Mueller argues that I must be
mistaken in the poison plant which affected the camels, he thinking
it must be a plant of the poisonous family of the euphorbiaceae. We
were now nearly in the latitude of Youldeh, and all we had to do was
to push west to reach it; but one of our cow camels, the one old Jimmy
and Tommy rode, was very near calving, and for some days had not
travelled well, and gave a good deal of trouble to find her of a morning.
I wished to get her to Youldeh before she calved, as I intended to form
a depot there for a few weeks, during which time I hoped the calf
would become strong enough to travel afterwards. On the morning of
the sth July only about half the camels were brought up to the camp,
and as Mr. Tietkens and my riding camels were amongst them, we
rode off to Youldeh, which was only seven or eight miles away, telling
the others to come on along our tracks as soon as the remaining camels
were got, Mr. Young, Saleh, and Tommy being all away after them.
On arriving we found Youldeh much the same as when I left it, only
now the weather was cool, and the red sandhills that had formerly
almost burnt the feet of both men and animals were in the shaded


places under the big leguminous bushes slightly encrusted with a
light glittering mantle of hoar frost, for the thermometer that morning
had stood at 28°. My old slabbed well had got filled-up with sand, and
it was evident many natives had visited the place since I left it on the
24th March, 103 days ago. We managed to water our camels, as they
lay down on the top of the well, and stretched their long necks down
into it. We then quietly waited till long past midday for the caravan to
come up. We had nothing to eat and nothing to do —we couldn’t dig
out the well, as we had no shovel. At last Mr. Tietkens got alarmed at
the non-arrival of the party, so he and old Jimmy went back to the
camp, and took my riding camel with them, as she would not remain
quiet by herself. I remained there mighty hungry, and wandered
about on the top of all the high sandhills, to see if I could perceive any
dust of the approaching caravan, but no such thing was to be seen.
Darkness began to creep over this solitary place and its more solitary
occupant. I thought I had better try and go to sleep (though I had no
bedding) to pass the time away till morning. I coiled myself up under
a bush, and fell into one of those extraordinary waking dreams which
occasionally descend upon imaginative mortals: when we know that
we are alive, and yet think we are dead; when a confused jumble of
ideas sets the mind “peering back into the vistas of the memories of
yore,” and yet also foreshadowing the images of future things upon the
quivering curtains of the mental eye; and at such a time the imagina-
tion can revel only in the marvellous, the mysterious, and the mythical.
The forms of those we love, idealized and spiritualized into angelic
shapes; the faces of those we have forgotten long, or else perchance
have lost, once more return seraphic from the realms of light; the
lovely forms and winning graces of children gone, the witching eyes
and alluring smiles of women we have loved, the beautiful countenances
of beloved and admired youth once more we seem to see; the youthful
hands we have clasped in love and friendship so often in our own once
more we seem to press, unchanged by time, unchanged by fate,
beckoning to us lovingly to follow them, still trying with loving caress
and youthful smiles to lead us to their shadowy world beyond.
O! youth, beautiful and undying! the sage’s dream, the poet’s song —
all that is loving and lovely is centred still in thee. O! lovely youth!
with thine arrowy form and slender hands —thy pearly teeth and
saintly smile —thy pleading eyes and radiant hair —all, all must
worship thee; and if in waking hours and daily toil we cannot always
greet thee, yet in our dreams thou art our own. As the poet says —
“In dreams you come as things of light and lightness;
We hear your voice in still small accents tell
Of realms of bliss and never-fading brightness,
Where those who loved on earth together dwell.”
Then while lying asleep, engrossed by these mysterious influences and
impressions, I thought I heard —


Celestial sounds upon mine ear,
Vibrating music’s rapturous strain,
As though an heavenly choir were near,
Dispensing melody and pain.
As though some angels swept the strings
Of harps ethereal o’er me hung,
And fann’d me as with seraphs’ wings,
While thus the voices sweetly sung: —
Be bold of heart, be strong of will,
For unto thee by God is given
To roam the desert paths of earth,
And thence explore the fields of heaven.
Be bold of heart, be strong of will,
And nought on earth shall lay thee low.
Be e’er aspiring higher still,
From step to step still onward go;
Be thine the task!
When, lo! —I woke, and found the party with all the camels had
arrived, the fire relit, and the whole place, but lately so silent, was now
in a bustle. I got up, and looked about me in the most utter astonish-
ment, as I could not at first remember where I was. But I soon dis-
covered that the musical sounds I had heard were the tintinabulations
of my camels’ bells, tinkling in the evening air, as they came closer
and closer over the sandhills to the place where I lay dreaming, and
my senses returned at length to their ordinary groove. Tommy and
Jimmy’s old cow calved that night. I was glad to find she had delayed
doing so until she arrived here. Now the calf would be allowed to live,
as some of my party would remain here for a few weeks. It appears
the camels that were absent this morning were not found till late in
the afternoon. We were now, however, safely landed at the Youldeh
depot once more, and upon the whole we might say we had had an
agreeable journey from Port Augusta to it. On the following morning
I christened the calf Youldeh, after the name of her birthplace. On
the 6th, 7th, and Bth we all remained in depot , doing various kinds
of work, as redigging and reslabbing the well, making a large canvas
trough for the camels to drink out of, making some covers and altera-
tions to some water-beds I had for carrying water, and many other
things. I had some camels to deliver at Fowler’s Bay, and some letters
to dispatch, as well as some other business necessary to be done before
a Magistrate, which compelled me personally to return there —
otherwise I should have gone away to the north, to look for another
watered depot in that direction. But now I committed this piece of
work to my two officers, Messrs. Tietkens and Young, while I and
Alec Ross went south to the bay. Both parties started from Youldeh
the same day, namely, on the gth. I took old Jimmy with me, to
return him (with thanks) to his family, and Tietkens and Young took


Tommy with them, as that young gentleman had no desire whatever
to return or to leave me.* Between ourselves, I had caused him when
I first got him in February to commit some very serious breaches of
aboriginal law, for he was then on probation, and not allowed to
come near the blacks’ camp or near women. He also was compelled
to wear a great chignon, which made him look far more like a girl
than a boy. This I took off and threw away, much to the horror of
the elders of his tribe, who, if they now caught him, would have
given him condign punishment. When he and old Jimmy met at
Port Augusta, and old Jimmy saw him without his chignon and other
emblems of novicehood, that old gentleman commenced to talk to
him like a father; but Tommy being a bit of a pet in the camp, and
knowing he had my sanction for what he had done, quietly told old
Jimmy in plain English to go to blazes. The expression of old Jimmy’s
face at thus being flouted by a boy was inexpressible; he thought it
his duty to persecute Tommy still further; but now Tommy only
laughed at him, and said I made him do it; so old Jimmy gave it up
at last as a bad job.
Alec Ross, Jimmy, and I reached the bay on the 14th; but at
Golona, on the 12 th, we heard there had been a sad epidemic amongst
the natives since I left, and poor old Jimmy had lost two of his children.
When he heard it, poor old fellow, he cried, and looked at me as
much as to say if I had not taken him away he might have saved them.
It was but a poor consolation to tell him (and which he did not
understand) that those whom the gods love die young. I also suffered
a loss, as a bright little black boy called Fry, a great favourite of mine,
with eyes like tea saucers, and whom I had intended to bring with me,
as a companion for Tommy, was also dead. I parted with old Jimmy
the best of friends, having given him presents and clothes and a dress
for his wife —indeed everything he asked for, which was not very much.
Our stay at Fowler’s Bay was not extended longer than I could help.
Mr. Armstrong, the manager, made me a present of a case of brandy,
and as I was going to take some stores from there, he allowed me to
take back the camels I was to leave there, and sent a man of his,
Richard Dorey, to accompany me back to Youldeh, and there take
delivery of them. On the 17th we left the bay. We stayed at Golona
a couple of days, and left it on the 21 st, arriving with Richard Dorey
again at Youldeh on the 25th.
Tommy Oldham’s father had also died of the epidemic at Fowler’s
Bay. When Tommy heard of it, he said to me, my (adjective blooming)
old father is dead too. I said, “Is that how you speak of your poor old
father, Tommy, now that he is dead?” to which he replied, much in
* Alec Ross in his reminiscences records that “Mr, Giles carried a small leather bag
containing cheap necklaces, pocket knives, and fancy coloured handkerchiefs. His
intentions were to make small presents to any wild blacks” and that “Tommy Oldham
always had a covetous eye on this bag ...”


the same way as some civilized sons may often have done —“Well,
I couldn’t help it.”*
* The Journal of a Forgotten Expedition ends here. In at least several of the printed
copies of it, Giles later added the manuscript explanation that his expeditions “in
continuation of these Travels” had been published as parliamentary papers well
before it was printed, and that, “hence the name”.
Tietkens and Young had returned to Youldeh on the twenty-fourth, and in his
later account to Elder Giles gave “a condensation of Mr. Tietkens’ report of his
journey”, as follows.
On leaving Touldeh, which is situated in latitude go° 24' 10", and longitude 13T 46', they
went first to a small rock waterhole I had visited when here previously in the summer; it was
fifteen miles away, and lay about N. J4° W., and called Paring. The blackboy Tommy followed
my old horsetracks to it, but on reaching it they found it dry. The following day they travelled
north, and passed through a country of heavy sandhills and thick scrubs, with occasional open
patches with limestone, and camped at twenty-four miles. Continuing their journey the next day
they went over better country and more open, and made twenty-four or twenty-five miles of
northing. Some more good country was seen the following day, but no water, though they saw
native huts and native tracks. On the following day they sighted two small flat-topped hills,
and found a native well in their neighbourhood, which, however, did not promise a very great
supply of water. The views obtainable from the little hills were not very inviting in any direction,
as scrubs appeared to exist nearly everywhere. This little well was eighty-two miles from
Touldeh, and laying nearly north io° west from it. They continued on further north for twenty-
five miles to latitude 28° 52' 10", and longitude 13T 31' 8", when they turned to the south-west,
and continued on that course for eighteen miles, finding a small native dam with water in it;
then turning a little to the north of west they found some claypans with a little more water. They
went forty-four miles nearly west from the little dam, and though the country seemed improving
they could discover no more water. From their farthest westerly point in latitude 28° yf, and
longitude 130° 2g', they turned upon a bearing of S. 55°E., direct for the native well found
near the two little flat-topped hills mentioned previously. In their progress upon this line, at
forty-five miles, and right before them, they came upon a small open, flat space, very well grassed
and very pretty, and upon it they found another native well, and saw some natives, with whom
they held a sort of running conversation. There were several wells, all of which had water in.
Their blackboy managed to elicit from the natives the name of the place, which they said was
Ooldabinna [Ouldabinna on Giles’s map ]. This seemed a very fortunate discovery indeed, as
the first well found near the flat-tops was by no means a good one. Here they encamped, being
quite delighted with their successful journey, as they now had found a new depot ninety-two
miles, lying north 20° west from Touldeh, the position of this spot being in latitude 2g° f 4",
and longitude igT if 4". From here they departed in a straight line for Touldeh, where they
arrived the day before I returned from Fowler’s Bay.
That resume was later printed as part of Giles’s Explorations, 1875 (S.A. Parliament-
ary Paper No. 22, 1876), which gave his account of the expedition from 27 July
onwards. The previous December had seen printed a brief reference to Ooldabinna
and the other native well, as described by Jesse Young: “two permanent drainage
holes in the middle of the most beautiful country imaginable, covered by a carpet
of emerald grass, dotted with myriads of immortelles” {South Australian Register,
9 September 1875).
In the same parliamentary printing Giles recalls that once reunited with Tietkens
and Young he wasted no time before departing from Youldeh, “giving my letters
to Richard Dorey, who had accompanied me back from Fowler’s Bay”.


HARRY TIETKENS’S ACCOUNT *
At this time, August 1874, and while in Adelaide I made up my
mind to devote my energies to some particular calling and for many
reasons I decided to adopt that of land surveying and for that purpose
went to Melbourne to study for the Licensed Surveyors Examination
and for six months I took very humble lodgings with an old Jewess.
No one knew of my whereabouts, I never saw my old and esteemed
friends the Fagans; every copper I had was devoted to this one object,
not until every penny was gone and my Mothers watch in pawn did
I appeal to Giles’ people for assistance, Mr. Gill his Brother in Law
lent me £lO which satisfied the demands of my old landlady and
redeemed my watch. As good fortune does sometimes visit those in a
dilemma, Giles sent Gill a Telegram from Adelaide asking my where-
abouts and soon after I got a letter from Giles asking me if I would
join him in another Exploring Expedition that was being fitted out by
Sir Thomas Elder, an expedition in which Camels were to be used
instead of horses. Necessity knows no law, I was compelled to accept,
so in due course I took my passage by steamer to Adelaide. It will be
seen that I was compelled to leave my Studies from sheer necessity
but I considered I had made very satisfactory progress and had fully
made up my mind to continue them at some future time. I had an
interview with the Baron Sir Ferd von Mueller before I left Melbourne
and from him I received a large packet of various kinds of seeds
which were to be planted at favorable places on the proposed line
of march. Taking passage in a coasting Steamer I arrived after a
two days rough passage in Adelaide! where Giles introduced me to
Sir Thomas Elder; in a few days we started for Beltana. Arriving
there 24 suitable camels were selected & I had my first experience of
riding one of these creatures. It seemed very pleasant at first but oh
so wearying after the first few miles; fortunately the first days stage
was a short one and I was glad when the halt for the night was
sounded. We journeyed Southwards from Beltana to Port Augusta
* From Tietkens’s Reminiscences , saa 82/379.
| On 22 April, in the Aldinga.
47


where we took in the whole supplies for the Overland journey of
nearly two thousand miles, through an entirely unknown country to
Perth the Capital of the Colony of West Australia; the party consisted
of Mr. Giles as Leader, myself as Second in Command and observer,
Mr. Jesse Young Collector, two men, an Afghan Camel driver and
a Fowlers Bay black boy of about 15 years of age. Leaving Port Augusta
on the 23rd May 1875 with heavily loaded camels we took a westerly
& N Westerly [course] through good pastoral country to the N end
of the Warburton Range. At this point we entered upon an extensive
desert country which continued uninterruptedly until we reached
Youldeh* which is 120 miles North of Fowlers Bay.
At this point we stayed a few days to give the Camels a rest for
they were all carrying very heavy loads, after which it was arranged
that Mr. Young and the black boy should accompany me on a journey
to the Northward for a week or two to find if possible a depot where
water existed from whence we could make a final start for the West
Coast. We travelled for two hundred miles & were successful in finding
water, the weather was cool and the nights cold and frosty and
travelling was pleasant. Upon our arrival at Youldeh the whole party
packed up and started for Ooldabinna, the new water discovered by
Mr. Young and myself; it was only a small soakage . . .
* Tietkens uses the later “Oldea”, that is, Ooldea.


JESSE YOUNG’S ACCOUNT*
In 1874 Mr. Elder determined on sending an expedition across on
the thirtieth parallel, about 400 miles south of Forrest’s course, to the
city of Perth, and so set at rest the conflictive surmises of what really
was in that much dreaded country. Mr. Giles was selected to be the
leader, and he made his old associate, W. H. Tietkens, second in
command, while I had the honor of acting as observer and naturalist,
under instructions from Mr. Elder to go up to his large station north
at Beltana, and get arms, ammunition, and camels ready for our
departure, and await the arrival of Mr. Giles and the other members
of the party. One hundred miles by rail brought me to Burra-Burra;
I then had 180 miles to ride in the most springless, rickety coach
imaginable, and as it generally went at a foot pace, and made frequent
stops, I preferred to walk —excellent training, but rather tiresome.
From Blinman, where there are copper mines, I rode on horseback
to my destination. My baggage, including the blankets and clothing,
only weighed thirty-two pounds, and consisted of two flannel shirts,
two pairs of socks, two pairs of leather inexpressibles, and two pairs
of boots, besides the things I then wore. I got all our provisions ready
sewn up in green-hide bags, as a protection against the scrub.
The latter end of April [1875] Mr. Giles arrived, having come up
from the south coast, where he had been exploring near Fowler’s Bay.
He lost all his horses coming through; two camels carried his party
220 miles without water, besides carrying enough to supply the horses
while they lived with a bucket of water each day. They passed through
a horrible country, and suffered greatly.
When all was in readiness, we left Beltana with five white men,
two black boys, two camel-drivers, and eight months’ provisions.
One camel-driver became exhausted the first day, and was sent back.
These camel-drivers have religious observances that sometimes are
annoying. It is their custom to pray five times a day, and although
we did not object to their worshipping, we disliked to have them wait
so long; so, to make them quick, we took the camels on, so it was with
* American Geographical Society Bulletin, Vol. 10, 1878.


difficulty they could catch up with the party again. Their zeal for
prayer generally exhibited itself at times when we were obliged to
stop on account of a broken nose-line, or some other mishap. We
had three kinds of camels —bulls, cows, and bullocks. The idea of
using bullocks had always before been scouted, but we risked taking
them, and found them to have very superior qualities of endurance,
better than either bull or cow. The latter we used for riding, and the
others for beasts of burden. They carry great weights. Our average
was 500 pounds at starting, and I have seen one old fellow we had
laden with half a ton. We stopped at Port Augusta a day or two,
and then made our way northward to the west of Lake Torrens, a
dry salt lake, to Elizabeth Creek.
Shortly after our arrival at Lake Gairdner, we crossed the tracks
of Mr. John Ross ... As we left Mount Finke with only ninety gallons
of water, we could not afford the extravagance of making tea, since
too much of it would be wasted in the shape of steam. On the second
day it commenced raining, and we had to stop on account of the
saddles getting wet. A damp saddle on a camel’s back is not comfort-
able, and the camels do not like it any more than the riders. Camel-
riding is generally as safe as the rider chooses to make it. The ordinary
saddle consists of three wooden crutches, fixed at a distance of eighteen
inches apart, on two bolsters, which fit along the camel’s side, the
hump being immediately under the second crutch. This arrangement
keeps the saddle off the camel’s loins and shoulders. Between the
crutches the traveller puts his blankets, and other scanty luggage.
On the sixth day out, we had our first experience in eating the grub,
a chrysalis found in the roots of trees. It is about as long as one’s
finger, soft and juicy, but with a hard head, crushing of which is
objectionable. The taste is peculiar, but one can acquire a strong
liking for it, if hungry. The natives cook it, but we did not.
From Lake Gairdner our way was over the highest of sandhills
and prickliest of spinifex, the densest of abominable scrub, and the
most yielding of soft white sand.
From Mount Finke to Youldeh our journey was not difficult.
Though sandhills were plentiful, the waterholes too were frequently
found, and we arrived without mishap. Mr. Giles left Youldeh, and
went south to Fowler’s Bay, taking with him one black boy and three
worn-out camels. Mr. Tietkens, the second in command, and myself,
with four camels and provisions for one month, started north mainly
to find water for a future depot. We intended to push to the Musgrave
Ranges, previously discovered by Mr. Giles, and after recruiting
there make our way back. We were fortunate enough to find in the
course of 100 miles’ travelling, a small waterhole containing a few
gallons. We returned to the depot, and brought up the party. Mr.
Giles having returned from Fowler’s Bay, our party now consisted
of seven men instead of nine, as at starting from Beltana.


The following letters are transcribed from the originals by Elder and illustrate the
circumstances under which Young went with the expedition.
Adelaide yth Feby 1875
Jesse Young Esq
Oulnina
My Dear Sir
I have had two letters from you from Oulnina, the last suggested by a communication you
had received from Jack Bakewell touching your proposal to join Ernest Giles' expedition to
Western Australia.
lam quite willing to sanction you joining the party, and have written to Giles (who is now at
Fowlers Bay ) to that effect. He will be employed for another month in surveying some country
for Price Maurice in that locality, and will then proceed to Beltana, where the expedition will
be fitted out, and from whence it will take its departure for Perth as soon as possible.
I see you would like a day or two in Adelaide before starting for the Interior and I see no
objection to that—you had better come down soon for that purpose, and afterwards proceed to
Beltana to get things prepared against Mr Giles's arrival.
Mr Giles writes me he wishes to take nothing but camels for the journey, and I think he is
right as camels and horses don' t do well together. I have a sufficient number of these animals to
select from at Beltana and Mr Phillipson the manager has instructions from me to provide the
requisite supplies: it will take about a month to prepare everything required for the outfit at
Beltana and if that is completed in all March it will suit Mr Giles' arrangements for starting
at once into the Interior; he is anxious to lose no time as he desires to make use of the whole
of the coming winter for exploration.
I hope you have fully and deliberately counted the cost of the proposed expedition and after
putting your hand to the plough will not think of drawing back? You say you know full well
the hardship of the undertaking, but your love of adventure will carry you through: I think you
have a wonderfully cool and determined leader in Ernest Giles but then he understands his
business well, and is quite competent to steer you safely to your journey's end. I have nothing
particular in the way of news to relate . . .
I am training Tricotrin, Lorenzo, & Jessica for the May races but am not very sanguine
about them. My new stables are roofing in. The house at the Bay will be finished & made
habitable next week and I mean to spend a month or two in it before the yachting season closes.
I have been away cruising in the other gulf for the last ten days which was the reason for my
not replying earlier to your last letter.
Make my respects acceptable to Walter Duncan & believe me
My Dear Sir
Faithfully Yours
Thos Elder
[Birksgate, Adelaide ]
26th March 1875
My Dear Sir
I received your letter last week, but have been so busy with the English mail that I could not
find time to reply to it; even now it is not easy as the mail does not leave till tomorrow, but
this is Good Friday, and a holiday in town, so that I am not so completely tied down to time.
Mr Phillipson tells me you are busy getting necessaries ready for the journey pending Mr
Giles' arrival —I doubt if you will see him at Beltana for another month, but that will make no
difference to you as you can employ your time pleasantly, if not usefully in seeing the country and
in preparing for a start.
I am in hopes Mr Tietkens, Mr Giles' former associate, will go as Second in Command for
Mr Giles writes me it is indispensable that the 2nd in command should be a man who could
and would traverse independent lines if required. I am afraid that would be a stretch beyond


your powers on your first journey, I expect you of course to enter my service as one of the party,
and you will be paid by me same as another would doing the same duty —“Honor & Glory”
are all very well in their way, but the labourer is worthy of his hire . . .
I hope you find yourself happy and comfortable at Beltana.
Believe me
Tours faithfully
Thos Elder
Jesse Toung Esq
Beltana
The following passages in Elder’s letter to Young of 15 June 1876 are also relevant:
I am favored with your letter of igth April, and note all that you say.
You seem to have met with a cordial reception from the Geographical Society, and your modesty
seems to have restrained you from recording your adventures in the form of a book . . .
I am glad to see Forrest has got the gold medal for he deserves it, and let us not begrudge
him & Giles the C.M.G. if they are fortunate enough to get it. Explorers have a hard and risky
work to perform, and when successful are well entitled to public recognition! I wish you had come
in for a share of these honors for you had no easy task to perform on your journey to Perth.
Console yourself with the reflection that the best performers are generally overlooked and the
worst rewarded, & publicly acknowledged . . .
What a pity you did not take out a slice of pastoral country in the Far North —almost the
whole country has been appropriated since, and the character of the country is well spoken of.
I have iy,ooo sq. miles under lease now, and that ought to be enough —for one man.


ALEC ROSS’S ACCOUNT*
We arrived in Adelaide at the latter end of July, 1874, and after a
few weeks’ spell I again made my way back to Beltana, as I had
promised Mr. Phillipson, and took my job as a hand on the station.
Before leaving Adelaide I had an interview with Sir Thomas Elder,
and he promised me that should he send out another expedition he
would hold a position for me.
My work on Beltana was mostly taken up mustering stray stock of
the well-known T. E. brand. One of my journeys was as far north-west
as Mount Hamilton with the late Frank Booth as companion. While
we were mustering I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Ernest Giles,
the explorer, who had just arrived at the Finniss. He had two camels,
a white man, and a blackfellow. He reported that all his horses had
perished on the trip from Fowler’s Bay, having gone one stage —from
water to water —200 miles. I remember his saying what a different
tale he would have had to tell, if he had only had camels in Gibson’s
Desert, during his trip of 1873. He also said that he was going to
Beltana to organize another expedition for Sir Thomas Elder, and
that Sir Thomas had given my name to be included as a member
of the party.
I forgot to mention that I met John Forrest about two months
before, at Beltana, then on his way to Adelaide, with party and plant.
This was after his wonderful trip from the head of the Murchison
* Alec Ross’s “Pastoral Pioneering” reminiscences were published in the Adelaide
Register during July, August and September of 1928 and presumably were written
at about that time. When he joined Giles he was only 18, but even so had been a
member of the expedition led by his father, John Ross, that had set out to explore
the country west of the Peake and to Perth, in 1874. He recorded that Giles was
“a man of undaunted courage, and a born leader, and his old second, W, H. Tietkens,
was the same”. In later years Ross became “manager of a succession of cattle stations,
among them Finniss Springs, for the Beltana Pastoral Co., Undoolya, for the late
Mr. Andrew Tennant, Grown Point, for the James Cowan Estate, and Dalhousie
for the late Mr. John Lewis . . .” He died at Adelaide in 1938.
Who can but warm to a man who fifty-four years after the event recalled his delight
at being invited to join Giles, and who simply said of such arduous exploration,
“I dearly loved the work”?


River, in Western Australia, to the Peake Station, on the overland
telegraph line. Forrest’s expedition was more wonderful at the time,
as it was all done with horses, and the honours bestowed on him were
well earned.
After having finished the horse muster with Frank Booth, at
Mundowdna, I received an urgent letter to hurry back to Beltana as
the Giles expedition was about to leave, and it was arranged that I
was to accompany him. I was delighted, as I dearly loved the work,
and was grateful to Sir Thomas Elder for having kept his promise.
Frank Booth and I arrived at Beltana on May 28, 1875, and were
informed by Mr. Phillipson that Giles and party had left for Port
Augusta. He had given instructions that I was to overtake him so
soon as possible, and had left a splendid little camel named Reechy.
On May 29 Booth and I delivered about 150 head of horses to Mr,
Phillipson —all that we had mustered during my two months’ journey
north.
At 2 o’clock the same afternoon I caught little Reechy, and after a
hurried farewell to my friends on the station, I started to overtake
Mr. Giles, and met him on the fifth day, at Freshwater Well, 20 miles
east of Port Augusta. Mr. Giles was glad to see me, as he was anxious
to send one of the Afghans (Coogee Mahomet) back to Beltana. He
was a big, lazy scamp of a fellow, and had been giving Mr. Giles a
lot of trouble. He was very much annoyed at my arrival, knowing
that he would lose his position. He cheekily wanted to know, “What
the devil you leaving father for?” Before I could give him one back
Mr. Giles took a hand, and said, “Why the devil did you leave your
father?” Coogee said, “Oh, Mr. Giles, my father he dead.” Mr. Giles
replied, “And why the devil did he leave you?” However, in the
morning Coogee was packed off back to Beltana. Every one in the
party was glad to see the last of him. The other Afghan, Saleh, whom
Mr. Giles decided to take with him, turned out a splendid man. The
party now consisted of W. H. Tietkens, Jesse Young (who was to
assist Mr. Giles in the navigating, and who, I am told, had been a
navigating lieutenant in the Spanish Navy), Peter Nicholls (cook),
Saleh (camel driver), myself (as bushman), two aborigines (Neutinna,
usually called Jimmy, and Tommy Oldham, a young native about
18 years of age). Both these natives had been with Mr. Giles during
his survey work at Fowler’s Bay. We had 16 pack camels, and six
riding camels. We arrived at Chinaman’s Dam on May 14, and formed
a camp, getting all our equipment together, as well as stores.
It will be needless for me to describe that long and hard journey
across to Western Australia, as Ernest Giles has given a detailed
description of everything that happened from May 23, 1875, to March
4, 1876 . . .


