

THE
LAND ACT, 1862:
AND THE
REGULATIONS AND FORMS UNDER THE ACT
AS APPROVED BY THE GOVERNOR IN COUNCIL.
With Map.
MELBOURNE:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, 69 ELIZABETH STREET.
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.




VICTORIA
Map of the 10 Millions of Acres
reserved under th e Land Act 1862.
The Hon: The President of the Board of Lando & Survey has gcrien Permcssion to Nes[?] Fergussion & Milehell , Lilhagraphers, Lollins St, West, to Print and publish
This Map on condition that no alleration on addition be made.


THE
LAND ACT, 1862:
AND THE
REGULATIONS AND FORMS UNDER THE ACT
AS APPROVED BY THE GOVERNOR IN COUNCIL.
82U it!) IRap.
MELBOURNE:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, 69 ELIZABETH STREET
and all booksellers,


WALKER, MAY AND CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOURNE STREET WEST.


THE LAND ACT, 1862.
Whereas it is expedient to amend and consolidate
the laws relating to Crown Lands in Victoria and to
give increased facilities for the sale and settlement
of such lands and otherwise to provide for the good
order and management of the same Be it therefore
enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by
and with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council and the Legislative Assembly of Victoria in
this present Parliament assembled and by the
authority of the same as follows—
Part I.—lntroductory.
Repeal of Existing Laws and Saving of Gold Fields
Act.
I. The Acts mentioned in the First Schedule
hereto from the times therein mentioned and all Orders
of Her Majesty in Council and all Regulations respect-
ing the sale or other disposal of the waste lands of the
Crown in force in Victoria at the time of the passing
of this Act shall be and are hereby repealed but
nothing herein contained shall alter or repeal the
Act of the Parliament of Victoria numbered XXXII.
or any part thereof.
Penalties and Rights under Land Sales Act.
11. Notwithstanding anything herein contained
all proceedings civil or criminal of what nature or
kind soever for the enforcement of any forfeitures
or penalties in regard to any land alienated or
demised under the authority of the Act No. CXVII.
shall be commenced and prosecuted as if this Act
had not been passed and nothing herein contained
shall be deemed to affect any estate right or interest
created or existing under or by virtue of the said
Act.
Governor to Convey only under this Act.
111. Under and subject to the provisions of this
Act but not otherwise the Governor in the name and
on behalf of Her Majesty shall grant convey or
otherwise dispose of Crown lands for such estate or
interest as in each case is hereby authorised and for
none other.
Existing Engagements to be Fulfilled.
IV. Where the sale of any land has prior to the
passing of this Act been lawfully effected or where
prior to the passing of the Act of the Parliament of
Victoria numbered CXVII. any right of pre-emption
had accrued and had been applied for and would but
for the passing of such Act had been recognised
according to its usual practice by the Board of Land
and Works the Governor notwithstanding anything
in this Act contained may complete or give effect to
any such sale or right and may execute the proper
conveyances accordingly.
Lands Reserved from Sale.
V. The Governor in Council may from time to
time reserve from sale either temporarily or per-
manently any Crown lands which in his opinion are
required for any public purpose whatsoever or for
quays landing places tramways railways and
railway stations roads canals or other internal com-
munications or for reservoirs acqueducts or water
courses or for the use or benefit of the aboriginal in-
habitants or the sites of markets abattoirs public
baths or washhouses schools reformatories colleges
places of public worship dwelling houses for the
ministers of any religious denomination mechanics
institutes libraries museums or other institutions for
public instruction experimental farms gardens parks
or hospitals asylums or infirmaries or places for the
interment of the dead or for the recreation con-
venience or amusement of the people.
Lands may be Granted for Public Purposes to Trustees.
VI. Where before the commencement of this Act
any Crown lands have been promised and set apart
for any of the purposes herein-before mentioned if
possession thereof have been given or if trustees
thereof have been appointed or if a written promise
to grant the same have been given by the Govern-
ment and if such promise be established to the satis-
faction of the Board of Land and Works and the
fulfilment thereof be claimed within twelve months
from the passing of this Act and if notice of such
claim have been published in the Government Gazette
for four consecutive weeks and where under the
authority of the Act of the Parliament of Victoria
numbered CXVII. or after the commencement of this
Act any Crown lands are lawfully reserved from sale
for any such purpose the Governor may convey any
such land in fee or for any lesser estate to trustees
for any of the purposes aforesaid.
Reserved Lands not to be Sold.
VII. After any land has been temporarily reserved
from sale the same shall not be sold until such tem


porary reservation be revoked by the Governor in
Council and after any land has been permanently
reserved from sale every conveyance or alienation
thereof except for the purpose for which such
reservation has been made shall he absolutely void
as well against Her Majesty as all other persons
whomsoever.
Notice of Permanent Reservation of Land to be Pub-
lished in the “ Government Gazette ” before such
Reservation.
VIII. Before any land is permanently reserved as
hereinbefore mentioned notice of the intention to
reserve the same shall be published in the Govern-
ment Gazette for four consecutive weeks before the
same shall be so reserved and in every such notice
the land proposed to be reserved and the purpose for
which it is to be reserved shall be fully described
and stated.
Notice of Temporary Reservation to be Published in
“Government Gazette” after such Reservation.
IX. When any land has been temporarily reserved
as hereinbefore mentioned notice of such reservation
shall be published in the Government Gazette for four
consecutive weeks and before any temporary reserva-
tion is revoked as hereinbefore mentioned notice of
the intention to make such revocation shall be
published in the Government Gazette for four con-
secutive weeks.
Escheated and Forfeited Lands may be Conveyed.
X. When Her Majesty has become or may here-
after become entitled to any lands either by escheat
for want of heirs or by reason of any forfeiture or
by reason that the same had been purchased by or
for the use of or in trust for any alien or aliens if
the Governor in Council thinks fit so to do the Go-
vernor may grant such lands or any part thereof in
fee simple or for any less estate to any person for
the purpose of restoring the same to any of the
family of the person whose estate the same had been
or of carrying into effect any intended grant convey-
ance or devise of such last-mentioned person in rela-
tion thereto or of rewarding any person making
discovery of such escheat or of Her Majesty’s right
and title thereto and every such grant heretofore
made shall anything in any Act to the contrary
notwithstanding be valid and effectual as well
against Her Majesty as against all other persons.
Crown Grants and Leases to be Antedated.
XI. Notwithstanding any law or usage to the
contrary all Crown grants and leases which are
issued after the commencement of this Act shall
bear date on the day when the persons named
therein as grantees or lessees respectively first
became entitled to such grants or leases and shall be
of the same force and validity as if they had been
enrolled on the day on which the same bear date
and the eighty-sixth section of the said Act numbered
CXVII. shall be read and construed with reference
to any grant issued under it while in force as if the
words “ and enrolled” had been inserted after the
word “ sealed.”
Part ll.—Estates in Fee and Leases with
Covenants of Pre-emption.
I.—Sale of Lands by Selection.
What Lands to be Sold by Selection.
XII. The lands comprising ten millions of acres
and upwards delineated on the map signed and with
the boundaries initialed by the President of the
Board of Land and Works and deposited with the
clerk of the Parliaments shall be reserved for
proclamation in Agricultural Areas as hereinafter
provided and not less than four millions of acres
shall be open for selection in such areas within three
months of the passing of this Act and there shall
constantly be kept open for selection in such areas
at least two millions of acres while so much of the
lands delineated in the aforesaid map remains
unsold.
Survey of Agricultural Areas.
XHI. The Board of Land and Works shall from
time to time cause to be surveyed agricultural areas
taken from the aforesaid lands and such areas shall
be as much as possible in defined and extensive
districts and not in isolated or scattered portions and
shall be surveyed in allotments of not less than forty
nor more than six hundred and forty acres and the
board shall cause plans of the lands so surveyed to
be prepared and on such plans each allotment shall
be divided into two equal subdivisions.
Agricultural Lands after Proclamation to be Open for
Selection.
XIY. When the survey of any area is completed
the Governor in Council shall forthwith proclaim
that all the lands therein situated will within a
period of not more than three months from the date
of such proclamation be open for selection After
the expiration of such period such lands may be
selected by the first applicant in the manner upon
the terms and to the extent herein set forth.
Proclamation of Land Office and Land Officer.
XV. Every such proclamation shall distinguish
the area by a name and shall state some proper
officer (hereinafter called the Land Officer) to whom
and some Land-office at which applications for the
lands so proclaimed may be made and the purchase
money paid.
Land Officer not to be a Purchaser.
XYI. And no such land officer shall directly or
indirectly purchase any land in relation to which
such proclamation has been made.
Mode of Selecting Agricultural Lands.
XVII. Where any person desires to select any
allotment in any agricultural area if he make a
written application to the land officer for such
allotment and a declaration according to the circum-
stances of his case in the form contained in the
second schedule hereto and if he pay to such officer
the purchase money for the whole allotment or as the
case may be the purchase money for one moiety
thereof and one year’s rent for the other moiety and


if no prior applicant have made such payment such
person shall thereby become the selector of such
allotment.
Applicants’ Register Book to be kept at Land Office.
XVIII. The land officer on receiving any such
application shall endorse thereon the day and hour
of its receipt and shall enter the same in an
Applicants’ Register Book and such book shall
during office days and hours be open without charge
to public inspection.
Priority of Application to be determined by lot.
XIX. Where two or more applications and pay-
ments for the same allotment are received on the
same day during the ordinary hours in which the
office is open for the transaction of business the land
officer in such manner as the Board of Land and
Works may direct shall determine by lot which of
the said applicants shall have priority and such
determination shall be conclusive between the ap-
plicants.
Certificate of Purchase and issue of Crown Grant.
XX. The land officer anything in the Act of the
Parliament of Victoria numbered LXXXVI. to the
contrary notwithstanding shall forthwith return to
the unsuccessful applicants if any the money lodged
with him by them and shall give to the selector a
certificate stating the receipt of the consideration
and the allotment in respect of which it was paid
and the selector shall thereupon be entitled to go
into possession of such allotment but shall not
receive any Crown grant thereof before the expira-
tion of one month from the date of such certificate.
Mode of Payment for Agricultural Lands.
XXI. Every selector of any such allotment shall
be entitled either to purchase the fee of the whole
allotment at the price of one pound for each acre or
fractional part of an acre therein or to purchase in
like manner and at like price the fee of one moiety
thereof and receive a lease of the remaining moiety
on the terms herein contained. .
Duration and Covenant of Lease.
XXII. Every such lease shall be for a term of
eight years at a rent payable yearly in advance of
two shillings and sixpence for each acre or fractional
part of an acre so demised and shall contain the
usual convenant for the payment of rent and a
condition for re-entry on non-payment thereof and
upon the payment of the last sum due on account of
the rent so reserved or at any time during the term
upon payment of the difference between the amount
of rent actually paid and the entire sum of one pound
for each acre the purchaser of the first moiety his
heirs or assigns shall be entitled t# a grant of the
remaining or leased moiety as real estate and the
enrolment on record of the grant of the remaining
or leased moiety shall have relation back to and
shall take effect from the time when the grant of
the first moiety took effect.
Former Purchasers of Land to be entitled to select
under this Act.
XXIII. Every person not being a mortgagee seised
at law of or seised of an equity of redemption in
lands in fee simple within the Colony of Victoria
purchased previously to the coming into operation of
this Act shall be entitled to select an allotment of
Crown lands in any agricultural area and hold the
same under lease on the same terms and in the
same manner as hereinbefore provided for selectors of
land in an agricultural area and the payment of one
year’s rent shall constitute such person the selector
of such land provided the quantity to be selected
shall not exceed in extent the land of which he is so
seised and in no case shall the said land so selected
exceed three hundred and twenty acres Provided
that no person shall be entitled to become a selector
under this section unless he shall apply for this
purpose within twelve months from the date of this
Act or who has within twelve months previously
become a selector in an agricultural area in the
manner hereinbefore provided or who has rented
agricultural lands under the Act of the Parliament
of Victoria No. CXVII.
Such Selectors to Produce Title.
XXIV. No person shall become entitled to a lease
of any allotment under the provisions of the last
preceding section unless he produce his title deeds
for the perusal of a solicitor to be appointed by the
Governor in Council and upon approval of the
title by him and payment of the taxed costs out of
pocket of investigating the same and of such fee to
the said solicitor as the Governor in Council may ap-
point (which fee the said solicitor is hereby em-
powered to retain for his own use and benefit) such
person shall be entitled to obtain a certificate in the
form contained in the sixth schedule to this Act.
Forfeited Leaseholds may be Sold by Auction.
XXV. When any such lessee has been ejected the
land so demised may be sold in fee simple by public
auction unless it be included by the Governor in
Council in any proclamation of lands open for selec-
tion issued after such ejectment and the lessee shall
not be entitled to any compensation for any im-
provements effected upon such land.
Extent to which Agricultural Lands may be Selected.
XXVI. No person shall be entitled either in his
own name or in the name of any other person to
select within a period of twelve calender months
more than six hundred and forty acres of land and
no infant or married woman except a married woman
who has obtained a decree for judicial separation
binding according to the laws in force in Victoria
or person not domiciled in Victoria at the time of
application shall be entitled to select either directly
or by trustees any such land.
Unselected Lands may be Sold by Auction.
XXVII. After three years from the date of any
such proclamation as aforesaid if any lands in any
area so proclaimed remain unselected the Governor
in Council may direct that such lands or any portion
of them shall be sold in fee simple by public auction
as hereinafter provided in relation to lands not re-
served for proclamation in agricultural areas.
Remedy for Persons Injured by an undue selection,
XXVIII. Where any person desires to select any
allotment in any agricultural area and is prevented


from so doing by some person selecting such allot-
ment in violation or evasion of the restrictions con-
tained in this Act if within one month from the
date of such undue selection he send to the land
officer aforesaid a notice in the form given in the
third Schedule hereto and also make application
with the declaration aforesaid and pay the purchase
money or the purchase money and rent for such
allotment as if it were still open for selection the
Crown grant of the disputed allotment shall not
issue to the party claiming to be the selector thereof
until the proceedings hereinafter directed have been
taken.
Sheriff to summon special jury of four.
XXIX. After the receipt of any such notice the
land officer shall notify the same to the sheriff or
deputy sheriff of the bailiwick in which the dis-
puted allotment is situate and such sheriff or deputy
sheriff shall thereupon so soon as may be require both
parties to appear before him at some fixed time and
place aftd shall then and there impanel four men from
the special jury hook of the jury district in or nearest
to which such allotment is situated to try the matter
of such dispute and the provisions of any Act now
or hereafter in force for the regulating of juries
shall apply to juries under this Act.
And to Administer Oaths and Assess Costs.
XXX. The sheriff or deputy sheriff may adminis-
ter the lawful oaths to the jurors and witnesses and
may assess the costs of the proceedings so that the
same do not exceed ten pounds and may award such
costs to the person in whose favour the questions
hereinafter mentioned are decided and shall grant and
deliver to such person a certificate in the form con-
tained in the fourth Schedule to this Act for the
amount of such costs and such certificate may be
filed in the Supreme Court and judgment may be
signed thereupon and execution issue as in the case
of a certificate of a judgment in the County Court
filed in the Supreme Court,
Questions to be Tried by Sheriff’s Court.
XXXI. The sheriff or deputy sheriff and the
jury shall hear and determine the following ques-
tions or some of them as the case may require
and none other that is to say whether the defendant
did or did not select either in his own name or in
the name of others more than six hundred and forty
acres of land within a period of twelve calendar
months or whether at the time of such selection the
defendant was or w;as not an infant or a married
woman not having obtained a decree for judicial
separation binding according to the laws in force in
Victoria or a person not domiciled in Victoria or a
trustee for such infant or married woman as afore-
said or person not so domiciled or whether he was
or was not the first selector in point of time or
agent for any other person and the decision of
the majority of them shall be final and conclusive.
Consequences of Sheriff’s Decisions.
XXXII. The sheriff shall notify to the Board of
Land and Works such decision and if the finding he
for the defendant the Crown grant of the disputed
allotment shall forthwith issue to him and if the
finding be for the plaintiff such plaintiff shall be
taken to he the selector of the allotment in the same
manner as if on the day on which the decision was
given he had selected the same in the usual manner
and unless the Governor specially remit the forfei-
ture the defendant shall forfeit the purchase money
or rent or any part thereof paid by him for such
allotment.
Occupation Licensees to be Selectors under this Act,
or to Bemain in Possession on the Conditions of
his License.
XXXIII. When at the time of the passing of this
Act any person holds or has been promised a license
in accordance with the terms of notices published
in the Government Gazette and dated respectively the
sixteenth of May and the twenty-eighth of August
One thousand eight hundred and sixty-one or a cer-
tificate in lieu of such license from the Board of
Land and Works to reside upon and cultivate any
Crown land if the conditions of the license or certi-
ficate published in those numbers of the Government
Gazette specified in the fifth schedule to this Act
have been duly fulfilled and if application be made
within twelve months after the commencement of
this Act every such person shall he entitled with the
consent of the Board of Land and Works at his
option either to select the land described or intended
to be described in such license or certificate if he
hold under such first mentioned license at such a
price as the Board of Land and Works may deter-
mine upon not exceeding the average upset price
lawfully fixed for the sale of lands by auction in the
district within which the lands so occupied are
situate and if he hold under such last mentioned
license in the same manner and upon the same terms
as if such land was an allotment of land in an agri-
cultural area within the meaning of this Act and as
if lie were declared the selector and any sum paid
as license fee for the said land shall be credited
as part of the purchase money of the same or to
remain in possession thereof for the period and
upon the conditions specified in such license or
certificate and every such license or certificate shall
be taken to be valid and effectual in law.
Extension of Bight of Selection to Occupation Licensees
XXXIY. When any land occupied under any
license or certificate issued or granted in accordance
with tne notice published in the Government Gazette
dated the sixteenth of May One thousand eight
hundred and sixty-one is contained within any allot-
ment of land already surveyed by the Government
it only one _ such license or certificate has been
granted or issued upon such surveyed allotment snch
licensee or holder of certificate shall be entitled with
the consent of the Board of Land and Works to pur-
chase within twelve months after the passing of this
Act the whole allotment and where two or more
such licenses or certificates have been granted or
issued in respect to any surveyed allotment as afore-
said such allotment may be as nearly as practicable
equally subdivided in such manner that each licen-
see or holder of certificate shall be entitled with the
consent of the said_ Board of Land and Works to


purchase the subdivision containing the land held
by him under such license or certificate But where
a license or certificate as aforesaid has been granted
or issued in respect to any unsurveyed lands if the
Board of Land and Works consent thereto the licen-
see or holder of certificate of such land shall be en-
titled to purchase within the period aforesaid any
adjacent unoccupied Crown land within an agricul-
tural area Provided that every such purchase shall
be made upon the same terms and in the same man-
ner as is directed in the last preceding section of
this Act in respect to licensees or holders of certifi-
cates under the notice as aforesaid of the said six-
teenth day of May and provided also that no such
licensee or holder of a certificate shall select in res-
pect to such license or certificate more than one
hundred and eighty acres Provided also that when
any such land so held under license or certificate of
the sixteenth of May aforesaid is contained within
the lands delineated upon the map hereinbefore
mentioned the holder of such license or certificate
shall notwithstanding anything hereinbefore con-
tained be entitled to select such land and the exten-
sion of the same authorised by this clause on the
same terms and conditions as hereinbefore provided
in the case of persons holding certificates or licenses
obtained in accordance with the terms of the notice
published in the Government Gazette and dated the
twenty-eighth day of August One thousand eight
hundred and sixty-one.
Readjustment of boundaries under occupation License.
XXXV- When any land occupied under any such
license or certificate as aforesaid is not surveyed in
the manner and form Avhich the regulations under
which such license or certificate was issued prescribe
or where the boundaries of such land are found not
to conform to the design of subdivision adopted for
the survey of the block comprising such land such
irregularity of survey shall not in any way prejudice
the right of the licensee but the Board of Land and
Works may readjust the boundaries of such land so
that the same may conform as nearly as may be in
size and shape to the size and shape prescribed by
the regulations aforesaid.
Obligations of Selector.
XXXVI. Every selector of an allotment as afore-
said within one year after he becomes a selector shall
cultivate at least one acre out of every ten acres
thereof or shall erect thereon a habitable dwelling
or shall enclose such allotment with a substantial
fence.
Lessees under Act No. 117 may Surrender and Keceive
Leases under this Act.
XXXVII. Every person who under the pro-
visions of the Act of the Parliament of Victoria
numbered CXVII. has been declared the selector of
a subdivision of an allotment at the price of one
pound for every acre contained in such subdivision
and is the holder of a lease of the remaining subdi-
vision of such allotment shall be entitled at any
time within twelve months after the passing of this
Act to surrender such lease and to receive in lieu
thereof a lease under the provisions of this Act of
the land comprised in such first-mentioned lease for
the term of eight years from the date of such sur-
render and at the same rate and containing the same
covenants and conditions and with the same right
of pre-emption as if he had been the selector of an
allotment under this Act.
Assisted Immigration.
XXXVIII. There shall be appropriated to the
purposes of assisted immigration into Victoria in
every year after the thirtv-first of December One
thousand eight hundred and sixty-two one-fourth of
the net moneys received in such year from the sale
or the leasing of land or from licenses for the use
thereof under this Act and the Governor in Council
may from time to time make regulations for pro-
moting and directing such immigration which regu-
lations shall he first submitted to both Houses of
Parliament hut the division of the said moneys shall
be made in such a manner that the immigrants shall
be selected during the first nine months of the year
from England Scotland Ireland and Wales in pro-
portion to the population of such countries respec-
tively according to the last Census for the time
being
2.—Sale of Land by Auction and Valuation.
What Lands Sold by Auction.
XXXIX. All lands not delineated in the map
hereinbefore mentioned and reserved for proclama-
tion in agricultural areas shall be sold subject to
such covenants conditions exceptions and reserva-
tions as the Governor in Council may direct in fee
simple by public auction at an upset price of one
pound for each acre or at such higher upset price as
the Governor in Council may direct and no such
lands shall be sold otherwise except as hereinafter
provided.
Quarterly Auction and Notice thereof.
XL. Once at the least in every quarter of the year
there shall be holden one or more public sales by
auction of lands in fee simple and any person au-
thorised by the said board may hold such sales
without having an auctioneer’s license or incurring
on that account any penalty and notice of every
such sale shall be given in the Government Gazette
within three months and before one month thereof
and every such notice shall declare with all practi-
cable precision the time and place at which such
auction will be held and the lands to be offered for
sale thereat and the lots in which the same will be
offered and the upset price for each lot and the
amount of the deposit required.
Conditions of Sale at Auction of Lands.
XLI. It shall be a condition of sale at every such
auction that the purchaser pay at the time of the
sale a deposit of such amount as the Board of Land
and Works may from time to time require but in no
case less than twenty-five per cent, of the whole
price and further pay the residue of the price within
one mouth next after the time of such sale by auc-
tion and on failure of such payment the deposit shall
be forfeited and the contract shall thereupon be
void.


Upset Price of Lands Unsold at Auction to be Reduced.
XLII. When any lands have been put up to auc-
tion and remain unsold thereat the Governor in
Council may direct that such lands continue to be
set up to auction at any reduced price not less than
one pound per acre and until such direction be given
all such lands shall be open for sale to the first appli-
cant at the upset price or in case of an increased
price having been offered for the same then at the
highest price which shall have been offered.
Closing and Alienation of Unnecessary Roads,
XLIII. Where a road adjoins any purchased land
and is required for access to such lands only
and not otherwise for public use or convenience if
the owner of such land make application to close
such road and if the local authority lawfully ap-
pointed for the management of the roads of the dis-
trict or in case there be no such local authority the
Board of Land and Works approve thereof and if
notice be given in the Government Gazette and in the
local newspapers if any of such application and if an
adequate money consideration according to the de-
termination of an appraiser appointed by the said
board be paid for the same the Governor in Council
at any period not less than six months after the first
publication of such notice may order such road to
be closed and the Governor may grant in fee the soil
of the road so closed to the owner of such adjoining
land.
Detached Strips of Land may be Sold at a Valuation.
XLIV. Where in the opinion of the Governor in
Council there is no convenient access to any portion
of Crown lands or where any such portion is insuffi-
cient in area for sale under this Act or lies be-
tween and adjoins any land (alienated before the
commencement of this Act) and any highway which
forms or should form the only convenient approach
to such land or where buildings erected on lands
alienated before the commencement of this Act
encroach upon any portion of Crown lands or where
any other case of a like nature arises the Governor
may grant in fee such portion of Crown lands not
exceeding five acres to the owner of such adjacent
lands at a price determined by an appraiser ap-
pointed by the Board of Land and Works.
Declaration to be made by Appraiser.
XLV. Before any appraiser enters into the con-
sideration of any matters referred to him under
this Act he shall in presence of a justice of the
peace make and subscribe the following declaration
that is to say—
“ I do solemnly and sincerely
declare that I have no interest either directly or
indirectly in the matters in question and that I
will faithfully and honestly and to the best of
my skill and ability make any appraisement
and valuation required of me under the pro-
vision of an Act intituled ‘ The Land Act
1862.’ ”
Governor may Sell or Withhold from Sale Lands pre-
viously Reserved or Offered.
XLVI Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore
contained the Governor in Council may withdraw
from sale as being auriferous or mineral or as having
a water frontage or as being in other respects im-
proper either at that time or generally to be sold any
land about to be selected rented or purchased.
Part 111 —Leases and Licenses for Other
than Agricultural or Pastoral Purposes.
Leases for Novel Industrial Enterprises.
XLVII. When any person desires to make vine-
yards or oliveyards or mulberry or hop plantations
or permanently to establish in Victoria any useful
plant or industrial enterprise or process which was
previously unknown or not generally known and
used therein if he make application in a form pre-
scribed by the Governor in Council for a lease of
any Crown lands required for such purpose and if
notice of such application and of the lands to be
demised and the purposes for which such demise is
sought be given for four consecutive weeks in the
Government, Gazette the Governor may grant to
such person a lease of such Crown lands not exceed-
ing thirty acres for any term not exceeding thirty
years from the date thereof but not more than one
hundred such leases shall be issued in one year and
the conditions of every such lease shall within four-
teen days after the execution thereof be laid before
both Houses of Parliament if Parliament be then
sitting or if Parliament be not then sitting within
fourteen days after the next meeting thereof.
Pre-emption granted to the Lessee.
XLVIII. Upon the expiration of any lease granted
under the provisions of the next preceding section
or at any time during the currency of such lease not
less than five years from the commencement thereof
if the convenants and conditions' thereof have been
fulfilled and if payment be made to Her Majesty at
the rate of one pound for each acre comprised in
such lease every such lessee his heirs or assigns shall
be entitled to receive a grant in fee simple of the land
so leased.
Mining Leases.
XLIX. When any person desires to mine upon
any Crown lands for any metal or mineral except
gold if he apply for a lease of such lands and if
notice of such application and of the lands sought to
be demised and the purposes for which they are so
sought be given for four consecutive weeks in the
Government Gazette the Governor may grant to such
person a lease of such Crown lands on or below or
both on and below the surface not exceeding six
hundred and forty acres for a term not exceeding
thirty years from the date of such demise.
Leases for other Purposes.
L. The Governor may grant leases of any Crown
land not exceeding (except in the case of leases for
guano or other manure) three acres for a term not
exceeding seven years from the date thereof and at
a yearly rent of not less than five pounds for any of
the following purposes that is to say—
1. For obtaining and removing therefrom guano
or other manure


2. For obtaining and removing therefrom stone
or earth
3. For sites of inns stores smithies bakeries
or similar buildings in thinly populated
districts
4. For sites of bsthing houses bathing places
bridges ferries toll or punt houses
5. For sites o tanneries or factories or saw or
paper mills
6. For sites of quays and landing places or for
sites for the depositing of materials
7. For the working of mineral springs
8. For sites for ship and boat-building or
repairing
9. For the manufacture of salt
Conditions of Leases.
LI. Every lease so granted as aforesaid shall be
subject to such covenants and conditions and to the
payment of such rent or royalty as the Governor in
Council thinks fit to impose and shall contain a con-
dition that if the lessee his executors administrators
or assigns fail at any time during the term to use
the demised land bond fide for the purposes for which
it has been demised the lease shall be voidable.
How Priority of Application for Leases to be Deter-
mined.
LII. Where several persons apply for a lease of
the same land if one of them be the first discoverer in
cases under the forty-ninth section of this Act of the
metal or mineral in that locality or the first per-
son who has actually introduced into Victoria for
commercial purposes the plant enterprise or process
in respect of which the application is made and if
the fact of such discovery or introduction be
established to the satisfaction of the Board of Land
and Works and if such discovery or introduction
have taken place within six months of the date of
such application such person shall receive such
lease but if there be no such person and in
all other applications for leases the first applicant
shall have the preference and in doubtful cases the
priority of application shall be determined by
lot in such manner as the Board of Land and
Works may direct.
Purposes for which Licenses may be issued.
LIII. The Governor or any person duly authorised
by him in that behalf may from time to time grant
to any applicant a license to enter upon any Crown
lands not under lease for any of the following pur-
poses (that is to say)—
1. To search for any metal or mineral except
gold
2. To cut and construct upon and through the
land described in such license or to deepen
widen clean repair or otherwise improve
any race drain dam or reservoir
3. To cut dig and take away any live or dead
timber bark gravel stone limestone salt
guano shell seaweed sand loam brick or
other earth
4. To occupy the site of fishermen’s residences
and drying grounds
5. To occupy the sites of fellmongering
establishments slaughter-houses brick or
lime kilns
6. To erect pumps
7. To collect ballast
8. Or for any of the purposes for which leases
may he granted under the fiftieth section
of this Act.
Conditions of Licenses.
LIV. Every such license shall hear date of the day
on which it is issued and shall continue in force for
a period not exceeding one year from such date and
shall be subject to such restrictions limitations and
conditions and to the payment of such reasonable
fee as the Governor in Council by general regula-
tions published in the Government Gazette think fit
to impose.
Holder of Miners’ Eight may Cut Timber, &c.
LY. It shall be lawful for the holder of any
miner’s right business license or carriers’license to
cut and remove from any Crown lands not declared
to be either temporarily or permanently reserved
any live or dead timber except Blackwood or strip
bark from any tree growing thereon or remove any
stone or gravel therefrom for building for himself
any place of residence or of business or for mining
purposes or for fuel or otherwise for his personal
use.
Water Easements Eeserved on Purchased Land.
LYI. When at the time of any conveyance under
this Act or the Act of the Parliament of Victoria
numbered CXVII. any race drain dam or reservoir
flows through or over or is upon the land so conveyed
although no reservation or exception thereof be con-
tained in the Crown grant of such land no person
unless specially authorised thereto by the Board of
Land and Works shall obstruct or interfere there-
with.
Licenses for such Easemeuts.
LVII. The Board of Land and Works may grant
licenses in respect to such last mentioned race drain
dam or reservoir in the same manner as if the same
were situated on Crown lands and the licensee may
by the authority thereof and for the purposes therein
expressed enter upon the land so conveyed but such
licensee shall make compensation to the owner of
such land for any damage occasioned by such entry.
Amount of Compensation to be Determined by
Valuators.
LVIII. For the purpose of determining the amount
of such compensation some competent person shall
be appointed by the said board and another shall be
appointed by the owner of such land or his agent
and a- third shall be appointed by the person to
whom such license has been granted and it shall be
the duty of such three valuators or of any two of
them to determine the amount of such compensation
and such amount when so determined may be re-
covered in a summary way before any two justices.


Proceedings on Neglect to Appoint a Valuator.
LIX. Upon any such reference as last aforesaid
each party on the request of the other shall appoint
a valuator by delivering to him an appointment
signed by such party or his agent and if for one
month after notice by one party (who has duly ap
pointed a valuator) to the other party stating sue 1
request and accompanied by a copy of such appoint
ment the party to whom notice is given fail to ap
point a valuator the valuator appointed by the part)
giving the notice shall be deemed to. be appointee
by and shall act alone on behalf of both parties anc
the valuation of any valuator or valuators appointee
in pursuance of this Act shall be binding final anc
conclusive to all intents and purposes whatsoever.
Death of Valuator.
LX. If before such determination as aforesaic
any valuator die or refuse or become incapable to
act the person by whom such valuator was appointee
shall appoint in like manner another in his stead anc
if such party fail so to do for the space of fourteen
days after notice from the other party in that behalf
the valuator appointed by the party giving the notice
may proceed alone ex parte and every valuator so
appointed shall have the same powers and authorities
as were vested in the valuator in whose stead the
appointment is made.
Production of Documents.
; LXI. Any appraiser or arbitrator appointed by
virtue of this Act may require the production of sucl
documents in the possession or power of either party
as he may think necessary for determining the
matters referred and may examine the parties anc
other persons as witnesses on oath.
Governor may prohibit Felling Timber, &c.
LXII. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore
contained the Governor in Council may by pro-
clamation declare that no person although he be
duly licensed or otherwise authorised shall cut or
remove live or dead timber or bark or stone or gravel
from such portions of Crown lands as are named in
such proclamation or shall exercise on any such por-
tions the powers or any of them conferred by any
license granted under the authority of the third part
of this Act.
Part IV.—Commons.
Saving of Existing Commons.
LXIII. Nothing in this Act contained shall affect
except as expressly herein provided any commons
proclaimed under the Act of the Parliament of
Victoria No. CXVII. or the rights of any person
entitled under the authority of the said Act to de-
pasture his horses or cattle upon any such common
from and after the passing of this Act.
Interpretation Clause.
LXIV. In the following sections of this Act the
following expressions shall have the meanings here-
inafter assigned to them that is to say—
The word “cattle” shall mean and include
horses mares geldings colts fillies asses mules
cows oxen heifers steers calves and shall apply
to. any one or more animal or animals of the
said several kinds.
The words “ gold field” shall mean those parts
of the Crown lands upon which any persons are
actually engaged in mining for gold and which
the Governor in Council shall by metes and
hounds proclaim to he a gold field.
Five Classes of Commons under this Act.
LXY. When any Crown land remains unsold in
or within five miles of any municipal district or
upon or within five miles of any gold field or in or
within five miles of any town not contained in any
municipal district or within any agricultural area
of which at least one-fourth part has been selected
the Governor in Council may proclaim such land to
he a municipal common or a gold fields common or
a town common or a farmers’ common respectively
as the case may be.
Temporary Common,
LXVI. When one-eighth part of any agricultural
area has been selected as aforesaid or when any
holders of miners’ rights not less than fifty in num-
ber are mining on any auriferous land not proclaimed
as a gold field the Governor in Council may proclaim
any unselected portion of such agricultural area not
exceeding twice the quantity so selected or any
Crown lands not distant more than half-a-mile from
such auriferous lands to be a temporary common for
the respective use of such selectors or of such holders
of miners’ rights and of the holders of business
licenses resident in the locality where such mining
is being carried on and where no temporary common
for the last mentioned purposes has been so pro-
claimed every such holder of a miner’s right or of
business license may depasture upon any land which
might be included in such temporary common any
number of cattle not exceeding one team.
Persons Entitled to Commonage.
LXVII. All householders of any municipal dis-
trict and all holders of miners’ rights and of busi-
ness licenses and all householders of any town and
all selectors of any land under this Act their heirs
or assigns who are resident on the land so selected
shall be entitled subject to the regulations herein-
after mentioned and free from all charges save the
fee imposed by such regulations to depasture their
cattle upon any common appropriated to them
respectively and no other person except as herein
expressly provided shall depasture any animals
thereon.
Managers of Commons.
LXVIII. Every common as aforesaid shall be
governed by managers elected or appointed as here-
inafter provided and all such managers shall be
taken to have in respect of such common the
authority of Crown Lands Commissioner under this
Act.


Election of Managers in Municipal and Gold Fields
Commons.
LXIX. The municipal council of any municipal
district within or in the vicinity of which any town
common within the meaning, of the Act of the
Parliament of Yictoria numbered CXVII. or any
municipal common is situated or the mining board
of the mining district within which any gold field
common is situated shall elect annually in such
manner as they may respectively by bye-laws
prescribe three persons to be managers of such town or
municipal or gold fields common respectively as the
case may be and may at any time remove any one or
more of such managers and elect others in their
stead.
Appointment of Managers in Town and Farmers’
Commons.
LXX. Until any town having a town common es-
tablished under this Act become a municipal district
or part of a municipal district and until farmers’
commons or temporary commons or farmers’ common
within the meaning of the Act of the Parliament of
Victoria numbered CXVII. be placed under such
other control as the Legislature may provide the
Board of Land and Works may appoint and remove
the managers of any such town common or farmers’ 1
common or temporary common respectively.
Amalgamation of Commons.
LXXI, Where there are two or more neighbour-
ing commons the Governor in Council may proclaim
that the same shall be a common under the name of
the “ United Town and Gold Pield [or as the case
may be] Common of ” for the
benefit of all persons entitled to commonage on
either.
Management of United Common.
LXXII. In the case of any united common all the
managers taken together of the separate commons
therein included or a majority of such managers shall
be the managers of such united common.
Managers to make Regulations for Commons.
LXXIII. Such managers shall not receive any re-
muneration whatever for their services and shall
have the exclusive charge of the common in respect
of which they have been elected and shall from time
to time make rules for the proper management
thereof and for determining the number of cattle
which .each person entitled to commonage may de-
pasture thereon and the fees payable in respect
hereof (which shall be recoverable in a summary
way before some justice] and shall keep a registry
of such cattle and shall appoint herdsmen and shall
pay such herdsmen out of such fees and the residue
of such fees it any shall be applied to such public
purposes for the benefit of the town district gold
field or agricultural area as the duly constituted
local authorities if any or if no such local authority
exist as the Board of Land and Works shall direct
and all such rules as soon as they are made and all
accounts of receipts and disbursements once in every
year w T hen audited in such manner as the local au-
thorities or the Board of Land and Works may di-
rect shall be published in the Government Gazette or
some newspaper circulating in the locality.
Special License to Dairymen.
LXXIV. The managers of any gold fields com-
mon or united town and gold fields common may
grant to any person upon payment of such sum as
shall be determined by them a special license to be
called a “ Dairyman’s License” to depasture on any
such common the number of cattle specified in such
license for dairy purposes only and the holder of
such license may depasture such cattle on such com-
mon accordingly.
Special License to Butchers.
LXXV. The managers of any town or gold field
or united town and gold field common may grant to
butchers or other persons engaged in the trade of
slaughtering special licenses to depasture on any
such common any number of horned cattle sheep or
swine specified in such license and may appoint the
fees payable for the same and the holders of such
license may depasture such animals on such common
accordingly.
Managers may permit Commoners to Depasture
Sheep.
LXXYI. It shall be lawful for the managers of
farmers’ commons to permit the commoners to de-
pasture sheep thereon and to set apart if they think
fit a special portion of such commons on which
such sheep may be depastured.
Governor may Increase or Diminish Commons.
LXXVII. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the sale by auction or selection or the leasing under
this Act of any land comprised in any common pro-
claimed or subject to licenses granted as aforesaid
before or after the passing of this Act and the
Governor in Council may at any time increase
diminish alter or abolish any such common but no
common except in the case of farmers’ commons as
hereinbefore provided shall be greater than may be
sufficient to enable each person entitled to common-
age thereon to depasture four head of cattle.
Privileges ofTravellers.
LXXVIII. Notwithstanding anything herein con-
tained every traveller may while he is travelling de-
pasture for any period not exceeding twenty-four
hours his cattle and sheep unless the same be affected
with any contagious or infectious disease upon any
unsold Crown lands, within one quarter of a mile on
either side of any road or track commonly used as a
thoroughfare or though not previously so used lead-
ing to any auriferous Crown lands on which persons
are actually engaged in mining for gold and to which
no road has been proclaimed whether such lands be
or be not comprised in any common.
Privileges of Public Officers on Duty and of Holders
of Miners’ Rights.
LXXIX. Where any person is employed by the
Board of Land and Works or is otherwise engaged
in any public service or when any holder of a miner’s


right is actually engaged in searching upon Crown
lands for gold if any such person or holder have
with him in pursuance and for the purposes of bis
duty or in the reasonable prosecution of such search
any cattle he may during the continuance of such
employment or service depasture all such cattle
upon any Crown lands not under lease whether
commonable or otherwise and may encamp
thereon.
Part V.—Licenses for Pastoral Occupation.
I.—Existing Runs.
Yearly Licenses shall be Issued.
To confer no greater Privileges than Previous
Pastoral Licenses.
LXXX. The Governor shall in the same manner
as heretofore issue to the persons who shall at the
time of the passing of this Act be in the licensed
occupation of runs for pastoral purposes and the exe-
cutors administrators and assigns of such persons
yearly licenses to occupy such runs for pastoral pur-
poses but no such license heretofore or hereafter to
be issued shall be deemed to prevent such run or any
part thereof from being sold or leased proclaimed a
common or occupied by virtue of any miner’s right
or license for other than pastoral purposes or from
being otherwise dealt with under the authority of
this or any other Act now in force or to confer any
greater privilege upon the person to whom the same
shall be issued than licenses to occupy for pastoral
purposes have hitherto conferred Provided that no
such yearly license shall be dated after the first day
of January One thousand eight hundred and seventy
or be in force after the thirty-first day of December
of that year.
First Half-yearly Instalment to be Paid; afterwards
Rent Substituted.
LXXXI. The half-yearly instalment of the assess-
ment on the stock depastured on the Crown lands
comprised in such runs which by virtue of the Act
of the Parliament of Victoria numbered LXXIX. will
become payable on or before the last day of June
in the present year shall be paid in the same man-
ner as in former years but the second instalment shall
not be paid but in lieu thereof a rent shall be paid as
hereinafter provided.
License Fees Payable only during 1862.
LXXXII. The license fees shall be paid during
the present year at the same rate and in the same
manner as heretofore and shall not be payable after-
wards.
Rent to be according to Grazing Capabilities as
determined by the Board of Land and Works or
Arbitratoi’s as the case may be.
LXXXIiI. The rent to be paid by every such
licensee for his run shall be at the rate of eight-
pence for every sheep or two shillings for every head
of cattle which it shall be determined to be capable
of carrying by the Board of Land and Works or
where the determination of such board shall be dis-
puted by the arbitrators hereinafter n e.itioned.
Principle upon which the Board is to determine the
Grazing Capabilities of Runs.
Deductions may be made in respect of Inferior Class.
LXXXIV. In determining such capability the
said board shall proceed as follows It shall divide
all runs into four classes according to their grazing
capabilities each class including those runs which
shall be estimated to he capable of carrying a certain
number of sheep or cattle for every hundred acres
comprised therein It shall ascertain as accurately
as possible the number of acres comprised in each
run and according to its class and area shall deter-
mine how many sheep or cattle it is capable of
carrying but in arriving at such determination the
said board may nevertheless make a deduction from
the number of sheep or cattle which a run would
according to the class in which it shall be ranked be
determined to be capable of carrying in respect of any
land comprised in such run which may be of such
inferior quality that it would be ranked in a class
lower than that in which the run as a whole is ranked
or which may not be available for pastoral purposes.
Runs may be divided by the Board in order to
facilitate the ascertainment of the amount of
rent.
LXXXY. Where different parts of a run vary
materially in quality the said board may if it think
fit divide such run into two or more runs and shall
in such case place the same in their proper classes
and shall determine the grazing capabilities of each
such run into which the original run shall have been
so divided and a separate license shall in such case
be issued for each such run.
Rent not to be less than the amount of assessment,
except where part of a Run has been Sold, &c.
LXXXYI. In no case shall a run to be determined
be capable of carrying a smaller quantity of stock
than the quantity which was depastured thereon in
the year One thousand eight hundred and sixty-one
according to the return delivered to the commissioner
of the district in compliance with the said Act num-
bered LXXIX. unless the grazing capabilities of
such run shall since such delivery have been
diminished in consequence of a portion thereof
having been sold or leased or proclaimed a common
or from some other such cause.
Rents as determined by the Board to be inserted
in the “ Government Gazette ” and to be con-
clusive unless appealed against.
LXXXVII. When the said board shall have
determined the grazing capabilities of the runs in
any of the districts into which the colony has been
heretofore divided in connection with the occupa-
tion thereof for pastoral purposes it shall cause to be
inserted in the Government Gazette a notice of the
amount of rent to be paid in respect of each run in
such district in the form contained in the seventh
schedule hereto and the amount therein mentioned
shall be binding and conclusive upon every occupier
of land for pastoral purposes unless he or his agent


shall within two months after such publication send
a notice to the said board intimating his intention to
appeal against its determination as to the amount of
rent to be paid in respect of his run and naming the
person whom he appoints to be one of the three
arbitrators hereinafter mentioned and shall at the
time of bis giving such notice deposit the sum of
fifty pounds as a security to the said board for any
costs incurred by it in connection with such appeal.
Appeal to be heard by Arbitrators,
LXXXVIII. Every such appeal shall be decided
by three arbitrators or the majority of them one of
such arbitrators to be appointed by the said board
the second by the person appealing or his agent and
the third by the judge of the county court holden
nearest to the principal building on the run.
How Arbitrators appointed.
LXXXIX. Such arbitrators shall have all the
powers which by any Act now in force can be exer-
cised by any arbitrator appointed by a rule of court
including the power of examining witnesses upon
oath.
Arbitrators to take an oath.
XC. Every such arbitrator shall previously to
entering upon his duties take and subscribe before
some justice of the peace for the colony or some
part thereof the oath contained in the eighth Schedule
hereto.
Amount of Rent.
XCI. Such arbitrators or a majority of them shall
determine the amount of rent to be paid in respect
of the run according to its grazing capabilities and
shall have power to fix the rent at a higher or lower
amount than that fixed by the board and the amount
so determined shall be the rent to be paid in respect
thereof and every such determination shall be made
within four months after such publication in the
Government Gazette as hereinbefore mentioned other-
wise the same shall be of no effect.
Successful Party to be entitled to Costs.
XCII. The arbitrators shall award that the
unsuccessful party shall pay to the other party the
reasonable costs attending such appeal and also the
costs of the arbitrators but such last mentioned costs
shall not exceed the sum of three pounds and three
shillings for every day occupied by each arbitrator
in going to and returning from the run and in
inspecting the same and examining witnesses and in
no case shall the costs to be paid to the arbitrators
exceed thirty pounds.
Except where the Rent is Reduced only one-tenth.
XCIII. If the amount of rent determined by the
arbitrators shall be less than that determined by the
said board by one-tenth only the party appealing
shall not be entitled to recover any costs from the
said board.
Deposit to be Applied in Payment of Costs.
XCIY. If the said board be successful it shall be
entitled to apply the deposit so to be paid as afore-
said towards satisfaction of it* costs.
Death, &c„ of Arbitrator.
XCV. If before the making of such determination
as aforesaid any arbitrator die or refuse or become
incapable to act the party or judge by whom such
arbitrator was appointed as the case may be shall
appoint another in his stead and if such party fail to
do so for the space of fourteen days after notice from
the other party in that behalf such other party may
appoint an arbitrator in his stead and every arbi-
trator so appointed shall have the same powers and
authorities as were vested in the arbitrator in whose
stead such appointment shall have been made.
The Board may within One Year Increase the Rent
of any Run
XCVI. If on proper representation the said board
shall have reason to believe that the amount
originally determined as the rent to be paid in
respect of any run or runs was fixed at too low
an amount it shall be lawful for the said board at
any time within twelve months after such determina-
tion to increase the amount of such rent Provided
always that notice of the fact of such increase having
been made shall within one month thereafter be
inserted in the Government Gazette and that a copy
of such notice be posted to the occupier of such run
in a letter addressed to him at such run.
Appeal against Increase
XCVII. Such occupier may appeal against the
determination of the board in making such increase
and such appeal shall be decided in the same manner
and such decision shall have the same consequences
in all respects as is hereinbefore provided with regard
to an appeal from the original determination of the
board as to the amount of rent to be paid.
2.—New Runs.
Unoccupied Country and Forfeited Rims may be
Sold by Auction,
XCVIIT. All Crown land which at the time of the
passing of this Act shall not be occupied by virtue of
any lease license or other authority and all runs which
may be forfeited or surrendered under the provisions
of this Act may if the Governor in Council shall see
fit be exposed to auction in runs of such extent as
he shall approve provided that no such run shall be
of a larger extent than will be sufficient according
to the estimate of the said board to carry all the year
round five thousand sheep or one thousand two
hundred and fifty head of cattle.
Amount of Rent to be Fixed and Notice of Sale to
be Given.
XCIX. Before any run shall be so exposed the
said board shall determine the amount of rent to be
paid for the same and notice of such auction shall
be given in the same manner in all respects as is
hereinbefore enacted with regard to land about to
be sold by auction in fee simple.
Highest Bidder to be Entitled to License.
C. The person who shall bid the highest sum by
way of premium for any such run shall be entitled


to receive a license to occupy the same for pastoral
purposes for any period not exceeding fourteen years
provided he shall pay such sum at the time of such
auction and in default of such payment the run shall
be forthwith again put up to auction.
If no Bidder Rent to be Reduced and Run again
Exposed to Auction.
CL If there shall he no bidders at such auction the
said board may reduce the amount of rent and the
run shall be again exposed to auction after notice of
the same shall have been given in manner herein-
before provided and so on from time to time until
the said run shall be sold.
Reserves for Sale on New Runs.
CII. It shall be lawful for the Governor in
Council from time to time during the period any
such license shall be in force to order that one or
more reserves for sale shall be made on any run
exposed to auction so that the extent of such
reserves shall not in the whole exceed one-fourtli of
the area of the run and no part of such reserves
shall be sold until after three months’ notice in that
behalf shall have been given to the licensee and no
part of such run not situated within such reserves
shall be sold during the period for which the license
to occupy the same has been granted but nothing
herein contained shall be deemed to prevent such
run or any part thereof from being leased or occupied
by virtue of any miner’s right or license for other
than pastoral purposes.
Runs taken up during 1860 and 1861 may be Surren-
dered and New Licenses Issued,
CIII. Any person who during the years one
thousand eight hundred and sixty or one thousand
eight hundred and sixty-one received a license to
occupy for pastoral purposes any run which had not
been previously occupied under any such license or
the license for which had been forfeited may at any
time within twelve months after the passing of this
Act surrender such run and every such person shall
upon such surrender be entitled to receive a license
to occupy such portion of such run not exceeding
an extent sufficient according to the estimate of the
said board to carry all the year round five thousand
sheep or one thousand two hundred and fifty head of
cattle at a rent to be determined by the said board
according to the grazing capabilities of such portion
and every such license may be granted for the same
period and the same provisions shall be applicable
to the run occupied by virtue thereof as if such run
was a run exposed to auction under the powers here-
inbefore contained Provided that the rent fixed
by such board may be appealed against by such
person and such appeal shall be decided in the same
manner and shall have the same consequences in all
respects as hereinbefore provided with regard to
existing runs.
3.—General Provisions as to Buns.
Licensee not to Cultivate except for Consumption
on the Run.
CIY. Every licensed occupier of a run for pastoral
purposes may cultivate so much of the run as may
be necessary to provide such grain hay vegetables or
fruit as may be required for the use and supply of
his family and establishment but not for the purposes
of sale or barter and any licensee making such sale
or barter shall be liable for every such offence
to forfeit a penalty of not less than ten hor more
than fifty pounds.
Licensee may make Improvements and Dig Stone
and Cut Timber for domestic use.
CV. Every such occupier may erect any buildings
yards or fences and make such reservoirs for water
and other improvements on the run as shall be
necessary for the residence of himself his family and
servants or for the more profitable occupation of
such run for pastoral purposes but shall not be
allowed any compensation for the same except
as hereinafter provided and may dig stone or cut
such timber as may be required for domestic uses
for firebote fencing yards or other such purposes.
Runs may be divided by the occupiers.
CYI. The occupier of any run may with the
sanction of the said board and upon payment of
a fee of ten pounds for every subdivision divide
such run and the said board shall determine the
amount of rent to be paid in respect of each sub-
division of the original run so that the rent to be
paid for the whole of such subdivisions shall not
be less than the rent paid for the run when
undivided and the Governor shall issue licenses
authorising the occupation for pastoral purposes of
each run into which the original run shall have been
so divided at the rent so determined by the said board
as last aforesaid.
License to Confer a Chattel Interest.
CVII. The interest in a run held under a license
to occupy for pastoral purposes shall be deemed to
be a chattel interest for all purposes.
Interest may be Transferred.
CVIII. Such interest may be transferred by writ-
ing attested by a justice and in such form (if any)
as may be prescribed by the regulations hereinafter
mentioned and the person to whom such interest
shall be transferred shall be entitled upon payment
of a fee of one pound to receive a license to occupy
for pastoral purposes Provided also that the per-
son making such transfer shall be liable for the
instalment of rent which shall become due next after
such transfer.
Provisions in case part of a Run shall be Sold, &c.
CIX. In case the value of any run shall be
diminished by reason of any portion thereof being
sold leased proclaimed a common or otherwise ren-
dered unavailable for the purposes of pastorai occu-
pation the said board shall at the request of the
occupier or his agent and upon payment of a fee of
five pounds determine the amount of rent to be
paid in future in respect of such run and such occu-
pier may appeal against such determination and such
appeal shall be decided in the same manner and such
decision shall have the same consequences in all
respects as is hereinbefore provided with regard to


an appeal from the original determination of the
said board as to the amount of rent to be paid.
Compensation for certain Improvements hereafter
to be effected on Runs not within Agricultural
Areas.
CX. If the occupier of any run not being part of
the lands delineated on the map hereinbefore men-
tioned and reserved for proclamation in agricul-
tural areas shall after the passing of this Act desire
to erect any substantial fence or to make any per-
manent reservoir of water on such run he may apply
to the said board for permission so to do and the
said board if they are of opinion that such erec-
tion or making will conduce to the more profit-
able occupation of the run for pastoral purposes
may grant such application and cause the same
to be registered in a book to be kept for the
purpose and such occupier may within three
months after the completion of such fence of
reservoir make before a justice a declaration in the
form or to the effect contained in the ninth schedule
hereto and transmit the same to the said board
and in case any portion of the run on which such
fence or reservoir or any part thereof shall be
situated shall be thereafter proclaimed a common or
a reserve for any public purpose whatsoever or be
leased under this Act he shall be entitled to receive
out of the public revenue or if such portion shall
be sold out of the purchase money as hereinafter
provided the value of such fence or reservoir at
the time such portion of the run shall be so pro-
claimed or shall be sold or leased to be fixed by
the said board on the principle following—that is
to say—if less than one year has elapsed since the
erection or making of such fence or reservoir the
value shall be fixed at nine-tenths of the fair and
reasonable cost of erecting or making the same
if more than one year and less than two
years at eight-tenths of such cost and so on
deducting one-tenth of such cost for every year
which has elapsed since such erection or making
and in case such occupier shall be dissatisfied with
the amount at which the said board shall fix the
value of such fence or reservoir the value of such
fence or reservoir shall be determined by some
appraiser to be appointed by the judge of the
county court holden nearest to the portion of the
run where such fence or reservoir is situated but
such appraiser shall fix the value on the same
principle as the said board are directed to fix the
same and in no case shall the cost of such fence or
reservoir be estimated at more than the amount
mentioned in the declaration lastly hereinbefore
mentioned.
Occupiers of New Runs entitled to Compensation for loss of
Euildings and Yards.
CXI. The occupier of any run not occupied for
pastoral purposes until after the passing of this
Act may include in such application and declara-
tion as lastly hereinbefore mentioned buildings
yards and other such improvements and shall be
entitled to receive the value of the same in the same
manner as if they were fences or reservoirs but the
value of such buildings yards and improvements
shall never be estimated as exceeding five hundred
pounds Provided always that it shall be lawful for
the Governor in Council to permit such occupier to
purchase three hundred and twenty acres of the
land on which such buildings yards or improvements
shall be situated at the price of one pound an acre
and when such permission shall be given such
occupier shall not be entitled to receive the value of
any of such buildings yards and improvements.
On Sale Value of Improvements to be added to price.
CXII. Where the portion of the run on which the
improvements the value of which shall be allowed to
the occupier as hereinbefore mentioned shall be sold
such value (unless the occupier of the run shall him-
self be such purchaser) shall be paid by the pur-
chaser in addition to the purchase money which he
has to pay.
Rent to be Payable Half-yearly.
CXIII. The. rent payable in respect of any run
shall be paid by two equal half-yearly instalments
on the last day of June and the last day of December
in every year.
Assessment Equivalent to Rent.
Increase of Rent not to affect Instalment already paid,
CXIX. Tne payment of the assessment on stock
payable on or before the last day of June in the
present year and of the usual license fees shall be
considered as equivalent to the payment of the first
instalment of the rent for that year and whenever
any increase or diminution shall be made as herein-
before provided in the amount of rent payable in
respect of any run such increase or diminution shall
have no effect or operation as regards any instalment
of rent already paid.
How Rent is Recoverable.
CXV. The rent may be recovered in like manner
as any other rent is or shall be recoverable by law
and in case the same shall be levied by distress an
order of the Governor in Council shall be a sufficient
warrant and authority to distrain any enactment to
the contrary notwithstanding.
Penalty for Non-payment of Rent.
CXVI. If the occupier of any run shall not pay
each instalment within seven days after it shall
become due he shall be liable to a penalty of two
pounds for every day that such rent shall be in arrear
after the day when it became due to be added to the
amount of the rent due Provided always that it shall
be lawful for the Governor in Council to remit the
whole or any part of such penalty.
Forfeiture of Run for Non-payment of Rent.
CXVII. If such rent and penalty be not paid
within one month after such rent became due the
said board shall cause to be inserted in the Government
Gazette a notice to the occupier of such run that the
same is liable to forfeiture and if such rent together
with the full amount of the penalty be not paid
within one month after the date of such insertion it
shall be lawful for the Governor in Council at any
time thereafter to declare such run forfeited and


after any such declaration the interest of such occu-
pier in such run shall cease and determine.
Boundaries to be fixed by Arbitration.
CXVIII. When any difference or dispute exists or
shall arise between the occupiers of adjoining runs
as to the common boundary thereof the said board
may by an order in writing direct that the same shall
be ascertained by some competent person to be
appointed in such order and by two other persons
one to be appointed by each of the said occupiers
and such three arbitrators or any two of them shall
make their award in writing of and concerning the
premises on or before the day named for that purpose
in such order on or before such further day as the
said hoard shall by writing endorsed on the same
order appoint and such award shall be transmitted
to and deposited in the office of the said hoard and
shall be binding and conclusive on Her Majesty
and the said occupiers respectively and the costs of
such arbitration shall be borne by the said occupiers
in such manner or proportions as the said arbitrators
shall direct.
Marking of Boundary by Arbitrators,
Attestation of Maps and Plar.s.
OX IX. It shall be lawful for the arbitrators who
may determine the boundary as aforesaid to mark on
the ground such boundary and such boundary so
marked shall be held to be the boundary of such runs
And it shall be lawful for the said arbitrators or any
authorised officer chosen by the said board to certify
by his or their signature duly attached to any plan
representing such boundary the accuracy of such
representation and such plan shall thenceforth be-
come and be legal evidence of such boundary.
Area of Runs to be Ascertained.
CXX. When the area of any run has not hitherto
been ascertained with sufficient accuracy the Board
of Land and Works may cause such run to be sur-
veyed for the purpose of ascertaining its area and in
consideration of the expense of such survey may
charge to the licensee of such run a sum not exceed-
ing twenty pounds and the sum so charged shall be
taken to form a part of the rent payable during that
year in respect of such run and may be recovered in
the same manner as such rent is recoverable.
3STo Compensation if Act ultered hereafter.
CXXI. No occupier of land for pastoral purposes
shall be entitled to any compensation by reason of
this Act being hereafter repealed or altered.
Part Vl.—Trespasses and Penalties.
Governor may appoint Commissioners of Crown Lands,
CXXII. The Governor in Council may from time
to time appoint a sufficient number of persons to be
Commissioners of Crown lands and every such com-
missioner shall during his continuance in office do on
behalf of her Majesty or in respect of any Crown
lands all acts for preventing intrusion encroachment
and trespass thereon or for such other p arpose as
any bailiff lawfully appointed miy by law do in
respect of a ly lands tenements or hereditaments of
his employer.
Persons in Unauthorised Occupation may be Dispossessed.
CXXIII. Wlieye any person is in the unauthorised
occupation of any Crown lands or is in the occupation
of any such lands in virtue or under colour of any
such lease as aforesaid although the term thereby
created has expired or become forfeited or of any
such license as aforesaid although such license has
expired or been forfeited or revoked if any person
authorised by the Governor in Council in that behalf
prefer to any justice an information in writing
setting forth such unlawful occupation such justice
shall issue his summons for the appearance before
any two justices at a place and a time therein to he
specified of the person against whom any such com-
plaint is made and the justices if on hearing the
case they are satisfied of the truth of the com-
plaint shall issue under their hands a warrant to
dispossess and remove such person from such
Crown lands as aforesaid and to take possession
of the same on behalf of Her Majesty and every
constable to whom any such warrant is directed
shall forthwith execute the same according to the
tenor and exigency thereof.
Penalty on Land Oiiiosr Parollasing Land, &o.
CXXIV. If any land officer directly or indirectly
purchase any land declared open for selection in
any proclamation in which he is named he shall
thereby forfeit his office and shall also forfeit the
sum of one hundred pounds with full costs of suit
which may be recovered by any person who
sues for the same in any court of competent juris-
diction.
False Declaration a Misdemeanor.
CXXV. If any person wilfully make any false
statement in any declaration made in pursuance of
this Act or if any appraiser wilfully act contrary
to any declaration so made by him he shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
Penalty for Breach of Selector’s Obligation.
CXXYI. If any selector of an allotment in any
agricultural area under this Act shall not within one
year from the time of his having become the selector
of the same cultivate at least one acre out of every
ten thereof erect thereon a habitable dwelling or en-
enclose the said allotment with a substantial fence he
shall forfeit a penalty at the rate of five shillings for
every acre comprised in such allotment but no pro-
ceedings to recover such penalty may be taken ex-
cept by some person authorised in that behalf by the
Board ot Land and Works.
Penalty for Unauthorised Occupation or Depasturing
on Lands not Commonable.
CXXVII. If any person be found in unauthorised
occupation of any Crown lands or knowingly and
wilfully depasture without authority in that behalf
any cattle or sheep on_any j such land not being a


common he shall be liable on conviction thereof to
the penalties following (that is to say) for the first
offence a sum not exceedingfive poundsfor the second
offence after an interval of fourteen clear days from
the date of the previous conviction a sum not exceed-
ing twenty pounds and for any subsequent offence
after a like interval a sum not exceeding fifty pounds
but no proceedings to recover any such penalty may
be taken except by some person authorised in that
behalf by the Board of Land and Works.
Penalty for other Trespasses on Crown Lands-
CXXVIII. If any person not licensed or other-
wise authorised under this Act search upon any
Crown land for any metal or mineral (except gold)
or cut dig or take from any Crown lands (not
under lease) any live or dead timber gravel stone
limestone salt guano shell sand loam or brick-earth
or strip or remove bark from any tree on any Crown
lands every such person shall on conviction of any
of the said offences forfeit and pay any sum not ex-
ceeding ten pounds.
Penalty for Improperly Depasturing on Commons-
CXXIX. If any person infringe any regulation
made by the Governor in Council under this Act or
any rule so made by any managers for any common
or depasture any cattle on any common without
being entitled so to do or depasture any sheep on any
common except as hereinbefore provided or depasture
any cattle in excess of the number which he is entitled
to depasture or knowingly and wdlfully remove or
unnecessarily disturb the cattle of any person or
persons entitled to pasturage on such common he
shall on conviction thereof forfeit and pay for every
first offence a sum not exceeding five pounds and for
every subsequent offence a sum not exceeding twenty
pounds.
Obliteration of Boundary Marks a Misdemeanor-
CXXX. If any person shall wilfully obliterate
remove or deface any boundary mark which may
have been made or erected by or under the direction
of any authorised officer or arbitrators as aforesaid
he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Proceedings not to be Quashed or Removed-
CXXXI. No order or other proceeding made
touching or concerning the matters aforesaid or
touching or concerning the conviction of any offender
or offenders against this Act shall be quashed or
vacated for want of form only or be removed or re-
movable by certirorari or any writ or process what-
soever into the Supreme Court.
Appeal Given
CXXXII. Any person who shall feel himself
aggrieved by any conviction of any justice or justices
under this Act may appeal therefrom to the next
court of general sessions of the peace which shall be
held nearest to the place where such conviction shall
have been made and the execution of every such
conviction so appealed from shall be suspended in
case such person shall with two or more sufficient
sureties immediately before such justice or justices
enter into a bond or recognizance to Her Majesty in
the sum of fifty pounds which bond or recognizance
respectively such justice or justices is and are hereby
authorised and required to take and such bond or
recognizance shall be conditioned to prosecute such
appeal with effect and to be forthcoming to abide the
determination of the said court and to pay such costs
as the said court shall award on such occasion and
such court is hereby authorised and required to hear
and determine the matter of the said appeal and the
decision of such court shall be final to all intents and
purposes
Governor may make Regulations-
CXXXIII. The Governor in Council shall have
full power from time to time to make any rules and
regulations for prescribing the form of leases and
licenses and transfers of pastoral licenses to be
issued under this Act and the conditions on which
such leases shall be issued for imposing any reason-
able charge or fee for any Crown grant or other docu-
ment issued under the authority of this Act and for
the more fully carying out the objects and purposes
of this Act and to rescind such rules and regulations
and to make other rules and regulations in lieu
thereof and all such rules and regulations shall be
laid before both Houses of Parliament within fourteen
days after the making thereof if Parliament be then
sitting and if Parliament be not sitting then within
fourteen days after the commencement of the next
sitting of Parliament.
The Commissioner of Crown Lands to lay an Annual
Report before Parliament-
CXXXIV. The Commissioner of Crown Lands
and Survey shall annually lay before the Legislature
a report of the proceedings taken under the pro-
visions of this Act up to the month of December in
the year preceding the date of such report.
Continuance of Act-
CXXXV. This Act shall continue in force until
the thirty-first day of December in the year of our
Lord One Thousand eight hundred and seventy and
no longer Provided nevertheless that it shall be
lawful after such day to do all such acts as may be
necessary for fulfilling any contract or engagement
theretofore legally made or entered into under this
Act And all proceedings civil or criminal by this
Act authorised to be taken may be commenced or
prosecuted after such day,
Short Title of Act-
CXXXVI. This Act shall be styled and may be
cited as “ The Land Act, 1862.”
B


SCHEDULES.
FIRST SCHEDULE.
DATE OP ACT.
TITLE OF ACT.
4 Win. 4,
An Act for protecting the Crown
No. 10
Lands of this Colony from en-
croachment intrusion and trespass.
5 Win. 4,
An Act to amend an Act intituled
No. 12
“ An Act for protecting the Crown
Lands of this Colony from en-
croachment intrusion and tres-
pass.”
B
11 Viet.,
An Act to enable Trustees of
<r+-
No. 31
Commons in Hew South Wales to
&
CD
have perpetual succession and to
empower them to regulate the use
B
of such lands as may be granted as
O
Commons within the said Colony
and for other purposes relating
l B*
thereto.
•n
11 Viet.,
An Act for appointing Commission-
p
GO
No. 61
ers to examine and report upon
S*
disputes respecting boundaries of
CTC
runs between the claimants of-
Leases under Her Majesty's
o
Orders in Council of the
ninth March One thousand
►>
eight hundred and forty-seven.
O
e-h
Act No, 117.
An Act for regulating the Sale of
Crown Lands and for other pur-
poses.
Act No. 79
An Act for an Assessment on
Stock. — From the first of Jan-
uary A.D. 1863.
SECOND SCHEDULE.
Part First. — Where only one'allotment has been selected.
I the undersigned do hereby state my desire to
become the selector of allotment No.
section No. at [or in the parish of]
containing acres and to purchase the
fee of the whole of the said allotment [or and to
purchase the fee of one moiety of the said allotment
and to apply for a lease of the other moiety accord-
ing to law] and I herewith tender the sum of £
in consideration thereof And I do solemnly and
sincerely declare that my domicile is in Victoria and
that I am above the age of twenty-one years and (if
the applicant be a female) that I am not a married
woman [or that I am a married woman but that I
have obtained a decree for judicial separation binding
according to the laws in force in Victoria] and that
I apply for such allotment on my own behalf and for
my own use and benefit only and not as agent or
trustee for any other person whatsoever and that I
have not selected any other allotment and that no
other person with my knowledge and consent has
selected any other allotment for me or on my own
behalf or for my use and benefit within a period of
twelve calendar months last past.
Signature
Occupation
Address
Part Secona. — Where several allotments have been
selected.
I the undersigned do hereby state my desire to
become the selector of allotment No.
section No. at [or in the parish of]
containing acres and to purchase the
fee of the whole of the said allotment [or and to
purchase the fee of one moiety of the said allotment
and to apply for a lease of the other moiety accord-
ing to law] and I herewith tender the sum of £
in consideration thereof And I do solemnly and
sincerely declare that my domicile is in Victoria and
that I am above the age of twenty-one years and (if
the applicant be a female') that I am not a married
woman [or that I am a married woman hut that I
have obtained a decree for judicial separation binding
according to the laws in force in Victoria] and that
I apply for such allotment on my own behalf and for
my own use and benefit and not as agent or trustee
for any other person whatsoever and that the only
other allotments which have been selected by me are
the allotments numbered and that I have
not selected any other allotments than those above
mentioned and that no other person has with my
knowledge and consent selected any other allotments
than those above mentioned for me or on my behalf
or for my use or benefit within a period of twelve
calendar months last past.
Signature
Occupation
Address
THIRD SCHEDULE
I the undersigned being an applicant for the allot-
ment hereinafter named and having duly deposited
the purchase money for the same hereby give notice
that I object to the issue of a Crown grant to A.B.
of in respect of allotment No.
section No. at (or jn the parish
of) and I allege that the said A.B. is not
the lawful selector of the said allotment for the
following reasons (that is to say)—because the said
A.B. or [ here insert name addition and address of the
alleged selector ] with his knowledge and consent on
his behalf or for his use and benefit has within a
period of twelve calendar months last past selected
other country lands the total amount of which and
of the said allotment exceeds 640 acres
or
Because at the time of the said pretended selection
the said A.B. was an infant (or a trustee in respect
of such allotment for an infant) (or) was a married
woman not having obtained a decree for judici
separation binding according to the laws in force in
Victoria (or a trustee in respect of such allotment
for a married woman not having obtained such
decree as aforesaid) (or) was a person (or a trustee
in respect of such allotment for a person) not domi-
ciled in Victoria.
FOURTH SCHEDULE.
This is to certify to the Supreme Court that an
inquiry held before me and four special jurors under


the provisions of “ The Land Act of 1862” the sum of
£ was awarded to be paid by to
and that the whole [or pounds
part] of the said sum is still due by virtue of said
award.
Given under my hand and seal this
day of
(1.5.) Sheriff (or Deputy Sheriff) of
FIFTH SCHEDULE.
Schedule of Gazettes containing Regulations and Con-
ditions for Occupation of Crown Lands for Agricultural
purposes.
Gazettes —
23rd May,
Schedule of Fees for Occupation
1861.
Licenses for Residence and Culti-
Limit, 2 acres
vation on the Gold Fields.
to 20 acres.
8 th July,
Regulations and Conditions under
1861.
which the Residence and Culti-
Limit, 2 acres
yation Licenses specified in the
to 20 acres.
Schedule of 23rd of May 1861
28th August,
would he issued by the Board of
Land and Works.
Regulations and Conditions under
1861.
which Residence and Cultivation
Limit, 40
Licenses for occupation of Country
acres to 160
Lands would be issued by the Board
acres.
of Land and Works.
27th Septem-
General directions relative to appli-
her, 1861.
cations for Licenses to occupy
7 th October,
Country Lands already surveyed.
(Modification of previous notice.)
Defining the term “ existing gold
1861.
workings” as used in the two pre-
22nd October,
ceding notices, and further notify-
ing the conditions under which
miners would be allowed to enter
upon land held under Residence
and Cultivation License,
Notifying that each application for
1861.
Residence and Cultivation License
8th Novem-
must be accompanied with a de-
posit equivalent to one quarter’s
license fee for the land proposed to
be occupied ; and also notifying
that non-occupation within three
months from issue of license would
involve forfeiture of the land.
Notifying that all Residence and
her, 1861.
Cultivation Licenses would be
issued on the understanding that
the owner or owners of any im-
provements erected on land applied
for under the regulations of 23rd
May, 1861, or those of 28th
August, 1861, shall be allowed one
month from the date of any such
license being granted for removal
of the same.
SIXTH SCHEDULE.
I hereby certify that A. B. is seised at law (or as j
the case may be seised of an equity of redemption in) |
lands in fee simple within the Colony of Victoria
purchased previously to the coming into operation
of the Land Act of 1862, and of which he was seised
previous to the coming into operation of the said Act
and that such lands amount in extent to
acres.
Signed
Solicitor.
Dated this day of in the year of our Lord 18
SEVENTH SCHEDULE.
,
Number of
Eh
,
d
s
©
acres
1? a
Quantity
© .
M
©
deducted as
ft 3
© &
of Stock
M §
being of an
denatured
0.2
o
o.2
inferior class,
a°
on Run
'£?j
a?
0) ft
02
and class m
in 1861.
U P*
a
=3
§
a
©
◄
5
which they
are ranked.
g£
0
©
3
©
O
.
EIGHTH SCHEDULE.
I A.B of being an arbitrator appointed by
under the provisions of “ The Land Act
1862’’ do solemnly and sincerely declare that I will
to the best of my knowledge skill and ability de-
termine the amount of rent which should be paid in
respect of the run named according to its
grazing capabilities and upon the principles upon
which according to such Act the grazing capabilities
of runs are to be determined and that I will act in the
discharge of my duties as such arbitrator without
favour or affection to either party.
So help me God
[Signature]
Sworn and subscribed
NINTH SCHEDULE.
I of do solemnly and sincerely de-
clare that I have expended the sum of
pounds in erecting a fence and the sum of
pounds in making a reservoir on my run called
and that such fence and reservoir are the
same as are referred to in my application to the
Board of Land and Works dated the day of
and that I believe that the prices paid by
me for such fence and reservoir were fair and rea-
sonable [where the ivorJc has been done by hired servants
then the declaration is to be varied as follows'] the fence
and reservoir erected and made by me on my run
called being the same as are referred to in
my application to the Board of Land and Works
dated the day of were erected
and made by my hired servants and that I believe
that if the same had been erected and made under a
contract the erection of such fence would have cost
me pounds and the making of such reser-
voir would have cost me pounds and I
make this declaration conscientiously believing &c.
(as in the schedule to 9 Yict. No. 9).




REGULATIONS UNDER THE LAND ACT, 1862.
LICENSES FOR INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES.
Regulations under which the Board of Land and Works are empowered by the Governor in Council, under
the fifty-third section of“ The Land Act, 1862,” to issue Licenses through the agency of Commissioners
of Crown Lands, Receivers of Revenue, or Collectors of Imposts.
Licenses are classed in two divisions, the first division containing those licenses which confer the exclusive
right to occupy portions of Crown lands, and which licenses cannot be issued until the applications tor them nave
been submitted to and approved of by the Board of Land and Works, and the second division comprises those
licenses which do not, with the exception of wood licenses, confer any exclusive right to the occupation ot Crown
Lands, and which can be issued at the discretion of local officers appointed to issue such licenses under a general
authority from the Board of Land and Works.
DIVISION No. 1.
Nature ofXicense.
Fee.
. Conditions.
For obtaining and remov-
£10 per annum, payable
quarterly in advance
Exclusive right to occupy a site not exceeding six acres in ex-
ing guano
tent, in such a position as may be approved by the Board of
Land and Works.
Ditto stone
£25 ditto
Exclusive right to occupy a site not exceeding two acres m ex-
tent, in such a position as may be approved by the Board of
Land and Works.
Obtaining limestone and
erecting lime-kilns
Ditto, ditto
Exclusive right to occupy a site not exceeding two acres m ex-
tent, in such a position as may be approved by the Board of
Land and Works, and the right, in common with other holders
of these licenses, to collect limestone on such unappropriated
Crown Lands near the lime-kilns, as may be temporarily al-
lowed to be used for this purpose. Wood for fuel for tne kdns
cannot be obtained on Crown Lands unless a “ wood license
be taken out by each person employed by the licensee to pro-
cure the wood.
For obtaining brick-earth
£10 per annum, payable
Exclusive right to occupy a site not exceeding acres m ex-
and erecting brick-kilns
quarterly in advance
tent, in such a position as the Board of Land and Works may
approve of. , ....
Trees on such site may be cut down and made use of for the
kilns by the licensee, but no wood beyond the boundaries of
the site can be removed from Crown Lands for use at the
brick-kilns unless a wood license be taken out by each per-
son employed by the licensee in procuring wood.
For abattoirs
£10 to £25 ditto, ditto
Exclusive right to occupy a site not exceeding two acres in ex-
tent, in such a position as the Board of Land and Works may
approve of within the specified limits.
For building or repairing
From £10 to £50 ditto,
Exclusive right to occupy a site of such an extent and in such a
ships or boats, or for
establishment of patent
ditto
position as the Board of Land and Works may approve of, and
who will determine the amount of fee to be paid within the
slips
•
specified limits.
For landing places or for
depositing materials
Ditto, ditto
Ditto.
For a factory
Ditto, ditto
Ditto.
For a tannery
Ditto, ditto
Ditto.
For a water-mill
Ditto.
For a steam-mill
Ditto, ditto
Ditto. ...
Wo od for the steam-mill cannot be cut from Crown Lands beyond
the boundaries of the site specified in this license, unless a
“ wood license” be taken out by each person employed by the
licensee in getting wood. _ . .
Erection of pumpg
£10 per annum, payable
quarterly in advance
P osition and area of the site to be occupied to be approved by
the Board of Land and Works.
C


Nature of License.
Fee.
Conditions.
Working mineral springs ..
••
; Position and area of the site to be occupied and fee to be Daid
j to be determined by the Board of Land and Works with refer-
Baths .. .. ...
£5 to £10
| ence to the circumstances connected with each case.
Fee to be £5 if the site below high-water mark, and £10 if wholly
or partially above it. Position and area of the site to be an-
Manufacturing salt
£10 to £25 per annum,
payable quarterly in ad-
proved by the Board of Land and Works.
Position and area of site to be occupied within the specified
limits, and fee to be decided with reference to each case by
the Board of Land and Works.
Exclusive occupation of a site not exceeding one acre in extent,
m such a position as may be approved by the Board of Land
and Works.
Exclusive occupation of a site not exceeding two acres in ex-
Bor an inn or store in a
proclaimed township
£25 ditto, ditto ..
Rural inn or store
£10 ditto, ditto ..
Punt or ferry „
£10 to £50 ditto, ditto
tent, m such a position as may be approved by the Board of
Land and Works.
Exclusive occupation of a site not exceeding three acres in ex-
tent, m such a position as may be approved by the Board of
Land and Works. Fee to be determined by the Board of Land
and Works with reference to the locality and the nature and
extent of the traffic. The scale of charges to be adopted at
the punt or ferry to be approved by the Board of Land and
Works.
Exclusive right to occupy twenty perches of land, in such a
Fisherman’s hut or tent ..
£ 1 to £3
position as may be approved by the Board of Land and Works
and use of adjacent unappropriated Crown Lands for drying
To search for any metal or
mineral except gold
£1 to £10 per annum, pay-
able in advance
Post Office at Melbourne, and £1 elsewhere.
The conditions and amount of fee within the specified limits
to be determined in each case by the Board' of Land and
Works with reference to the special circumstances connected
with it.
The conditions and amount of fee, to depend upon the special
circumstances of each case, will be determined bv the Board
of Land and Works.
To cut, construct, alter, or
repair races, drains, dams,
and reservoirs
DIVISION No. 2.
Nature of License.
Fee.
Conditions.
For removal of surface
stone ..
5s. per week payable in
advance
To be taken from such Crown Lands as may be temporarily
allowed to be made use of for this purpose. No blasting or
excavating the stone to a greater depth than twenty inches
below the natural surface of the ground can be permitted
For obtaining sand
Ditto, ditto
under this license, which is available for one person only,
lobe taken from such Crown Lands as may be temporarily al-
lowed to be made use of for this purpose. Licenses available
Ditto salt
Ditto, ditto
for one person only.
Ditto.
Ditto loam
Ditto, ditto
Ditto shells
Ditto, ditto
Ditto gravel
Ditto, ditto
Ditto tea-tree brush
Ditto, ditto
Ditto ordinary wood
£5 per annum ..
To be procured from such Crown Lands as may not be speciallv
reserved or situated within ten miles from Melbourne seven
miles from Geelong, or within the boundaries of any pro-
claimed township or municipal district, or within one mile
from the shores of Port Phillip. This lic’ense is available fo?
one person only, and confers the privilege of the occdpation
for a residence and garden of a site not exceeding half an
acre in the forest wherein the wood is being obtained by the
licensee ; provided that such site does not include any portion
of a creek containing permanent water or any permanent.
water-hole, and does not comprise within its boundaries, or
otherwise obstruct, any track; and also subiect to removal of
improvements from the land without compensation, after re-
-Ditto wattle or other bark
Ditto, ditto
ceivmg one quarter’s notice to remove them.
Ditto blackwood ..
£10 per annum ..
In addition to the foregoing restrictions with regard to the
crown Lands whereon ordinary timber can be obtained, no
blackwood can be cut under this license within the distance
oi twenty-tour miles from the Melbourne Post Office This
Ditto dead wood ...
£2 ditto
license is available for one person only.
To be procured from such Crown Lands as may not be speciallv
reserved or situated within the boundaries of any pmcl^irned
township. -this license is available for one person only and
confers the privilege of residence in a tent on the land from
1
whence the dead wood is being obtained.


APPLICATION FOR A LEASE.
Application for a Lease for Novel Industrial Purposes , under an Act of the Parliament of Victoria,
No. 145, Section 47.
In pursuance of The Land Act, 1862, section 47,1, the undersigned, do hereby make application for a lease, of
the ground, the situation, area, and description of which are specified below, together with the purpose for which
it is required.
Situation.
Area.
Description.
Containing the lengths and hearings of the boundary lines of the
site applied for, and its connection with a fixed point
in an existing Government survey.
County.
Parish
or
Block.
Section
and
Allotment.
Acres roods perches.
Purpose for which, the land applied for is required.
Date
Signature
Address
Lease under Section 47.
(This form will also be suitable for leases under section 50, omitting the part of the recital marked in brackets.)
Victoria, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, Queen,
Defender of the Faith, and so forth : To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting: —
Whereas of hereinafter called the lessee,, has made application
in pursuance of The Land Act, 1862, for a lease of the lands hereinafter described for the purpose of
[and whereas notice of such application, and of the land to be demised, and of the purpose for which such
demise was sought, has been given for four consecutive weeks in the Government Gazette ] : Now know
ve, that in consideration of the rent and covenants hereinafter reserved and continued on the. part of the
said lessee, his executors, administrators, and assigns, we do hereby demise unto the said lessee, his executors,
administrators and assigns, all that parcel of land described in the schedule hereto, and delineated, with the
abuttals thereof, in the map drawn in the margin of these presents and coloured : To hold unto the same, his
executors, administrators, and assigns, from the date of these presents for the term of _ years thence
next ensuing : Yielding and paying therefor, to us, our heirs and successors, yearly in advance, during every year
of the said term, the rent of £ , without any deduction whatever, the >ext payment thereof
to be made on the day of . And the said lessee, his executors, administrators,
and assigns, shall pay unto us, our heirs and successors, the rent hereby reserved in the manner hereinbefore
mentioned, without any deduction whatever, and shall use the land hereby demised for the purpose hereinbefore
mentioned, and shall.not use the same for any other purpose, and shall [here insert other covenants if any j.
And the said lessee, tor himself, his heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, doth hereby covenant with us,
our heirs and successors, that he the said lessee, his executors, administrators, and assigns, will perform all and
singular the acts, matters and things, and in the manner which we have hereinbefore commanded him or them to
perform, and will forbear from doing all and sing-ular the acts, matters, and things which we have hereinbefore
commanded him or them not to do. Provided always, and these presents are upon this condition, that if the rent
hereby reserved be unpaid for fifteen days after the same is due, although no legal or formal demand shall have
been made thereof) or if the premises hereby demised are not used for the purpose hereinbefore expressed, or if
the said premises are used for any different purpose [or in case of the breach or non-performance of
any of the other covenants and agreements herein contained on the part of the said lessee, his executors,
administrators, and assigns],* then, and in any of such cases, it shall be lawful for us, our heirs and
successors, by any officer appointed in this behalf by the Board of Land and Works, at any time thereafter
into and upon the hereby demised premises, or any part thereof, in the name of the whole, to re-enter and
the same to re-possess and enjoy as if this grant had never been made, and the said lessee, and all persons claiming
under him, for ever to expel and remove therefrom without any legal process whatever, and as effectually as any
sheriff might do in case judgment had been obtained for recovery of possession thereof, and process had issued on


such judgment directed to such sheriff in due form of law to obtain such possession and in
r~S?„ p the P ™ S for "-*»« *"■>““«».’•* otter s%s
leX" XTsTXbeSoShS “dleX* °“ r “ to Bea,ed ™ lh the «“ °> «* «*• colony, and the said
Witness, &c.
* These words in brackets to be omitted if there are no other covenants.
Schedule (as before).
Form of License, Section 53.
Henryßarkly™ule Governor of Victoria, do hereby’ in*puimian<nf of*TAe 'zmid , Actfl^^giee^uf XCe^
authority to enter upon the Cr'olvn'LatHbnoUindi? lea™ ° f £ ’ by lllm d “ f !j ff“ d ! *" . license and
LJ S?a the in the r^Se£F =:
First Schedule.
Second Schedule.
AGRICULTURAL AREAS.
Sale of Lands in the Agricultural Area of
PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency Sir Henry Barely, Knight Commander of the Most Honorable Order of the Bath
fcT“ ral Govemor-ra-Chief of the Colony of Victoria, and Vice-Admiral of Se same;
Se?X U ““ ° f * he ““tterityin „e vested by The Land Act, 1862, Ido hereby notify and proelaim that on and
all the land situated in the agricultural area of 5 , r , om 1 present date,
Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Colony, at Melbourne, this dav of
and in the twentv ’ m thC year ° f our „ I f I , ' d thousand eight hundred and sixty-
anu m tne twenty- year of Her Majesty s reign.
By His Excellency’s Command,
President of the Board of Land and Works.
God Save the Queen !
Directions as to Procedure by Lot, Sections 19 and 52.
Whereas The Land Act : , 1862, provides that in cases of disputed priority between applicants for the selection
fhSfSf J«? do ffice r B, in B u eh manner as the Board of Land and Works may shall determLe bv iot
which of the said applicants shall have priority: And whereas it is expedient that directions should be niven accord
Sh ° Ul " h -r»- “» therefuS^SSTa
1. E very land officer shall keep in his office a box with an aperture in the lid, of sufficient dimensions to admit
- f *■» ™** *«. “ d -ft? txzxf&i
3 dl * pu s? as to priority of selection within the meaning of the Act arises, the land officer in the
Lk» it in ,th counters in the u “’ and sba “ the " lock ,he s “ aud
orderXrlXXS ‘ he ,a ° d “ d ° f eaCh ° ther ’ P™" l ' b e
cyn^ali l6 drawing by the applicants shall be determined by the alphabetical order of their resnectivc
or if U there Z>'\ theT t !r ?° S * uch . dlst . lactlor ? in their surnames, by the alphabetical order of their Christian names
’ distinction in either their surnames or Christian names, bv direction of the land officer ’
5. The applicant who draws the counter marked with the letter A, or with the letter out of all the om’interc
then drawn nearest in order to the letter A, shall be taken to have the priority counters
•eyeral draw™”® be bj re “ S ° n ° nly 0f “““ental error in determining the priority of the


Certificate of Land Officer. Section 20.
I certify that A.B. has become the selector, under The Land Act, 1862, of allotment No. , in the
of , and fliat I have received from him the sum of £ as the
consideration for the purchase of the fee of the whole of the said allotment , (or) as the consideration
for the purchase of the fee of one moiety of the said allotment, and one year’s rent in advance for the remaining
moiety thereof.
(Signed) C. D.,
Land Officer.
Grant in an Agricultural Area.
Victoria, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, Queen,
Defender of the Faith, and so forth : To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting :
Whereas in pursuance of The Land Act, 1862, the person hereinafter named has become the selector of the
allotment of land in the colony of Victoria, hereinafter described, and has elected to purchase the whole of such
allotment, and has paid to us in consideration thereof, the sum of One pound for every acre or fractional part of
an acre therein contained : Now know ye, that in consideration of the said sum so paid we do hereby grant unto
, his heirs and assigns, all that allotment of land, described in the schedule hereto, and
delineated with the abuttals thereof in the map drawn in the margin of these presents and coloured, to hold unto the
same, his heirs and assigns, for ever.
In testimony whereof we have caused this our grant to be sealed with the seal of the said colony.
Witness, &c.—
Schedule.
Situation of Allotment.
Its Number on Surrey
Map.
Superficial extent.
Boundaries.
Acres roods perches
Agricultural area of
County of
Parish of
Lease of Selected Lands.
Victoria, by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, Queen, Defender of
the Faith, and so forth : To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting :
Whereas , of hereinafter called the lessee, has become, in
pursuance of The Land Act , 1862, the selector of the allotment of land hereinafter described, in the colony of
Victoria, and has elected to receive, according to the provisions of the said Act, a lease of one moiety of the said
allotment, and has paid in advance one year’s rent for the same : Now know ye, that in consideration of the rent
and covenants hereinafter reserved and contained on the part of the said lessee, his executors, administrators, and
assigns, we do hereby demise to the said lessee, his executors, administrators, and assigns, all that parcel of land
described in the schedule hereto, and delineated, with the abuttals thereof, in the map drawn in the margin
of these presents and coloured, to hold unto the said lessee, his executors, administrators, and assigns,
from the day of _
for the term of eight years thence next ensuing, yielding and paying therefore yearly in advance, during
the said term to "us, our heirs and successors, the clear sum of Two shillings and sixpence for every
acre or fractional part of an acre so demised : And the said lessee, his executors, administrators, and assigns
shall, and the same for himself, his heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, doth hereby covenant with us
our heirs and successors, that he the said lessee, his executors, administrators, and assigns, will during the said
term, pay unto us, our heirs and successors, the rent hereby reserved, in the manner hereinbefore mentioned,
without any deduction whatever. Provided always, and these presents are upon this condition, that if the rent
hereby reserved, or any part thereof, shall be unpaid for fifteen days after any day on which the same ought to
have been paid, although no formal or legal demand shall have been made thereof, then it shall be lawful for us,
our heirs and successors, by any officer appointed in this behalf by the Board of Land and Works, at any time
there after into and upon the hereby demised premises, or any part thereof in the name of the whole, to re-enter
and the same to re-possess and enjoy as if these presents had never been made [here insert the clause written in
the margin of the form for “ Lease under s. 47” to the corresponding part of the form].
In testimony whereof we have caused this our demise to be sealed with the seal of our colony, and the said
lessee hath also set hereto his hand and seal.
Witness—
Sir Henry Barely, See., Sec., Governor.


Schedule.
Situation.
Number on survey
Map.
Superficial Extent.
Boundaries.
Agricultural Area of
County
Parish
Allotment No.
Subdivision
Acres. Eoods. Perches.
Form or Pastoral License.
Know all men, That I, Sir Henry Barkly, the Governor of Victoria, do hereby, in pursuance of The Land
Act, 1862, give to . ,of , his executors, administrators, and assigns, in consideration
of the payment by him of the rent by the said Act required to be paid, full license and authority to occupy, for
pastoral purposes, all such unappropriated Crown Lands as are commonly known and described as being or being-
part of the. run. . • and this license, shall be in force from the date hereof until the 81st day of
December in this present year, and no longer, and shall be subject in all respects to the provisions respecting
licenses for pastoral occupation contained in the said Land Act, 1862.
Form or Transrer to be endorsed on License.
In consideration of the sum of £ paid by him to me, I hereby*transfer all my interest in the run held
under the within written license to A. 8., of , his executors, administrators, and assigns.
Dated C. D. (1.5.)
Witness—G. F., J.P.
I accept the above transfer. A. B. (1.5.)
LAND ACT—IB62.
Sections 33 and 34.
Application to select Land held under Residence and Cultivation Certiricate
Regulations or 16th May, 1861.
I, the undersigned, being the holder of a certificate of the Board of Land and Works, dated 186 ,
and issued under the Regulations of 16th May, 1861, and being, by virtue of such certificate, in lawful occupation of
acres roods perches of land, situated in allotment No. section
t; 0, , parish of , do hereby make application to be allowed to select, at a price to be fixed by
the Board of Land and Works, acres roods perches of land, situated
and .I hereby declare that I have fulfilled allthe conditions of the said certificate, as enumerated in the notice
published in the Government Gazette, and dated sth July, 1861, and that I have, up to this date, paid the sum
01 * : f as license fee, for the said land.
Signature
Occupation
Residence
Dated this day of 186 .
The Honorable
The President of the Board of Land and Works.
(This application is to be delivered to the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the district, who will report in the
prescribed form, and hand it to the District Surveyor for further report and transmission to the head office.)
Received this day of 186 .
Commissioner of Crown Lands.
I certify that Mr. * has made the following payments on account of the land held by him
date 1 " " esidence 5111(1 Cultivation Certificate, being the full amount of license fee due upon such land up to this
Date
| Amount.
i
1
Date.
Total...
s
rH
Commissioner of Crown Lands.


Report op District Surveyor at
1. Have the conditions of the certificate 1
referred to in this application been >
fulfilled ? 3
2. Is there any local objection to the)
alienation of the land herein applied >
for. If so, what? _ 3
3. Do the boundaries of the land applied)
' for require adjustment ? _ 3
4. At what price should the land, in your)
opinion, be alienated ? 3
Date District Surveyor.
LAND ACT—IB62.
Section 33.
Application to Select Land held under Residence and Cultivation Certipicates in
ACCORDANCE WITH THE REGULATIONS OF 28TH AUGUST,. 1861.
tmn of acres ood ap pi icat i o n to be allowed to seleet the said land upon the terms, m the
parish of ,qo ueieoy fpp , . lafio- and I hereby declare that I have
Dated this day of 186 •
Signature
Occupation
Residence
The Honorable , „ , . , .
The President of the Board of Land and V\ orks.
Received this day of 186 , Commissioner of Crown Lands.
. , __ 3in<a made the following payments on account of the land held by
him under r ß?side a ncfand Cultivation Certificate, being the full amount of license tee due upon such land up to
this date.
1
-g
1
o
a
<1
o
a
ft
00
r—t
o
H
Date
Commissioner of Crown Lands.


Report of the District Surveyor.
1. Have the conditions of the certificate referred to in \
this application been fulfilled ? \
2. Is there any local or departmental objection to the I
alienation of the land herein applied for. If so, 5-
what ? )
3. Do the boundaries of the allotment applied for)
require adjustment ? j
Date
District Surveyor.
LAND ACT— IB62.
Section 37.
Application to Surrender Lease under the Act 24 Victoria, No. 117.
I, the undersigned, having, under the Act of Parliament of Victoria, No. 117, been declared the selector of
subdivision , allotment No. , section No. , parish of , at the price of One
Pound per acre, and being under the said Act, the lessee of subdivision , containing acres
roods perches of the said allotment, do hereby make application to surrender my lease, and to
receive in lieu thereof a lease under the provisions and subject to the conditions of The Land Act, 1862, for the
term of eight years, commencing from this date inclusively, and I herewith tender the sum of £ , being
one year’s rent in advance, at the rate of Two shillings and sixpence for every acre and fractional part of an acre
contained in the said subdivision.
Signature
Occupation
Residence
Dated this day of , 186 .
The Honorable
The President of the Board of Land and Works.
Received the above sum, this day of , 186 .
Land Officer.
(This application is to be delivered to the Land Officer for the district, who will certify [to the receipt of the rent, and
forward the form to the President of the Board of Land and Works, Melbourne.)
WALKER, MAY AND CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOURKE STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.


COMMISSIONERS OF CROWN LANDS.
The Governor in Council has appointed the undermentioned gentlemen to be Commissioners of Crown Lands
under and in accordance with the provisions contained in the 122nd clause of The Land Ac t, 1862, viz.:
Alley, James Henry,
Amos, Gilbert Andrew,
Barnard, Edward Thomas,
Blair, James,
Bull, John Edward Newell,
Call, Frederick,
Carey, John le Marcliant,
Carr, Charles Warburton,
Clow, James Maxwell,
Crawford, William,
Crespigny, Philip Champion,
Daly, James,
Dowling, Charles Cholmelev,
Fetherstonhaugh, Cuthbert,
Gaunt, William Henry,
Gilles, Lewis,
Hamilton, John Prendergast,
Lane, Henry Bowyer,
Lavender, William,
Lowther, Gorges Macdonald,
McCrae, Andrew M urison,
Lands and Survey Office,
Melbourne, 80th June, 1862.
Mollison, Crawford,
Orme, Francis Knox,
Pasco, Crawford Aitclieson Denham,
Piper, William,
Polilman, Frederick Roper,
Powlett, Frederick Armand,
Rede, Robert,
Scott, R. D.,
Sherard, Charles Wale,
Shuter, Charles,
Smith, Bernhard,
Stewart, George,
Strutt, Charles Edward,
Taylor, J ames Grant,
Templeton, William,
Thomson, John Campbell,
Tyers, Charles James,
Webster, Graham,
Willoby, William,
Wills, Alfred Currie,
Esquires.
By His Excellency's Command,
C. GAVAN DUFFY.
LICENSES TO ENTER UPON CROWN LANDS NOT UNDER LEASE.
The Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, has, in exercise of the power conferred in the 53rd clause
of The Land Act, 1862, authorised the Board of Land and Works to grant to any applicants licenses to enter
unon any Crown Lands not under lease for the purpose specified in the said clause.
y J ■ By His Excellency’s Command,
Lands and Survey Office, G. GAVAN DUFFY.
Melbourne, 30th J une, 1862.
FEES CHARGEABLE ON ISSUE OF DEEDS.
The Governor in Council has, in exercise of the power conferred in the 133rd clause of The Land Act, 1862,
made the following Regulation touching the charge or fee for any grant or lease of lands issued under the authority
of the said Act, viz. d
For grants of purchased land or rented land* not exceeding j qqq a<^ es * * ..150
Not specially prepared, above .. .. • • 300 „ • • .. 110 0
For grants for public or charitable purposes, or any other deeds specially prepared—
If with a plan ? Jj ®
Without a plan .. .. .. ■ • •• •• •• .. 1 0 U
Also counsel’s fees (if any) for settling the draft deed. ~ , _
By His Excellency’s Command,
Lands and Survey Office, G. GAVAN DUFFI.
Melbourne, 30th June, 1862.
PERSONS AUTHORISED TO PREFER INFORMATION FOR UNLAWFUL OCCUPATION OF
CROWN LANDS.
The Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, in exercise of the power conferred.in the 123rd clause
of The Land Act, 1862, has authorised all Commissioners of Crown Lands, the Crown Lands Bailiff, and mem-
bers of the Police force, to prefer informations, in writing, against any persons in the unauthorised occupation of
any Crown Lands, or in the occupation of any such lands, in virtue or under colour of any lease the term whereof
has expired or become forfeited, or in virtue or under colour of any license which has expired or has been forfeited
oi revoked. j}y His Excellency’s Command,
Lands and Survey Office, G. GAVAN DUFFY.
Melbourne, 30th June, 1862.




THE NEW LAND ACT.
ROBERTSON’S POPULAR EDITIONS.
NOW READY.
I.
Foolscap quarto, Price Is. Gd.
IHE LAND ACT, 1862, with the REGULATIONS as approved by the Governor in Council,
together with the Hon. C. G. Duffy’s GUIDE to the LAND ACT, and a MAP OF
VIGIOLIA, showing’the Fen Millions of Acres Open for Selection.
11,
Foolscap quarto, Price Is.
IHE LAND ACT, 1862, with the Regulations as approved by the Governor in Council.
With MAP.
111.
Foolscap quarto, Price 6d. \
GUIDE TO THE LAND ACT, by the Hon. C. G. Duffy.
IV.
12mo, Price Is.
THE LAND ACT, 1862.
V.
On Strong- and Fine Paper, Price 3d.
MAP of the COLONY OF VICTORIA, showing- the Ten Millions of Acres Open for Selection'
under the New Land Act.
I
MELBOURNE:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER, 69 ELIZABETH STREET.
