

WRECK
OF THE
SHIP
“General Grant,"
(With loss of 68 lives,)
ON HER VOYAGE FROM
AUSTRALIA to LONDON,
J. S. DOIDGE,
PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, "DIRRCTORY” OFFICE,
REDRUTH.


THE
WRECK
OF THE SHIP
(With loss of 68 Lives,)
ON HER VOYAGE HROM
AUSTRALIA TO LONDON.
PRINTED BY JOHN S. DOIDGE.
u mmormi'' ofnm, nmz m
x s g &<.


REDRUTH !
PRINTED BY J. S. DOIDGE,
FORE STREET*
raxlJL


PREFACE.
2he following account of the loss of the Ship “Oeneral
Grant ” has a melancholy interest to the Friends of the
Passengers who Embarked in her, on their Voyage from
Australia to England,
She left Melbourne in May, 1866, and was not heard of
for a period of 18 months afterwards. It was believed she
had foundered in mid-ocean during one of the severe storms
which occurred during that time, and not a person had been
lift alive to tell the tale,
'lhe supposed Shipwreck proves, however, to be 'too true,
but instead of haring foundered in mid - ocean, as was feared
during a terrific gale, it is ascertained that the ship was
drawn into a Giant Cave, and there wrecked on the shores of
the Auckland Islands.
The affecting story of the 10 Survivors, who reached
Kew Zealand, is taken from the New Zealand papers ; the par-
ticulars of her Cargo and Passengers, being extracted from the
Melbourne Journals.


WRECK OF THE SHIP
“GENERAL GRANT."
...One more gacl. story of disastrous shipwreck and loss of life,
m the Auckland Maoris, hasten placed on record. Early on tb,e
rooming of X(hhJauuary,Xß6B,a telegram was received annmm?
ciag the arrival at the Bluff of tire whaling brig Amherst, Garda
.Gilroy., with ten persona on board, (l&clxiding 1 female.) the
survivors of the crew and passengers of the ship General Grant,
which left Melbourne for. London in May, 18156, with a valuable
Cargo of wool, hides, and gold. The narrative told by the rescued
people partakes of the nature of that fearful episode, the loss es
the London, but with loss of battling with the elements. A
noble ship, with, a stout and able ccew—by oue of those strange
combinations of circumstances that human skill is powerless
to eoxabat —drifted like a log on the iron-bound shores of the
Aueklauds, not to be ground to atom-* ihe alm>>\{ end-
less, wall of rocks environing them, but to be embayed, in one
of the cavernous crevices formed by volcanic actioe, and then
slowly,.but surely, to be drawn ns it score into a giant earn,
against the sides and roof of which the good shin's timbers
crashed until she sank. “ There was one t-hriek, 5 ' f-ays a
survivor, u and they were gone those forty or fifty -human
beings. We will not forestall the plain statement that follows
by saying anything of the almost miraculous escape of the
■fifteen who reached the land, some of them ouiv to leave it :m


al; probability jot death. At least such, we .fear, baa been the
late of the breve mate and. his companions, who. without
compass or nautical 'm-umrmut of any Med, adventured'in a
trai; boat to reach 4 h -c metres to obtain relief for their
fellows. Mow tnese -r <><>Ve. and lived on, upheld by hope.
Vvo now know. 'Alt' uk ' fervent prayers may they have
launched. tb.B;.r frail ‘‘messengers,” These messengers were
rudely carved miniature ships, perhaps three feet In length,
kept deck upwards m the water by means of a keel- made of
pieces of ord iron found on the island, securely fastened beneath,
A stout short mast of about eighteen irfch.es ip length, with a hit
of tin nailed to it so serve at once as a sail, and to render the
messenger conspicuous, completed the contrivance. On the
deck they cut ia legible characters the ship A name. See.
Another plan adopted was to inflate the bladders of the seals
and pigs killed, and tying them to hits of wood marked in the
same manner, set ;hem ahead in the hope of their being picked
up. Two of these singular mementoes, just prepared for
launching as the Amherst hove in sight, were brought over by
Mr. Meadows, ft is ceemed, possible that the boot h crew mav
have reached the Campbell. Meads, as they are called, (lying
about 100 miles to the eastward or the Auckland®,) and are
there dragging out a miserable existence. With the knowledge
that many have sailed from colonial ports, and never more
been, heard of. It will be the duty of tbe Australian Govern-
ments to join in sending a vessel to cruise among these desolate
islands, the scene of so many terrible wrecks.
Jit Is bblleved that the snore valuable portion of the cargo of
the General. Grant may he recoveredyas within the cave there
Is sometimes comparatively smooth water . Her loss is assign-
able to the fact that the anchors and chains had been stowed
away below.


NARRATIVE OF THE SURVIVORS.
The General- Grant 1200 tons, William Herby Dong Min,
master, left Hobson's Bay on fee 4th May, 1880, with a fall
cargo and passengers. Hothing particular oecsrred up to fee
night of fee 18fe when, 'about 10 o’clock, was sighted what
was supposed to be Disappointment Island, on fee port bona
The course steered, to the beat of our recollection, was cast by
north, wind about norsh-weat, The night was very dark.
We then bore away south-east for about half an hoar, then
hauled up again to fee east-ward.
About II o’clock we sighted the. Auckland Islands night
a-head. The vessel was then hauled on the port tack c fee
wind light and a nasty short sea: bad hardly steerage way.
Stood on the'port tack about two hours. During this period
fee ship was setting bodily towards the laud. The vessel then
struck the perpendicular eliits, and earned away fee iibboom,
and afterwards drifted astern about- half & mile to a projecting
point of land, where she curried away fee spankerboom and
rudder. By this the man at the wheel bad several of his ribs
broken.
The vessel then canted head towards fee land, and .finally
set into a eave about 250 yards deep. The forosopntast coming
la contact with the top of the cave, carried away the foremast
close to fee deck :. the maintopgallant mast Mling with it, ns


well as the bowsprit and cathead, Some large pieces of rook
also Ml!eg with it, stove in the forecastle. The Ship lay in
this hopeless pi k'fe j til daylight, striking heavily the whole
time, with S 5 far >o r , < f water under the stem. At daylight
we commenced t > ,U „t away the boats, A boom was then
got over the stern, with the accessary tackle to launch the
boats. The first boat (pinnace) ’being safely got oat, three
men. were sent out the cave with the necessary lines and kedge
for the purpose of hauling the other boats off. Some time after
the second boat (gig) was safely got o ver, containing the chief
ohicer, three seamen and a passenger, James Teer (formerly
acting pilot on the river-during the pioneer days of Hokitika),
TJp to this, the tide appeared to fall, when the malntopmast
canto down, and top ship set .farther infra the cave. Tire maim
mast then -took a set on the roof of the bare, which mast have
started her bottom, as the vessel after this settled down very
■iast.
Op to this the greatest order prevailed, In eon sequence of
the tide, sea, and wind making, and increasing considerably,
and as the water was covering the main deck, the female
passengers were then ordered to fee taken first Into the boat,
Sirs. Jewell (the stewardess) Whs scented by fee whip, hot fell
into the water, when Teer caught hold of her, bat in
consequence of the heavy sea he-was unable to get her into fee
boat, Jewell (her husband) Jumped from the Ship, swam to
the boat, and succeeded in getting his wife into it. Allan and,
Canghey (passengers) followdngdewell reached the boat safely.
The long boat was then seen touting oil fee main deck, and
the sea sweeping fee poop. The boat (gig) was then taken
out to clear the breakers, when ive got into fee pinnace, The
chief officer then -made an effort to return to the Slop, when
the long boat was seen goat-tog from the poop with at< least
40 persons in her, mid the Ship sinking fast. The long boat


proceeded about 50 yards, hut not clear of the breakers,
and with the black wash from, the- rocks was scon dilcd, and
sank, leaving Its human freight straggling with the waves,
Ashwoxibj Hayman and Sanguiiy swimming through the break-
ers, were picked up by the boats. The captain, was last seen
waving his handkerchief from the tairen-tnn, aad another man
by Ms side, when the vessel disappeared. For a considerable
distance on each side of the -cave, the cliffs were several
hundred feet Mglx, ami quite perpendicular, and at many places
overhanging. The ship’s position was about east half north.
The boats thus waited for a time, but seeing all had gone
down endeavoured to make Disappointment Island, distant
about tea mb es, In the evening the boats reached some rook %
midway under winch they lay for the night On the following
morning an attempt was made to round the point of the main
land? but It was found, impossible. The boats then made for
Disappointment Isl and.
In trying to effect a landing for the purpose of procuring
water, the pinnace was swamped, bat those in her got safely
on, the Socks, The boat drifted off and was recovered by , the
gig. Of the provisions hurriedly thrown in, only nine- tins of
soup and bouilll remained in her. Towards evening those on
the island were taken off, the wind in the meantime shifting
to the south-west, blowing very hard until, midnight. It then
calmed down, and the boats again steered for the west- point,
to what was supposed to be the mainland.
On the following day about neon we reached what appeared
an entrance Into a bay (very narrow), into which we. steered.
With the heavy sea rouping, and the’ rip, it was wl th muds
difficulty and danger effected. This is a .narrow..passage
between the mainland and Babbit Island into Fort Boss, hut
named by us « Welcome Bay.” After proceeding some distance
towards its head, we landed near to what waslqrimady ,bwa


to sealers as baralrs Bosom for the purpose of making a fire.
Fortunately one of mo party had one Inciter match, and by
it a lire was kindled. All were now suffering much from the
cold and wet. It being the depth of winterand as we were
almost destitute of clothing ami food, bat for the inciter match
it is a question it one would now be left to tell the tale. .The
drat food partaken of was albatross and mussels. It. was
necessary, also, to keep a two .hoar watch to prevent onr fire
going out, as it was raining the whole night.
On the following morning one boat proceeded to the opposite
side of the bay, where was found the remains of an old hat,
with the roof fallen in, under which, the whole party crept on
the second night. On the following morning a boat went in
search of a more convenient camp, when a hut in passable
preservation, a few miles distant, was found, to which the party
at once removed. Os the next morning, one boat started for
an island opposite (Euderby), and returned in the evening with
a seal, then our only food. In consequence of the sudden
change of diet and exposure, all suffered severely from
dysentery, and at night, from warmth, all lay huddled together,
earn only covering being grass.
There was a general impression among the party that the
Government s.s.Tictoria, from Melbourne, on her visit to. these
islands, had left a depot of previsions and clothing for the use
of shipwrecked 'persons, A boat, therefore, was despatched,
without, delay, to search the bay and the headlands between
Fori; Boss and the Straits ; the second boat also making a close
search of Port Boss. The crew of the pinnace, on the first
evening,, camped in a. bay about midway. The evening meal
consumed our limited supply of provisions (seal), laxly on
the following morning, without food, a start' was made, when
it became thick and foggy, with wind and rain. We lost sight
of the land lor a considerable time, after which breakers were


he.4io, »u<x we pulled for the snore, omd ug&in escaped In the
same bay ,
rb.e weather continuing boisterous,- we were detained here
three days, oar only rood being mussels, and suffering- at the
eame time severely from dysentery* During this delay, a m&l
was billed, iVe then started re reach the entrance to what
afterwards pros ed to be the Strafe, bat from sickness, exposure,
and the severity of the weather, we were compelled re return
to oar former camp, end on. the following- morning- left for
Port Boss, bat were unable that even ing to reach it, and there-
fore camped in & bay a short distance from it- 5 and here
another seal was killed. Chi the following morning, the wind
moderating, we reached the camp.
After recruiting for a time, daring which an attempt was
made to make a lias sail, which proved a faihwe~--wo
afterwards succeeded in making a sealskin one—the pinnace
again started on. a further search for the much needed depot.
On this occasion we reached the Straits, camping -near the
entrance on a shelf of rocks. .It raining incessantly, a most
trying rugnt was passed. On the following morning an early
start was made, and we got a short distance in the Straits. but.
w-nre compelled to camp in consequence of a snow storm.
Hero we were detained a week, during which time two seals
were killed.
Another attempt was then made to get through the Straits,
bnt we were again compelled to return to the former camm
We then endeavoured to go round Adam's Maud, into the
Straits, hut faded. A subsequent attempt was then made
when We reached the Straits by the best entrance. On the
following day, in searching the bays, we came on “ Musgrave’s
luith ail fully assured that temporary relief was at- hand. We
read the document left- by the steamers Victoria and South-
bank, which proved to oar hitter sorrow that uo provisions or


clothing had been loft by them on their visit to the island.
However, part of a box of matches was found here, which
proved a great 'blessing.
Alter remaining three days, to recover in. a measure from
sickness and, disappointment, we refereed to Fort Boss, to
report to our fellow sufferers the result of our labours, This
being a better hob and there being a more plentiful supply of
seal,, it was arranged for one half of the party to return and
reside there. This search occupied, three weeks. Hating this
time the whole of the east and south coasts of Adam’s island
into the. Straits, were closely examined. During their -absence
those in charge of the second boat (gig) had found the marked
trees of the Victoria and Southland, and to the imagination
must.be left to realise the disappointment experienced by the
sickly and destitute castaways when reading the documents
that no provisions or clothing had been left, lb searching, the
old camping grounds- two old hies and a piece of hint were
found.: those proved of great value, as it relieved the incessant
watching of the dre.
On the Bth December, after several; visits to Port Boss, the
pinnace returned frons, the Btraats (Masgrave’s)-with a view of
fitting out to endeavour to reach : the coast of New Zealand,.
Daring their stay of eight months a bull dog ( ears cut ) with
others came tip sear the hist, and the impression was That the
dogs had. not been long resident- on the island. The pinnace,
S 2 ft overall, and, & ft. 4 m, beam, was then, decked with scab?
skins. . The sails were made from old canvas ( the lining of
Musgravo’s hut- ). and provisioned with the following ; : The
meat of one goat ( branded Ad on horn ), and two kids, taken
from Enderhy Island ; a quantify of smoked seal, a few
dozen sea-lowi eggs, and seven tins of soup and
hitherto preserved tor. this particular object— and a qiumtity
of water in seals’ gullets..


Things being now ready, on the 22nd Jmmary, 1.86?, Barthoi-
ossew Brow:;., chief' officer, William Howto® Bcott, Andrew
Morrison, and Peter M’Hevin, seamen, left Fold: Pose, without
compass, chart, or nautical instruments of any ulnd, on the
forlorn hope of reaching the coast of Mew Lea-land. Too
remainder of the party war reduced to eleven souls. On a fur-
ther search of the old camping grounds tone ovens,' two old
axes, scraps of iron, nails, &c., &&, were found.; these were of
great service In cooking, making salt, and procuring firewood,
which, had previously to be brought from a great distance’
and then only dead limbs. On a- further search and. near the
entrance between Babbit Island and the mainland, was found
a “ jniamia ” with three banks rudely fitted, and a barrel stave
oh which was inscribed, as follows;-™ Minerva of Leith, May
10, 1864, and March So, 1866, with figure 4 Written 1 thereon.
Also on Rabbit Island was fonndahut with three '■bunks'fitted
and remains of wearing apparel not decayed, and two pieces
of seal hanging up, which led to the belief that the persons
occupying had not long been removed from theMamh
On the 6th October a ship was sighted coming from the
westward c the boat proceeded out to meed her o and signal
fires were also made ; the day was clear and line (au excep-
tion ), It appeared to those in the boat as well as those on
•shore ( being only a few Indies distant), impossible mot to be
observed. The wind freshened, and the ship 'passed by ; the
fires were kept burning during the night. After this it was
arranged, to remove to Eadorby Maud, the position being
more favourable for a look-out station for passing vessels. In
t.be meanwhile a quantity of old boards and planking were
gathered from the beaches, and au old whaling station, and
on the Bth of March the party removed to the island to erect
the two huts. Large piles of wood were also made ready for
signal fires, A daily watch from morning till evening was


kept: np to the time of being takers, ofi the island.
On a visit to the north-west point of the mainland, to a bay
known to sealers as Faith. Harbour, for the propose of procur-
ing planking, the first pig tracks were observed, and a sucker
was captured. On the second visit another was caught, but
some bettor method than running them down was needed. It
is- necessary here to inform the reader that many of the party
were unable to ran, from as they supposed, continued wet feet,
their le.es having become swollen to twice their oroinary sire,
the sinews completely collated, and were at this time fit suejeets
for hospital treatment.
One of the party (Teer) suggested using tire nook, behaving
previously found some, old bolts and a cannon bail which served
for an anvil. Bo time was lost in making one as an espen-
saeut, The description and mode of using it may here be
given lor the information of future sufferers. Ihe nook of
half-inch ronnd iron, similar to the ordinary fishhook without
barb, is one foot long; to this is securely attached a. line
mode of flax ( we may here mention that flax grows but spar-
ingly on the island). Tire hook, is then slightly tied to the
end of a pole ten feet long ; the end of the regie is held with
the pole; they then crept on then?, when feeding ; the hook
was fastened into them. Then the slight laslnng giving way,
the pig was secured by the line, until killed. By inis process
a number was secured.
After living on. seal only for hit eon months, pork was a great
luxury. The hooks used are left at tnc huts on Enderby Is-
land. . jn searching for pigs,-quantities of sea-fowl eggs were,
got. The time of the party was fully occupied in hunting for
food, keeping a look-oat. despatching many raesengeim
making clothing, bedding, caps, costs, trousers, shoes (mocas-
sins). and under clothing, including the female attire for the
stewardess, entirely from sealskins.


lu August 1807, David M’Lelhmd took ill, am on the 3rd
September departed this life, aged 02, Previous to bis death,
be wunnnnneated. that .be was a native of Ayr, Ayrshire, Scot-
land, that bis wife and family resided In Glasgow, and that he
was formerly employed in. Todd, and M'fbregors yard, as boat-
swain and rigger. This occurrence east a melancholy gloom
over the remaining survivors. Chi the 19th 'November, a sail,
was seen oy the man on the look-out some distance in the oMag;
unfortunately the boat-was away seeking provisions. Signal
fires were mails, but apparently unobserved, As the vessel
passed by to the south-ward and east-ward.
On the 21st a vessel was sighted running along the ear-;
coast, towards Enderbj Island. The boat was manned, and
immediately put off to meet her, Bbe proved to be the brig
Amherst, Captain Gilroy, from Bltd? Harbour. A survivor says;
Q& nearing her a line was thrown to ns, and we were
taken on board. Words cannot express oar feelings of joy for
such a deliverance from hardship and privation during a
period of eighteen months.” The Amherst then beat up under
very heavy squalls to Sarah's Bosom, Fort Boss, reaching the
anchorage- off er dark.
Ou the following morning, the \yind having moderated, a.
boat was despatched to remove the remaining survivors.
Everything the ship afforded, and every kindness was shown
by Captain Gilroy and every one of his crew. Too >ucvlvors
recommend to the Governments of Australia and New
Zealand the serious necessity of placing on i m jdrtnh a; P > t
Boss, a oeaconto direct shipwrecked nersox-s where temporary
redef may ne oomined, and to deposit provisions aad eiotbing
rn hermetically seared packages. Also, to leave a bout (on
blocks), covered with painted tarpaulin, a boat compass, and
a tracing of the. course and distance to New Zealand, with
instructions to be used by persons only in. actual distress.


There is lei t at the marked tree ol the Victoria (Port Boss)
two slate tablets, oxi which mo engraved the following
u Bacred to the memory of sixty-eight persons, who lost their
lives by the wreck of the General Grant, on the morning of
the 14th May, 1.866, on the Auckland Mantis.”
M Sacred to the memory of Bartholomew Brown, chief officer;
William Mewtoxi Scott, A. 8., Andrew Morrison, A,8., Peter
MfNevin, A. 8., who started in a boat, on the 32nd January,
186 T, for New Zealand, without chart, compass, or nautical
instruments,”
On the back is inscribed the following :
“ Ten. Survivors, rescued by the brig Amherst, of Ivereargill,
New fed and, Patrick Gilroy, master. 21st November, 1867,
There are also left at the hats oxhEnderby Island, two axes,
oven.' need for cooking, one other for making salt, seal skins as
used for clothing, and pigs turned adrift for the purpose of
increasing their xmxnber.
Also left by the Amherst at the Victoria ” marked tree, tin
case containing the following articles : —One knife, one box
matches,-quantity of fish hooks, twine for fishing lines, With'
the followixig notice deposited in the bottle of the Victoria ~
Parties visiting those islands are requested not to break open
the tin, the same being soldered up. These articles are left at
the suggestion of the survivors of the General Grant,, aim
found their xieed of them In their destitute condition,”
The'undermentioned articles have been deft- by the grig
Axnherst, off Binff Harbour, New Zealand,-(and a document in
bottle) at the Victoria marked, tree (headed up in a cask ,5
one Bible, one Testament, one book, LooMmg to the Omm;
•one ditto, IS Lectures m St. Fmd ; one ditto, m Froper ;
one ditto, British Mmeng&r; one ditto, Sunday at Hmm ;
one- ditto, Spurgeon's Sermons; one ditto, Waits' Hymns;
one ditto, Mynm mid ; two,dozen fishhooks, cure gnn,


box oops, shot, load, bullet mould. paper, pencil, dint and. steal,
one host compass, Patrick Gilroy, master, Port Eoss, January
?, 1868.
The General Grant was s new Ship and --owned by Page,
BichardsOn and Co,, of Boston,
LIST OF SOEPiVORB FEOM THE WEE OK,
Crew--Barthoiomew Brown, chief officer ; Andrew Morrison,
A3d William Mewlon Scent-, A. 8.; Peter M’Nevin, A 3,
[These are supposed to be lost in the boat, or wrecked between
tire Auckland Islands and Kcw Aealaad.l David M’Lellau,
A. 8.; Joseph. Jewell, A.Bp Cornelias Drew, A. 8,; Willies
Ferguson. A.B.* William Murdock Ban gully, O.Sq Aaron
Harman, O.Sg Mary Ann Jewell, stewardess.
Passengers—James Peer, Frederick Patrick Caughey, David 1
Ashworth, Hieholas Allen,
DIED OS THB'ISLAND.
David M'Lellan, A.B.
The usual formal enquiry into the loss of the General Grant
was commenced and dosed in the Court-house, Camphclltown,
Mr. 0. F, De S. O’Toole, the principal officer of the port, con-
ducted the examinations, which were heard by Mr. L Jf. Watt,
K.M., with Captain 'Waldron, of the barque Ethels, as nautical
assessor. The rescued orew mastered, outside the Court-boas®,
awaiting their turn to give evidence, formed a picturesque
group, with their Bobiason* Crusoe looking dfesses, and
weather-beaten but not bronced faces—4be climate of the
A ncklands. lias too little su nshinc for that, The Stewardess
too was there—once more dressed in, civilised costume, looking
rosy and happy. By a special train dispatched from Irercargill,
in the afternoon, Mr, Commissioner Weldai, (acting nader
in structionß from the Government) name down, to tender such
assistance as might- be required In. the shape ol KotMn.g, See.,


«ad to invite the party to Ivereargill, whither they went in the
evening, after the examination was closed. The excitement-
m the train ran in was intense, and as the first n-an stepped
os the platform it found vent in a hearty cheer. The men
■wore speedily quartered at Coiyers Princess Hotel, Dee Btreet,
where they were, we need not say, soon surrounded oy eager
enquirers.
By a straugs coincidence, it seems that the General Grant
had on hoard as cargo a large part of the goods intended for
shipment- by the ill-fated London, had she arrived at Mel-
bourne,
The following is a copy of the clearance of the ship General
Grant, from Melbourne, as it appeared in. the Argun of the 4th
May, 1866,
CLEARED OUT,
May 3,—General . Grant, ship, 105)6 tons, W. H> Loughlin,
for London, -I, H. White,:,and Co,, agents.
ISBGETS.
General . Grant, Bar London ; 205 T bales of Wool,- SO bales
shins, 238 packages leather, 180 packages pelts, 1281 packages
bark, 87 hales 50 tons rags, 2 tons spelter, 10,446 horns, a
quantity of bones and hoofs; I bundle hides, f2O pieces my all
sroodi 61.46. hides, 7SB call skins, 18 bales woollens, 170
qaekattes sundries, 2. boxes gold, (2876 os, (> darts,)
LIST OF PABdEMGIiIS,
Tire following is a complete list of the passengers ■ Cabin—
Mr. and Mrs, Bay, Hot-. Fan! Sarda, Mr, J, Edeb Mr. W.
Beans, Mrs. Elisabeth' Ost and Misses -Oat, (4), Messrs, F.
|ohnstene,_ John Tobhatt* .John Woodrow, A., Mramp and
Emii^Morlnx. Steerage W, Stevenson, Charles; Bowman;
James Bayles, .Richard Jed Vies, .Matthew' liamilthrp i i@B:&
Harvey* Thomas Batshcder, Samuel TemflMoa,,damen: Bahip


Auguste- Lawson, Olemenoe'Fawsuu p,l G< Lawson, Clemence
Lawson (S) Emily Lewson, Arthur Lftvreos, Biisahe th Roberts,
Ana Eobens. Fmaois Bobett*, John Roberts, Nicholas'
Alloa, Bose Allan, Marj Ailem,-Margaret Alien, Imvphim
Alien, Francis Oldfield* SamU Oldfield, Frederick Oldfield,.
Ernest Oldfield, William Frost, IX Bushworth, IF Kent, W.-
Main, A, Mitchell, .F. Kelly, lb Wise, ..F Tear, P. Caughey, K.
Ksenias, Caroline Smith, Elisabeth Smith, William. Smith,
List of the Crew—H. W, Baton, Mery Ann Jewell. B. Mulligan,
>.F Terrier. W. Ferguson, A. Morrison, lb M‘Millan, W. IhttnaM
T. Jackson, D. M’Lellao, P. A. Lacon, A- BAyman, W. Scott,
C. Drew. D. Mather, B. Smith, F, G. Coßiiw, J. Jewell, W.
Barton, B. Brown, B. Jones, S. Whitney, S. Dodd, W. Sangally,
J, Davidson,
Mr, and Mrs, William Bay, to whom wo have already
referred as among the passengers by the General Grant,
had, previous to their departure on: this ill-starred voyage
resided for some years in Soath-Anstraiia, They came out to
this colony in the Standard, from T.mnloo. and arrived here in
the month of October, 1853. Mr, May was a builder hy trade,
but carried on business as a publican in Adelaide until 185 S,
when .he built the Corio Hotel at Goolwa, arid, there resided
until bis departure from, the colony. His house was well fcuowfi
as one of Fee best conducted ra the south, and bo was much
respected, by all the residents in: that district, He took an
active part in most of the popular movements in his neigh*
bourhood, aad warmly interested himself in the formation, in
1859, of the Goolwa Company of B'fio Volunteers, in which ho
held the rank, of lieutenant.. Mr. and Mrs, Bay hud no relatives
in the colony ; but an. only child is still living, who was left
in England: by Medical advice when his parents sailed for
Australia, Mr. Bay had, hy care and attention to his business
soured for hirasaK a moderate independence; and w® believo


his intention in ei siting England was to return after a short
tirae bringing bis son with hum In, August last, probate of
Ms will was granted hj the Supreme Conrt, on the assumption
that there.,could be little donbt of Ms and his wife's death
an assumption which tee inteliigsnee now pMslisf-ecl .fully
eonarxns.
S. S> DOWm, miWTEBy EEBECm


J. S. DOIDGrE,
P»I «TE R ,
BOOKBINDER, BOOKSELLER, AND STATIONER,
TORE STREET, REDRUTH.
(Nearly Opposite Cross Street.)
RELIGIOUS TRACT
AND
MIMI sum MUUMTMT.
Agent for the Naval and Military
Bible Society.
EVERY DESCRIPTION OF
Executed with Neatness,,Accuracy, and Dispatch,
BOOKBINDING
IN EVERY STYLE OF THE ART.
Agent to the BRITON LIFE ASSOCIATION,
Policies payable during the life time of the
I®*’’ Assured.
(T
I ■ i
A
