

-0 7
/ ,7
Reprinted from
I'ol. Kill., ‘‘ Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science
[lssued 22nd May, 1912.]
Section F.
B.—THE FUTURE OF THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
YEN. ARCHDEACON LEFROY, Sydney.
(Abstract.)
The aborigines seem to be a fairly distinct race, mainly of Caucasian
origin. In many respects they are one of the most interesting races
on the earth. Popular opinion has dreadfully misrepresented them,
as though they weredegraded in character and mostfeeble in intellect.
On the contrary, in character they compared most favourably with
the islanders of the South Pacific as the two were known to Captain
Cook. Relatively they were gentle and moral beings. Their tribal
and family laws and customs are of considerable ethical value. As
for intellectual power, they certainly can acquire European ways
of thinking and living with marvellous rapidity. Their non-pro-
gression, or retrogression, in the past thousands of years is due to
unfavourable environment. Australia in its natural condition is an
inhospitable land. Its glorious climate encourages a day to day
existence, and supplies no stimulus to its native inhabitants. Had
a band of European settlers been thus isolated, even for a century,
they also would have terribly degenerated. In recent times the
mining 0 f the white man has made matters worse for the aborigines.
In the first place it has demoralised them, in the second place it has
three parts exterminated them. Little positive good, by mis-
sionary and other effort, has been done to counteract this evil effect.


“£ K ' b l: ‘
PROCEEDINGS OF SECTION F.
Far more effort and devotion has been employed in uplifting the
South Sea Islanders. With regard to the ill consequences of the
European occupation, there is reason to think that by cruelty,
negligence and the communication of disease and moral corruption,
it has reduced the native population by three-fourths. Calcula-
tions made by Mr. Westgarth, in 1846, seemed to show that the
density of population in the so-called settled parts was about 1 in 20,
though the population in those parts had certainly been reduced by
one-half since the beginning of the English invasion. In other
words, the average density of population 120 years ago may be
taken as about 1 in 10 square miles, which would allow 300,000 as
the population of the whole continent. As bearing out this calcula-
tion, there are at the present time about 75,000 aborigines in the
far north, in an area which is about one-fourth of the Common-
wealth.
Late in the day though it be, some remedy must be sought.
It will be found to lie in making the whole of the remnant a national
responsibility under national control. Ample reserves should be
set apart for them, stocked with cattle and otherwise industrially
developed, and on these reserves humane and statesmanlike efforts
should be made for the uplifting of a race which was Australian
long before we were.
