

THE
PICTORIHL CUIDE
BLUE MOUNTHINS
New South Wates
Districts between Parramtta & Bathurst
INGLUDING THE JENOLAN GAVES:
CONTHINING MAPH OF THE LOCALITIES NOTICED
THIRD EDITION.
WITH
A Terse Description of the Chief Natural Features,
the Engineering Works, Pleasure ,Resorts,
etc.,etc.,and
Suggostlve Hints for the Tourist and Visitor.
GIBBS,SHALLARD,&CO
PRICE,ONE SHILLING.


DRINK CADBURY’S
0
9
$8
PU
sfi
H
5S ,
JSS
I
9£
m
"V-.
*?"T.. r 6
am
SS
□
m
MAKERS
TO THE QUEEN
PURE COCOA


->u
FOR
WOODFORD,
i mmwwT^MNa^
CHANGE OF AIR & MOUNTAIN SCENERY.
SUPERIOR ACCOM MO DATION FOR VISITORS.
A FIRST-CLASS TABLE KEPT.
SAFE BATHING PLAGE FOB LAMES ABB CHILDREN AT
TBE FALLS Q»W TUB ESTATE.
CHOICE FRUIT FROM THE ORCHARD AT TABLE.
TERMS STRICTLY MODERATE.
SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR FAMILIES.
APPLY
fdEW IX'iSflR/IXGE COJdPANY,
81 PITT ST., SYDNEY;
OR,
4JOHN R. PLACE#-
sxWOOOWOBSS. S3.VM MOVWTBIKB.m
n chpithe tennis @n the e^eaNDg.
Extensive additions have been made. Woodford House is now one of the most com-
plete Establishments on the Mountains. It is replete with every convenience, and has a
Balcony of upwards of 100 feet in length, by a width of 8 feet.


4*llml
i
Wine Grower and Merchant
Vineyard, COOLALTA, Branxton, N.B.W.
®» 352 GEORGE STREET, Baek of Paling’s.
list of wiites.
Red—
Hermitage
Shiraz
Burgundy
Claret
Port
White—
Madeira
Hock
Shiraz
Reisling
&e.
3P3R1C38 LISTS OOST ABPaPX^ICitTIOKT.
ErXOR FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY
LIMITED.
Chief Offices—s LOTHBURY, LONDON, E.C
Paid-up Capital
Subscribed Capital £1,000,000.
" £300,000. Reserved Fund
Annual Income £200,000.
I>I3R3PCXO3RS :
£50,000.
James Staats Forbes Esq. (London, Chatham, and
Dover Railway Co.), Chairman .
James J. Allport, Esq.
Charles Eley, Esq. (Eley Brothers, Limited).
Lord Claud JoHH Hamilton, M.P. (Great Eastern
Railway Company).
Ellis Elias, Esq
Lord Norreys (Anglo-Universal Bank).
John Staniforth, Esq. (Anglo-Universal Bank)
Hon. E. G. Strutt, Springfield, Chelmsford.
G. H. Tod-Heatly, Esq.
Francis Webb, Esq., Chancery Lane.
FIRE INSURANCE on every description of Property in
Town and Country, at Lowest Rates.
X OSSES PRO MPT L Y ADJUSTED A&JB PAIB Iflj SYDNEY,
NEW SOUTH WALES & QUEENSLAND BRANCH: 26 BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.
Jlf©. C* HXItD, Manager.


THE
Pictorial Guide
TO THE
BLUE MOUNTAINS
NEW SOUTH WALES,
_A_3SJ"T> TO THE
Districts between Parramatta and Bathurst
Including the Jenolan Caves,
WITH MAPS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
Compiled, and Drawn from Personal Survey, by J. E. M. RUSSELL.
Sydney:
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., PRINTERS AND GENERAL PUBLISHERS, &c.
x 885,


THE STEfIIE SO^IEE..
T HI^n old -f, Stabllshed and com^or t a^e . Hotel offers accommodation of a superior class to all visitors to “The
, Village. The situation has exceptional advantages. Fronting both Corso and Steyne, its broad verandahs
and balconies afford sunshine or shade, shelter from the winds, or free play of ocean breeze, as may be desired,
lhe rooms are all of good size, thoroughly ventilated and well furnished.
THE CUISINE IS GOOD, AND THE LIQUORS THE BEST PROCURABLE.
All arrangements are under the personal supervision of the Proprietor and Mrs. Cousins, whose constant aim is to
maintain, and, if possible, better the reputation they enjoyed at their well-known Hotel, Mount Victoria, Blue
Mountains. There is a well appointed Billiard Room, and Shower and Plunge Baths, conveniently placed. The
Pier is within easy five minutes’ walk, and the Ocean Beach but a stone’s throw from the front balconies.
A FIRST-CLASS ORDINARY DAILY AT ONE.
THE STEYNE HOTEL, STEYNE AND CORSO, MANLY.
<T- G-. OOTTSIZEsTS, Peopeietoe.
CyO
ep
PITT STIEII HOSTS. SYDHEY
H
Pianoforte Gallery, Organ, Harmonium, and Music Warehouse,
329 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
Jhe Jlighest Glass pianofortes,
(ENGLISH AND GERMAN)
WIT'M IRON QB WOQDBNi FRAMES,
Pianos from £27.
-A-TsT SYSTEM,
Easy and Equitable. For Town or Country-
■A-T BLVY & CO. ; S
The Finest Toned Organs
FOR
Church and Household Use.
3P3RICES LOW.
THE NEWEST MUSIC,
THE POPUIAB MUSIC*
THE STANHABD MUSIC,
A.T ELVY «& CO.’S


INDEX
MAPS.
Blackheath ... facing page 34
Katoomba ~ ~ 30
Lawson ... ~ ~ 24
Lithgow ~ ~ 42
Springwood ~ ~ 22
Wentworth Falls facing page 28
Woodford ~ ~ 24
Valley, The ~ ~ 20
Victoria, Mount ~ ~ 38
Jenolan or Fish River Caves ... ~ ~ 44
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page
Christabel Fall, Dante’s Glen ... ... ... 27
Fern Gully, Blue Mountains ... ... ... 20
Flying Fox, or Sassafras, Gully ... ... ... 23
Govett’s Leap, Blackheath .. ... ... ... 37
Livingstone (late Adelina) Fall, Lawson ... ... 26
Nepean and Warragamba Creek ... ... ... 16
Nepean and Euroka ... ... ... ... ... 18
Page
Orphan Rock, Katoomba ... ... ... ... 31
Parramatta Park .. ... ... ... ... n
Parramatta Orange Grove ... . ... ... 13
Sassafras, or Flying Fox, Gully ... 23
The Carrington (late Great Western Hotel), Ka-
toomba ... ... ... t ... ... ... 33
Wentworth (late the Weatherboard) Falls 29
PLACES AND OBJECTS NOTICED.
Page
Addenda .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 48
Birdie’s Dell .. _ .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Blackheath ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
Blacktown .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Blaxland .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
Clarence Siding and Tunnel .. .. .. .. .. 41
Coal Mine, Katoomba .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
Elder Cave, The .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 47
Emu Plains 17
Engineer’s Cascade 40
Engine Point Bluff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Fairy Dell, Mount Victoria .. .. .. .. .. .. 41
Faulconbridge .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24
Flying Fox Gully .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 22
Gap, The, Katoomba.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
Glenbrook 19
Govett’s Leap 36
Gracie’s Hill .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Hartley Vale .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 41
Hazelbrook .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
Hints and Suggestions .. .. .. .. .. .. g
Introduction 7
Itinerary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10
Jenolan or Fish River Caves .. .. .. .. .. 43
Kanimbla Valley and Zigzag .. .. ~ .. .. 40
King’s Cave, W oodford (late Buss’s) .. .. .. .. 24
Karrabar . .. .. .. .. .. .. jg
Katoomba .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
Katoomba Falls .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Ladies’ Rock .. .. .. .... .. .. .. 34
Lawson (late Blue Mountains) .. 25
Page
Leura and Lurline Falls .. .. .. .. .. •• 35
Lithgow .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 4 2
Look-out Hill .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • 37
Lucas Cave, The .. .. .. .. • • • • • • 47
Lucasville .. .. •• •• •• •• •• •• *7
Madeline Glen .. .. .. .. •• •• •• •• 22
Mermaids’ Cave 37
Mount Piddington 39
Mount Victoria .. .. .. • • • • • • • • 38
Mount Victoria Pass .. .. .. .. •• •• •• 4 1
Mount Wilson .. .. .. .. •• •• •• •• 4 1
Nellie’s Glen .. .. .. •. •• •• •• •• 34
Nepean, The .. •• .. •• •• •• •• •• X S
Numantia .. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• 2 4
Parramatta .. .. .. • ■ • • • • • • • • 10
Penrith .. .. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• J S
Perry’s Look Down .. .. .. .. • • • • • • 37
Rooty Hill .. .. .. .. •• •• •• •• x 5
Sassafras, or Flying Fox. Gully 22
Seven Hills .. .. .. •• •• •• •• *4
St. Mary’s (late South Creek Station) .. .. .. .. 15
Springwood .. .. .. .. • • • • • • ■ • 22
Toongabbie .. .. .. •• •• •• •• •• x 4
Tourists’ Information 9
Valley, The 2X
Water Nymphs’ Dell .. .. •• •• -• •• 3°
Wentworth Falls (Weatherboard) 28
Witches’ Glen, Mount Victoria 4°
Witches’ Leap, Katoomba .. .. .• •• •• •• 33
Woodford (late Buss’s) .. .. •• .. •• .. 2 4
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Page
Anderson & Co., Sydney back of cover
Baird, Wm„ Katoomba .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Biles’ Hotel, Katoomba .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
Brush. J., Son, & Co., Sydney .. back of Springwood map
Brav Brothers, Sydney .. .. .. .. .. .. 21
Butts, Mrs., Blackheath .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
Cadbury’s .. .. .. .. .. 2nd page of cover
Cadbury’s .. .. .. .. .. 3rd page of cover
Cale, James, Jun„ Blackheath .. .. .. .. .. 33
Dunn, Mrs., Katoomba .. 34
Elvy & Co., Sydney .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Ennis, Mrs. J. M., Mount Victoria .. .. .. .. 38
Geggie, J., Lawson .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
Gibbs, Shallard, & Co., Sydney .. .. .. .. .. 4
Howell, Mrs., Mount Victoria .. .. .. .. .. 39
Hydora House Family Hotel .. .. .. .. .. 35
Illustrated Guide to Sydney .. .. .. . .. 12
Imperial Hotel, Lithgow .. .. .. .. .. .. 42
Page
King, Henry, Sydney 44
Lion Insurance Company .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
Marshall, Miss, Mount Victoria 39
Mullany, P , & Co., Katoomba 34
Mulheran, Mrs., Wentworth Falls .. .. .. .. 28
Park Gates Hotel, Parramatta .10
Plummer. E.. Mount Victoria .. .. 39
Richardson & Wrench, Sydney .. back of Springwood map
The Steyne Hotel, Manly 4
Tattersall’s Hotel, Lithgow . .. 42
The Carrington, Katoomba 32
Watkin & Watkin, Sydney .. 12
Webb & Co.’s, Manly 6
Wentworth Hotel, Wentworth Falls .. .. .. .. 28
Wilkinson, John A., Sydney .. .. .. .. .. 2
Wilson, Sarah, Lawson 26
Wilson, Mrs. A. A., Blackheath 35
Woodford House, Woodford .. .. .. .. .. 1


WHAT DOES THIS PAGE SAY P
Head it, and you will find it one of
the best in the booh.
VISIT
§).<&&)
Emm % ce.’js §»
e rs>° fo
STORES,
GEOI6E ST., BATHURST.
BRANCH CASH STORE—
Close to Railway station,
KIFFIL STREET, BAFIUBBT.
UNIVERSAL PROVIDERS
In every sense of the word. They keep
DRAPERIES, all kinds; FURNISHING,
MEN’S MERCERY, CLOTHING, BOOTS
and SHOES, GROCERIES, all kinds;
also, IRONMONGERY, CARPENTERS’
TOOLS, BEDS, BEDDING, and AGRI-
CULTURAL MACHINERY.
For the convenience of Customers E. W. & CO
have opened a BLACKSMITHS’ SHOP, where all
repairs are neatly and well done.
Prices of Goods the same in Bathurst at
WEBB’S as in London.
EL WEBB & CO.
ARB
ienernf Ironmongers, facers,
AND
BOOT AND SHOE MERCHANTS.
When the words “ Universal Providers ”
are applied to this firm, we may safely say
they are correctly used.
If you want to buy first-class articles
at the most reasonable prices
while in Australia,
ZE’-A.'X' _A_ VISIT TO
*E. WEBB & CO/S^
GEORGE STREET,
14TSTOSf,
branch Cash store-
CLOSE TO THE RAILWAY STATION,
TCESPSPEIT, ST.
THE FISH RIVER OR BINDA CAVES.
WHOSE persons who travel to see the won-
■*" ders of the world should not remain too
long in artificial Sydney. Sydney has some
beauties natural to her, but these can be ser n
at any time. It is in an obscure spot that the
greatest treat to all travellers is to be found.
As the gold hideth itself in quiet nooks, and
the beautiful sparkling diamond secludes itself
in the place where man would last think of
looking for it, so nature has planted one of
the most interesting sights of the world in a
most secluded place, not far from that pretty
and busy city, Bathurst, where persons are
seen securing the latest fashions, brought out
direct from London and Paris to the firm of
E. WEBB & CO,, Universal Providers.
In our younger days we read of the marvels
of the East, the magnificence of the Continent,
and the excitement and wonders of London.
Our curiosity was excited 1 On the 18th day of
December, 1874, we started off to satisfy our-
selves. Putting up with much inconvenience
in consequence of heavy seas, we got to Point
de Galle. Finding this spot uncomfor’ably
hot, we went on immediately by the P. & O.
Steamer “ Pekin ” for Suez. This was “ out
of the frying-pan into the fire.” The Red Sea
was a caution,—no pleasure seeker should
ever attempt it—it was real misery and no mis-
take. We spent rather a pleasant time in
Egypt, travelling without any fear of being
taken prisoners by the Mahdi, who at that
time did not anticipate the arrival of an
Australian Contingent in his country, or near
it even. After visiting Suez, Ismaili, Cairo,
the Pyramids, and the tombs at ancient
Memphis— which last we did on donkey back,
and fine fun we had too, one of our party
getting no less than sixteen falls from that
everlasting goer, “Dr. Kenealey,” we think,
was his name—we soon got full of the
Khedive’s country, so hastened on to
Alexandria, —got nearly drowned in getting
on board steamer for Brindisi. Saw Italy,
arrived near the heel of the famous
“Wellington Boot.” Journeyed round to
Naples, Rome, and Turin ; then on to Paris,
and eventually London. Well! what did we
see? Some wonderful and grand sights, of
course ! London, with its everlasting streams
of human beings tearing along the streets,
and the apparently unlimited miles of houses
astonished us.
Reader, on our return from all these
wonderful places, we took up our abode in
Bathurst, and soon visited the Fish River
(now Binda) Caves.
What we thought of the Caves.—
A great many persons have attempted to
describe them. We do not intend to make
any effort in this direction, for the simple
reason that our knowledge of the English
language does not extend far enough for us
to find words to express our feelings of
astonishment and utter amazement, as we
climbed from rock to rock, from stalagmite
to stalagmite, and gazed from stalactite to
stalactite with our candles in hand. The
climax came when the now famous “Jerry”
(the caretaker), brought us to the Imperial
Cavo, and lit it up with the magnesian wire
To hear the interjections, “Oh, How beautiful'”
“How grand!” “ How lovely!’ “See the pearis
and diamonds in thousands !’* and numerous
others, more emphatic, according to the
direction the person uttering them happened
to be looking, was, to say the least of it
highly gratifying. But there were those
among the party who had such an eye for the
beautiful scene laid before them, that all they
could do was to stand with eyes, mouth and
ears wide open, and utter—not a word.
Before visiting the wonderful Caves it would be
well to run on to Bathurst and secure a few pairs
of those Tenacious Lawn Tennis Shoes from
E. WEBB & CO., as they may save you many
a nasty fall, if not save your life.
When asked to describe the Fish River Caves,
we generally look much astonished, and commence
by saying something, but always finish up by
saying, “we have seen almost everything in
Effypt, Italy, Fran.'e and England, and were much
disa_ pointed, as a whole, except with London.
Now, if you want to see one of the sights of the
world don’t miss the Binda Caves.”
So far, perhaps, you may be tired of reading
accounts of caves, &c., a little change might be
good. Whatever you do never visit the Caves in
your best clothes, buy a cheap suit or dress from
E. WEBB &, CO., and you will be the gainer.
Tourists’ Tweed Suits, 575. 6d., made
to order. A special line!
E. WEBB & CO., of Bathurst, have been
established for over thirty-three years. They go
in for all kinds of goods, chattels, and wares,
from the proverbial “ needle to the ploughshare.”
Their warehouse is more like an immense English
Wholesale Store, handsomely decorated through-
out, than what persons expect to see in a city so
remote from Europe.
As to the prices goods are sold at in Bathurst
generally, they have been acknowledged to
rule lower than elsewhere, notwithstanding
the difference in trainage. This is accounted
for by the fact that E. W. & CO. import
direct from the makers at first cost.
The climate of Bathurst is one of the finest
in the world, beautifully dry, clear, bright,
and generally warm, with just sufficient frost
during a short winter to kill disease, and give
a healthy summer. Sometimes, however, the
clerk of the weather forgets us, and we do
not get quite so much rain as we would wish,
but our Government are getting on with the
water-works in slow time.
At E. WEBB & CO.’S, Bathurst, N.S.W.,
You will find all kinds of
Haberdashery, Trimmings, Hosiery, Dress
Goods, Mantles, Costumes, ready-made
and made to order, Millinery of all
hinds, Blankets, Calicoes, Quilts, Prints,
Curtains, ete., etc.
Men’s Hats, Caps, Ties, Scarves, Shirts,
Collars, and Handkerchiefs, also Men’s
Ready-made Clothing are all a speciality.
N.B. — E. W. <& CO. are the only
business people who keep up a weekly
half-holiday in Bathurst. On Wednes-
days the George Street Store is closed
at 1 o'clock, and on Tuesdays the
Keppel Street Branch Store closes at the
same time.


INTRODUCTION.
||HE characteristic grandeur of the Mountain and Forest Scenery of
New South Wales has been the theme of many gifted writers; and
among these have been men of the widest travel and experience of
the picturesque features of most parts of the world.
The visitor who leaves the colony without having witnessed the natural
marvels of Govett’s Leap, the Kanimbla Pass, the Valley of the Grose, the
Weatherboard Falls, Katoomba Scenery, the Fish River Caves, the Hawkes-
bury River, and other notable features—not to mention the vast engineering
works by which some of these are reached—will have lost a most enviable
opportunity, and one he will not fail to regret he had not taken.
One great drawback, hitherto, has been the absence of any reliable
information to guide the tourist, or stimulate the visitor to fully explore these
regions. To do justice to a trip of this kind he has been compelled to employ
some one in the district to accompany him, and this has been expensive and
inconvenient in many ways. Frequently, too, this guide has nothing but his
knowledge of the locality to recommend him—lacking all sympathy, and every
quality in common, with the party he takes charge of, who often vote him a
drag and a bore.
It is to render the tourist independent of such assistance that this Guide
has been prepared. The districts described have been thoroughly explored ;
trees, fences, and rocks marked ; tracks indicated ; and a detailed contour map
drawn from an actual survey of each locality, by the compiler.
It is felt that the work cannot fail to be welcomed as exactly filling
a great public need ; and as giving an impetus to that health-promoting
custom of occasionally visiting our mountain districts, and there taking in a
fresh supply of ozone, which is so deficient in the crowded centres of
population.
To the masses who cannot afford the luxury of a visit to the Alps,
Pyrenees, and other mountain scenery of Europe and America, it should be
a matter of congratulation that they have it in their power, by the exercise
of a little economy, to witness, at least once a year, scenes quite as wonderful,
quite as health-giving, quite as beautiful as the historic and popular old-world
resorts of English tourists, yet possessing a characteristic and rugged grandeur
unexcelled by scenery in any part of the world.


THE TOURISTS' GUIDE
BLUE MOUNTAINS and the Districts between PARRAMATTA aqd BATHURST,
ADJACENT TO THE GREAT WESTERN RAILWAY.
(RAINS to all the important stations on this line of railway leave the
Redfern Terminus twice a day—namely, at 9 a.m. and 5.2 p.m.—and a
mail train leaves at 8 p.m., stopping only at Penrith, Lawson, Katoomba,
Mount Victoria, and all stations to Bourke. On Saturdays, however, there
are two additional trains , leaving Redfern at 7 a.m. to Bathurst, and 1.48 p m.
to Mount Victoria. No trains run on Sundays, except one to Penrith and
intermediate stations, starting at 12.15 a - m - from Redfern.
By the additional Saturday trains the fare is 2d. per mile first class, and
id. per mile second class; but special excursion tickets are issued for these
trains at the rate of 2d. per mile first class, and id. per mile second class
return ; or, the double distance being reckoned at the single rate. These
tickets are available for returning by excursion train the same (Saturday)
evening, by the Monday morning, or on that day week by the same train.
The visitor may, if he like, prolong his stay and return by any ordinary train
by paying the amount of difference of the fare.
The times of departure of trains above mentioned are of course liable to
be changed, and are only given as showing the arrangements in force at date.
The general details as to the rail service must also be taken in the
same way, but it is improbable that any material change will take place either
in the times of departure or in the fares, and of any such variation the fullest
notice is given in the numerous penny pocket guides.
Trains leaving Sydney for the country are always called down trains ;
and all trains approaching Sydney are called up trains.
THE RALL WAYS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
fjtHE three main arteries of the railway system of New South Wales are the Great Southern
W ar, d South-Western line, terminating at Albury, but branching off at Junee to Narrandera
kw and Hay ; the Great Western, terminating at Bourke ; and the Great Northern, starting
from Newcastle, and running north and west towards the Queensland border. From these arteries
branches extend right and left, connecting the more important towns and districts with the main
trunk. A line of railway is also under construction from Sydney connecting the Great Northern
line at Hexham, a point about 20 miles from Newcastle. Another line will bring the fertile coast
districts of Kiama and Wollongong in immediate reach to Sydney, and tend to develop the vast
mineral resources of those regions. Many other branches are in course of formation or are
projected.


Hints anb Suggestions to Mountain Tourists anb others.
entering upon any excursion it is well to be prepared for little emergencies or adverse
n|y events; and there is no reason why the pleasure should be marred by deprivations which a
little foresight and arrangement would obviate.
If the party consist of several, and the intention be to “rough it” in the bush, a light tent
or awning will be useful, but a good rug will be absolutely essential, whether the trip be in
summer or winter. A spare suit of clothes should always be taken, one being of light tweed and
the other somewhat heavier, and a strong loose calico coat is pleasant for hot days. Crimean
shirts without collars and with a loose necktie are better than white ones for bush work, and
woollen socks or stockings are better than cotton ones. Good strong Blucher boots are to be
preferred to elastic-sided or half Wellingtons, as in wet weather the latter are difficult to get on.
A pair of serviceable leather slippers are always handy, and give great relief to the feet after a long
journey. A soft, shady felt hat is better than a stiff, close-brimmed one. An overcoat and
comforter for the neck will give a sense of snugness in cold weather, and a light waterproof coat
will save much discomfort in showery weather. Leggings, unless they fit well and are easily
fastened, are often a nuisance, as they cramp the legs or interfere with the free action of the
muscles. A leather waist strap for the trousers is useful, and especially when brace buttons give
way, as they are provokingly prone to do on occasions when an extra strain is put upon them.
Clothing attended to, the next consideration is that of food. This should be as portable
as possible, the preserved meats, jams, condensed milk, concentrated coffee and chocolate, &c.
(all in tins), are very convenient. Biscuits and bread, sugar, salt, pepper, a bottle of Worcester
sauce, and some tea, in quantities to suit the size of the party and length of stay will suggest
themselves. A covered strong tin billy and cups or pannikins for the tea or water, with knives,
forks, plates, and spoons, are all necessary.
Sundry conveniences are the followingA good knife, small tomahawk, pencil and paper,
small pocket compass, a good field glass, leather strap, a dozen yards of parcel cord, sticking
plaster, pins, needle and thread, and a few buttons.
Tea is the most comforting beverage for the bush, and it is very portable. Beer and
porter are cumbersome to carry and heavy to drink. If any alcoholic drink be deemed necessary
a little good brandy, schnapps, rum, or whisky in a pocket flask, may be taken, always bearing in
mind that in high mountainous country even a slight indulgence in spirit is very liable to be soon
followed by numbing headache and lassitude.
A good handy valise or expanding leather bag will be requisite for clothes, &c., and this
should not be too large to be carried in one hand when full.
Soap and rough towel should not be forgotten, and a small bottle of chlorodyne has often
been of service in cases of internal pain or diarrhoea.
In many of the districts herein described the necessary provisions and refreshments will
be obtainable, and so the trouble of taking a supply from town will be quite unnecessary.
Usually in the text is given the nature of the accommodation to be obtained in a given district;
and it will only be in rare cases where foresight will have to be exercised as to taking food and
refreshments by visitors from town or distant districts.
B


ITINERATY.
Hp I is of course no part of the object of this Guide to offer any details as to the purely suburban
J|l district of Sydney passed through to Parramatta. Information as to Sydney and suburbs will
be found in Gibbs, Shallard, and Co.’s popular “Guide to Sydney.” The stations on the line
are:—Sydney, Eveleigh, M’Donald Town, Newtown, Stanmore, Petersham, Summer Hill,
Ashfield, Croydon, Burwood, Redmyre, Homebush, Rookwood, Auburn, Granville (Parramatta
Junction), and Parramatta. These places present the usual features of thriving suburbs of a large
and prosperous city. Villa residences of merchants and tradesmen, cottages of every grade,
gardens gay with flowering plants, and in the season brilliant with fruit-laden trees; each township
having its nucleus of shops, public-houses, churches, and schools.
All these places are rapidly passed by the main line trains, except perhaps Homebush,
where a halt for a few moments is usually made. A few years back Homebush was the great
“contesting ground” that the Randwick Racecourse has since become, but it was too far from town
and otherwise inconvenient, and had to yield to modern requirements. Rookwood is the Station
for the Haslem’s Creek Cemetery, the chief Necropolis of the Metropolitan district. At Granville,
or, as it was till lately called, Parramatta Junction, 13 miles from Sydney, the Great Southern
line branches to the left, and the Great Western and Richmond to the right, passing through
Parramatta hereafter described. Ihe country from this is, for the most part, scantily cultivated,
but some glorious orange orchards gladden the eye on either side of the line.
Parramatta
(14 miles from Sydney; 49 feet above sea-level).
Op(HIS, next to Sydney, is the oldest town in Australia.
n || Soon after the settlement at the head of Sydney
OT Cove in 1788, Governor Phillip, attracted by the
suitability of the soil for agricultural purposes,
fixed upon the site and formed the township of Rose
Hill, the name being afterwards changed to Parramatta,
the native name of the district. It was here the first
fruit garden was formed, and the first grain sown. Here
also the first sheep were depastured, and the value of
our indigenous grasses but faintly guessed at. Little
was it dreamed in those days that within the nineteenth
century the export of wool would exceed a value of
eight millions sterling per annum from the port of
Sydney alone; and that the total export of wool from
the Australasian Colonies would, within eighty years,
reach a total value of twenty millions of pounds sterling
per annum.
By a happy chance the dried pips of an orange were
sown at Parramatta in its early days, and thus was made
known the exceptional suitability of the district for the
growth of this valuable fruit. Perhaps many of the
largest trees in the world are here, some more than fifty
years old, in the most perfect health and luxuriance of
PARRAMATTA,
PARK GATE HOREL
mins comfortable Family Hotel, newly
Renovated, offers every comfort for
* Travellers and Families.
Overlooking the splendid old Park, and
passed by Tram to Boat or Train.
Private Suites of Rooms for families. Sample
Room for Travellers, fitted with two of Alcock’s
best Billiard Tables.
Hot and Cold Plunge and Shower Baths.
Luncheon provided for any number on
notice by Letter or Telegram.
Good Paddock and Stabling.
Ordinary Daily, at I p.m.
J. FISHER CRIPPS
JUN.,
proprietor.




NOW READY.
ibbg, glar'd, \ fio.’g
ILLIfSTKATED
So
fIND its Suburbs
AND TO ALL THE
Favorite Places of Resort.
TO BE HAD OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.
- - pNE Shilling.
IF YOU WANT TO BUY OR SELL
Houses or X,and.
Property /|uctinnears,
281 PITT STREET.
ifPIIX
growth. Some idea may be formed of their productive-
ness when it is mentioned that from several of these
trees a crop of more than four hundred dozens of
marketable fruit has been gathered in a single season.
A writer, alluding to this feature of the district, says :
“To those who have not seen the orange growing in a
congenial home, or who may but have seen it under the
rude culture of some of the continental growers, a visit
to the celebrated estate of Mr. Pye, of Rocky Hall, is
not likely to be soon forgotten. Here may be seen
growing every variety of the orange and lemon, and the
other members of the citrus family, from the tiny cum-
quat to the gigantic shaddock; and, as illustrative of
the capabilities of the climate, and the vast range of
fruit-yielding trees that may be grown to advantage
hereabouts, we may mention that, in close proximity to
the orange, may be seen the apple, pear, and plum of
Northern latitudes; the peach, apricot, and nectarine,
of the East; the loquat, of Japan, and almost every
fruit-yielding shrub or tree, growing in the wildest
luxuriance. It is a great treat to catch Mr. Pye on
some leisure day, and, in a pleasant stroll
“ Through leagues of garden flushed with fruit,”
hear from him the life history of some of the special
trees in his grove—how this one tree yielded several
hundred dozens of fruit in a season; how that group
of trees were planted fifty years ago, and still, like
their proprietor, seem ruddy with health. It must be
glorious to be the owner of an orchard which, as a
lad, one has helped to plant, and grown old in tending !
And then there is the supreme satisfaction of knowing
that the industry has grown to be one of vast com-
mercial importance; for one has only to look at the
piles of cases of this fruit awaiting transit at the Sydney
wharves, to realize how great an element of wealth this
product has become.”
In addition to this industry, Parramatta has long been
famed for the manufacture of woollen fabrics, “ Sydney
tweed ” having, for many years, been deservedly popular.
The factories of Messrs. John French and Son, and of
Mr. Alfred French, turn out a large quantity of work
and employ a considerable number of hands. The
manufacture of leather, too, has long been a feature of
Parramatta trade.
For many years the large but somewhat antiquated
building to be seen in the picture, and known as
‘ Government House,” was the country residence of the
governors of the colony. It, however, no longer serves
this purpose, and the reserve is devoted to the public as
a park and recreation ground.
It was at Parramatta that Lady Mary Fitzroy, the
sister of the then Governor, was killed by a carriage
accident. T his lady had endeared herself to all classes


of people, poor and rich, and her death was in many ways deplorable, and was bewailed as a great
loss to the colony. She may truly be said to have exhibited in her person all the best characteristics
of an English gentlewoman. A good story is told of her in relation to her domestic qualities. *A
Sydney tradesman called at Government House early one morning for orders, and seeing a neatly
dressed lady bustling about at such an early hour concerning herself with the domestic arrangements
of the household, he fancied she must be the housekeeper, and, thinking to secure the lion’s share of
the business of Government House, he slipped into her hand a note, evidently in that spirit of
gratitude for the past which Ur. Johnson was apt to define as a “lively hope of favours to come.”
It is said Lady Mary accepted the gift, but presented it to a charitable institution.
Parramatta has an interest, too, of rather a painful nature, for here are situate the penitentiary
and the asylum for the insane, both buildings of very large dimensions, and dating far back into the
ORANGERY—PARRAMATTA DISTRICT.
earliest history of the colony. Both were erected by the enforced industry of a class which, as
Barrington—himself one of their class—says,
“Left their country for their country’s good.”
Parramatta is altogether a pleasantly situated town, and it has all the conveniences which
mark modern progress. The various religious bodies have well-appointed churches and chapels,
several of these being very tasteful in design and commodious in accommodation. There is a good
Mechanics’ Institute ; the place is lighted with gas ; and there are two creditable newspapers. First-
class hotels are scattered over the town, those of exceptional note being “The Woolpack,” an old
favourite place of resort, with a well-kept bowling gieen and garden. Creasey’s “ Tattersall’s” and
Hack’s “ White Horse” are other representative hotels. There are capital shops, and a good deal


PARRAMATT A— Continued.
of intelligent enterprise is displayed in catering to the varied requirements of a rapidly rising town
and extensive community. 1 3 b
road bv'VTA" about . fif [ eei ! miles from Sydney, and may be reached by the old turnpike
nver i.jr ’ by 5 6a ™ erS ’ , whlch regularly up the river. The scenery on the banks of the
a visi tlT^- h n a f rmin ?’ ana "° Pleasanter day can be spent than in a trip by water to Parramatta, and
a visit to the interesting gardens and orchards of the district
asnpri statl ° n is convenient to the town; it is a neat structure, presenting a rather busy
aspect on the arrival and departure of the evening and morning trains, and during the orange harvest
there is an air of commercial bustle about the place. 8 8
• , • For some distance past Parramatta the district is dotted with orange groves and fruit orchards
various stages of growth and fruitfulness. It is a sight in the months of June, July, and August
estimatTLv e hp he f aVI y ri ad f ei li orange trees , bendin g under their wealth of golden fruk; and some
trS awhe Tp ° f “Tr™' importance of the industry by the tiers of cases awaiting
transit at the various stations along the line. °
Toongabbie
S IN a short distance of this station there are some fine orchards and orange groves, and
I! Z 3° f nga i ble Cre , ek r IS 1 es P eciall y interesting from the dense vegetation and picturesque
of vsnnn f P6nCll artlSt This creek flows throu g h a rich soil, and the cultivation
severa vine f v r a Tds g o Cr ° P H K r § Y Up ° n by the settlers hereabouts - In the neighbourhood
chipflv of H y 1 ’ Cd b y Germans have proved very successful—yielding fine crops of grapes,
chiefly of dessert varieties, and for which the very highest rates are obtained in the Sydney markets.
Seven Hills
f(2O miles from Sydney; 113 feet above sea-level.)
H k T lprv S intl ne r VieW here ° f r the town and neighbourhood of Parramatta, and the district
es ‘ n § and beautiful from the prevailing plantations of fruit and other trees. There
and Seven Hm™ 6 m ? undulat,n g stretches of lightly timbered and grass lands between Parramatta
ana seven Hills. Ihe next station is
Blacktown
§(22 miles from Sydney ; 183 feet above sea-level.)
, re , nd , ez l vous for the aborigines—hence its name—in the days of Governor Macquarie,
raniHi h 'f- iere an * nst itution having for its object the civilizing and caretaking of the
GC min f / 16 scener y f°r the next fifteen miles is very varied and interesting.
The farms in H OUS n J° S °^.f att , sheep are slowly feeding on their way to the Sydney abattoirs,
attention of ti 6nS W 1 w^ the country is studded are illustrative of the varied care and
evince the snerhln owners > ut here and there orchards of orange trees, brilliant with fruit and bloom,
P y careful hand of the husbandman. There are also some pretty peeps of
“ Hills and valleys veined with streams,”
and here and there a glimpse of the old turnpike road which the rail has so far rendered obsolete.
bearingMaytofh r enOTh n wes d t. and W ' n<lsor branchcs ofr at B'acktown from the main trunk line,


Rooty Hill
(25 miles from Sydney ; 131 feet above sea-level)
3jtS the next station. It is a busy place, supplying Sydney very largely with firewood. Near here,
|| too, is Chatsw r orth, the interesting nursery of the Messrs. Shepherd and Co. Along the line from
Blacktown a splendid distant view may be had of the Blue Mountains, and the country seat of
Mr. Walter Lamb stands out well in the foreground with its park-like surroundings.
St. Mary’s (late South Creek Station)
§ND PARKES PLATFORM, are the next points of halt. The country passed through here-
abouts as a rule is not very interesting. A vineyard or two and dairy farming, with a rather
extensive tannery, are the chief features of interest.
Penrith
(34 miles from Sydney; 88 feet above sea-level.)
§ MASSIVELY constructed iron tubular bridge over the Nepean River cannot but strike the
observer, as it is a good specimen of modern bridge building. The columns supporting the
iron way and tubes are four substantial piers of solid masonry, the two centre ones being 58 by
17i feet at their foundations with a height of 59 feet and the span being 186 feet. The right-hand
side is used by the railway, and the left by vehicular and foot traffic. The bridge forms the
connecting link between the two counties of Cumberland and Cook.
Penrith is a quaint old place, telling of the very early colonial days. It is situate on the
eastern bank of the river Nepean. Some of the hotels’ signs and surroundings remind the visitor of
an English provincial town; the “ Wheelwrights’ Arms,” by T. Doyle; the “ Old Wheelwrights’
Arms,” by Mr. Joyce, and the “ Red Cow,” by Mr. T. Smith; the “Commercial,” by Mr. Dickson,
and the “Australian Arms,” by Mr. Hall, are all snug hostelries, within hail of each other. The
two banks- the Commercial and New South Wales—are good examples of business architecture ;
the Telegraph Office and Savings’ Bank occupy the same, a substantial building. These, with good
public schools, churches for various denominations, a temperance hall, seating 500, and accom-
modating the various lodges, societies, and for public concerts, &c., constitute the general features
of Penrith.
Despite the salubrity of the climate, three doctors, Brady, Bond, and Ewington, find occasional
duties on their hands.
There are several comfortable houses where Board and Residence may be obtained at from
£1 per week.
Buggies, boats, and a steam yacht are always procurable.
Describing the River Nepean, a visitor breaks almost into poetry as he writes :
THE NEPEAN RIVER.
This river is undoubtedly one of the noblest rivers in Australasia. Quietly sleeping within the bounds of its
picturesque banks, its waters are seldom ruffled by even the rudest blast, and always showing a sublimely tranquil
surface. But all nature’s beauties are not exhausted in making it enchanting to the eye. It has lately been discovered
by scientific men that its waters at Erskine Creek possess medicinal properties of great value, which should be a great
inducement to excursionists and invalids to visit the locality, where can be obtained the same health-giving advantages
as are obtainable by the continental tourist at Baden Baden or Munich, or at the Spas at Bath The creek itself is a
vast amphitheatre of mountain splendour, winding canons and elfin caves, rocky ledges, beautifully clothed with stately
shrubs and ferns of the rarest species, over which the mountain torrent dances gleefully, and the timid deer and
wallaby quietly feed—seldom disturbed by man’s intrusion. Here the overheated palate can be refreshed, and as the
enraptured tourist imbibes the crystal stream his spirits, imbued with new vigour, rebound to the heart laden with
health-giving medicines. The beautiful spot is situated ten miles from Penrith, and is reached by steam yacht or boat,
to be obtained on the river. Leaving Erskine “on the lee,” and steaming away to the highest navigable point of the
Nepean—namely, the “Basin” (15 miles from Penrith) —we leave our boat at the junction of the Warragamba with the


THE JUNCTION OF THE WARRAGAMBA WITH THE NEPEAN.


PEN RlTH— Continued.
Nepean, and walking about 300 yards on foot we reach the gigantic natural basin, which is unfathomable in all parts,
forming the largest and most magnificent natural bath in any part of the known world. The boat arriving here at about
11 a.m. leaves again at 3.30 p.m,, giving tourists ample time for a good swim, and doubtless a good repast in true
picnic style. This trip forms one of the most enjoyable day’s amusements obtainable by tourists or lovers of mountain
and river scenery in the colony, as the views of the Nepean can in every respect compete with those to be seen on its
sister, the Hawkesbury. There are also many beautiful drives in the neighbourhood, from Penrith to South Creek forms
a pleasant afternoon drive ; passing over a well metalled road you reach the cross roads, where you attain a great
elevation above Penrith, giving a grand view of the distant mountains, some of the principal of which are plainly
visible —namely, Mount King George and Mount Wilson, two of the highest peaks in the Blue Mountain Range. Many
other drives are also about here —Fernhill, Mulgoa, Castlereagh, Lapstone Hill, Emu, &c., &c.
The population is about sixteen hundred, and the rateable value of property about
Penrith is within easy distance of many interesting surroundings, and a man having leisure may
spend a week very pleasantly, and enjoy many strolls in the neighbourhood. The charming scenery
of the Emu Plains and the wonders of the first Zigzag may be explored and more fully appreciated
than is possible in a mere trip by rail through the district. Indeed nothing is more tantalizing to the
lover of the picturesque than when lost in admiration at the grandeur and sublimity of a scene to
be whisked unceremoniously away from it to the casual and fleeting contemplation of other wonders.
Indeed the whole journey from Sydney to the Blue Mountains by rail resembles very much the ever-
changing beauties represented by a slowly revolving kaleidoscope; for, just as in the instrument, one
pattern of beauty is formed only to be changed at the next turn, so the tourist catches glimpse after
glimpse that he would gladly dwell upon did not the exigencies of rapid travel dissipate the view in
a moment.
Two characteristic views of the “ placid Nepean ” are given on the preceding and opposite
pages. The junction of the Warragamba Creek with the Nepean River is a very favourite resort of
tourists, and as the trip may be taken on a Saturday afternoon from Sydney, returning the same
evening, it is very accessible. A party contemplating such a trip should notify the day before
as to their requirements.
Emu Plains
(36 miles from Sydney; 87 feet above sea-level.)
J&N approaching the horizon of mountains which, on leaving Sydney, looked like an irregular blue
4iO line dividing sky from earth, the walls, parapets, and gorges become traceable, and give form
cjr? and definition to the mountain range. Passing over the Nepean Bridge before described, we
enter upon a rich and fertile tract of country under various agricultural crops, and in the season
largely occupied with waving luxuriant crops of Indian corn. Here and there, too, orchards are
dotted over the plain with a group or two of homesteads, forming the characteristic type of an
Australian township. We soon commence the ascent of the first great engineering work on the line,
the Little Zigzag, by which the formidable buttresses and natural fortifications of Lapstone Hill were
scaled, and reduced to an even highway for King Steam and his civilizing attendants.
A grand panorama soon spreads out before us as we ascend the giddy height, and look down
on the valley of the Nepean. The scene is indescribably grand, and we cast a long, lingering glance
over the river and valley, sorry in our hearts at the necessity for so quickly quitting. The sensation
is a strange one, too, as we rise to the higher level, and breathe the more rarefied atmosphere of an
elevation of nearly 600 feet from Emu Plains, to
Lucasville
(39 miles from Sydney ; 700 feet above sea-level.)
is a platform only, where the train stops by arrangement with the guards or on being
signalled. As we pass upward the ever-changing views are wondrously grand, and one may
fairly say that Nature has done her best with mountain, valley, and river, to perfect her master-
w> piece. At an elevation of 245 feet above Emu Plains we cross the celebrated Knapsack Gully,
so called from the circumstance of the early explorers leaving their shoulder burdens here as they


THE NEPEAN RIVER, NEAR EUROKA CREEK.


LUCASVILLE— Continued.
attempted still further to climb the rocky heights. Over this is thrown the famous viaduct of which
such good views may be had from various parts of the line lower down. This was a colossal work
to accomplish, and formed one of the chief difficulties in the construction of the line. But thanks
to the energy of the Engineer-in-Chief, Mr. John Whitton, it was effected without serious mishap,
and now stands a durable monument to his genius. The viaduct is composed of seven successive
arches—five of fifty feet span and two of twenty, and the total length is 388 feet; the greatest
height from the gully bed being 126 feet. Some idea may thus be formed of the enormous mass of
solid masonry forming the structure. The mode of progression up the seemingly inaccessible heights
is precisely that which a man naturally adopts as the easiest in ascending a steep bank—taking a few
steps to the right and then to the left, and thus gradually scaling the height. The engine takes the
train a few hundred yards to the right—the gradient being 1 foot in 30 —and then the “ points ”
are moved, the engine is reversed, and the train pushed up the second incline at a similar gradient,
to its termination, when the engine again pulls the train up the third incline, and so on till the summit
is reached at an elevation of 700 feet from the foot of the first incline.
Glenbrook
(41 miles from Sydney ; 766 feet above sea-level.)
@HE district hereabouts is very interesting and picturesque, but at the date we write no hotel
or other accommodation for visitors is to be obtained. Unless, therefore, the tourist has his
&V tent and other essentials for his use, a prolonged stay will scarcely be possible. The indigenous
timber is chiefly gum trees, and the flora is sparse and uninteresting as compared with districts
hereafter to be described.
Blaxland
(42 miles from Sydney ; 766 feet above sea-level.)
HIS station was once called Wascoe’s Siding, but the many claims of the intrepid Lieutenant
Blaxland, who first explored the mountain, have justly been recognized by the place being
named after him. There is here good accommodation at Wascoe House. The house and
grounds, which are situated 500 yards from the platform, have for many years been noted as
the favourite retreat of newly married couples, who here take the rambles so delightfully romantic
under such conditions. There are some very pretty walks and drives to be taken hereabout —notably
along the old Bathurst road, once thronged with bullock drays laden with wool on their way to
Sydney, but now as quiet as an English country lane. On the road towards Glenbrook, a walk of
about a mile, will reveal a bold projecting rock, from which we obtain a capital view of Richmond,
Windsor, South Creek, Penrith, and Emu Plains, the Nepean Valley, and the watershed of the
Hawkesbury. The district is clothed in places with ferns, mosses, and flowering plants—platy-
ceriums (“ stag’s-horn ”), aspleniums (“ bird’s-nest ”) being most abundant on the trees and rocks.
The district well merits a prolonged stay by the visitor, the gullies, glens, and valleys being t full
of interesting, natural objects.
Karabar
«S situated midway between Blaxland and the Valley stations. The district is very pretty, but
1 not much frequented by tourists, who are attracted by the greater marvels of the higher
mountain regions.


CHARACTERISTIC ALPINE VEGETATION—FERN GULLY.






sSV
O
£?*
SS'
J$V
►v
\W
&
» ■^
.4 V
S>'
$
&
$>
V
>
#
%
K % * -<&*'
A.
oCy
* ,e9‘
*>' . x
&>
o '
s* /--op
.^'
„ \o' \£
.< >^ N
fc® 3
\P
O' «*ss* . c^ V
<A© V x\° r^'
ctf° c <b'
A*
v
*
X
The Valley
(46 miles from Sydney ; 1,048 feet above sea-level)
Is the name given to the prospect which opens on the
J| view hereabout. A lovely vale of grassed undulating
h land, lightly timbered and well-watered, presents
quite an English park-like appearance. But instead of
huge gnarled oaks, beeches, and elms, we have here
colossal eucalypts, syncarpias, and other majestic in-
digenous timber, while the rocks with which the gullies
are faced are everywhere clothed with a wealth of ferns
of immense variety, Gleichenias, Adiantums, Dicksonias,
Pteris, and a host of other forms valued by collectors
may be gathered here in waggon loads. If the fortunate
owner of an acre of this country could but transport its
vegetation unimpaired to London or Paris he would
quickly find himself a moderately wealthy man. Glei-
chenias (the star-fern) and other rare varieties which
abound here are frequently sold in London at from
three to ten guineas per plant. In the spring and during
the early summer months some of the most beautiful
members of the mountain flora are in full bloom. The
Waratah, Eriostemons, Boronias, Correas, Indigoferas,
Heaths, Dilwynias, and many others, are radiant with
blossom, while the selaginellas and mosses everywhere
abound, giving life and incident to the
“ Zigzag paths and juts of pointed rocks,”
to the beauties of which only a Kendall could do full
justice. The visitor is especially advised not to leave
the Valley without seeing the locality of Fitzgerald’s
Creek, the upper portion of which is very rich in ferns
and the indigenous flora usually associated with these
mountain rivulets. By following down the Valley road
for about a hundred yards, taking the line of a wire fence
to the left, and then turning sharply to the right over the
rise, the tourist comes across some most charming scenery,
The climate is remarkably mild and equable, and well
suited for invalids, who may forget their ailments and
* * * “ Here in this home,
Away from men and books and all the schools,
Take Nature for their teacher and restorer.”
The principal residences in the neighbourhood are
those of Messrs. J. Rae, L. Brennand, W. Deane,
“ Upton,” the property of Mr. W. Dawson, and “ Wyom-
ing,” the property of Mrs. Berne.
Good accommodation may be got at “Tusculum” and
at “ Wyoming,” both near the station, and as shown on
the annexed plan.
A whole day may be profitably spent in exploring the
varied beauties of Fitzgerald’s Creek, its leaping cataracts
and placid reaches, edged with mountain moss and ferns,
as it hurries along its course to the Nepean River and to
the ocean.


Springwood
-fjTL (47 miles from Sydney ; 1,216 feet above sea-level.)
<§:S about a mile from “ The Valley ” station before referred to, Springwood has two hotels,
1 ; a public school, police station, and a general store; and the residences of several influential
tv S ent^ lemen are adjacent. Divine service of the Church of England is conducted twice a month
Kg at one of the resident s houses j and that of the Roman Catholic Church once every eight weeks.
ihe public school is attended by children from the districts of Glenbrook and Woodford,
as well as by those in the neighbourhood.
The police officer of Springwood is Mr. J. Illingworth, and the station master is Mr. Tanner ;
both are always courteous, and ready to give information to visitors.
The principal private residences in the district are those of Mrs. John Frazer, the Hon.
J. Norton, T. B. Hoare, C. Moore, and a cottage owned by Sir Henry Parkes. A post office and
te egraph ofhce are other conveniences of the place ; letters are despatched and arrive daily, and
telegrams may be sent between the hours of 9 a.m. and 8 p.m.
lr G c^m f. te \ s nj’ider in winter than that of Sydney ; and, of course, never has the great heat
ot the Metropolis during summer. It is considered well suited to those having lung or chest
diseases. Snow is never seen within six miles of Springwood.
A magnificent view may be enjoyed from a spot about a mile from the station, along the
Hawkesbury road; after crossing the railway bridge and passing the residence of Mrs. John Frazer,
on the left a succession of charming scenes open out to the view at every bend of the road, till the
top of the hill is reached. The view from here is unsurpassed in the district, and for startling
grandure can scarcely be excelled anywhere. On a clear day Windsor, Richmond, the Nepean
River, and the intervening country can be plainly seen, and with an ordinary field-glass, the prominent
public buildings of Sydney, the South Head Light-house, the Heads of Port Jackson, and the steamers
at sea off Coogee and Bondi may be clearly traced. On the left, the outlines of successive mountain
chains meet the eye, with Mounts Tomah and Wilson standing out in bold relief against the grey
background of sky. On the right lie green luxuriant valleys and gulleys and creeks, with here and
there quaintly constructed cottages, peeping out with their white walls j and “ The Valley ” Station
stands sharply defined against the dark green leafage behind. One of the most luxuriant of the
characteristic gullies is that known by the name of
SASSAFRAS, OR FLYING FOX GULLY.
In a walk of ten minutes along a well defined track, at the back of the residence of Mr. T. B.
Hoare, with marked trees to guide him, the tourist will arrive at the head of a deep and rocky gully,
shaded on all sides by huge honey-combed, overhanging rocks, covered with large Sassafras, Myrtle,
lurpentine, and other trees, interlaced and bound together with supplejacks and other robust
climbing and twining plants. A stream of clear water runs into and overflows a chain of ponds
about a mile down this gully; and the sides of the creek are clothed with a dense covering of
ferns, mosses, and lycopods. The stems of trees are green with this most luxuriant growth, and
botanists declare that for beauty, and number, and rarity of varieties of ferns and allied vegetation,
his district equals any known. Alsophila Australis, Dicksonia antarctica, many of them with stems
over t irty eet lg 1, here display their canopy of graceful fronds, and very finely developed specimens
ot many choice ferns are met with on every side.
In the fruit season flying foxes make the rocks and trees of this gully their resting place by
day, and thousands of these may be seen hanging by their talons, awaiting the approach of dusk,
when they sally out on their nightly raids on the neighbouring orchards. The native pheasant, lyre
bird, bronze-winged pigeon, king and other parrots, abound in the neighbourhood, and add to the
romantic beauty of the place.
MADELINE GLEN
Is the title of a pretty fern gully of easy descent. Going through the gate on the left ot the station, a
pat eads to the right, and a walk of less than ten minutes brings the visitor to a bright stream
running over rocks, tree stems, and ferns. The proximity of this gully to the station makes it
a favourite haunt of the ladies and children of the party.
These are the chief features of Springwood, but the whole district is rich in the picturesque,
and luxuriant with a vegetation almost tropical in character.


MAP
OF SPRINGWOOD


TRAVELLERS BY SEA
AND LAND.
Portmanteaus, Trunks, Bags, Writing
Folios, Post-bags, Tourist-bags,
Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Fitted-bags,
Dressing Cases, &c.
LARGE VARIETY TO SELECT FROM.
1,111,8
Manufacturers & Importers of Saddlery & Harness
403 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY,
03P3P0SIX3E 3BEOT3SIa.
RICHARDSON & WRENCH
LAND AUCTIONEERS & APPRAISERS,
STOCK & STATION AGENTS,
"wool :b:ro:k::e:r,S-
imnoa ——
Offices —98 PITT STREET.
Stores—CIRCULAR QUAY.


SASSAFRAS OR FLYING FOX GULLY, SPRINGWOOD.


Faulconbridge
(49 miles from Sydney ; 1,463 feet above sea level.)
®«WO miles from Springwood, and at a greater elevation, is the mountain home of Sir Henry Parkes,
H' the name of which gives the title to the locality. The district is exceedingly pretty, and the
m view from here a most extensive one, embracing the rugged watershed of the Nepean River
and the peaks of several mountains, notably Mounts Hay, Tomah, and Wilson. A cave and a
favourite glen, called the Rock-lily Glen, from the abundance of Dendrobium gracilis found there,
are points of special interest.
Numantia
(52 miles from Sydney ; 1,672 feet above sea level)
I’s the classic name given to this district. Sir Alfred Stephen’s residence, “ Alphington,” is near
|| here. Close to the platform also will be noticed the spacious mansion of Sir James Martin,
h from which a most magnificent prospect is obtained. There are no hotels or other accom-
modation at these places, but as Springwood and Woodford are within easy walking distance, they
may be easily visited in an afternoon’s walk.
Woodford (late Buss’s)
(55 miles from Sydney; 2,191 feet above sea level.)
§BOUT a third of a mile from the railway station, along the Bathurst Road towards Lawson,
is situated Woodford House, the only place where the visitor can get accommodation in the
neighbourhood.
The place used, in olden times, to be known as Buss’s, and was the halting place of the gold
escort, the remains of the old police station being still recognizable.
In December, 1874, the Government Astronomer selected the spot for the observation of the
transit of Venus, and with a highly successful result, some very conclusive and useful data being
obtained of that interesting astronomical event. If leisure permitted, a whole week may be very
profitably and pleasantly spent in the neighbourhood. There are eight very striking water-falls
within easy walking distance, the principal being the “ Mabel” Fall—a very pretty cascade of about
30 feet leap, with a clear sandy basin serving as a bath ; the “ Edith ” Fall, not far below, and some-
what larger; and the “Gemini” or “Twin” Fall, the largest of them all. This last is a very
picturesque water-fall. The course of the creek—and particularly in the vicinity of the cascades—
is clothed with ferns of very varied character. Here the pretty Adiantum hispidum, Cheilanthes
tenuifolia, Lindssea trichomanoides, Lomaria procera, Doodea aspera, Asplenium flaccidum, Gleichenia
dicarpa, and a host of other gems of fern life may be found in the rocky crevices or along the moist
banks, or clothing the stems of their giant neighbours—the tree-ferns, and fallen timber. Lycopods,
mosses, and lichens, of various hues of green, grow in wild luxuriance to the water’s edge, reminding
one of Kendall’s line—
“ Valley of the moss and myrtle and the glimmering waterpool.’’
KING’S CAVE.
Passing along the Bathurst Road towards Sydney, and twenty yards past the gate house, close
to the bridge, near Linden, the visitor comes across a mass of rocks on the right. These he should
ascend, as from the summit the finest view of the district is to be obtained. Windsor, Richmond, and
Brisbane Water to the left; in front, South Creek, and the vast plateau stretching away to Sydney
and Port Jackson ; and on the right, the sands of historic Botany, and the Camden district, which
has been called the cradle of the vine in Australia. Proceeding onwards past the second bridge,




r#
ate House
l_J 4.^
1 4M
# T
LAWSON


“ LYTTLETOISr,”
LAWSON, PEUE MOUNTAINS,
CLOSE TO LAWSON STATION.
J. GEG GI E respectfully intimates to the public that
the above Cottage is built expressly for the reception of
visitors to the Blue Mountains, and has first-class accommo-
dation on most reasonable terms.
Letters and Telegrams will have prompt attention.
Post Office on the Premises.
and leaving the beautiful house and grounds of Major Baines on our left, we cross the line through a
gate, when a well-made path brings us to a beautiful cave, where the thoughtful Trustees of the
reserve have placed a table, a seat, and a fireplace, with stack of fire-wood, for the use of visitors. Close
by is a never-failing spring of water, and nothing is wanted to make the place one of the most
delightful retreats for the lovers of the picturesque and beautiful in nature.
Tradition gives the name of King to the cave, a more than usually cunning bushranger, who,
with his gang, evaded justice here for some time ; and numerous stories are related of their raids and
exploits in olden times, when the Blue Mountains were nearly a terra incognita to the general public.
Hazelbrook
(56 miles from Sydney ; about 2,250 feet above sea level.)
MEVERAL water-falls within easy walking distance. Good accommodation to be obtained at
H? Hazelbrook House, thirty yards from the platform.
Lawson (late Blue Mountain)
(58 miles from Sydney ; 2,399 feet above sea level.)
HIS station, known for many years as “ Blue Mountain Station,” has had the name of Lieutenant
Lawson conferred upon it, as has also the township, to commemorate the enterprise and per-
H) severance of that officer, who, with Blaxland aud Wentworth, opened up a highway to the Blue
Mountains. It was to the intrepidity of these three that the public owe the discovery of the
practicability of reaching the interior, which has done so much towards developing the capabilities
of the colony. It is no part of the object of this Guide to enter at great length on matters of history,
and the feats of these men have long been recorded. But it may be doubted if the mass of the
public properly appreciate the arduous exertions and the importance of the work of Messrs. Blaxland,
Lawson, and Wentworth ; and we refer specially to them here as worthy the enduring honour and
remembrance of posterity. It was a happy thought to have recently associated their names with three
of the most important districts of the Blue Mountains, for in all years to come children will be told
of the exploits of these explorers, which are typified by the districts bearing their names. The recol-
lection of their feats, too, gives a spice of romance and intellectual enjoyment to the traveller as he
passes over regions rendered historic in this way.
It is a very convenient place to rendezvous, as, apart from the attractive natural wonders of
the place, it is intermediate or adjacent to other places of note. It has also a post and telegraph
office, letters being delivered and forwarded daily. All trains stop ten minutes, thus affording
opportunity for obtaining refreshment at the hotel facing the station, on the Bathurst road. There
are comfortable establishments and cottages, where visitors and families may take up their quarters for
a few days, or arrange for a prolonged stay, to recruit health. Indeed, the district is becoming
famed as a sanatorium, and enterprising individuals are surrounding their establishments with all the
adjuncts necessary for fitting them for the reception of spring and summer tourists in search of recrea-
tion and change from the busy whirl of city life.
The Blue Mountain Inn, kept by Mrs. Wilson,
is a homely, comfortable place, with reasonable charges ;
and about one hundred and fifty yards from the station,
on the right hand, there is a cottage where visitors may
get taken care of. These, with the more private estab-
lishment of Mr. Geggie, give plenty of choice to visitors;
but the respective announcements of the proprietors of
these will be found in the margin, and fully set out their
claims to public patronage.
D


XjAWSOPJ.
SSWI IMM,
Best Accommodation on the Mountains.
SARAH WILSON.
The beautiful Falls are within easy walking distance,
with good paths.
Wisely, the Government has set apart plenty
of land for reserves, and has vested the manage-
ment of these in trustees fully competent to do
justice to the natural beauties of the place. The
soil, in parts, is very rich and Messrs. Moore and
Hay have taken
advantage of the
varying character
of the soil to plant
largely of conifers
and other forest
trees, which will,
in a few years, add
greatly to the at-
tractiveness of the
locality. All the
hardy annual flow-
ering plants which
thrive so well in
English gardens,
find here the con-
ditions suiting
them. The pansy,
auricula, primrose,
daisy, stock, wall-
flower, and other
favourites, give
variety to the gar-
den, and afford a
pleasing contrast
with the indige-
nous bush flowers
abounding so pro-
fusely in the dis-
trict.
In the immedi-
ate vicinity of the
station are two
grand parks per-
manently dedica-
ted to the public,
and the whole
neighbourhood a-
bounds in water-
falls, cascades, gul-
lies, ravines, and
rivulets.
Getting out of
the train and cros-
sing the line a clearing will be noticed on an elevated
plateau, which gives an uninterrupted view of the
grandest nature. At a direct distance of six or eight
miles the mountains 01 the Grose Valley rise up in
solitary magnificence. Mount Hay, the only one on
the southern side of the valley, is directly opposite,
THE LIVINGSTONE (Late ADELINA) FALL, LAWSON.
with Mounts Tomah and Bell to the right and
in rear, while to the left is Mount King George,
looking from here, remarkably like the British
Lion. Leaving the plateau, a newly planted
avenue leads to the public park of San Josd,
where fine views
may be obtained.
In noticing the
falls and other
natural features of
the district, it is
right to mention
that some confu-
sion exists in the
nomenclature of
several. This has
arisen from the
old residents hav-
ing given one
name to a place
and the Govern-
ment quite a diff-
erent one. How-
ever, to make mat-
ters clear, and in
order that no fea-
ture may be
escaped, we give
where possible,
both the names
under which the
special spots are
known. There are
four falls on the
north side of the
line ; the first of
40 feet, the second
of 90 feet, third of
70 feet, and the
fourth Dante’s
Glen, called the
Christabel Fall,
120 feet.
To get to this
the tourist should
cross the line at
the station and
proceed along a
well-made road for


about four hundred yards, running due north;
then take the road to the left, which leads to
a small bridge crossing the creek near the
top of the first fall. Going over this the path
descends rapidly until reaching the head of a
beautiful fern-
clothed gully, with
the water falling
fully 120 feet sheer
into a rocky basin,
whose edges it
overflows and
forms the creek,
which soon loses
itself in the mossy
and tangled under-
growth of shrubs
and trees. Hem-
med in on all sides
huge black rocks
covered with lich-
ens, mosses, ferns,
and other moist-
ure-loving vegeta-
tion ; a fall in front
with rustic seats
adjacent. A writer,
in describing the
district of Dante’s
Glen, says: “The
lonely devious
path and the steep
declivities of this
cavernous glen are
difficult and wild
enough to remind
the student of the
selva oscura men-
tioned in the
opening of the
grand and gloomy
poem of the ‘ Im-
mortal Floren-
tine,’ there being
a weird character
about . the whole
place, calculated
to inspire the soul
with admiration
and awe.”
If time be limited, parties should take the
road to the left, sharp round Mr. Hay’s grounds,
and descending the ridge, cross, a little wooden
bridge at a distance of half a mile from the
station. Immediately below this Cecilia Fall
is snugly embosomed in a border of greenery,
THE CHRISTABEL FALL, DANTE’S GLEN.
and in a beautiful series ot glens, two other,
Sebastian and St. Michael’s, Falls occur at short
distances apart. Continuing the still declining
path to the left, the visitor will arrive at the
Christabel Fall, descending in the glen of that
name, much of the
beauty of which
has been marred
by the destruction
of the ferns and
the mutilation of
the trees by,Goths
anxious to per-
petuate their mis-
chief by cutting
their initials on
the sassafras and
other trees around.
Stringent regula-
tions have been
framed by the
Trustees to pre-
vent further raids,
and to secure the
restoration of the
original beauties
of the place. It is
to the patriotic ex-
ertions and intel-
ligent perception
of the require-
ments of the dis-
trict by the Hon.
John Macintosh,
M.L.C., that the
public is indebt-
ed for these public
parks being re-
served to its use
and their attrac-
tions conserved,
and the resident
'Trustees, Messrs.
Hay and Moore,
are with too
limited means
faithfully carrying
out their duties.
Avenues are being
planted, seats con-
structed, paths made, and exposed spots pro-
tected in many directions in the interest of the
public.
On the south side of the line of railway are
five falls, two of 40 feet, one of 60 feet, one of
30 feet, and one of 70 feet. The last has been


WENTWORTH HOTEL,
WENTWORTH FALLS
(Opposite the Station).
First-class Accommodation for
Tourists and Visitors.
SADDLE HORSE AND BUGGY KEPT.
Terms Strictly moderate.
C. A. WILSON.
Within easy distance of all Picturesque Views on
the Mountains.
KATOOMBA.
—s—
SUPERIOR ACCOMMODATION
FOR
Tourists and Private Families.
NONE BUT THE BEST BRANDS
OF
Wines and Spirits, &e M kept.
TERMS MODERATE.
GEORGE BILES,
PROPRIETOR.
This Hotel is greatly patronised by Newly
Married Couples.
All Views can be visited without vehicles.
3jfoiU|t Cottage,
WENTWORTH FALLS.
Private Board I Residence.
Refreshment/* for Visitors always ready.
CQUIiHENAN.
ss
called the Adelina Fall, after a young lady in the district,
but the official appellation is the “ Livingstone ” Fall.
It is situated in the public park of Santa Cruz, and to
reach it the road on the lefthand side of the line must
be taken for a little over a mile. From this a ready
descent may be made to the base of the fall, but the
trouble and labour will be well rewarded.
There are several other cascades, falls, and glens within
easy distance, with well defined though somewhat rough
tracks leading thereto.
As indicated on the map, several charming views may
be obtained from many points ; one from a rock a little
beyond the bridge, about three-quarters of a mile from
the station on the Bathurst Road, and another at God-
frey’s Hill, at the site reserved by the Government for a
bridge, both commanding an extensive radius of country,
embracing the Hawkesbury, Nepean, Botany Bay, and
Sydney. From here, too, on a clear dark night, the
lines of light defining the streets of Sydney can be
clearly made out.
Wentworth Falls
(Late “The Weatherboard”).
(62 miles from Sydney ; 2,856 feet above sea-level.)
f) 1 |hIS magnificent cataract, which, from its physical
A[■ aspect, for many years had the title of “ The
wh' Weatherboard Falls,” has lately very properly had
the name of the foremost Australian statesman and
early explorer of these regions associated with it, and
will in the future be known only as the “Wentworth”
Falls. There have been many attempts to do justice to
the grandeur and picturesqueness of the whole scene,
and the descriptive powers of many able men have failed
in their efforts. To Dr. Lang may be attributed the
most eloquent tribute to the natural beauties of the
scene. He says, in one of those passionate bursts of
enthusiasm for which he was famed, —“ Where the rivulet
from the Weatherboard hut discharges itself, there is a
break or bay in the line of cliffs on that side, as if a vast
portion of the wall of rock had been quarried out for the
purpose, the two points appearing from behind like two
lofty headlands jutting out into the valley, and bearing a
remarkable resemblance to the Heads of Port Jackson.
The rivulet, which, in its course of two miles and a half,
has been swelled by one or two smaller streams issuing
from lateral valleys to the size of a common mill-stream,
precipitates itself all at once over the rocks at the head
of the bay, and is lost in the abyss, the fall being at least
1,000 feet. On gaining the edge of the precipice, the
waters seem to shrink instinctively from the frightful leap
to which they have been conducted in their course down
the valley, each individual drop appearing endowed with
separate volition, and seeming determined to shift for


Worth falls
|| pi Tracks 1o look out Points & Water Nympt




itself; and the whole mass of fluid resolving
itself into what appears like innumerable par-
ticles of snow.”
Darwin, in his “Naturalist’s Voyage,” says
of this part of the
country, “ About
a mile and a half
from the little
inn called the
Weatherboard, the
country is elevated
2,800 feet above
the sea-level. Fol-
lowing down a
little valley and
its tiny rill of
water, an immense
gulf unexpectedly
opens through the
trees which border
the pathway at the
depth perhaps of
1,500 feet. Walk-
ing on a few yards
one stands at the
brink of a vast
precipice, and be-
low one sees a
grand bay or gulf
—for I know not
what other name
to give it—thickly
covered with
forest. The point
of view is situate
as if at the head
of a bay, the line
of cliff diverging
on each side, and
showing headland
behind headland,
as on a low sea-
coast. These
cliffs are so abso-
lutely vertical that,
in many places, a
person standing
on the edge and
throwing down a
stone can see it
strike the trees in the abyss below. About five
miles distant in the front another cliff extends,
which then appears completely to encircle the
valley ; hence the name of bay is justified as
applied to this grand amphitheatrical depression.
If we imagine a winding harbour with its deep
WEATHERBOARD FALLS.
waters, surrounded by bold, cliff-like shores, to
be laid dry and a forest to spring up upon its
sandy bottom, we should then have the appear-
ance and structure here exhibited.”
To the natural
beauties of the dis-
trict the trustees
of the place, which
has been declared
a public reserve,
have planted out
in fitting positions
all the trees
deemed suitable
for adding to the
attractiveness of
the scene. These
embrace the ash,
the rowan or
mountain ash, the
horse chestnut,
Spanish chestnut,
larches, elms,
oaks, pines, wal-
nut s, plums,
birches, schinus
molle, willow, ficus
macrophylla, ficus
columnaris, aca
cias, hawthorn,
araucarius, limes,
&c There can
be no doubt that
many of these will
find here a con-
genial home ; but
some doubt may
be entertained as
to the success of
the ficus macro-
phylla ot subtropi-
cal Queensland,
and of the ficus
columnaris, the
typical fig of Lord
Howe Island. But
in any case the
experience will be
useful, as nothing
but actual experi-
ment can determine the suitability of a district
for a given plant or tree.
The strawberry, apple, raspberry, currant, and
many other fruit yielding plants of cold regions
are found to thrive well in districts and under
conditions which might be argued were quite


unsuitable for their healthy development. The Oriental Plane, which is a tree of warm latitudes, is
found to grow luxuriantly in the frigid climates of North Germany and Russia, and it is the most
valuable of shade tree in the almost torrid climate of Riverina. This experiment of planting these
mountain districts with exotic timber trees will be watched by many with great interest. It has
often been observed by writers on the Australian flora that, unlike the forests of America and Europe,
which are mostly deciduous—the trees shedding their foliage annually—nearly the whole vegetation
of Australia is evergreen, the deciduous trees having been introduced from Northern Europe. It is a
great point gained to have a public reserve of this nature placed under the conservancy of a Board
composed of gentlemen having the requisite knowledge and taste for doing justice to a district so
rich in the picturesque.
It has often been asserted that to plant trees exotic to the scene is not in good taste, but this
is now voted as hypercriticism, for nothing can lend colour, variety, incident, and life to a scene so
much as the everchanging tints of the foliage of deciduous trees and the contrasts they afford at
the various seasons of the year.
j * ie f rustees of the Wentworth Falls Reserve are Sir H. Parkes, U. Fletcher, B. Backhouse,
W. Pritchard, with E. H. Biden, as Secretary, all gentlemen spending a good deal of time in
improving the region.
I he features calling for special remark as not to be missed by the visitor are the grand views
from King’s Table Land, the Weeping Rock in the Reserve, near the Falls, and Prince Regent Glen.
to the accommodation to be procured in the locality, there will be little difficulty.
At Wilson’s Wentworth Hotel, a few yards from the station, the best attention is given to all who may
place themselves under the hospitality of the kindly hosts to be found there. But though they are
ever ready to adapt themselves to emergencies, it will be well and but courteous for the intending
visitor to notify a little beforehand his visit, and the extent of requirement as to accommodation.
Half way on the road to the falls, on the right will be seen a comfortable cottage, where
excellent accommodation can be had, and visitors to the falls can obtain refreshment at any hour.
About a quarter of a mile from Wilson’s Hotel is the village of Brasfort, a very good rendering
of the old Saxon name “ Strongitharm.” Here a short time ago—December, 188 r—the Govern-
ment held a land sale, when about seventy acres were sold, the lowest price being £2O and the
highest per acre. These rates, considering the upset price set by the Government was but
£ l ° per acre, may be said to indicate the public appreciation of the district Recently, in March,
1882, another sale of land was equally satisfactory, and everything seems to point to the rapid
advance of the district.
Ihe best route to take in visiting these Falls is to cross the bridge on the Bathurst Road,
which can be seen from the station ; then turn to the left over the green, where a sign-board
points to a well-defined path, along which the Trustees have placed seats and planted a number of
English trees. A walk of about a mile and a half will bring the stroller to a white gate, the entrance
to the recognized reserve. Here will be found a hut, with tables, seats, fire-place, and a stack of
fire-wood for the use of the visitor, and within easy distance a perennial source of pure water, as
shown on the plan.
I racing the track a little further on will be discovered a small cave worthy of inspection. At
the time of our visit two prospectors for coal informed us that they had been able, by means of ropes,
to descend a distance of a thousand feet, but they lacked the additional necessary five hundred feet of
rope to enable them to get to the bottom.
Returning to the Station, a very charming walk may be taken by way of the Jamieson Valley
Creek, crossing it by the little bridge. Here, on the rising ground to the right, will be found
waratahs and other grand flowering plants and ferns in the wildest profusion.
WATER NYMPHS’ DELL.
1 o reach this the visitor must proceed some forty yards along the rail, descend the bank to
the right of cottage, cross the swamp, and follow the path at the foot of the hill, bearing to the right
till the end of the fence enclosing the grounds of Mr. H. Palmer is reached, then go down the rocky
track for about a quarter of a mile, when the top of the gully will be arrived at. In the descent great
care will be necessary, the path being very broken and rugged. If the visitor has done justice to his
opportunities he will return in the evening quite ready for the ample repast he will find awaiting him,
and will enjoy a quiet evening’s amusement and thorough rest for the night.




KATOOMBA


Katoomba
(66 miles from Sydney; 3,349 feet above sea-level.)
fEAVING Wentworth, and still ascending, we
pass through splendid rugged scenery on
the right and left for about four miles,
when Katoomba
is reached, a name
suggesting its abo-
riginal origin, and
making us regret
that the native
names had not
been conferred on
other picturesque
localities which
have been modern-
ized without ade-
quate cause.
There is no
lack of excellent
accommodation.
“The Caring-
ton,” (late Great
Western Hotel),
is always ready,
and as conducted
by its enterprising
owner, whose
experience was
gained in the
“Victoria” Hotel,
Melbourne, of
which he was
proprietor, will be
able to satisfy the
most epicurean
patron. This
hotel, of which we
give an engraving,
adds a new fea-
ture to the district.
It is splendidly
situated, com-
manding some
of the finest views
in the world; from
the balcony the
valley of Kanim-
bla, and on clear
days the chief
buildings of Sydney, with the intervening valley
and river of Nepean, can be clearly traced with
the naked eye—a common field-glass bringing
out in clear definition the shipping of the harbour
and other features of the city and its environs.
THE ORPHAN ROCK, KATOOMBA.
The hotel occupies two-and-a-half acres of land,
the garden being quite famed for the splendidly
developed fruit it yields. Many of the fruits
are those thriving
so well in cool
latitudes—notably
the pear, apple,
peach, plum, apri-
cot, cherry; and
the smaller fruits,
such as currants,
gooseberries, rasp-
berries, filberts,
which all grow
with great luxuri-
ance, and remind
one of the wealth
of a Kentish
orchard. On the
other side of the
way is the garden
for vegetables, a
very useful and
necessary adjunct
to a high class
hotel. In fact the
hotel has been
built on the most
modern principles
to ensure to visi-
tors the comforts
and even the
luxurious ease to
be got in first-class
establishments of
the kind in Eu-
rope and America.
Baths of all kinds,
electric bells, gas,
water, and every
provision for
health and con-
venience have
been studied and
wrought out in the
general design.
The rooms are
spacious, well ven-
tilated, and warmed; and from roof to cellar have
satisfied the aims of architect and proprietor.
Speaking of the cellar reminds us that this is
a special feature of the house, and Mr. Goyder
is not likely to jeopardize its fame in that respect.


<r3v£-P
l
(LATE “GREAT WESTERN” HOTEL)
m O W BA.
—THK—
MOST FASHIONABLE RESORT
—ON THE
BLUE MOUNTAINS.
First Class Accommodation
for Visitors.
Billiards, Lawn Tennis.
F. C. GOYDER,
3P3EiO3P3RI3STO3R.
“The Carington ” has been named in honor of the
new Governor, Lord Carington. The establishment
which has always held such a high reputation in the
estimation of visitors and tourists, has been recently
purchased by Mr. F. C. Goyder, long and favorably
known throughout the Australian colonies as the pleasant
host and attentive proprietor of the famous “ Victoria ”
Hotel in Bourke Street, Melbourne. Mr. Goyder pur-
poses giving to his new establishment the benefit of his
personal attention, which is a guarantee of excellent and
liberal management.
The hotel commands a view of the beautiful valleys,
fern gullies, water-falls, and mountain peaks around, and
the spot has been selected from the best special stand-
point in this particular. Many of the chief points
and objects of interest are within easy distance of “ The
Carington.” Katoomba Falls are reached in a mile’s walk,
from whence a good view of the great Valley of the
Jamison is obtainable. A litte further on is the favourite
“ Orphan Rock,” an immense solitary obelisk, hundreds
of feet high. From here we soon come to the new coal
mine opened out by Mr. North, whose tramway down
the declivity is considered one of the wonders of the
Blue Mountains.
A good path has just been completed, so that visitors
may walk under the fall, thus—in a mimic way perhaps—
realizing somewhat of the weirdness, if not the grandeur
of Niagara. It is contemplated, too, by some of the
adjacent proprietors to construct a dam across the valley
falls, so as to form a lake of good size, with
a depth of from 20 to 30 feet, wherein tourists in hot
weather may disport themselves, after or before the weary-
ing yet delightful work of exploring the scenes in the
neighbourhood.
About a mile away are the Leura Falls, another good
view of the valley, an interesting “ echo,” and a glen
rich in ferns and wild flowers. A charming spot to
which has been given the name of “ The Meeting of the
Waters,” is close here, and quite a group of minor
cascades and runnels.
From this spot the tourist will be within easy distance
of several famed resorts on the Blue Mountains. A
good road of four miles leads to the celebrated Went-
worth Falls ; and Govett’s Leap, with the Valley of the
Grose, are the same distance from Katoomba as they are
from Mount Victoria, and as a fairly good road connects
the two places they are quite as accessible from here as
from Mount Victoria. The place is destined to be
largely frequented by those seeking rest, and change of
air, and scene; and especially during the spring, summer,
and autumn, when the bracing climate is a delightful
contrast from the humid, enervating atmosphere of
the city.
Among other excellent houses here are Biles’ Hotel,
in front of the Railway Station, a comfortable retreat,


greatly favoured by newly married couples and others preferring quiet, with roomy apartments, good
attendance, pleasant society, and great variety for patrons.
Balmoral House, kept by Mrs. Dunn, contains 16 rooms, specially built to afford comfort to
visitors. Families and ladies a speciality.
The private boarding house of Mrs. Baird is highly spoken of as affording comfortable quarters.
There are also several stores, where all necessaries of life may be had at reasonable prices,
rendering all anxiety on the score of commissariat details quite unnecessary.
The visitor to Katoomba, after settling down to his quarters, may take a glance at our map of
the district when he will see clearly indicated the points of interest in the district.
THE WITCH’S LEAP
Is easily found by the winding path which leads to the foot of the fall, with perpendicular cliffs on
each side towering up to a height of 150 feet; and here will be seen one of the prettiest dells or
“THE CARRINGTON,” Late “GREAT WESTERN” HOTEL.
gullies of the mountains. The fragrant sassafras, native musk, aster, and other odour-yielding
shrubs and flowers, with fine timber trees, line the descent till the valley and coal-mine is reached
a thousand feet below. At the foot of the fall a crystal stream flows for some distance, through
ferns and other vegetation, past a rock known as “ Maud’s Wonder,” which commands a fine view ;
and farther on the “ Orphan Rock ” before referred to. Turning sharply to the left and going through
the ferns at the foot of the “Orphan Rock” we arrive at M-Y, a suggestive title for what is also called
the “ Lovers’ Picnic Ground.” The scenery hereabouts is wild and romantic, and the thrice repeated
echoings of a spot close by is a source of amusement and surprise to most visitors.
Returning to the “Orphan Rock” and passing it, as the descent of the gully is pursued the
scene changes at every step. On the right may be seen the coal trams coming through a split in the
£


1
AGENTS, &c, &c„
KA.TOOMBiL
fANCY jaOODS,
-fBAtMORAI* HOUSE,§F
KATOOMBA.
fRIVATE ACCOMMODATION for Families,
Tourists, and Visitors seeking change of
air and scenery on the mountains, and requiring
home comforts. Apply by letter or telegram.
Mrs. DUNN.
BLUE dVEOTTdSTT^AXIsrS,
KATOOMBA. KATOOMBA.
GtENAMPIE HOUSE.
All the comforts of a home will be found at the above
establishment. Terms to suit visitors.
Proprietor— WM. BAIRD.
rock, and passing on their way at an apparently impossible angle until they reach the valley below
when turning to the right they enter the face of the cliff. Great care is necessary here : the trams
should be followed closely till the vallev is gained.
1 here are now about 70 people in this part of the Valley, a number of small cottages, general
store, a butcher s shop, and a school for the children. A good track is now made to the ruined
castle, and is well worth a visit.
KATOOMBA FALLS.
The rock on the right affords the best view of the Fall, as also a fine view of the “ Orphan Rock ”
which from this point looks like a small pillar separated from the main cliff; it is however over
two hundred yards long, and falls on its eastern slope more than a thousand feet to a perfect forest
of grandly developed tree-ferns, many 40 feet high, with heads extending 25 feet, and other charac-
teristic vegetation.
THE BLUFF AT ENGINE POINT.
From here may be seen the “Three Sisters.” The whole mountain takes the form of a cathedral
with three spires, and a rocky formation resembles an old woman entering at the porch. Other
features are the “ Ruined Castle, ” the Corowal or “ Solitary Mount,” the “ Megalong ” “ Mount Clear
and the Picton and Nattai Ranges, some fifty miles away.
A little to the east from this point is the wonderful freak of nature known as “ The Split ”
which suggested and greatly facilitated the formation of the incline, tunnel, &c., now used for raising
tnc coal. * 1
GRACIE’S HILL.
.. Fr< >m the junction of the Engine Road the view embraces on the south-east side the Jamieson
Valley, Ihe Sisters, portion of Kanimbla Valley, to the Cox River, Mount Victoria, Blackheath,
&c., and a curiously-shaped rock, called the Boar’s Head.
BIRDIE’S DELL.
A track to the right, a 1 ittle before Engine and Megalong Roads are reached (see map), leads to
a large area of swampy land, at the north-western end of which is situate the charming dell known as
• i 1 I , eS ' J - .j j casca(^e h ere when the wind is westerly is beaten back and the water seems to return
in finely divided spray over the head of the rock, and forms a perfect cloud of vapour. The
waters from the falls seen in the distance meet at
“ Nellie’s Glen.”
LADIES’ ROCK.
This is a favourite roadside seat, from which splendid
views of the mountain ranges, rising tier over tier, can
be closely studied. This is “ Mountain Chain
View.”
NELLIE’S GLEN.
A well-defined old quarry track to the left of the
Bathurst Road, a little beyond the “Ladies Rock,” leads in
about 200 yards to a line of marked trees running south
towards “Nellie’s Glen,” in which is a cascade formed by
the meeting of two water-courses. From this spot a
striking echo is heard—the word shouted being exactly
repeated three times. I his glen is a remarkable gorge
or break from the top of the mountain to the Kanimbla
Valley, varying from 60 to 20 feet, and sloping rapidly for
a distance of 500 feet. The walls of the declivity appear
to have been washed out and tunnelled into caves of all
sizes, which are full of luxuriant ferns and mosses. The
propiietor offers every facility for visitors enjoying their
trip, only stipulating that they do not lay ruthless' hands
on the ferns and other natural adornments of the place.




MAP OF
BUCIiHEATH


m
BLACKHEATH.
S
jIYDORA pUOE FAMILY JIDTEL.
fHIS Hotel, replete with every home comfort,
and convenience for Tourists, offers excep-
tional advantages to Travellers and Families.
In close proximity to the renowned Govett’s
Leap, Mermaids’ Cave, Perry’s Look Down, &c,,
&c.
Private Suites of Rooms for Families, Croquet
Lawn, Paddocks, &c.
Buggies, Batns, Saddle Horses, Wines and
Spirits of the Best Brands.
Communications will meet with prompt atten-
tion.
R. J. S. NICOLLE,
PROPRIETOR.
Mrs. Nicolle personally supervises the house-
hold arrangements.
ORDINARY DAILY, 1.30.
Terms—Bs. to i2s- 6d. per diem Families by
arrangement.
E&HIMBM HOUSE,
BLACKHEATH.
Private B&srd emdl BmMQUQQ*
Terms —7s. 6d. per Day, or £2 2s. per Week.
lES. A. A. WILSON.
EXCHANGE STORES, BLACKHEATH
JAMES CALE, Junr.
General ®t@£©&@©p@ir & Imparted.
Freight Paid to all parts of the Mountains,
Bus ffioann ¥ ulh,
BLACKHEATH.
Five Minutes’ Walk from Station. B,h9hfeet above sea-
level, on the Western Line of Railway.
IIT
IS PREPARED TO
Receive Visitors Requiring Change of Air.
TERMS MODERATE.
To prevent disappointment, intending Visitors should
intimate the Accommodation they require.
LEURA AND LURLINE FALLS.
To visit these follow, from the 'Station, Katoomba
Street till it intersects Waratah Street; go along this for
150 yards, and pick up the track bearing S.S.E. At the
end of this track is the gorge into which the falls dis-
charge. These, with the valley intervening, are a splendid
sight. Following the track a little further, and bearing
to the left, the “ Leura ” Falls break upon the view. A
track leading N.W. from here leads to the famed “ Meet-
ing of the Waters” at “ Lurline ” Falls —a sight scarcely
to be surpassed in any part of the world. This is a
favourite neighbourhood for picnics, and the basin of the
Falls forms an admirable bathing place.
THE GAP,
As indicated on the map, is another marvel of beauty not
to be missed by the visitor, who, if he is artistically
inclined, may find many weeks’ work for his pencil.
THE COAL MINE.
Last, but not least, in an economical point of view, is
this mine and its accessories. The tramway is a mile
and a quarter long from the railway siding, and the cars
are propelled by a single steel cable 2*4 miles long,
weighing tons. One is left wondering how such a
mass of steel was got to its destination from the maker’s
works in Scotland. The Gladstone Coal Mine is about
3 miles from Katoomba and about 2 miles from Went-
worth Falls.
There is a post, money order, and telegraph office on
the Bathurst Road, and a capital school, with a daily
average at date of 42*5, the children coming from the
district within nine or ten miles. Divine Service is held
every Sunday, and at other times as announced.
The land sales held recently show the district to be
rapidly growing in appreciation, as large prices were
realized.
Blackheath.
(73 Miles from Sydney ; 3,494 feet above sea-level.)
Off HE whole region reached within a half hour’s walk
• from the Station is weirdly wild and picturesque ;
and though much can be done in a summer day’s
ramble, the district would afford full occupation for
a whole week or more.
The visitor will have plenty of choice offering him for
accommodation, and he will be very hard to please if he
find no place to fully suit his taste and requirements.
Hydora House, by Mr. R. J. S. Nicolle, is a fine hotel,
with a good garden and capacious grounds. “ Blue
Mountain Villa,” kept by Mrs. Butts; and “ Kanimbla


House,” by Mrs. A. A. Wilson, are all deserving of a share of public patronage, as their proprietors
seem to vie with each other in studying the comfort and convenience of visitors. The general store
of Mr. J. Cale is a great boon to temporary occupiers of cottages.
GOVETT’S LEAP.
To reach this, turn to the left at the end of the fence of Hydora House, following the course
of the road for about a mile-and-a-half. Here will open out to the view the Great Gorge, with its
surrounding battlements of stupendous rocks.
The Trustees of the Government Reserve have placed near here a shelter shed, with seats and
table. Looking from this hut down into the Gorge, “Breakfast Rock” stands a little to the right,
projecting over the edge of the cliffs. By following the path one may descend to the shelf-like
ridge, whence the finest views of the Gorge and Falls are to be obtained. Many writers have
attempted to adequately describe the awful majesty of the scene as taken in by the eye from the
edge of these cliffs, but even the most skilful word-painter must fail utterly. Pen or pencil can but
mimic the vast panorama stretching to the right and left, with the hidden winding creek and the
forest valley extending from the foot of the cliff for miles in front. Tall timber trees, and majestic
tree-ferns, with luxuriant, rank vegetation, are all dwarfed by the distance, and present a dull, dead
level of scrub—lighted up here and there by bright tints of the fern fronds —to the beholder’s eye.
On the right is seen “Govett’s Falls,” the waters of which pour over the face of the cliffs 160 feet
below the level of the hut, and have a clear drop of 520 feet. Below this is the fine cataract known
as “ Trinity Cascade,” and still further below and to the left is what is known as the “ Left Hand
Fall.” Indeed there are several falls forming pretty subjects for the artist, but which are quite
eclipsed by the larger proportions of the tumbling mass of waters at Govett’s Leap.
The centre of the Gorge is about 1,800 feet below the stand-point, near the hut, whence it
gradually descends to a depth of 2,027 feet—being then about 1,050 feet above sea-level —where
the silver thread of the creek draining the valley mingles its waters with those of the Grose River,
under the cliffs of Mount King George. The width of the valley, as defined by the surrounding
cliffs, ranges from three-quarters of a mile to a mile-and-a-half. The descent to the foot of the falls
is at present impracticable, except by some elaborate engineering efforts or feats of daring, the cliffs
being 800 feet high at the most accessible point.
The following further details relative to Govett’s Leap are gathered from various sources, and
are given in the Railway Guide published under the auspices of the Government. Mr. E. Barton
says : —“ Once on the track the visitor has nothing to do but to follow it up until he reaches the
tremendous rent or depression in the earth, which is said to be the deepest chasm with perpendicular
cliffs in the known world. It is almost surrounded with these cliffs, which are believed to be
nowhere less than 3,000 feet above sea-level. The full sublimity and grandeur of the scene is not
realized at the first glance. After contemplating it for some time the mind becomes filled with awe
and wonder as it vainly strives to comprehend
‘ the vast immeasurable abyss,
Outrageous as a sea, dark, wasteful, wild ! ’
The trees in the valley below, although one or two hundred feet high, or perhaps more, are indistin-
guishable in their individuality. The scenery is full of grandeur, and to add to its beauty there are
two streams which are precipitated into the mighty chasm, and although meeting with no impediment
but the atmosphere in their descent they are dissipated into mist before their waters can reach the
bottom; and often, when the wind is favourable, they are wafted upwards and along for a considerable
distance.”
Another writer says :—“ To the right, at the distance of about half-a-mile, the Govett’s Leap or
Fall pours itself headlong over a perpendicular wall of dark-tinted rock, 520 feet in sheer descent,
into a mass of black fragments of stone, which has in the course of ages accumulated at the base of
the cataract. This descending mass of water, white and misty as the driven snow, sways as the
wind blows to and fro, like the veil of a bride; the vast height of the waterfall, the strong contrasts
of colour, and the undulating motion so produced imparting a very singular and most charming
effect. When the sun attains to a certain altitude a rainbow plays for hours around the cloudy
folds of this fairy veil.”


The top of Govett’s Leap can be reached by
a path running to the right of the pic-nic shed;
close by this lovely spot is the Blackheath Coal
Mine, which can be easily reached by a well
made road. Visitors to Blackheath should not
leave without pay-
ing a visit to the
Brewery of W. A.
Allen & Co. (see
map); it embraces
all the most
modern improve-
ments, and is ca-
pable of turning
out 120 barrels a
week; the pro-
prietors will al-
ways welcome a
visitor, and allow
them to draw a
glass of ale from
any cask in the
cellar.
The following
features of the dis-
trict should not
be missed by the
visitor :
PERRY’S
LOOK-DOWN.
This, with
“ Docker’s Lad-
der,” as shown on
the map, may be
reached by a fair
path, running for
about seven miles.
Junction Camp,
situate in the
Gorge of the
Grose, is reached
by a perilous
track, the depth
being 2,150 feet
below the general
level of the rail-
way station.
LOOK-OUT HILL.
About three hundred yards from Blue Moun-
tain Villa, along the Bathurst Road, a good view
may be got from the hill; and on clear days,
with an ordinary field glass, the city of Sydney
may be plainly seen.
GOVETT’S LEAP FALL.
THE MERMAIDS’ CAVE.
Lost in amazement at the grand scenery of
the Gorge and Govett’s Leap the visitor too
frequently misses the minor,* beauties of the
district. The “ Mermaids’ Cave ”is exquisitely
pretty, and it may
be readily reached
by crossing the
railway, keeping
along the fence,
towards Sydney,
as far as the
second telegraph
post past the
semaphore. Ten
yards further on
the word “Cave ”
will be found
painted in red on
the fence; then
the track to the
right must be fol-
lowed inclining to
the left for about
half a mile. This
leads to a beauti-
ful cave-like for-
mation, clothed
with ferns, mosses,
and lichens; the
trickle of small
water falls giving
moisture and
coolness to the
rockey wall and
surface soil. Ar-
riving at the end
of the path, de-
scent must be
made between the
rocks on the left,
when the glorious
beauty of the
place bursts on
the vision. Masses
of rock of fantastic
shapes, with trees
and shrubs in all
stages of growth,
towering high
overhead; under unwilling feet are trodden
maiden hair and other ferns, with mountain
moss and liverwort of many species. A clear
runnel of water plays laughingly over the stones
along its course to the valley, and the air is


MAHOR HOUSE,
MOUNT VICTORIA
(Late residence of J. R. Fairfax, Esq.)
MRS. J. M. ENNIS, Manageress.
— —
«HIS convenient, comfortable,
and commodious Hotel is
situated directly opposite the
Railway Station. It is replete
with everything tending to the
convenience and comfort of
Ladies, Tourists, Families,
Travellers, or Invalids.
Large and lofty Rooms and well-
aired Beds. In and out-door
amusements.
Well laid out grounds. All the
English Fruits in season.
Buggies and Saddle Horses.
PIANOS AND BATHS,
And all the comforts of a home.
yate Suites op
For those who require privacy.
terms: FROM 3 guineas a week.
Letters and Telegrams receive prompt attention.
redolent with perfume of acacias and musk trees. The
whole scene needs but the elfs and fairies to realize some
of the scenes depicted in the “ Midsummer Night’s
Dream.” Kendall exactly describes this place when in
one of his poems he writes—
“ Through beautiful bountiful forests that screen
A marvel of blossoms from heat,
Whose lights are the mellow and golden and green,
He walks with irreverent feet.”
Mount Victoria.
(77 miles from Sydney ; 3,422 feet above sea-level.)
:T would require a small volume to describe the
3 ' places and objects which have been named after
W her Majesty the Queen of England ; but it may be
questioned whether any place will more deservedly
perpetuate her honoured name than the highest peak
of the Blue Mountains of New South Wales, and the
district adjacent.
Quite a township has sprung up within the last half
dozen years, and what was, a single decade ago, but an
almost unused halting-place is now a busy thriving coun
try resort. High-class hotels, stores, boarding-houses,
and villa residences, with their surroundings, are rapidly
giving form and definition to the streets which a few
years ago had but an ideal existence on the surveyor’s
plans. Little did the early explorers of the district think
that within a “ stone’s-throw of years ” thriving hotels,
churches, schools, and other features of settlement would
so soon mark their footprints. Well laid-out gardens
and grounds, facilities for cricket, lawn tennis, quoits,
croquet, aud other out-door sports; well-appointed
billiard-rooms, skittle alleys, and other surroundings of
highly civilized life are available here, where fifty years
ago the early explorers were unable to bring even their
knapsacks. A good public school, with a roll of 96,
and an average attendance of 75, the scholars coming
from the neighbourhood for some miles around, either by
train or on horseback. The services of the Church of
England are administered by the resident clergyman,
Rev. J. A. Newth, twice on Sundays; and other bodies
are occasionally represented by some visiting minister.
The population, which numbers 350, is chiefly engaged
in the usual country pursuits or in catering to the visiting
world who make the mountains their temporary home.
There is abundance of accommodation of all kinds at
Mount Victoria.
Immediately upon leaving the Station, directly in front,
will be seen “Manor House Hotel” and adjoining villa,
the late residence of the Messrs. Fairfax, with their
tastefully laid-out grounds and English fruit trees of all
descriptions. Here may be seen in perfection the


4k ,ii|¥ *w^pL
4§? 5*JW* :j®F
\ < i*




HVDRS-
FERN COTTAGE,
MiOTTITT TnCCTOaRIA.
Qorpfortable Board apd Residence
WITH ALL THE
COMPORTS OK .A. HOMED,
FIVE MINUTES’ from the RAILWAY STATION.
Terms—6B. per day, or 355. per week.
Good Bath.
Telegrams requiring Replies must be Pre-paid.
ACCOMMODATION FOR VISITORS.
E. PLUMMER.
LtEIGESW (goiFWAGE,
MOUNT VICTORIA.
BfßAffiii mwwmm 9
MOUNT VICTORIA,
PRIVATE BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT.
i MA§SgAg§, proprietress.
Terms, £2 2s. per week.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
English hawthorn, chestnut, oak, elm, and poplar, growing side by side with the Australian pine, the
Bunya Bunya, and other indigenous timber. The fond remembrances of old England and Christ-
mastide grow strong upon us as we note the prickly, red-berried holly thriving as if in its natural home.
The grounds are seven acres in extent, and the houses are second to none in the colony as houses
of public accommodation for visitors, being elegant-looking villas with large, lofty, well ventilated
rooms, and wide verandahs on three sides. The enterprising manageress, Mrs. Ennis, has, at great
expense, constructed additional rooms, and the establishment could now accommodate seventy
visitors. Neither have sports and pastimes been forgotten, and even the children have been thought
of in the way of swings, see-saws, &c.; while for those of larger growth there are croquet, lawn-tennis,
quoits, bowls, bagatelle, &c., &c. For those who visit the district with their families, and require
privacy and retirement, there is the establishment of Stratford Cottage, conducted by Miss Marshall,
situate at the rear of Perry’s and the Imperial Hotels, and overlooking the whole township. Here
the visitor will appreciate the kindly attention of Miss Marshall, with her special aptitude for making
everybody at home. Lovers of music may gratify their taste here, there being a piano, harmonium,
and always pleasant visitors as society at Stratford.
“ Fern Cottage ” also offers quiet accommodation for tourists and visitors, who always appreciate
the kind attention of Mrs. Howell.
The “Imperial,” a first-class hotel, is one of the largest on the mountains; Annie C. Perry,
proprietress. At “ Leicester Cottage,” conducted by Miss Plummer, the visitor will find all the
comforts of home.
To the larger establishments it is not so much a matter of moment, but to the smaller ones
notice should always be sent a day or two before as to the extent of the party and its requirements in
the way of accommodation.
The chief points of interest at Monnt Victoria are
Mount Piddington, whence a very comprehensive view
of the district may be had; the zig-zag descent to the
Kanimbla valley, with the caves on the way; the
Engineer’s Cascade; the “ Fairy Dell,” not nearly as
pretty as of old; and fine views of the chief mountain
peaks, conspicuous amongst which are mounts Tomah,
Wilson, York, Clarence, and some minor eminences. The
township is conveniently situated as a centre from which
many places previously named and yet to be mentioned,
may be visited. Govett’s Leap, Katoomba, the Valley ot
the Grose, Lithgow, and Hartley are all, by an early start,
to be reached from here in short drives, giving plenty
of time to return in the afternoon in time for dinner.
Mount Victoria has been called the paradise of tourists.
Nature here has finished her work with the grandeur of
omnipotent might. The Cyclopean masonry of the frown-
ing walls which mark the boundary of vast chasms as
large as an English county, lying prone down thousands
of feet below; gullies and ravines clothed with luxuriant
vegetation; tumbling masses of water, forming picturesque
falls and cascades; caves, passes, and intricate winding,
rocky, and mossy paths make the place most attractive
to all in search of health and pleasure.
MOUNT PIDDINGTON.
This is close to the township, and is of easy access.
It was named after the Hon. W. R. Piddington, who had
tracks cleared and the place rendered more accessible to
visitors. The Trustees of the reserve deserve great
credit for the care taken of the place, and the skill exer-


cised to conserving the natural features, while at the same time studying the convenience of visitors in
every way. A good path has been made all round the mountain; a fine picnic shed has been erected
wherein to take shelter from the rain or fierce rays of the sun. Good views may be had from the summit,
as indicated on the subjoined plan of the place—Mounts Hay, Clarence, Wilson, “The Sugar Loaf,”
Tomah, King George, the Hunter Range, and the distant Camden uplands ; while close at our feet
lie Hartley and the Kanimbla valleys. On the west side of Mount Piddington a winding path leads
down into the valley. A little way down is the Solitary Rock. Here the path turns due south, and
near the corner of the next turn running due west, as shown on our plan, is
THE WITCHES’ GLEN,
a charming spot, having a wealth of ferns and flowering plants scattered all around. A little further
on, by taking the path to the left, “ Fern Cave ” is reached. Then, following down the path tending
south, the “ Fairy Bovver ” is seen on the left; here a fine stream of clear water rushes through a
cleft in the rock, falling into the basin below, where a shower or plunge bath may be enjoyed.
Continuing down the glen for some distance the “steps” are reached, but at present they must not be
descended. Take the path on the right along the edge of the cliff" till a large wooden ladder is seen ;
ascend this to “ Cox’s Cave,” named after its discoverer. The entrance to this is about 30 by 40 feet,
and the cave opens out as you enter. The ferns and other vegetation is something to be remem-
bered, and the trustees are doing everything in their power to preserve the natural features of the
place for the public enjoyment. Returning to the top of the steps previously mentioned, and, making
the descent, a very pretty waterfall will be seen on the left. Still going down the path—with here
and there steps cut in the rock for the convenience of visitors —some fine fern trees are visible, and
after passing the water-fall “Fern-tree Gully” is arrived at, the sides being densely clothed with
tree-ferns in every stage of growth and with the moss, maiden-hair, and numerous other of the smaller
ferns. The scene is bewilderingly beautiful; a stream from Fairy Bower here flows into the Black-
heath Creek. At the bottom of the steps, which are 160 in number, those who are not afraid of some
rough work, may continue their stroll, bearing to the right, and return to the hotel by ascending the
Kanimbla Pass or “ Little Zigzag,” hereafter described, or return by the path just followed.
THE LITTLE ZIGZAG, OR KANIMBLA PASS.
About half-a-mile from the township, along the Bathurst Road, and passing the school-house on
the left, a track turns off to the left, which leads to the head of the gulch-like formation, leading down
to the Valley of Kanimbla, which is in its way, as remarkable as the chasm known as Govett’s Leap.
A series of well-constructed zig-zag paths, or terraced ways, seventeen in all, will severely test the
endurance of the visitor, but by taking occasional rests by the way, the descent is not difficult. It is
the return that tries the physique of the climber and puts to the test his muscular power. The great
point to be observed in mountain climbing is to take matters coolly and quietly. To attempt to rush
a difficulty of this kind is to court distress, for wind and muscle cannot endure the strain. It should,
then, be borne in mind that in making the descent of Kanimbla Pass one should not be “ tied to
time,” so as to necessitate hurry ; half a day at least will be necessary to carefully explore the
neighbourhood. By starting after an early breakfast, the place may be visited and a return made in
time for dinner, but the visitor will not be in any mood for a very long ramble in the evening.
At the foot of seventh point, nearly half way down the Zigzag, are to be seen the Kanimbla
Caves, and these are very interesting. The entrance to these is sharply round to the left on the face
of the cliff. Great care should, however, be exercised in exploring them, as there are some points of
danger. Lights are necessary, and no one should attempt to grope their way about in the dark
unless well acquainted with the intricacies of the place. A large chasm in the rock exists at the end
of the upper Cave, and the place is black as night, so that without a light it is impossible to
realise the dangers and the interesting features of the place. The lower cave is 80 feet; the upper
one about 60.
THE ENGINEER’S CASCADE
and Ross’s Cave may be reached from near the top of the Zigzag by taking the track to the left,
which traverses very interesting and beautiful scenery.


THE FAIRY DELL.
This, the property of the Hon. Mr. Piddington, has been converted, by damming up the waters
at the fall, into a large bathing place for visitors; and to reach it the road past the Manor House to
the north east must be taken.
MOUNT VICTORIA PASS.
This is about two miles from the station, and may be reached in an easy drive along the old
Hartley Road. Fine views are commanded all along the road, the grand peaks of the principal
mountains standing out sharply against the clear grey sky.
These are the chief sights at Mount Victoria, but the whole district is so full of interest and so
rich in the picturesque that a month may be very pleasantly spent in exploring its varied attractions.
Visitors will find at Mount Victoria all the conveniences of a rising township—butcher, baker,
general store, blacksmith, &c., &c., and those desirous of possessing some record of their trip may
procure splendid photographic views from the establishment of Mr. Caney, who here pursues with
marked success his profession as a photographic artist.
Hartley Vale
(81 miles from Sydney; 3,318 feet above sea-level.)
-*|SfEAVING Mount Victoria and proceeding towards Lithgow, the tram takes a course north and
3)1 north-east, passing some extremely rugged cuttings through the rock, and picturesque “peeps.”
FTT About a mile and a half from Mount Victoria, on our right we leave Mount King George, and in
another mile can be seen in the distance the entry to the Valley of the Grose River. About
another half mile on the track the branch line of rails turns off, leading to the Hartley Vale Kerosene
Shale Works. A pretty sight of the town of Hartley opens out on the view from this point. “ The
shale mines in Hartley Vale,” says Barton, “ are well worth seeing, not only on account of the scenery,
but also from the fact that an important and successful industry is in full operation.”
Mount Wilson
(83 miles from Sydney; 3,478 feet above sea-level.)
CT?HIS is about 4% miles from the mountain bearing that name. Mr. Du Faur, in his notice of
ff Mount Wilson, says, “ A ride of about five miles from the platform, along the northern water-
shed of the Grose, and of about three miles further along a spur bearing to the northward from
Bell’s line of road, and leading down to some of the heads of Wollangambe Creek and the
Colo River (affluents of the Hawkesbury) brings the tourist to the foot of a ridge, which on his right
hand appears to be bounded by the usual perpendicular escarpment of horizontal sandstone character-
istic of the Hawkesbury formation; but the dense undergrowth, the increased size and improved
symmetry of the trees, and the rich black soil under his feet, tell of a sudden change.” The tourist
should not return without visiting Mount Wilson, for there he will see some of the most magnificent
scenery and splendid tree-ferns which this colony can boast of.
Clarence Siding
(88 miles from Sydney ; 3,658 feet above sea-level.)
11l HIS is the greatest altitude reached by the line of railway. Such is the rugged nature of the
2 L country that the surveyors had to be let down the cliffs by ropes to do their work, and the
contractors had to commence their work in the same way. Passing through the Clarence
sg Tunnel, 539 yards long, and a further distance of two miles the descent of the mountain is


IIiPMHL HOTEL,
Opp. mum STATION, LITHGOW.
I. F. CORBETT, Proprietor.
The above Hotel is fitted up is every detail for the reception and
comfort of Visitors.
SUITES OF BOOMS FOB FAMILIES.
TOURISTS are particularly reminded that the Eskbank
Station is in the very entre of Lithgow, the nearest point
to all the principal industries and objects of interest.
All Letters and Telegrams will receive prompt attention.
flffMMUt’S HOTEL,
LITHGOW.
By JOHN CONNELL.
Good Accommodation for Travellers.
commenced by the “ Great Zigzag,” a series of inclines similar to those by which we scaled the
mountain range at Emu Plains, but of a more colossal character. This work of engineering skill
is justly regarded as one of the most stupendous ever yet accomplished in railway construction.
The gradient nearly the whole distance is 1 in 42, the line in parts traversing the brink of the
mountain range. It is estimated that these five miles of railway cost the country half a million.
Lithgow
(96 miles from Sydney; 3,006 feet above sea-level.)
fHIS is a busy place, with its mining and metal industries represented by the Lithgow Valley,
Bowenfels, Eskbank, and Vale of Clywdd Companies. These are engaged in the production
cwju of coal and other minerals and metals, smelting of iron and copper, the manufacture of iron
'ygC in all its branches, of terra-cotta and coarser pottery, of a very superior character of fire-brick
and ordinary building bricks. The pursuit of these industries has necessarily given rise to a
township of growing importance; and the richness of the whole district around seems to point to
Lithgow as the future Wolverhampton of New South Wales.
The visitor to Lithgow will meet with excellent accommodation in every way at the hotels, several
of which are fine, carefully managed establishments. The large hotel just on the right of the Eskbank
station, is the “ Imperial,” kept by Mr. Corbett, where every attention is shown to visitors; another
is Connell’s hotel, on the main road, near Lithgow station, and there are six others —the “ Cosmopoli-
tan,” the “Club House,” the “Court House,” the “Zigzag,” the “Royal,” the “Commercial;” and
there are convenient and respectable boarding houses and two billiard saloons. Stores abound
where all the requirements of the inhabitants can be readily obtained; there is a chemist, a doctor,
n i 1 / a 1 I*l <» /» 1 •
a School of Arts and library, churches of five denomina-
tions, a Public school, with good attendance, conducted
with great credit by Mr. McPhee, the girls being under
the able direction of Miss Williams, and the infants
under that of Miss Caldwell. The average attendance of
children in all divisions of the school exceeds 300.
The fine brewery of Mr. Inch, about a quarter of a
mile from Eskbank, is worth a visit. The brewery is con-
structed of brick and wood, and is capable of turning out
eight hogsheads in one, or sixteen hogsheads in two, shifts,
every twenty-four hours. The mountain ale is of an
amber colour and very transparent. Its wholesomeness
is widely known, and as a stimulant it has often been
recommended to invalids by the faculty. The English
visitor is struck by the similarity of its flavour and colour
to the very best light, sparkling ales of the “Old Country.”
Nor is this to be wondered at, seeing the climate on the
Blue Mountains so closely resembles that of England.
Mr. Inch, the proprietor, is always willing to show the
brewery and its contents to visitors.
Lithgow is also rich in the social institutions charac-
teristic of civilized life. There are several Masonic,
Druids’, Oddfellows’, Foresters’, Orange, Sons of Tem-
perance and Good Templar Lodges and Courts held, and
members of these bodies are ever willing to hold out the
right hand of fellowship to visiting brothers.
Finally, there is a good local representative of the
press—the Mercury —which has a fair circulation, and a
fine field for the well-directed enterprise of its proprietors.


f MAP or
LITHGOW




The Jenolan or Fish River Caves.
THE THREE ROUTES FROM SYDNEY.
Route No. i.—Sydney via Tarana and Oberon.
(Tarana, 120 miles from Sydney by rail, and 2,561 feet above sea-level.)
IT is necessary to send a telegram or letter a few days before starting, addressed to the guide,
“J. Wilson, Keeper of Caves, Glyndon, Oberon,” informing him by what train you intend to leave
Sydney, and the number of the party, so that he can meet you at Tarana with the buggy or
horses. As “Jerry” is an important personage in this trip—in fact, without “Jerry” the Caves
would almost lose their identity—a few words may be said about him. He is the guide appointed by
the Government to take charge of the Caves ; and as a coachman and guide it would be hard to find
his equal; in fact he is the right man. And too much cannot be said of Fred. Wilson (Jerry’s brother),
assistant-guide; he is one of the most genial fellows under the sun. Tarana to Oberon is about 18
miles. Shortly after leaving Tarana can be seen a ridge of granite rocks, called Evans’ Crown, on
the top of which large boulders stand, some of them an immense size and nearly circular in form.
On a clear day a fine view of Bathurst plains can be obtained from this mountain ;it is well worthy a
visit, if time will permit. Going on our journey, and still ascending, and after passing through some
very picturesque country, a small village is seen in the distance, and soon we are informed that we
are at Oberon, which consists of two hotels, a store, a police office, and a few houses. Here we
generally stop for the night. It may be mentioned that those fond of shooting can get plenty of
sport all the way from Tarana to the Caves, and a few days shooting would be time well spent
at Oberon. After an early breakfast a start is made for the Caves, distant about 18 miles; after
passing some farms the remainder of the road is like most Australian roads, the views on either
side being gum trees. On nearing the Caves some of the trees are very large and the country very
wild ; where the road crosses the ridge it has an elevation of 4,200 feet, the entrance to the Caves
being only 2,400 feet above sea-level, and the descent is very abrupt. When turning a point in the
road a truly magnificent sight will meet your view. You stand on the top of a mountain, while some
500 feet below is a narrow valley, which stretches a long distance, and is then lost in the winding
of a mountain chain. This valley runs between high, rugged mountains, whose sides slope almost
perpendicularly to the valley below, in some places clothed with trees, in others the hard outlines of the
rocks only presents themselves. In the valley a brawling-silvery stream is running its course, marked
by a band of greener verdure. The entrance to the Caves is situated beneath you; and if you were
possessed of wings, or could walk down a place as steep as a wall, you could reach them in a very
short time, but you have to take the zig-zag track made by the Government down the mountain,
which lengthens the journey to two miles and a half, and you are at “Jerry’s” house, a few yards
from the Caves.
Route No. 2. —Sydney to the Jenolan Caves via Mount Victoria.
The distance from Mount Victoria to the Caves is about 31 miles, a good road nearly all the
way. Soon after leaving the mount you pass over the well-known Victoria Pass—a large cutting made
in the early days by convicts; the pass is a long one, and leads to the Hartley Valley. Ihe views
here are very grand. On the left you get an occasional view of the Kanimbla Valley, lying hundreds
of feet below; and on the right, some very fine views of Hasson’s Walls and the town of Hartley.
A little beyond Hartley the roads from Lithgow and Mount Victoria join ; the River Cox is crossed by
a good timber bridge. Continuing our journey the scenery is varied and picturesque ; now a valley
is seen, green with the thriving wheat fields of the settler ; now the rugged outlines of the lofty
mountains, and occasionally some fine specimens of forest timber well stocked with birds, and here
and there a native bear, kangaroo, wallaby, or hare About 1 o’clock a halt is made for lunch, by the
side of a silvery mountain stream, with a few farm houses close at hand. About 7 miles from the
Caves the track leads through the bush, and could be easily made into a good road to the hill over-
looking the Caves, and here a practicable road for vehicles could be made by adopting the zig-zag
method. Three miles from the descent the track from Katoomba joins. Arriving at the top of the


m
ARTISTIC PHOTOGRAPHY.
!-<s>--
lllf lIHII MIIIIY,
COMPRISING
Yielua nf the §lue jy[nuntaina,
AND THEIR PRECIPITOUS GORGES.
Also of the GRAND HARBOUR of
FORT JACKSON
AND ITS PICTURESQUE SURROUNDINGS.
-Ka
Ring’g (Jelßifated picture
Are triumphs of modern Photography. This
unrivalled series includes the following, amongst
many other, objects of interest :
THE METROPOLIS.
SYDNEY AND ITS PARKS,
BOTANIC GARDENS,
PUBLIC BUILDINGS,
WHARVES & SHIPPING,
SEASIDE RESORTS & SUBURBS, &c., &c.
——-KM-
BLUE MOUNTAIN S6ENERY
INCLUDES —
FISH RIVER CAVES,
THE ZIG-ZAG.
MOUNT VICTORIA & BLACKHEATII,
KATOOMBA & WENTWORTH FALLS, &c.
A large collection of the above and many
other subjects, too numerous to catalogue, always
in stock, mounted or unmounted, or can be
obtained, tastefully finished and mounted, in
suitable Album form.
We invite inspection of our
ALBUMS :
AUSTRALIAN SCENERY.
ABORIGINALS OF THE COLONY.
4-<£H
ZHUEJUNTIRY ZKIUNTG-,
Portraitist and Landscape Photographer,
316 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY
(BETWEEN GENERAL POST OFFICE & HUNTER ST).
The Work at the Studio includes all the latest styles of
Portraiture, the artistic excellence of which has given the
establishment a world-wide reputation.
SPECIALTIES ENLARGEMENTS.
Fading Pictures Copied and Enlarged.
Old and
mountain, overlooking the Caves, the buggies are left;
the tourist shoulders his swag and commences to wend
his way down a track about two miles long, cut in the
side of the mountain for the convenience of visitors.
Near the bottom of this track, and on the top of the
Devil’s Coach-house, is a hole a few feet square, which
the traveller should keep clear of. Arriving at the accom-
modation house, you receive a hearty welcome from Mr.
Wilson, the guide.
Route No. 3. —Sydney to the Jenolan Caves
via Katoomba.
Leaving Katoomba station the Bathurst road is
followed for one and a half miles. On reaching the
Explorers’ Tree (a tree walled and fenced in, having a
stone bearing the following inscription : “ This wall and
fence has been erected by the Hon J. S. Farnell, Esq.,
Minister for Lands, to preserve this tree, marked by
Blaxland, Lawson, Wentworth, being the farthest distance
reached in their first attempt to cross the Blue Mountains
in the month of May, a.d. 1813.”), by following a track
leading to the left, you will soon reach the top of the
glen down which a zig-zag path is made. This glen or
chasm is very like the one leading to the Orphan Rock.
When about half way down a very pretty fall of water
of about 30 feet is seen on the left, and all the way,
on either side, large tree ferns. On emerging from this
gorge of gloom, profound even at mid-day, and from
many points further on, striking views are obtained of
the long line of sandstone cliffs behind and on each side,
the outlines and the great masses of light and shade
being very bold and varied, and the colouring of yellow,
red, purple, and green superb. In many places the cliff
overhangs, and one craggy mass to the west of the cleft
bears a strong resemblance to a huge castle, with its
great square towers, battlements, buttresses, and turrets,
even the lines and joints of the masonry being distinctly
visible ; and another to the east, on which has been
conferred the name of the Boar’s Head, is curiously like
the head of an heraldic dragon, with pointed ears and
open jaws. When flushed with the morning or evening
glow, this mighty natural rampart is a sight worth going
far to see.
Proceeding onwards, a mile or so of rough ground
is passed over, a slope strewn with angular rocks of
different shapes and sizes, the accumulated wreck of ages
from the cliff above, and covered with rather thick bush
and scrub. After this the track passes through capital
walking country, with sandy or gravelly soil, open bush,
and no scrub. It is almost level for the next 3 or 4
miles to Megalong Station, where some huts are seen
on the right. After striking the S.E. corner of the pad-
dock fence the track runs alongside the fence for about a
mile, and at the S.W. corner (6| miles from Katoomba,
and 1,870 feet above the sea) leaves the course of Mega-
long Creek, which we have followed from the cleft


A.Clai\i^son.
Surveyor & Draugtjhiriaf}.
?6 S T.




thus far, and bearing to the left, sidles the sloping ground on the left bank of the Cox, which
foams along its rocky bed far below. An easy gradual descent for 3J miles takes us to the
crossing, passing on the way, between marks 47 and 48, some picturesque granite rocks, which
have in past ages come tumbling down from the hill above (called the Pinnacle) like colossal nine-
pins ; one group, to which, from its shape, the name of the Toad has been given, being curiously
perched one upon another, whilst across the river a ridge, with three prominent knobby peaks,
attracts attention on the right. At 10J miles we arrive at the crossing of the Cox, at its confluence
with the Gibraltar Creek, the level of which is only 940 feet above the sea, so that we have descended
no less than 2,500 feet since we left the Western Road. The river bed is well worth noticing : it is
composed almost entirely of grey granite, mostly solid, but with loose rocks and boulders strewn
about, some of them of huge dimensions, whilst the clear green water forms deep mirror-like pools
among them, or tumbles over in brawling cascades, A mile or so further up the stream the valley is
crossed by a dyke of red granite, of a lovely rose colour, well worth turning aside to see, if time
allows, or it could be taken on the return journey, and a cut across made afterwards to rejoin the
track above. In its ordinary state the river can be crossed dryshod, and if the water should be
unusually high a log which spans the stream a few chains below is available, but in the case of a
flood it would not be wise for an inexperienced person to attempt the passage, whilst it is needless
to say that during a high flood nothing can cross without swimming. Half a mile below the crossing
is the comfortable hut of Peter Reilly, a free selector, who acts as stockrider on the. adjacent hills,
which are well grassed. He and his wife are the only residents on the route, and is novv erecting
new rooms for accommodation of travellers, for Megalong Station is only occasionally inhabited.
Any traveller who spends an evening with Peter will be entertained with a number of racy anecdotes
concerning the wild bush life which he and so many others have led in the days gone by. Ihe track
follows up the Gibraltar Creek, and after crossing it three times, sidles up the steep slopes of its right
bank. It is easy going, with the exception of two sharp pinches, which can be avoided by side
cutting when the track is made, and brings us at miles to a low saddle (2,310 feet) across tie
Mini Mini Range, an off-shoot of the Main Divide, forming the northern boundary of the Little
River Valley, into which we descend by an easy spur, and at miles we reach the bank of the
river, 1,830 feet above the sea. Here, bordered by low' hills, is a small flat, which will be a capital
position for a half-way house hereafter. Following the left bank of the clear, pebbly, musical stream
for half a mile, we cross it and commence the ascent of the Black Range, another off-shoot of the
Main Divide, running easterly from it, and separating the waters of the Little and Jenolan Rivers.
By a long easy spur we rise 1,400 feet in the next mile and a half; this gives an average grade of
x in 6, so that it is a task of no difficulty, except for one stiff pull, where the grade of the natural
surface is about 1 in 4 for 60 chains, and where the going condition of the traveller is put to the
proof. On reaching the top (15J;, height 3,200 feet) the broad and apparently flat range extends
westward for 4 miles, then turns north for a mile, so as to head a gully of great depth, in which uses
one of the heads of the Jenolan River; and, bending to the west again for half a mile, joins the
Main Dividing Range of the Colony at 2of miles, and at a height of 3,980 feet above the sea. A
along the Black Range an old cart track is followed, used in former years for the transport of bark
to Bindo and Hartley. Although, as might be expected, pursuing a very serpentine course, it makes
a capital walking track, quite equal if not superior to the average Sydney foot pavement, and much
better than the Sydney macadam. Here and there, where the track approaches the edge of txe
ridge, extensive views are obtained to the north, north-east and south-deep gullies plunging steep y
down into the great valleys, seas of dull green foliage, out of which rise the blue-green hills, with
light yellow scars on their distant flanks, plainly denoting the sandstone formation. About a mile
further, at a point 4,040 feet high, the Main Range, which in this part of its course forms a
remarkable (V) curve, turns to west and north-west, and our track leaves it and follows a spur trending
almost due south, right away to the caves. Along this spur runst he buggy track from Mount
Victoria, before alluded to, which, being cleared 10 or 12 feet wide, and the ridge being nowhere
steep, affords another 3I miles of excellent walking. Some extensive views to the eastward are to
be had from several points on this part of the route, embracing, to the left, Katoomba, with Ihe
Carrington” (late Great Western Hotel) standing out against the sky ; to the front Cox Range, Mellow
Gap, and the striking two-peaked hill of the Brothers visible through it, reminding the travelled
Australian of the Mythen on Lake Luzern ; and to the right the profound recesses of the great
Jenolan Gorge, terminating in the mount of that ilk, one of the hills which has the honour of being


named on Sir rhos. Mitchell’s excellent map, still by far the best in existence of the mountain district
within ioo miles of Sydney. On the west is the deep gorge of the Jenolan Creek, clothed in luxuriant
timber, and on its further side the long wall of the Main Range stands up high against the sky.
le descent of the spur we are on is so easy that at 25 miles we are still 3,770 feet above the sea;
and then commences the descent to the caves, which are 1,200 feet below. The spur plunges
irregularly down to its termination at the caves, so that it is inexpedient to follow its ridge, and
lence a narrow track has been trenched in its side, up or down which it is easy for man or horse to
wa k, except after dark. This brings us to the Eastern Arch of the caves—a natural bridge of
limestone striding over the Jenolan (M'Keown’s, or M'Ewan’s) Creek, from the spur we have come
down, to another which is followed by the road from Oberon. The top of this archway is strewn
wi slippery limestone rocks, and sundry holes descend to the regions below, so that wary walking is
necessary in this neighbourhood. A track is, however, marked out which there is no difficulty in
finding by daylight; and following this down we come at last, after a journey of 26A miles, to our
destination. In harmony with the philosophy of the American, who said that there was no prospect,
owever fine, which was not improved with a good hotel in the foreground, the traveller who has
come thus far will probably deem the sight of the accommodation house stretching across the narrow
valley in front of him one of the pleasantest on the journey, the more so as for the last 13 miles since
eavmg .Little River there is only one place where, excepting just after rain, water is conveniently to
oe nad. He will be sure to receive every comfort and attention from Mr. and Mrs. Wilson, and
under the experienced guidance of the former, or his brother, can proceed next morning to explore
the caves, which may be aptly termed the Australian fairy land, and to the examination of whose
ciarms several days should be devoted. For extent, variety, and wonderful beauty combined, this
senes of caves has few equals in the world. The present writer is aware of only one, the grotto of
delsberg, in Carniola, 12 miles S.E. of Trieste, where the features are very similar, and command
lie unbounded admiration of travellers from every part of Europe. Considering their attractions,
it seems surprising that our caves have not been visited by every intelligent person in the colony
who possesses the time and means necessary to enable him to make the expedition. No doubt a
aige number have been deterred by the tedious and roundabout route at present employed, and the
. num ker which the house at the caves has hitherto been able to accommodate. Both these
difficulties are in course of being remedied to some extent: the one by the horse track, which is in
C ?^ se of construction along the line marked out by Mr. Cooper, and the other by an enlargement
o r. Vilsons house, which has been recently completed, though it appears to be still inadequate to
public requirements on special occasions.
It is understood that arrangements are in contemplation to exhibit their marvellous beauties in
? e Y oy which anything like justice can be done to them, —by lighting up the caves by
e ectricity. I his, if carried out, will add tenfold to their charms, and cannot fail to induce a much
larger number of persons to visit what will then certainly be one of the sights of the world.
m w h m f ° lloW V" g extiact from a P a P er furnished to the “ Railway Guide of New South Wales,” by
ir. Wilkinson, Government Geologist, conveys to the uninitiated an idea of the scientific theory of
le causes to which first the limestone rock, and afterwards the extraordinary series of caverns by
which it appears to be honeycombed, owe their formation, and forms a fitting close to this article:—
“ ctnnVliUof , l j n i ‘^ lterest | n B to reflect that this limestone, now a compact grey marble, was once a mass of living corals,
. . ’ ‘ Kr m °fl uscs > revealing the former existence, in the Siluro-Devonian epoch, of conditions of marine life
. j , e , . in ? hose which support the beautiful living forms which build up the reefs in the coral seas of the
P r . ‘ y, f a 11S Sl g m flcant of the vast changes that this part of the surface of the earth has undergone, when we
• • n f a er s , reams > at an elevation of several thousand feet above the sea, now flowing through rocks that were
y c J meG eneatli the waves of the ocean, at a very remote period of the earth’s history. First, the decaying
rlp^rin^°iv, 0 . son l e ancien ! forest is invisibly distilling the gas known as carbonic acid ; then a storm of rain falls",
wtiipV. 'f 6 j ll -° n- 6 noxlous and distributing a thousand streamlets of acid water over the surrounding country,
, • 1 rains o not only wears the rocks it passes over but dissolves them in minute quantities, especially such as
frinrr.'r, i lme ’ t k en ’ with its various compounds, flows off to the distant sea, where reef corals, lying in
‘r oast ’ “5.® slowl y absorbing the lime from the water around them and building the fragile
, a CC A em I^e ' Slowly as the land sinks the coral bank increases in height, for reef corals can
{ c near e surface of the water, and soon a considerable thickness has been obtained ; while below the upper
comp pfi, lVe cora f. , a vast charnel-house of dead coral coverings. Then comes a change ; suitable temperature, or
.l „ A ej ! sen ia condition, fails, killing out all the corals, and through long ages other deposits accumulate over
l f a y crushing and consolidating the coral bank into a firm rock. At last a convulsion of the earth’s crust
g up rom e buried depth in which it lies, leaving it tilting on its edge, but still, perhaps, below the surface of the


ground. Rain, frost and snow slowly remove what covers it, until it lies exposed again to the sunlight, but so changed
that only for the silent but irresistible testimony of the fossil forms of which it is composed, it were hard to believe that
this narrow band of hard grey rock was once the huge but fragile coral bank glistening in the bright waters with a
thousand hues. And now the process is repeated; the decaying vegetation of the surrounding forest produces the
carbonic acid, the rains spread it over the ground, which is now the most favourable for being dissolved, and the
consequence is that the acid water saturates itself wiuh the limestone rock ; and whenever the least evaporation takes
place, has to deposit some of its dissolved carbonate of lime in one of the many stalacitic forms before it can flow off to
the sea and distribute its remaining contents to fresh coral banks. Thus the old coral reef melts away far inland, and
the lime that formed the coatings of its corals is again utilised for the same purpose. What a simple succession of causes
and effects ! and yet, before the circle is completed, long ages of time have come and gone. And what a fine example
of the balance between the waste and reproduction that takes place in nature !
The following is a short description of some of the principal caves. The “Imperial Cave”—the
entrance is in the “ Grand Arch ” —is a very rough looking place, from 70 to 90 feet high. After
climbing to the top of the ladder and entering the mouth of the cave, each one lights his candle, and
Jerry takes command. The “Wool Shed” resembles the wool on the sheep’s back in a variety of
designs. The “Architect’s Studio ”is a remarkable cave, with long stalactites. The “Margaretta
Cave ”is a very large cave. The “ Helena Cave ” contains the figure of the Madonna. The “ Lucinda
or Diamond Cave ”: the floor resembles a bed of diamonds, and the walls a shawl-like formation.
“ Kattie’s Bower ”: the stalactites resemble the pipes of an organ. The “ Bone Cave ” contains a
quantity of wallaby bones. The “Crystal Rock”: a large rock with the appearance of water running
over it. The “Imperial” also.contains the “Shawl Cave,” “Lady’s Finger and Lolly Caves.” The
“Show Rooms”: “Lot’s Wife,” “Crystal City,” “Mystery,” and “Nelly’s Grotto.” “Selina Cave”:
“Diamond Wall,” “Crystal Palace,” “Garden Palace,” “Jewel Casket,” “Gem of the West,”
“Fairy’s Retreat,” “The Queen’s Jewels,” and the underground River.
THE LUCAS CAVE
contains a large variety of caves, among which are the “ Music Hall,” the “ Cathedral Cave,” “ Shawl
Cave,” “ Exhibition Cave,” “ Lurline Cave,” “ Snowball Cave,” and the “ Fossil Cave.”
THE ELDER CAVE.
To explore these caves you have some rather rough work to do ; what with climbing and crawling
through long narrow passages, feet first, you are glad when it’s over. In one place a stalactite has
met his friend, the corresponding stalagmite, and the two have been sealed by Nature in an eternal
bond. In this wondrous place, cave, passage, and hall, floor, ceiling, and sides are jewelled and
bespangled, until the eye almost wearies of what the spirit would fain look on for ever.
It is necessary for all visitors to the caves to provide themselves with sand shoes, and a suit of
old clothes.


ADDENDA
Saturday till Monday. —Leave Sydney by 7 a.m., arriving at the great Zig Zag platform, at
12.40 p.m., here the trains cross; change trains, return to Mount Victoria, have dinner, visit Mount
Piddington, &c. After tea, if a moon-light night, walk to Blackheath, 4 miles; Sunday morning, visit
Govett’s Leap, have early dinner, drive to Katoomba, see Katoomba Falls, Orphan Rock. &c., leave
early on Monday morning by Luggage train for Wentworth Falls; see Falls, leave by 2.34 p.m. train
arriving in Sydney at 6.4 p.m. For this trip take Excursion Ticket.
THE JENOLAN CAVES.
Saturday to Saturday. —Leave Sydney by 7 a.m. or 9 a.m. train for Bathurst, arriving at
3.20 p.m., and 5.27 p.m. Leave Bathurst on Monday morning at 10.9 a.m., for Tarana, arriving 10.15
а. leave by coach for Oberon, have dinner, stroll through the village. Leave Oberon Tuesday
morning for Caves; arriving about 10 o’clock. Leave Caves on Friday about noon for Oberon. Leave
Oberon early Saturday morning, arriving at Tarana in time for train, 11.T5 a.m.; arriving in Sydney
б. p.m. Take Excursion Ticket.
Saturday till Wednesday Morning. —Leave Sydney by 1.48 p.m. train, arriving at Mount
Victoria, 6.30 p.m.; leave Mount Victoria by coach Tuesday morning, 7.30 a.m.; arriving at the
Caves about 5.30 p.m. Leave Caves 10 o’clock Tuesday morning, arrive Mount Victoria 6 p.m.;
leave Mount Victoria Wednesday morning, 3.10 a.m., 5.15 a.m., or 7.56 a.m., arriving in Sydney,
6.45 a.m., 9.20 a.m., and it. 35 a.m.


uio
pu&em
soluble! i
BE FREE MING!
One teaspoonful makes
a breakfast cup of stronger
and better Cocoa than two
teaspoonfuls of any Ho-
moeopathic or “prepared”
Cocoas, which thicken in
the Cup.
The reason why so many are
unable to take Cocoa is that the
varieties commonly sold are
mixed with Starch, under the
plea of rendering them soluble,
which really makes them thick,
heavy, and indigestible. This
may be easily detected; for if
Cocoa thickens in the cup it
proves the addition of starch.
Cadbury’s Cocoa Essence is
genuine, it is therefore of three
times the strength of these
Cocoas, and a refreshing bever-
age like Tea and Coffee.
cocoa t;ssE\m
uio
Mexican
Be sure to observe that
“Cadbury” is stamped on each
cake, as inferior descriptions of
Foreign and British manufacture
are sometimes substituted.
Guaranteed to consist solely of the finest Cocoa
and sugar, slightly flavoured with Vanilla. Great
care is taken in its preparation, so that it may
be depended upon as the best Chocolate, used
either as a Confection or as a Beverage.
Chocolate.


ANDERSON’S
SEEDS
For THE FARM & STATION.
For THE VEGETABLE & FLOWER GARDEN.
Genuine Quality. Reliable Growth.
Write for our “CATALOGUE & CULTURAL GUIDE.”
THE LARGE REVISED EDITION.
Beautifully Illustrated. Post Free.
Ask Storekeepers for
ANDERSON’S SEEDS,
In coloured pockets, with full directions for sowing.
-
ANDERSON & CO.,
SEEDSMEN AND PLANT MERCHANTS,
216 & 218 PITT STREET,
SYDNET - .
