

THE
SEX PROBLEM
BY
MRS. A. SCOTT BROAD.


A. H. SPENCER
New a Secondhand bookseller
Publisher, fine art dealer®
m B l o ,v^ e St., Melbourne
(the Hill of Content’) »\u.sf.










THE
SEX PROBLEM
BY
MRS. A. SCOTT BROAD
While Europe's eye is fix'd on mighty things ,
The fate of empires and. the fail of Icings;
While quad’s of state must each produce his plan,
And. even children lisp the rights of man;
Amid this mighty fuss, just let me mention
The rights of woman merit, some attention.
A chiefs amang ye talcin' notes,
An' faith he'll prent 'em.
— Barns.
ALL RIGHTS RRSRRVRD
1911




SEX ATTRACTION.
IT is stated as a scientific fact, and be-
lieved by a certain section of thought-
ful people, that the divine plan for
perpetuation of life was not through sex-
attraction and subsequent marriage, but
by diffusion or fission, as in those earlier
types of life represented by the kingdom
of the amoeba, the coral polyp, and
others. Evidence for and against every
aspect of truth is interesting to the impar-
tial student of life ; it is therefore worth
while to consider this position in brief.
On the scientific side, it is clear that
insect life presents many curious features
with regard to the propagation of spe-
cies, notably the spider tribe. Certain
crustaceans and aquatic plants also sub-
stantiate up to a definite point the posi-
tion that is claimed. But since the Great
Divide, when bird, beast and fish emerged
as a differentiated class from a seeming
chaos of prehistoric monsters, separate
sex function has been noted by science as
an invariable law, embracing the human


family within its scope. An investigation
along occult lines also claims that in a
remote period of the world’s evolution
man was given powers over the animal
creation in training, modifying and deve-
loping traits in the animal types then ev-
olving. But there is no evidence to show
that the powers pertaining to the herma-
phrodite ruled in either man or animal at
that period. Since those curious spiders
and crustaceans are still with us, types of
an enormously remote period of the earth’s
life, it must be assumed, in the absence of
further light on details, that the law ap-
pointing separate sex function came into
operation with the higher phases of evo-
lution, and was possibly established long
before the time of the ichthyosaurus or
mastodon.
With all due respect to the position as
claimed, it appears that certain learned
people have overestimated the importance
of physical facts and possibilities, and
been a little blind to the promise of man’s
spiritual expansion and ultimate destiny.
A full and complete being would hardly
be evolved if separately the sexes had
come down the ages ; and the divine plan
by which the loves, the fears, the hopes,
the conflicts, are experienced together,


under the conditions of the marriage tie,
is more in harmony with the deeper reli-
gious teaching that each soul reaches at
last the fulness of the godhead itself.
A world of units, bachelors and spin-
sters, multiplying their kind by a pro-
cess of self-reproduction, is seriously un-
thinkable. Also a careful study of our
complex physical, mental and moral na-
ture shows the value of inter-dependence,
both in a superficial and a more intimate
aspect.
To put the matter upon its simplest
footing. With the absence of the mating
instinct, the love of home would be im-
possible ; without the home and the fa-
mily, the communal spirit, the needs re-
lating to progression, peace and civil po-
wer, would not be evolved ; without com-
munities, there would be no deep-lying
elements of cohesion sufficient to bind
large bodies of people together ; therefore
sex attraction is one of the cosmic forces
in the foundation of every nation.
Yet to-day this force is continually re-
presented as a thing to be hidden away in
a corner, to be discussed with shocked
faces and lowered tones as some shameful
perversion of natural law. It is no won-
der that the whole marriage question, ill


regulated by law, and based on a false
economic standpoint, is from its inception
wholly inadequate to the ends of a really
progressive age.
Sex attraction arises unconsciously in
the young —the stirrings of new life, beau-
tiful and natural as the sap in the trees,
clothing in due time its branches with
flowers and fruit. It is not of itself fast,
vulgar, immodest, unchaste ; and it is as
surely a divine law operating toward im-
mense results, as the laws of gravitation
or cohesion, and bears with it in its finer
aspects a power without which higher
branches of advancement in any nation
would be impossible. Many lovely me-
lodies and songs have been given to the
world because a wild bird in mating-time
poured forth a thrilling dominant melody
to his mate, or a girl mourned her absent
lover. Along the strings of human love
and emotion there was a harmony or dis-
cord, before any instrument was evolved .
to imitate it.
The fine poems, the exquisite paintings,
the great plays, with their theme of love,
jealousy, despair, remorse, are all brought
into being by that influence which we
know as sex attraction. A wonderful cos-
mic force, carrying the world along in its


resistless tide, the fount of happy requited
loves, of fair hopes, of noble deeds ; an
invisible, intangible medium by which, in
the processes of time, the physical be-
comes spirit.
But sex attraction, while it is the fore-
runner of early love, is not confined to the
springtide of youth : to any age it is a
factor in human life. Nor does it operate
less in a woman than a man. That mis-
leading expression, “the passions,” has
placed the position on a wrong basis, and
feminine reserve is largely a creation of
civilisation, and carries many subtle ma-
ladies and miseries in its train.
Large social gatherings and audiences
are more brilliant and successful when both
sexes are present, and ‘hen conventions’
and ‘ buck picnics ’ are terms of deri-
sion. The bachelor and the spinster often
claim superiority as well as independence
in their single state, but their position is
fundamentally false —an exception to'the
divine rule. Sooner or later each indivi-
dual must know in the physical body the
functions of fatherhood and motherhood,
with their attendant anguish and rapture,
and take their part in the training of the
young lives.
Before any of the burning questions of


the social life can be discussed to advan-
tage, the fundamental one of sex attrac-
tion must be understood, and honored in
its place. Not only has there been a dis-
sonant note from an exclusive scientific
section, but ‘purists’ and narrow church-
men have created a false attitude toward
the subject, attributing to it, either by
implication or direct reference, a coarse
and even criminal aspect; yet in a very
deep and sacred sense there is symbolised
here the workings of the Universal Mind
calling a universe into manifestation !
“We are all parts of one stupendous whole,
Whose body Nature is, and God the Soul.”


WOMAN’S PEACE IN NATURE.
£HI£ masculine and feminine principles
in Nature have extraordinary and se-
parate values—extraordinary because, no
matter in what age or society a man finds
himself, some high supernal note is struck
from the confusion of sounds showing
suddenly the amazing potency of those
principles. Sometimes an apparently dull
and quiet woman is found to have har-
boured, under a drab veil of peaceful man-
nerism, a searching spirit of enquiry and
comparison concerning the secrets of the
Universe, that places her, when disco-
vered, as a corner-stone in the living walls
of her nation, for all the world to honor.
Public opinion, following in the wake of
superior judgment, leaps the barrier of
sex, and reverences the soul—the sexless
living spirit, that, pouring through the
physical brain, radiates out to the mate-
rial world. But let the supreme moment
die, after
“ Our hearts in glad surprise
To higher levels rise ”
that a * ‘ noble deed is wrought, ’ ’ and on all


sides we find dissatisfaction and murmur-
ing “it was really a man’s honor, for
a woman to earn it is unnatural.” This
feeling repeats itself, more or less audibly,
as long as honors are earned by women
outside their “ true sphere,” to use a fa-
miliar expression. Since this high note
is being struck with increasing frequency
by women, a fresh standard of judgment
is being forced on us ; for there is no con-
sistency in a judgment that condemns and
honors a woman’s achievement in one
breath.
On the other hand, it may be truly ad-
vanced that men’s successes, either ordi-
nary or remarkable, rarely if ever trespass
on feminine precincts. Male cooks and
nurses are few, and a male milliner or
dressmaker rare ; and though women are
pushing outward into offices and cash-
desks, holding positions as sanitary in-
spectors, teachers of hygiene, architects,
lecturers, and lawyers, besides those of
artists and novelists, which are admittedly
theirs in common with the sterner sex,
men are still keeping to their own lines of
activity. Naturally they have resented
the feminine advance, commercially they
fear it, politically they condemn it. “I
don’t like to see a woman out of her


place,” says the man in the street, dis-
cussing the situation, ‘‘her place is the
home and the family.” It is the univer-
sal masculine judgment.
Scientific observation, and the wide ex-
perience of the medical faculty, show that
woman’s place in nature is that of a com-
plementary factor to the man. Primarily,
therefore, women are the producers of the
race, and the guardians of its infancy. If
indeed any opposing force has been stirred
in women which makes motherhood of
secondary value, or no value at all, as too
often seems to be the case, it would ap-
pear to be subversive of natural law.
Putting aside for the moment certain at-
titudes which have arisen in an age at
once strenuous and luxury-loving, it must
be recognised at the outset that the law
of sex attraction involves as a corollary
sex-union or marriage, and the privilege
and responsibility of bearing and training
a family. If these things do not follow
in a harmonious sequence, the laws of na-
ture are perverted from the start, and first
the community then the race deteriorates,
and is impoverished. The Malthusian
theory, advising the limitation of the fa-
mily to ensure greater advantages, was
the thin end of the wedge ; but now, the


empty arms and cradles, few and late
marriages, and wide-spread prostitution,
point to something akin to national dis-
aster. Arming as we are against foreign
foes, we yet have feeding on the vital
forces of our people a destroyer infinitely
more to be dreaded than they, and one
which, like another Frankinstein, we have
created ourselves.
The causes which led up to this situa-
tion must be carefully studied from every
point of view. A powerful though unre-
cognised factor was a quickened intellec-
tuality which, like a fresh and virile im-
pulse, was in every child born about the
beginning of the nineteenth century, the
universal heritage of the Aryan race fall-
ing in its due order in the process of evo-
lution. Physical perfection was seen in
its height in the palmy days of Greece
and Rome; but a great expansion of
mind the greatest, according to some
thinkers, that our race will ever see is
the flower of our own time.
The marvellous fertility of ideas, the
quick perceptions, the enlarged judgment,
the wide outlook, the keen grip of essen-
tials, the notable development of the ma-
thematical and inventive faculties, toge-
ther with all the increased powers of ex


ecution, have permeated in a greater or
less degree both sexes. A recognition of
this fact will help us to understand the
New Woman, to use a term of derision
very popular a few years back. For we
are on the heels of the first discordant el-
ement following that generous birthright,
namely, that men have been quickened
and successful along their own beateu
track and its legitimate side-paths, but
women have reached over the sex-barriers
(or, as some contend, have shown that
there is no sex-barrier), to share the la-
bours, pursuits and salaries of the men in
their own person, fulfilling the primal
duties of their constitution and sex late in
life, or not at all.
Do we desire that a fuller flow of men-
tal power shall be given to men, and de-
nied to women ? That would be to cramp
and hamper the race. Every girl born
into the world is a potential mother, and
her physical and mental capacity are
transmitted to her children, therefore no
advantage should be kept from her. But
competition in the labour markets of the
world is her perpetual undoing. The ef-
fect of severe mental labor and strain on
women is sterility, or what is worse, chil-
e-.eu abnormal aud deficient, physically


and mentally. The most prominent fea-
ture of the times, the call for specialisa-
tion, is of itself responsible, according to
Herbert Spencer, for a low birthrate, with-
out including contributary causes on the
maternal side.
The mothers of our race in all classes
need primarily sound health, peace of
mind, and plenty of reserve force to draw
upon. And both the occupations and the
education of our girls should subserve
that end. Here we come to a fertile field
of trouble, “courting failure by our sys-
tem of feminine education,” as Professor
Armstrong, President of the British Che-
mical Association, stated in 1909. For
by the long hours of mental labor, having
but a remote bearing on a girl’s future
life, the brain is rendered weary and
11011-elastic, and the nerve-force greatly
depleted, the system of examinations alone
being responsible for serious deterioration
of health. But one thing is certain : high
ideals of learning and accomplishments
have been set by professors and boards of
management, regardless of the delicate
complex feminine organism; and they
have been pursued with ardor, partly to
escape the regular routine of the domestic
sphere, in which there arc no emoluments


or glories, and equally to please and as-
tonish the male portion of their circle
whether fathers, teachers, or friends.
Looking back over fifteen or twenty
years, we find that before girls had come
to a marriageable age, their health was
unsound, their nerves unstrung, their
ideals confused, and their disposition ge-
nerally to avoid the sacrifices of family
life, and even the marriage tie, in order
to get as much pleasure of a refined kind
out of life as possible. This attitude is
intensified at the present time, because
hired help is beyond the reach of the
greater part of the population, owing to
the great alteration in the condition of the
lower classes, and the high prices of the
ordinary commodities of life make house-
keeping a far more delicate and difficult
matter than it was years ago. Under
these conditions, over-refined and accom-
plished girls are obviously unfit for the
strain of child-bearing, coupled with in-
cessant domestic work. For the produc-
tion of a fine flower or fruit every care
and consideration is required ; how much
more the human flower, which is destined
to fulfil the great purposes of the Divine
Mind! The girls of our higher and
middle classes have a fine natural intelli


gence, and would mature well, if the re-
peated warnings of the medical faculty
were taken. It seems illogical in the ex-
treme that any but a committee of doctors
and mothers should have ever formulated
educational schemes for those who must
primarily stand as mothers of our race.


THE DOMINANCE OF MAN.
£0 the ordinary observer the masculine
principle in Nature is inseparably
connected with dominant force in human
and animal life ; although, as we have
previously stated, the masculine principle
was not invariably uppermost in the
earlier forms, such as those crustaceans
where the ‘mere man,’ so to speak, might
or might not be required by the lady
‘ shell-back ’ to subserve the purposes of
Nature. But we are concerned with the
laws which govern the human animal,
from the-time when he roamed the forests
of the pre-historic era, fought the woolly
mammoth and the monstrous bird on con-
tinents which are now a part of the ocean
bed, and directed a giant strength with a
small and slow brain. The simple mating
instinct of the animal-man served him for
the soul-affinity of which our poets write,
and the wild and active creature who had
to be clubbed or dragged by her hair into
his cave could hardly be said to feel the
call of sex-attraction. But the birth of a
child touched a dormant sense, and a long


chain of observation shows the enormous
value of mother-love per se in deepening
and enlarging the feminine nature of the
early peoples, and through it the whole
of the advancing humanity. Except in
a few isolated instances, too small and in-
effectual to be considered in any large
survey of the subject, man was master in
the slow progress of the races on the up-
ward path. The man was the pioneer in
establishing the great commercial centres
of the world; he evolved the various
schemes of government, divided the track-
less forest, spanned the seas, linked shore
to shore by boat; for him the ocean
yielded up her secrets, and the earth her
mineral wealth. And these achievements
are the natural result of the laws which
govern the masculine constitution up to
the present. By the ruggedness of the
fighting spirit which ensures success in
the battle for supremacy, by the prepon-
derance of physical force needed to wrest
from the elements the necessities of life,
by the fierce animalism that still surges
within him impatient of restraint, by
moods and fevers bred of an age which is
leaping on its heritage, the man’s place is
separate from the woman’s, and he is the
master of the world. There can be no


question of equality between man and
woman, no question of competition. They
each supply what the other lacks, and are
united by mutual need —in scientific lan-
guage, they are complementary factors.
From this point of view, the woman
loses immeasurably by coming out of her
place in Nature. The man’s expansion
was according to natural law ; the wo-
man’s was in many respects at his ex-
pense, and represents a divergence from
the course indicated by Nature. No won-
der she finds it rough and stony ground,
for her determined advance has affected
commercial estimates and conditions. At
first underpaid and indifferently treated,
she has maintained a high courage, and
pushes on undismayed, demanding justice
and wearing a bright face before the world.
But in her heart she knows, none better,
how much that was sweet and dear in life
has faded out before the fierce heat of
commercial competition. How gladly
would some of the girls and women who
crowd our offices and shops in the early
morning withdraw from the outer world
into the varied life of the happy home.
But the woman never does withdraw un-
less health fails; pride prevents in some
instances, the power of sex-attraction in


others, or the actual weed for money to
help those at home, or maintain herself;
or. again, a discordant home atmosphere
forces a sensitive girl to look for sympa-
thy in the outside world by the sheer ne-
cessity of self-preservation. The work is
done, and done well, the money and re-
putation are earned, the position is main-
tained ; but the woman is sunk in the
machine, and the functions of motherhood
are dormant, as they soon will be at-
rophied. Three parts of that feminine
throng w r hich floods our streets in the
mornings will never bear a living child.
We recruit our ranks now from that fourth
part, those in which animal life is strong-
est, and intelligence and spiritual life
weakest —a ‘ ‘ reversion to type, ’’ as Drum-
mond puts it —a step backward.
The position generally is condemned by
masculine judgment, but not harshly.
Surprise, anger, disgust and indifference
have swept over the communities of men in
turns as the situation develops and they see
women encroaching on their preserves, of-
ten filling their positions at half the salary.
They are pushed out; can they retaliate
by going home to cook, sweep and sew ?
These are visible and tangible results, but
there are other results which lie deeper.


The protective instinct, which rightly di-
rected is the salvation of many a man, is
not drawn forth by the new attitude of
independence in women, and love without
its attributes of tenderness and protection
loses much. It is to be feared too that re-
verence has lessened ; hundreds of young
people are thrown together daily, and un-
wise friendships or attachments, often
formed on a very superficial basis, des-
tined to end in unhappiness.
But there have been evidences that
laxity and immorality in men have insti-
gated the separate and antagonistic atti-
tude in women. Rather than marry men
of a gambling, vicious, or lazy disposi-
tion, some women rightly prefer a single
life. Social conditions, and the fact that
there is no domestic class to do the heavier
part of a woman’s work, and save her
from strain and over-fatigue, prevent
others from marriage. Some a large
and increasing number these, and not of
necessity on the lower levels of society
note with the keen eyes of a quickened
intelligence their worn-out mothers, chat-
tels, part of the home furniture, unloved,
unhonored, with no outlook, no wider in*
terests, with the heaviest burden of the
family responsibilities on their shoulders,


and ceaseless work, and they come to the
conclusion that too much is expected from
the woman—“ the game is not worth the
candle.” From this attitude comes the
host of flirts who, like the bee, sip honey
from every flower, but, unlike that useful
insect, never mean to settle down to life-
work —girls whose rich unfolding of love
and tenderness was withered at its birth.
Hard and brilliant, or moody, antagon-
istic and restless, as defeated womanhood
always is, yet bearing a deep inward sense
of injury, they fill our halls and public
resorts, clouding with the hard pessimism
of their mood the young fresh girls who
may be so happy as to know what true
love is, and what a shelter the heart of a
good man may be.
And every day that happens which
tears a woman’s heart with grief and in-
dignation for a dishonored sister for a
trusting, innocent girl, betrayed and de-
serted. Man, unfortunately, proves his
dominance increasingly as a destroyer,
not a protector, of women ; and lowers
himself to the level of the beasts of the
field —he who was given the dominion of
the wide earth. He who was to be the
“house-band,” as the old Saxon word
expresses it, the guardian of the family,


the defender of its sanctities, the one
whose high privilege it is to stand at the
altars of Christendom and vow to love
and cherish a pure and loving woman ‘ ‘ as
Christ loved the Church how does he
fulfil that sacred trust in these days ? Our
daily papers, our law courts, the open talk
of clubs and streets, and in fashionable
society throngs, give answer for the hu-
man ear. And to One who hears always,
and will repay, rise the sad cries of deso-
late women and girls, ruined, maddened,
dying, away out of human sight, because
man lias used his strength and cunning
as do the brutes. Yet this is an age that
boasts of its intellectual and scientific at-
tainments, and sends missionaries to every
remote spot of the earth. It is also a
great field for scientific experiment; race-
horses and greyhounds, sheep and cows,
flowers and fruit, are all bred and culti-
vated with the utmost care, to ensure a
fine, pure strain, and the keenest satisfac-
tion is displayed by the whole of the Eng-
lish-speaking race at the results. Yet all
the conditions with regard to the produc-
tion of the human being are chaotic and
unfavorable in the extreme —often a very
hotbed of mental and physical disease.
Only now is auy suggestion made of


teaching sex-physiology in the schools by
way of saving some innocent girls and
women from foul and undeserved shame,
and youths from a late remorse ; but other
abuses remain. The unions of the ‘ un-
fit’ are freely permitted ; epileptics, drun-
kards, consumptives, degenerates of any
and every type, and also the illegitimate,
the tainted, and discharged lunatics, are
as free to marry and perpetuate their aw-
ful and diseased conditions, as sound, ho-
norable and high-souled men and women.
If they were race-horses or dogs, they
would not be permitted to infect the rest.
Never were diseases so numerous and
subtle, though never were doctors more
clever and bountifully supplied for their
calling. But thirty years hence complex
and subtle diseases will be doubled ; for
our social economics, taken as a whole,
will ensure the utmost deterioration in
every part of the human system. If our
several boards of management had set
themselves to bring to a rapid end the
physical life of the Anglo-Australian race,
they could hardly have furnished better
conditions. We shall indeed present a
striking object-lesson to future races of
the earth when the faithful historian con -
siders, in addition to these facts, others


which have an intimate relation to them.
A democracy which is almost equivalent
to mob-rule, heavy and unequal taxation,
waste of public monies, the open support
of drinking habits and prostitution ; trifl-
ing punishments in law courts for serious
offences, and every kind of traffic and en-
terprise at the mercy of ignorant socialists
and their dupes. It will be shown incon-
trovertibly that a very high range of
knowledge was at our disposal, and we
showed a stupid, almost criminal, disre-
gard for it. True and wise government
we do not possess; long and careful study
by men especially fitted by nature to lead
and control must produce the efficient
ruler, whereas the man who carried the
hod, or sorted carrots at the tail of a
greengrocer’s van last year, may this
year be jerked into the duties of a states-
man, and help to frame laws by w r hich
men and women infinitely his superiors in
every way must abide.
“I have long ceased,” wrote a lead-
ing K.C. in this State, recently, “ to
expect the electors to choose men who
shall be wise rulers. In the present state
of politics there seems to be no room, no
place for thinking men who recognise
that no party possesses a monopoly of


wisdom. The hack politician who makes
his living out of the game, has come to
stay : he is oftentimes a man who cannot
make bread-and-butter in any trade, pro-
fession, or calling, and, possessed of a
certain readiness of speech, combined with
considerable elasticity of conviction, he
finds himself accepted by the great un-
thinking public.”
11l directed energy is in its nature des-
tructive, self-consuming, and operates to-
wards the same result as recognised weak-
ness, and ceases to exist. We need, as
men with a strain of heroic ancestry be-
hind us, to remember that the dominion
which England won was by sheer force
of character, and self-control even to as-
ceticism. Our success in colonisation was
built up on the same elements of success.
If we cannot govern ourselves as men and
women, we shall never maintain colonial
standing, far less reach colonial suprem-
acy, and history will repeat itself.


A NEW BASIS.
£HE fall of a nation or the degenerate
section of a root-race has frequently
been heralded by a gigantic form of ego-
tism and self-indulgence, built on the ac-
quisition of great intellectual and scien-
tific knowledge, combined with wealth.
The moral power, overshadowed by ex-
ternal brilliance, is insufficient to give
stability to the whole, and Nature’s forces
are brought into operation to destroy by
flood or fire the ‘ unfit.’ It seems super-
fluous to state here the well-known fact
that our mother-country has long erred
on the side of national egotism, and even
up to recent years has been proud of those
conquests by violence which made her the
mistress of the world. But the startling
depravity of the inner social life, and the
misery of the lower classes, side by side
with glowing intellectual power and sci-
entific invention, has opened the eyes of
the nation’s rulers to its moral weakness
and instability, and they are coming out
boldly with the truth, “He that ruletfi


bis spirit is greater than he that taketh a
city.” It is a new basis for our national
life Peace with Honor and its domi-
nant note came from the Throne itself —
from the domain of Majesty. History
will remember the last years of Edward
the Peacemaker. In a day of turbulent
democracy, that Justice should proclaim
Divine Eaw through kingly lips is of the
utmost importance. It is an affirmation
that moral force is superior to brute force,
and that restraint can be far greater than
action.
But there is an egotism in peace that
can germinate civil and industrial strile,
the exaltation of man by man, party by
party, for wholly selfish and ill-considered
ends, regardless of the well-being of the
community, or the larger destinies of the
nation. It is this spirit which is nation-
ally self-destructive, the apotheosis of
man instead of God, the external attri-
butes magnified into a false importance,
while the soul lies within, dormant —“a
god, tlio’ in the germ.” Wherever the
inward power has been sacrificed to out-
side brilliance, the decay of that existent
thing was in sight. The Eaw of Natural
Selection enforces that every living thing
in Nature shall live its best or suffer ex


tinction, whether flower or animal, indi-
vidual or nation.
But it may be advanced that both Sci-
ence and Religion, meeting on the com-
mon ground of Truth, attach no deep
significance to the death of an individual
or the downfall of a nation. As “leaves
have their time to fall,” so every nation
has its rise, its brief glory, and its de-
cline. There is a cyclic law which deter-
mines the duration of every race, or sub-
race, according to normal processes of
decay ; but it must be remembered, with-
in that again is that inexorable selective
operation which absolutely checks the
progress of evil, and removes the evil ma-
jority rapidly by pestilence, famine, the
sword, or convulsions of Nature, the
wiser minority still remaining their ap-
pointed time under such conditions as
they themselves have created. By a
wise provision, therefore, “low aim” is
treated as “crime.” The contention,
however, of a Christian * teaching which
still has the support of many devout peo-
ple, is that there is a Heaven awaiting
all our suffering, diseased and ill-treated
brethren, who are indeed ‘ ‘ chastened of
God,” and, if they could only see it, a
highly privileged people. According to


this reasoning, the rapid deterioration of
the English race, and the possibility of
Australia being swamped by a cosmopo-
litan tide of humanity, and her boasted
individuality lost, is nothing, if only the
souls of the remnant are set on that ‘ ‘ rest
above ’ ’ which is to be the panacea for all
earthly ills. But the wider view of Di-
vine purpose sees no virtue in shutting
one’s eyes to the hard struggles here, and
continually looking forward to death as a
gateway to pleasant rewards of an eastern
and lotus-eating character.
“ I count life stuff to educe the man,”
wrote Browning. “ The fields are white
unto harvest,” Christ told his disciples,
“ but the laborers are few.” Face Eife !
The spiritual conflicts are fought in the
earthly body. This is the cry of Science
and Religion alike. Five that inner life
of yours so that, when the fleshly body
slips away, you shall feel it to have been
the instrument of a thousand moral vic-
tories, and death but the gateway to larger
service and deeper trusts.
Five for God and your people—
“ For the cause that lacks assistance,
For the wrongs that need resistance,
And the good that you can do.”
The body has a permanent value as long


as evolution requires a physical instru-
ment, and makes it the channel through
which the soul gains experience. And it
is in accord with the highest spiritual
teaching that the physical life of the na-
tions shall be lived, and lived in conditions
of purity, justice, and peace that men
and women in their combined powers shall
produce and manifest the God-man here
and now. Facing the tremendous facts,
then, can it be advisable, from any point
of view, to undo or slight that masterpiece
of evolution, the Family?
And what substitute shall be provided
for the Mother, whose status has been so
sadly degraded ?
There can be but one answer.
Eet the individual and the State take a
fresh standpoint, and learn to estimate
Womanhood at her true value.
HONOUR WOMEN ! PROTECT
WOMEN 1
This is your new attitude, my brother,
the attitude of a MAN not a bird of
prey. Protect and help young girls, don’t
drag them down don’t admire them so
much for little superficial prettiuesses and
charms which in the nature of things
must be fleeting. Don’t ignore the qui-
etly dressed woman, for the smart and


richly-gowned ; don’t go so mad over a
pink-and-vvhite skin as to drive every
other woman to imitate it artificially.
Look for modesty, good sense, kindness
in girls ; look for love of home and the
family ; for a contented, cheerful spirit,
not a restless desire to be always on show
as the latest fashion-plate, or a ‘ star ’on
a public platform. And don’t be so base
as to draw out the love of a tender girl,
and take her from her sheltered home to
be your wife, and then treat her as an in-
ferior being, or a dog whom you may pat
or kick as the mood strikes you.
And if you dare—and among all your
daring achievements there is nothing
greater or more marvellous in its finality
that you can do than this —if you dare to
take upon yourself the responsibilities of
fatherhood, do consider in very truth that
you are calling from the Deeps of Crea-
tion a soul which shall reflect you and
another in the world of men. According
to the trend of your thought and life, will
be that man or woman, to shed honor or
disgrace upon your name or your country.
Love and reverence the mother of your
children because she is their mother.
Drop the false attitude of superiority.
You are not superior to women ; you are


stronger physically, which is quite ano-
ther thing.
Women are not only the producers of
the race and guardians of its infancy, but
they are the regenerators of the world.
In them is the deeper realisation of God,
of Universal L,ove and Power, and the
great far-off Destiny. Woman broods,
like the Spirit on the face of the Waters,
over the Sea of Undifferentiated Matter,
as the old Greek version has it, the unborn
Children of the Ages. She, prophetic in
her gaze, would warn them of the deeps
and shallows of life, the sharp rocks, the
beguiling shores. She, far more than
the man,
“ Hears at times a Sentinel
That moves about from place to place
And whispers to the worlds of space,
In the deep night, that all is well.”
For her,
“ All is well, though faith and form
Be sundered in the night of foar.
Well roars the storm to those that hear
A deeper Voice across the storm.”
Yet a woman’s earthly life circles around
the man ; she looks, unconsciously it may
be, through him to God ; in his small de-
gree he is the creator of her world, her
heart turns to him for love and guidance.
Hard, cold, neglectful he often is, yet she
waits to flood his hardness with her tender


love, to comfort and heal him, wounded
in the battle of life, as well as to be the
mother of his children. And with her
expanded powers of to-day she may be
still more richly furnished as a counsellor,
a guardian of the sanctities, a peace-
maker, faithful and untiring in duty and
love ; but who calls for such graces of
mind, and powers of the soul ? Not the
unit, and certainly not the State. The
man wants a mistress and cook for life
when he marries ; all other qualifications
are superfluous, and a family is neither
expected nor wanted. The State deliber-
ately turns out, in increasing numbers,
smart, shallow, hard, calculating women,
who are never taught that a woman’s first
duty is the care of a home and family.
They walk in the way that is laid down
for them, and the false beginning spoils
the after life.
A new basis for national life must in-
clude as a foundation-stone a reformed
feminine education. The State has surely
learned already that a thousand clever
single women are not as valuable as one
kind, intelligent mother. It now has to
learn how to regain lost ground. In this
connection possibly the chief obstacle to
an education which shall strengthen and


train the innate powers of the potential
wife and mother, will be found less in
masculine boards of education than in
women themselves. At no small cost,
they rose to the absurd standards set by
professors and educational statesmen (ris-
ing every year in Universities and Col-
leges), but the lesson forced upon mo-
thers and the feminine adult by blind
leaders is deeply rooted, and will not be
dislodged without a struggle, particularly
in the higher ranks of life. Heated by
the fever of competition, and dazzled by
a glittering array of medals and scholar-
ships, girls are pushed on by their own
mothers to their detriment. Yet every
mother has her hours of misgiving. Her
girls are clever with their music, French,
German, dancing, but they are no good
at plain cooking, shirt-ironing, house ma-
nagement ; her heart sinks at the thought
of family cares for them, and the distrib-
ution of the family income ; secretly she
melts with pity for the men who will
marry them, she knows they will be more
anxious to shine in some admiring circle
than make their husbands comfortable,
and love and train their children. Yet
again she asks herself what use to pay
high fees for brilliant accomplishments,


and after all settle down to the confined
activities of the homekeeper. For a sub-
tle change has taken place in our life, and
home seems to be a casual boarding-house.
Clubs and restaurants spoil both sexes for
the plain, wholesome living of the home ;
and too many holidays, sports and func-
tions give satiety to all, and mean persis-
tent and widespread extravagance. There
are deep pleasures in the home of sacred
love that are never reached outside ; God-
given honors and privileges are there, and
the springs of national faith, talent, loy-
alty. The alluring decorations and light-
ing of tea-rooms and cafes make the well-
worn home appointments look dull and
out-of-date, but only in summer weather ;
let the storms come, and no one seeks re-
fuge iu the booths of Vanity Fair—
“ There’s no place like home."
In the home the bright new souls are pre-
pared for the battle of Uife not in the
schools. Home training, bad or good, is
almost ineradicable, and can be traced to
the borders of the grave.
Does the present school training en-
courage the love of home, and are all the
graces and accomplishments acquired to
give pleasure in the family circle ? Un-
questionably not, in either case.


The mothers—be it said to their credit
—cannot say to their daughters openly,
“Your only chance of marriage is to
please the men’s eyes by your physical
attractions and entertaining accomplish-
ments ; a wide intelligence and moral
power is the lagt thing they desire from
you ; show but a hint of it, and your
pleasure-loving admirer will seek others
more to his taste.” But the education,
the dress, the exaggerated attention paid
to figure and hair and skin, tell their un-
blushing story. The pictorial advertise-
ments drawn by men, in journals and on
hoardings, of physical feminine charms,
show the masculine taste; and the rich
and beautiful dresses of the ball and the-
atre to-day are often as suggestive as the
originals worn in the licentious times of
the French Empire and decadent Rome.
Sumptuary laws may need to be intro-
duced, as over-dressing, and absurdities
and immodesties perilous to health and
offensive to reason or refinement, contin-
ually flood the community, though hav-
ing their origin often in the lowest strata
of society. The large drapers, specializ-
ing in the artistic show-window, foster
the love of adornment natural to both
sexes, but develop to an amazing and


disastrous degree the love of dress,
for itself, in the woman, though even
at the back of that (to do her justice)
is the desire to please some masculine
eye. For the girl must please to win a
husband, and the wife must please to
keep hers faithful, if possible, that she
and her children may not be engulfed in
poverty and dishonor. Sad training for
our girls; well may they revolt, not at
their womanhood, but at all the causes
that enforce their degradation, and in
their revolt grow cunning, hard, brilliant,
unsexed, hunting or cajoling the men,
not knowing or perhaps not caring that
sooner or later that revolt means con-
firmed mental disorder.
Reform your girls’ schools, honorable
Sirs on Educational Committees, and safe-
guard the innocent girls born to you, the
crown and joy of our humanity. Some
harm you are bound to do on the public
highways of our strenuous life; but as
you believe there’s a God in Heaven, and
a goal beyond the grave, be merciful to
young Womanhood; train your youth,
but leave the girls to Committees of Wo-
men, and medical supervisors.
Women should teach in schools for wo-
men, never men; and most of the teachers,


and always the Principal, should have
gone through the experiences of wife and
mother-hood. They should be sound,
kindly, intelligent women, not of neces-
sity academically distinguished, who have
reared a family, and should be so amply
encouraged and remunerated by the State
as to feel free to give an undivided, cheer-
ful attention to the school. Examina-
tions must be of a simple, pleasant nature,
and marks and prizes given for the year’s
work. Such academic and purely intel-
lectual teaching as is requisite should be gi-
ven in short and interesting lectures,
and must always -be practically related
and applied to present-day life and acti-
vities, and girls encouraged to ask ques-
tions and give opinions. Handsome ob-
jects, comprising silver-ware, furniture,
napery, cutlery, should form annual prizes
to be given the future wife and mother
for her house, from the age of fourteen
to eighteen. From that age to twenty-
one, the girl who is approved by a Wo-
man’s committee as thoroughly efficient
for the duties of a good wife, mother and
housekeeper should be paid by the
State, and promised £5 at the birth of
every child when she marries. Four /50
notes spent in that way will create a re


vulsion of feeling, based on the old primal
footing, but far higher. It will be the
affirmation that a highly scientific and in-
tellectual people have recognised, through
it all, that the greatest assets any nation
can possess are the Mother and her Chil-
dren. Roughly outlined, the mornings at
a girls’ school should be devoted to poultry
keeping and gardening, laundry-work,
cooking, house-cleaning, sewing and mil-
linery, simple upholstery. The last year at
school, when the learner should be eigh-
teen or nineteen years of age, should be
devoted to a thorough study of the ma-
nagement of an income, prices and qual-
ities of furniture and house effects of
every kind, the care of infants and herself
as wife and mother, the whole question
of sex relations as factors in our human
life, the question of domestic help, and
duties concerning the needs of humanity
and the claims of society. All this she
MUST KNOW. There should be no in-
tellectual work done after mid-day. The
brain is brighter and more receptive in
the morning from eight to twelve. There-
fore the literary teaching must be given
twice a week, before one o’clock. Read-
ing, writing, simple composition, rules of
health and diet, simple arithmetic (no


higher than compound division), simple
chemistry, geography, history, astron-
omy. The afternoons should be devoted
to games for physical development, walks
for study of Nature and health, visiting
places of interest and instruction. If
music, class singing and drawing are in-
troduced, without undue competition or
strain, the afternoons twice a week would
give sufficient time. Evenings should be
for recreation ; if in a boarding school
(and the fewer of these the better), the
home feeling should be encouraged, the
pleasant music by older people, vocal and
instrumental, light conversation, some
one may read a book aloud, and a little
fancy work done by a very good light,
early bed, simple but dainty bedrooms,
each girl to have the care of her own. A
model home should be attached to every
College, so that weeks of housekeeping
may be taken in rotation, and vegeta-
bles or flowers watched.
The whole course as outlined, with the
exception of music and drawing, should
be compulsory, except on the intervention
of a doctor’s certificate of ill-health, and
insufficient power to follow the course.
In the same way a brilliant and capable
girl may take up a language, painting or


music with the course; the teachers would
decide in exceptional cases, but in a girls’
school it must be understood that, while
the refined pleasures of life are delightful,
WOMAN’S WORK is ESSENTIAL.
And I claim, in this brief sketch of a
true feminine education, the support
of every thinking woman, and of every
man of the medical faculty, all over the
world.
But, it is advanced, after girls have
left the academic school is the time to
train them in domestic economy. Pos-
sibly in a few cases if they will be
trained, and if the literary habits of the
most impressionable time of their lives
can be broken up, and what seems to
them a lower set of tasks set before them
of an unpleasant and monotonous kind,
with no medals or prizes in the distance,
and a good deal of family criticism of a
stinging nature. A few weeks, or less
sometimes, of this change of activities,
and the daughter says, “I’ll never marry
to be a drudge like mother ! ’ ’
Out she goe,s to “earn her own living 1 ’
—that is, to escape the steady routine of
work in which she should have been trained
from Kindergarten days up. If she should
marry, she will be an indifferent home


keeper, will bear few and weakly chil-
dren, and will break down early : this is
the best that can be hoped for her. Thou-
sands of girls in America, England and
Australia are being turned out every year
by academic hothouses with such a result,
and many far,.far worse, enfeebled in
brain, diseased in vital spots, and low in
moral tone.
And I contend that it is MONSTR.OUS
to persist, in the face of such overwhelm-
ing evidence, to drain the nation’s vitality.
Weak women bear weak men, and weak
men mean race-extinction, or submersion
under a conqueror. Shall we never wake
up to our peril till the Handwriting is on
the Wall, and our kingdom “given to
another”? The Colleges existent may
argue very feasibly, with regard to the
purely domestic education, that to teach
all girls housework is to assume one class,
the class that cannot afford to pay for do-
mestic labour. Certainly, we are obliged
to assume that for a large number of gen-
tlepeople, since the present salaries of the
better class are disproportionate to their
attainments or their worth. The only
classes, by the upheaval and confusion of
all ranks and classes at the present, who
are able to spend money freely, and hire


help if they are disposed, are the
boilermakers, masons, miners, whose
tastes are elementary, and whose
calling - and acquirements require no
expensive maintenance, and, further up
the scale, the universal provider, but-
cher, and landowner. The brewer is,
of course, royal, in his wealth, but his
calling excludes him from any con-
sideration of national claims and coun-
ter-claims; he represents nothing
human or divine, but a huge destruc-
tive factor, a cancer in the social body.
The professions, Government officers and
clerks labor under many subtle diffi-
culties ; solicitors, doctors and architects
find life a heavy struggle, and temptations
many. They pay heavily for every-
thing, and hired help is essential to
them. Yet we have no domestic class-
feminine, stray servants looking for
easy places, high wages, plenty of holi-
days, yet leaving employers at an
hour’s notice without any apology or
consideration. We have a few of
these; but the sturdy, compact labor-
ing woman, built for the heavier part
of ,fhe woman’s work, whose place is
at the washitub and the oven, and the
house-cleaning departments of life,


where is she? Pitchforked into ano-
malous positions, riding - in carriages
and motor cars, over-dressed, glutton-
ous, silly, and falling into sheer animal-
ism and disease. The female laboring
class, divorced from their active life
and struggle, their simple needs, and
few aims, are as painfully ludicrous as
draught horses on the racecourses.
They seem to gain, t'he great mass of
artisans’ and laborers’ wives, blown
here and there by socialistic windbags,
pushing into society with their blatant
supporters and men folk; but the ad-
vantage is never real or permanent; a
fresh puff of wind, and where are they?
The upper classes never ‘ ‘ mix with them ’ ’
as they fondly imagine. That they are
tolerated at the gatherings of cultured
and aristocratic people, is the result of
the high breeding and fine manners
of past generations. Did our laboring
friends of the past fifty years ever open a
copy of Longfellow and read his deep
common sense and the abiding truth of
his advice ?
“ The heights by great men reached and kept
Were not attained by sudden flight ;
But they, while their companions slept,
Wore toiling upward in the ni^ht.


The longing for ignoble thingß;
The etrife for triumph more than truth ;
The hardening of the heart, that brings
Irreverence for the dreams of youth ;
All thoughts of ill; all evil deeds,
That have their roots in thoughts of ill;
Whatever hinders or impedes
The action of the nobler will
All these must firßt be trampled down
Beneath our feet; if we would gain
In the bright fields of fair renown
The right of eminent domain.
We have not wings, we cannot soar ;
But we have feet to scale and climb
By slow' degrees, by more and more,
The cloudy summits of our time. ”
Sound advice here, and eternal truth.
"By slow degrees,” by "toiling up-
ward in the night” of ages past, the
most perfect organisms have been
evolved. By a process of infinite gra-
dation man, conscious of God and his
relation to the Universe, grew from a
little mass of jelly floating in the turgid
waters of a new-born Earth. Mental
and spiritual processes are higher and
more subtle than physical; and the
real ruler of men is a rare product,
even in our day. Public opinion in
the mass is totally unqualified to
choose a ruler, or Secondary leaders
even. As a doctor is admittedly no


use as a solicitor, and an architect dis-
astrous as a naval commander, so your
tin merchants, printers, greengrocers,
and masons never can be wise leaders
or rulers. Ignorant, one-sided,
wholly uncultured, the great mass of
accumulated historical research un-
known to them; philosophy, poetry,
and art beyond the reach of their com-
prehension, how shall they guide in a
day of high attainment? How can
they dare to associate themselves with
Education Commissions, who never knew
Greek from French, and to whom the
names of Ruskin, Emerson, or Goethe arc
but faint and hazy figures of speech ?
The Labor leader’s courage is often
admirable, and a certain party-generosity
good, as far as it goes ; he is generally
shrewd and calculating, confident in man-
ner, and ready of speech; but much more
is required of a statesman.
Will the cultured leader be any bet-
ter when he emerges from the silence
into which the finer elements of life
have been compelled to withdraw out
of the din 'of the rabble in the market-
place?
Unquestionably, if wide observation
and reading, deep sympathy with


humanity, and reverence for God ac-
company the intense purpose and en-
thusiasm of a leader. In every ruler
there must be two essential things—
he must rule himself for God’s work,
and he must rule others for God’s
work, not for a problematic heaven of
harps and halos, but for the infinite
destinies of the evolutionary plan.
There are worlds for the future races
when this earth shall lie in a state of rest,
and the struggle “of the instinct that en-
joys, and the more noble instinct that as-
pires,’’ goes on in other atmospheres and
conditions, with calls to higher service,
and operations of great spiritual magni-
tude.
In true statesmanship there is much
knowledge and real power visible in a
long train of very careful actions, and as
a rule very moderate language. It is the
inevitable sequence and fruit of a trained
mind and the sense of proportion.
When in a man there is a correspond-
ence of moral rectitude you have your
God-man, worthy of his high calling,
and able to lead not only against the
encroachments of “principalities and
powers, ’ ’ but the ‘ ‘ spiritual wickedness
in high places.”


While I am aware that it sounds
very old-fashioned to bring in the name
of God in connection with Labor politi-
cians, I contend that the secret of their
narrow and distorted views and self-des*
tructive operations is, apart from the
question of ignorance, either defiance of
God or leaving Him out of their calcula-
tions as a hazy something that doesn’t
count.
The only starting point for every in-
telligent life is that the Creator of the
universe is supreme, and we live in His
will, in His power, co-workers with
Him. There is only one attitude for
all, high or low, prince or peasant, the
attitude of obedience. “Lord, what
wil.t Thou have me to do?”
How should we know the way if it
were not that “the guide of man is the
eye of God?” And how shall we pro-
test later when opportunities are taken
from us, and, like Peter, we are led
where “we would not?” The man or
woman 'who is guided of God, who
work Si in lowly or exalted position as
one who serves the Highest, fears no
fall, and has no steps to retrace. This :s
the only attitude and l.ife that evolves
the powers of leadership, and it is a


road that is strewn with the sacrifices
of the heart. Anxiety, tension, analy-
sis of motives, absence from the home
circle, careful considerations relating
to numberless public interests, loss of
rest and sleep, and the hatred and envy
of unworthy people, beset the path of
the leader. But once he hears the
call, from the Highest he obeys, and
never counts the earthly cost. “I am
among you as one that serveth.”
The “daily round, the (common task”
is no less service in its place. The man
or woman who fulfils each day s faith-
ful duties is nerving for a great crisis
or a battlefield —“Tempering the
heroic spirit,” writes Emerson. When
“the moving finger points,” that quiet,
unnoticed person comes forth and
plays his or h'er part on the chessboard
of life. If not, “they also serve who
only stand and waitand we live in
the power of an endless life.
Whether Labor leaders ever foresaw
such conditions and attitudes as are
present to-day it is impossible to say,
but it would appear that the lower in-
dustrial classes regard manual labor as
a disgrace and an infliction. Every
man wants to be a “gentleman,” every


woman a “lady.” Whatever else the
terms represent, they generally in-
clude as little as possible to do, and as
much gorgeous dressing and rich food
as they can get. Hundreds of domes-
tic servants have been saved in their
days of folly and youth by the care
and training of good mistresses, and
have lived happy married lives after.
Pride and socialistic talk have turned
their heads yet how foolish so that
they are ashamed of service, and take
the position of dictating to their em-
ployers where they condescend to
work, just as the workman “is as good
as the manager,” and should be mana-
ger “if he had his rights,” in every fac-
tory and workshop. Class distinction
is all through Nature incontestably,
each creature to its appointed environ-
ment; it is natural law operating Avith
marvellous fidelity. For brief periods
in every nation, revolt, hot-headed and
long-tongued, flames around the mai-
ket-places, and incites to bloodshed,
hatred, and national disintegration;
but it is short-lived, and has often been
strongest when the nation was wan-
ing to its close, an outward and vis-
ible sign of an inner and vital decay.


The servant girl problem was never
heard of till Labor Avas represented
in Parliament. Free and unrestricted
education and socialistic theories to-
gether have driven thousands ot
gentlewomen of refinement and high
capacities to wash, cook, and clean
their own houses. The girl.s of the
present must, unless drastic reforms
are made, be prepared to do the same
when they marry, although it will be
a matter for serious consideration if
ladies of all ages, and in good health
or otherwise, are to do the heavy do-
mestic work, Avhile the cooks and
maids, married to the wealthy tin mer-
chant or butcher, push into society
after free education at our schools, and
advocate for their children free edu-
cation at college and university. If
domestic labor cannot be got in our
own country it must be obtained from
other countries, or families will con-
tinue to be limited or permanently ab-
sent. Co-operative homes are talked of
also, but in the present difficulty a
visiting domestic service, arranged ac-
cording to a code of regulations, is the
best that offers.
Returning to the subject of an es


seutially womanly education, it is evi-
dent that literary or artistic pursuits
can be taken up when the girl becomes
a woman, and her health is fully estab-
lished. From about sixteen to
twenty-five the feminine brain be-
comes very active, perception is
brighter, and all-round intelligence
very marked. Languages, the arts,
deeper questions of social economy re-
lating to mixed marriages, adultera-
tions of foods, architecture from a wo-
man’s standpoint, and the problem of
their own education and aims in life,
could be taken up according to capa-
city and taste. But it must be under-
stood that the law of the conservation
of energy is absolute. The woman’s
body and brain must provide the
bodies and brains of from six to ten
images of herself; if she uses up her
reserves as a child, a girl, or a woman,
those children are lacking, they start
life handicapped, and nothing ever re-
coups them for that bad start. Ihe
harm is irremediable for this life, ihe
daily strain, the forced competitions,
the ceaseless, enormous mass of brain-
work a girl in a college and model
school” goes through from six or seven.


years to seventeen or eighteen is ap-
palling, and fatal. Fatal to strength,
and hope, and morality, a form of slow
torture while it lasts, and in almost
every department wholly inapplicable
to the woman’s side of life. As to
the female mathematician, ask your
doctors what she represents. She is
a degenerate, a “sport,” in scientific
terms. She has gone off on a side-
track, and all normal growth is ar-
rested. Not a man, not a woman, but a
calculating machine, with all the milk
of human kindness “dried up in her,”
her conversation is of angles and paral-
lelograms, not of human hopes and
loves. No one’s lovely rosy child will
lie upon her breast. Yiou cannot
imagine her wiping away the dews of
death and closing the tired eyes. And
she was never wanted. The man has
the mathematic faculty, and it is de-
veloped so universallv that any esti-
mate relating to the housewifery or
family needs will be supplied by a
plumber, or builder, an architect or
surveyor, and estimates of bulk quan-
tities by drapers or grocers. The whole
cruel strain of mathematic problems as
applied to girls is unnecessary, and has


been introduced by an education “fan-
cier," who ought to be out growing
"black roses,*’ and breeding animals
with an extra pair of limbs. Look at
the tired eyes, graying hair, and lined
faces of your young lady Bachelors of
Art. The hand of Death is already
upon them, and they are not yet thirty.
Not only so, but they are teaching
other poor creatures to be the same in
our high-class colleges.
We do not want to grow hard-
headed and diamond-polished prodi-
gies in our girls’ schools. We want
intelligent, capable, affectionate girls,
who will look forward to their Home
and its future more than to musical,
artistic or scientific careers, which will
never satisfy the wider calls of their
nature. There is a woman teaching in
a certain College of so high and pure a
strain, physical, mental, and spiritual,
that she alone might be marked out as
the typical mother of the race at its
present stage of evolution. Beautiful
in feature, with clear and lovely eyes,
fine, rose-tinted skin, sound though
not robust health, she was one upon
whom the State should have waited
in respect and hope. No money


and no consideration could be too
great to lay at the feet of such a type.
If from her early years you had trained
her to rule over the woman’s kingdom
of love she would, by the force of in-
herited gift, have expanded naturally,
and bred you the true rulers of the
world —wise, deep, clean living. A
God-woman, sent to mate with the
God-man, her sweet eyes and tender
voice and touch were made to shine
on the children of her love, and soothe
their sorrows in her arms. Now, out
educational system, and the ignorance
of our social policy, chain her to a
desk and blackboard where, for the
interminable hours of her life, she must
teach the children of strangers Greek
roots and Latin derivations, and all the
ill-assorted mass of information that
goes to form the course of the Master
of Arts degree. You have crowned
her with that, O Lords of Confusion
and Disintegration, but the flower and
fruit of womanhood is lost to her for
ever. You have destroyed the thing
that God made with such infinite pati-
ence—the mother. For I am giving
you solid fact. You cannot save one
whd, by t'he multiplication of Nature,


would have given you a million great
souls in pure bodies. Decay and the
waning of life’s forces are already vis-
ible where there should now be the
glory of a woman’s prime; but you
could smoothe the path to the grave.
And when you bury her under a block
of marble, light indeed compared with
the weight with which you crushed her
life, it may be that by her death a
thousand lives may be preserved to
flower into the higher humanity. And
she is not the only case. Every time
a woman takes University honors and
degrees the same thing happens in
degree. You have given her an
empty, fruitless honor, and barred her
from the full honors of her own king-
dom, and all the full riches of ex-
pansion which the world so badly
needs. So hard and cruel is the
Struggle for Life, that we cannot do
without love and tenderness. Rather
should we prepare the channels, deep
and wide, for the flow of those diviner
streams to quench our thirst in the
heat of the day.
The masculine education, while
needing much revision, is very largely
successful and appropriate to the


needs of the man's destiny. But his
ignorance of the laws which control
his own constitution, and of his duties to
the women of his country, or, for that
matter, any country, is responsible for
untold misery, disease, and poverty.
“Not less necessary to the world
than the mother’s gift of love is the
twin offer of the father—Righteous-
ness.” So writes Drummond in his
masterly analysis of the evolution of
family life. Start in and train your
men; a year to every young man, com-
pulsory, whatever his class, somewhere
between sixteen and twenty years of
age. Train him to difet his body
wisely, to conserve his strength, and
to honor and protect all women. Give
him specific teaching as a potential
husband and father, specific teaching
as to wise division of income, upkeep
of house and property, education and
training of children, provision for old
age or possible reverse in fortune, out-
lines of sanitary laws and conditions,
flower and fruit gardening, simple car-
pentering, and repairing Every young
man who can by some practical test,
easily arranged, show himself fit for
the rights of a householder, a husband,


and a father, should have a handsome
tribute from the State —some good sil-
ver that could be handed down to ins
descendants, and the men of less worth
a piece of good furniture, such as a
secretaire or bookcase.
If the test fails he is debarred from
marriage as much as a consumptive,
epileptic, or drunkard. The whole
marriage question is under considera-
tion among thoughtful people, but
amendments of the divorce laws are
as far as many have got. On the prin-
ciple that “prevention is better than
cure,” we shal.l find that to put sex
relations on a better basis, reconstruct
the nature of the marriage tie, and
provide safe and honorable channels
for the nation's expansion, will prevent
any desire for divorce, which obviously
is a mutual “cry over spil,t milk.” Easy
divorce breeds lax morality, and lowers
us to the promiscuity of the early car-
nivora. Even the idea is an insult
to the high attainments of our time.
The present marriage ceremony, though
poetic and deeply religious in some
aspects, fails in establishing any sys-
tem for the two partners who are set-
ting up in the new life with all its


difficulties. Its fault is that it im-
poses no restraint on the man, while it
gives him all the power. He may
desert his wife, or ill-treat her to a most
reprehensible degree before he brings
himself within the operation of the
weak, obsolete marriage laws. Num-
bers of affectionate and noble women
suffer years of slow misery before they
appeal to the Gour,ts, as in most cases
of appeal the family is branded soci-
ally. Sympathy and money are on the
side of the man, and both public and
private action combine to drag her and
her family to destruction. The man,
be he high or low as to status, is the
victor.
In a recent letter Sir John Madden,
Chief Justice of Victoria, writes: “I am
a daily observer, close at hand, of a
tide of sensuality and moral insensi-
bility which is steadily rising, so that
no one can fail to note it; yet no ef-
fort to stem it is being made. The
greatest danger to society in my
opinion is that vice and moral weak-
ness are taken as a matter of course.
Indifference seems to be acquiescence.
This attitude involves all in the cor-
ruption. Marking these dangers, it is


plainly within the judicial function to
warn the Legislature and the commu-
nity of their mischievous influence and
unjust operation. It remains for the
community to insist on and provide a
remedy. There are many rnen who
realise that our well.-intentioned di-
vorce laws operate unfairly /to women,
and subserve the moral abandonment
and the hideous selfishness of many
of their own sex. 1 aim indeed sur-
prised that active resentment and
amendment are so slow in coming, but
they will come, lam sure.” Such a
pronouncement amply substantiates a
concensus of opinion which leading
English writers have published with
regard to the Englishman’s attitude
towards the marriage tie, intensified
in America.
From that we understand, in brief,
that the attitude of the majority is
degrading to the status of a wife.
What the man marries for is continu-
ous and abundant sensual gratification,
the pleasures of prostitution being ex-
pensive, presumably illegal, and more
or less dangerous to health and life,
but always accessible as a form of ‘ ‘ des-
sert.” VV'e are told that this is what


the intending husband means when he
pays attentions to an innjoicent and
physically attractive girl. His duty to
his God, his nation, and posterity never
enters his head. Marriage means a
mistress and a cook for life; all other
things are secondary, children a neces-
sary evil., 'easily curtailed or dispensed
with, with the added knowledge of the
times. Once he is married he controls
the income absolutely. The wife and
children are pensioners on his bounty.
.By personal fascination or an ex-
tremely tempting dinner a wife may
succeed in wheedling money out of her
husband, but by honorable means
never, for the man has the full, support
of his countrymen. Society, we arc
told, is honeycombed with animal de-
sire and abundant gratification, and
quickened brain-power is being used to
further and conceal the bestiality of
men, and the degradation of the increas-
ing number of women who, naturally
yielding and affectionate, arc in inno-
cence caught in the onward sweep of
evil, and, quite unprotected, fall., and in
their fall perpetuate that ceaseless
stream which fills the “maternity”
homes, State Children’s Department,


Homes for Feeble-minded Children,
and “orphan” asylums, as they in their
turn feed the lunatic asylums, inebriate
retreats, the hospitals and prisons, and
we are told that all classes of society,
without any exception, contribute to
the total, which bids fair to become the
sum of the nation itself.
My friends, if this is a true summary,
it is clear that less time, thought, and
money should be spent on magnificent
architecture, or even new cities. The
IJVING WALES OF THE NATION ARE
CRUMBLING, THE FOUNDATIONS ARE
sinking. Man is false to his Maker and
the trust that was put in his hands.
Build up the walls, strengthen your
corner-stones. You that are wise, help
the weak, teach your brothers the
wiser way. In the onward march you
must serve your leader or fall out of
the ranks. Make the home the centre
of national influence, strength, and in-
spiration, as God is the centre of the
universe, and help the man and woman
in that home as builders of their na-
tion, each bound to serve it according
to their highest capacity. Let us
frame wise regulations, and enforce
them, for we are but very human yet,


and so sadly undisciplined that we
need even in the nearest and sweetest
of relations to be protected from one
another. And the first new law must
be to safeguard the woman and her
family. When this is done, and men
and women of every class instructed
as to the part the family plays in the
life of the State, marriage will no lon-
ger be a matter of sensual desire—
“lovely clothes” and up-to-date furni-
ture or calculating ambition to reach
“the top.”
If it is to have any stability the eco-
nomic principles which found and
maintain great business firms should
enter largely into the life of the two
partners. They should each put in
their acquirements and capacities as
working capital, (to leave for the mo-
ment the question of mutual affection),
and conduct the business of the firm
as two departments under one legal
head. The man naturally controls
the outside activities, attends to the
house property, land, drainage, as
much of the upkeep of the house as
may be definitely agreed upon, pre-
pares for others who come into the
firm as participants in its interests,


controls if necessary the buying of
fuel, food, or clothing in large quanti-
ties, and provides for its storage,
studies the interests of the family wrth
regard to health, education, and suit-
able acquaintances, and directs their
tastes into suitable channels and call-
ings. He also provides for old age
and the “rainy day." If he honorably
and gladly fulfils his side of the mar-
riage contract, he lays the foundation
for a 'happy married life, and is likely
to retain in ever-deepening measure
his wife’s admiration and affection, and
prove, not only an excellent example to
his children, but an influence for good
among neighbors and friends, and a
valuable man to the State. He may
in advancing years take a wise part
in controlling much larger (though not
more vital) interests, and help to guide
the thoughts and destinies of thou-
sands. He will in all probability be
quite qualified to play such a part. 1 he
other partner is admittedly the house-
wife and mother. She assumes the
control of the cooking, cleaning, laun-
dering, and sewing departments of the
family life. And, running through
all, that Yital and essential activity of


child-bearing and rearing, the carrying-
on of the race, which, though it en-
tails so much personal sacrifice and
pain, is the source of deep happiness
and after-comfort.
In proportion as consideration and
care are given to her she will control
her department wisely, and bring up
her children happy, healthy, and cap-
able. Social and religious duties are
most efficiently regulated by her, and
the inception of thrifty habits. She
should take office on committees re-
lating to social purity, feminine educa-
tion, female labor in factories, female
discipline and regulations in prisons
and reformatories, boards of health, re-
creation, social customs, and dress re-
form (which latter should be a later
form of the ancient sumptuary laws),
and should share equally judicial
power when the difficulties of married
people come into Court, which should
be conducted in camera.
Simpler and more youthful troubles
of married life should not be brought
to the Full Court. There should also
be a Government Board, to whom
young or old married couples may
apply in any difficulty—partly men,


partly women, chos'cn for sound judg-
ment, wide observation, and sympathy.
They should control a fund for assist-
ance, and branches of such a board
should be in every town. Tragedies
develop from incidents or small mis-
fortunes which, if taken in time, would
be dispersed without leaving a sting.
Government must also undertake the
regulation of recreations and holidays.
Young people are attracted away from
home too much, and it will be impos-
sible to make home-keepers of either
sex when so much liberty and recrea-
tion is allowed. Larger homes, less
decoration, room for each family to
provide refined pleasures within their
own walls, where the young people
may visit each other in pure domestic
surroundings, this is badly needed.
Outside recreations and functions
should be arranged by Government
Boards according to the classes —arti-
sans and laborers, middle class and
tradesmen, professions and Govern-
ment officials. The practice of intro-
ducing the lower class man to his
superior as an equal in ballrooms and
receptions would not be tolerated in
any other but English-speaking countries,


Character is tiie supreme ultimate
undoubtedly, but we are yet evolving,
and the law of selective operation must
rule in any nation which hopes for
moral and social progress.
The question of distributing the in-
come has been a large source of marital
trouble. In most houses there is no
business system. The man earns, the
man keeps—all but a percentage. The
law does not make the woman a part-
ner in financial affairs, although when
in trouble he shelters behind her busi-
ness operations or name. In a firm
composed of two partners there is al-
ways one who could take control if one
of the partners is incapacitated, and
share the responsibilities of both inner
and outer departments. The husband
and wife should be largely conversant
with each other’s aims and operations,
as the success of the home depends on
both carrying out their side of the
contract with integrity, yet being suf-
ficiently sympathetic to see each
other’s standpoint, and give assistance
in each other’s specific difficulties
where it is needed. At stated times
business firms meet to discuss receipts,
regular expenditure, the possibility or


wisdom of enlarged operations, or al-
teration of plans, depreciation of stock
or premises, and other matters relative
to the best interests of the concern.
In the same way husband and wife in
every class once a week or once a
month should go into the question of
income, and general expenditure. No
large burdens of debt could then be con-
tracted by one without the knowledge
of the other; no crying needs left un-
met, no vices could drain the family
purse, or hotel bars flourish at the ex-
pense of hungry children, and the re-
sponsibility of wise and considerate
action would be felt by both.
Children as they grow old enough
should be given an insight into the
working of the family life, for pur-
poses of restraining extravagant ideas,
and also to show them their larger
duties to the State. Thus home-train-
ing and school-training would agree ;o
build up the qualities of self-restraint,
“plain living and high thinking.” It
will take both in their purest and most
virile form to equip our children to
walk wisely between individualism and
altruism, ; to “render unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's,” and unto God


“the things that are God’s.”
It is a lesson often learned in bitter-
ness and sorrow, without the nearness
of the mother’s love to break its sharp-
ness or the father’s wise words, flow
many sad burdens we have brought
upon ourselves, how short-sighted and
selfish are our aims and purposes, how
the old inertia of the animal types cling
to us all. that we can silently condone
such social evils, and persist in such
stupid errors!
If indeed we were not held by a
Divine Centre of things, a great Uni-
versal Soul W ho breathed us out into
manifestation, broods over us with a
great Heart of Love, and patiently
draws us, enriched by the long life of
many ages, into Itself again, it would
be a hopeless task to reason with any
man or woman. But, lying beneath
all efforts for the betterment of human-
ity is the knowledge of One Who
guides as well as of a deep that can be
reached. In the secret chambers of
the heart every man is sensitive to
good, and feels the “power, not him-
self, that makes for righteousness.”
We are being tried in fierce fires of
the physical life, for the Great Refiner


•will have only pure gold. From wars
and bloodshed, avarice and tumult,
from lustful flesh and breaking heart,
from every form of human growth,
whether happy flower or scarred trunk,
God will bring forth the Heavenly
Gold the Soul of a People. To Him
we must all come—hammered and
bruised as driven by His power, or
steadfast on the path as held by His
Love —it is for 11s to choose.
“The earth is the Lord’s, and the ful-
ness thereof. The silver and the gold
are His, and the cattle upon a thousand
hills.” In these material evidences of
His power and His grace are our op-
portunities, here to serve, and here to
love, here to guide the feeble, to re-
claim the wanderer, to fulfil our stew-
ardship to the most high God. And
not here only, over the sea, in plains
and deserts, stewardship in the north
and the south, in the east and the west.
But one day they shall all come “and
sit down in the kingdom of God,”
whether white or yellow, bronze or
black, the Souls of the Nations must
yield their spiritual harvest through
the long ages.
As there is no place for national ego


tism, now that the l>eauty of altruism
is revealed to us, so there is no room
for the laggard, either as an individual
or a nation. Nothing le6S than the
whole power of both at their best will
serve the fine processes of the great
sweep of evolution.
Can we not STAND, who are Bri-
tish-born, and hold the place we won?
Further, can we not ADVANCE, and
guide the energies and purposes of our
race toward that high crest of the L,ife-
wave that shall break one day on a
western shore? Already the far mur-
mur of its tide beats upon our ears.
We arc reaching out wondering hands
towards the worlds of space, and the
opening chambers of the ether. In sil-
ence thought answers thought, space
is annihilated, the secrets of the human
evolution are revealed, the memory-
cells are vibrant with a long-storied
past. A myriad solar systems unfold
to us where other forms of life and
spirit move in their appointed path.
The firmament tells of planets fresh-
born and others fading back into the
reservoir of potential silence, of life's
principles taking bewildering form and
activity. From out the narrow con


fines of the earth we view, “as in a
glass, darkly,” new wonders of infinity.
Many suns must rise and set before
the Aryan race shall have run its
course, and the great quickening of the
spirit fall upon humanity. The map
of the world will then be altered, and
the seats of its government, but where
to-day the greatest cosmopolitan tide
gathers in ever-increasing volume will
the new range of powers open to man,
beside which the Intellectual age and
its achievements will be “as a tale that
is told.”
And again the inexorable law will
rule which ordains the Survival of the
Fittest. The victories of the flesh and
the intellect will have been accom-
plished ; the powers of the spirit, wher-
ever they are found, will be the basis of
that new race that is to carry on the
Divine purposes of creation.
We were counted worthy to receive
the Intellectual heritage of the world’s
humanity. Shall we be worthy to re-
ceive that Spiritual quickening which
will link us to the worlds which flame
in the midnight sky ? Again —it is for
us to choose.
Stand together, men and women,


you through whom the Divine purpose
is brought to fruition.
STAND BY YOUR RACE,
and honor the God who placed you in
it to further the destinies of humanity.




EN PARENTHÉSE.
N§SpME YEARS ago a train of facts
sfcSljf* came under my notice—strange
coincidences regarding the lives
Sag'* of two lovers, of diverse nation-
JjjF alities, and bearing upon the
present subject in rather a pa-
thetic manner. I have ventured to pre-
sent these facts in the form of a little
story, the meaning and moral of which
will be obvious.


THE PAINTINGS IN THE
TEMPLE.
The outside of the temple was rich,
barbaric, of massive proportions, cur-
vilinear in roof design, with Chinese
and Persian notes in the general, color
scheme. Long before I reached the
foot of the wide steps I saw it glowing
like a jewel on the green hill, with its
horned roofs lifting into a mysterious
shimmering haze of pearly light and
shifting cloud, for it was April in
Japan.
Within, the space and silence and
holiness of a sacred place. The hopes
and fears, the tender prayers, the sor-
rows of thousands of souls have left
their impress on the quiet-seeming air,
and I, who have lived my life, and
passed through the fires of affliction,
see in the retentive ether the beauty of
those flowers of the spirit that bloomed


when earthly hopes and loves faded in
the fierce heat.
“ Thy Will tv done."
It is written on all faces, the living 1
faces, as the worshippers kneel at the
altar. The priest repeats the invoca-
tions ; the tones rise and fall in a musi-
cal rhythm; every word and every let-
ter of those mantras and sutras have
their appointed work, to bind or to
loose, to disperse the evil, to call forth
the good, to temper the high spirit, to
raise thte feeble to a place of strength.
It is well to kneel there and realise the
Power which set the worlds in space;
but I am an intruder, and wear tiic
dress of another nation. I might all
unintentionally disturb the sensitive
atmosphere of the worshippers.
Worship is not a matter of place.
In the inner rooms of the temple are
treasures, carefully guarded night and
day, vessels of the sanctuary, the rolls
of the sacred writings, and relics which
mark the beginnings of national faith
and religious aspiration. Once I was
permitted to enter one of the inner
rooms to see and hear things that
changed the world for me. That was
years ago. lam drawn again to this


spot. One by one the guardian
priests, with their calm, inscrutable
faces, pass me <on to where the high
priest of their order is alone.
A heavy curtain is drawn. Some-
thing is said by the attendant priest.
After a short silence I know that a
look or a gesture has granted my ap-
peal.
The figure is more shrunken, the
face whiter and more transparent than
I remember years ago. The deep
eyes are still full of mystic power.
“ Is it well with thee, my brother / ”
He speaks in purest English. lie
has come forward, and bends in kindly
salutation. I know he will not touch
my hand. Ido not presume to offei
it. One thing stands out clear. He
has called inc “brother.” I who am
stumbling so far behind on the track.
“The night is dark,” I quote in an-
swer, “and I am far from home.”
No use to pretend in that presence.
He is clairvoyant, clairaudient. He
draws from me the poison of my dark-
ened mood, and dispels it. I shall not
need to tell him my wishes, my errand.
He will know.
The light, the brilliant spring sun


shine, comes in softened glow into the
room. Deep enclosures are here, and
in their drawers, folded in soft wool
and silk, and laid in white sandal-wood
boxes, are rolls of script, ancient rolls
of hieroglyphic character, ivory sticks
on which kakemonos are rolled, old
paintings of strange design and said to
bear 'Charmed properties. They are
so full of strange interest, these hidden
things, that I, bruised and discouraged
in life’s battle as I am, turn to them,
and their marvellous symbolism. For
a nation’s tragedy is in those relics,
as also the glory of her power, and the
promise of her future; and I know that
if I may bathe but for one short hour
in that deep life of the emotions and
aspirations, of deathless honor and
noble thought, something of the Eter-
nal Strength that sustained others in
their suffering will pass into me.
“I knew you would come, my bro-
ther, and I made things ready for
i 9
you.
He is taking, with great care ami
gentlest handling, four rolls of silk
from a carved casket.
“These are the paintings of one who
was, like yourself, an artist, struggling


to win fame. It was in earlier days
of our history, and he was only a fac-
tory hand, and employed in the casting
of bronze figures. But in his home-
life he had gone far beyond the lit
artistic gifts and pretty objects for die
house •rnt every Jananese boy pro-
duces as naturally as he breathes; and
one day he implored one of the masters
of art to take him for a pupil. Tint
master was Hokusai, the man who ren-
dered the life of the people with such
fidelity. Something of the restless fire
and keen intuition of that great man
seemed also to be in the pupil; but
there was something else that inriu-
enced him deeply, and altered Ids
whole life—the c'harm of the other sex,
‘the Eternal Feminine,’ as one of the
French writers has phrased it.”
We had seated ourselves on tv.o
wooden stools, and as the quiet voice
flowed on I seemed to see the life un-
roll. The girl of low degree, with her
Italian coloring and midnight hair,
picking tea on the slopes, or in holiday
attire at the festivals, smiling into her
lover’s eyes. I seemed to see him.
with that selective instinct of the ar-
tist. sunning himself in a sweet gnj-


den of girl-loves, not too faithful, in-
deed, and often riding away. And as
he loved he grew as a painter; finer
the curves and fairer the tints and freer
the play of fancy, more pliant ;he
brush, more keen the intuitive touch
that revealed in all the inner Power,
because of Love.
“ I understand. ... lam one with
my brother .... that he is of another
nation matters not . . . Ah, the subtle
fi res that fed the blood, and illumined the brain,
the colors of Youth and Joy !' ’
I hear of names and places and dates
of many a gem preserved by lovers of
his art; and then the first painting is
unrolled before me.
“Youth.” Yes; it is youth—a
lovely, mobile face, with those dusky
brown eyes alight with love, and the
wistful self-efifacing smile on the ten-
der mouth. He has caught her look,
trustful, confiding. Many times he
has seen that look dawn in a young
face, and the bud grow into a flower
under his passing love to paint it so!
. . . Would he give the second
chapter, or lie to his own soul? Here
was Youth in a cloudless sky, a very
morning-glory of color, roses on her


cheeks and lips, and on her out-
stretched hand a butterfly, symbol of
passing joy. But how came the night?
In silent peace and fragrance, with
stars jewelled in the deeps, to witness
a human love rooted in the Divine?
Or was it in tegirs and anguish, in
dumb and wondering agony?
There was a click of ivory sticks,
and another painting was unrolled.
“He wished these to be shown to-
gether,” the priest was saying, and held
up the two, so that one viewed them
side by side.
“A hunting scene!” The words
escape me. Somehow I am surprised
—stupidly surprised. There is a sil-
ence, and my gaze—the intent, critical
gaze of an artist on a brother artist s
work —finds every detail in that mas-
terpiece. For it is a masterpiece, al-
lowing always for Japanese methods
and restraint.
The hunter, clad in the old mediae-
val costume, is handsome, young, and
vigorous. I feel the fire in his veins.
He shoots, and down dropping
through the air is a grey bird with
broken wing. Amid the lush grass of
the spring lie other birds, wounded


and dying—a little ring-dove, fallen on
a rock, is full of soft grace, the rounded
body, the pretty helpless head, the
folded wings. Ah, I see it now, and
why “Youth” and “The Hunter” are
bracketed together!
“My brother . . I understand .
T remember the fierce rapture of conquest
. . the treasures of those pure loves given to
me ... as to thee ! and the
darhiess of remorse and shame ! ’ ’
I do not raise my eyes to the face of
the high priest. His gaze lays bare
my secrets. He knows.
“Late, far later than thyself, he came
to know the evil he had wrought.” The
quiet voice fell pityingly on my ear.
“In the last year of his life he painted
these—to guide another —he hoped
especially to help artists.”
Help? Was this heln, this stirring
of the waters of sorrow and remorse?
. . . I came to myself without my
brother's help. I gave it up—the
sweet, bewitching charm of fresh
young womanhood. I set my brush
to the delineation of nobler hopes and
aspirations. Why this sting from a
past phase of life
The third painting unrolls before me-


In it is the figure of the artist him-
self, kneeling at his low table, with
his saucers of color and brushes
around him. A fine scroll is under
his hand, his thoughtful face is bent,
and you see the head shaven according
to a particular design. Through the
opened panel of his studio show the
appointments of a fine house, rich de-
corative work, Satsuma jars, and blos-
soming dwarf fruit-trees. In the gar-
den beyond the fine hill scenes and pine
avenues form a background for beds
of purple vines. A white heron stands
by a pond, and is reflected as in a mir-
ror. But it is the figure of the artist
which holds you.
‘‘This shows the period of his life
when he was taken into the service of
a wealthy daimio, free to expand in
his own way. The peaceful, luxuri-
ous conditions of his daily life were
favorable to a very high development,
especially in the direction of religious
art. Many of his paintings were pre-
sented to the various Buddhist temples
by his lord, Hakodate. One is in the
second court of this building, on your
right as you leave.”
My brother’s face is heavy and re


solute in cas,t, th'e brow is full and
ideal., the cheeks apnear thin, the
mouth wears a deep dejection and dis-
content.
“ lirothcr oj mine , thou hadst come to see
the poor values of the passing shine—something
had stirred thee in thy soul! . . . Yet,
I cannot think the Vision Supreme had damned
upon tliec .... the deeps are still to
reach . . . and the flood-tide! ”
From that sheltered life, honored by
all, he flung himself into the war of
the Revolution, and fighting disap-
peared.
i hear it again for the second time,
the story of the claims of the Shogun,
the rights of the Mikado, the divided
nation, class against class. The gol-
den light within the room is paling, and
in its softened glow I seem to see that
emotional, impressionable soul, with
high patriotism nerving him to fling
aside the delicate tools of the peaceful
arts for the blood-stained sword and
the tumuft of battle; to face mutilation,
death by lingering torture, the loss of
sight; perchance the world and all its
beauties blotted out.
And then the second daughter of
the daiinio left her home to search for


him, and the history of a hopeless love
became known to me. Here she knelt
in the dress of the Sisters of Mercy
and took refuge from the wrath of the
father; for she gave up all for love.
She was a noble woman, brave and
high-spirited as well as beautiful. But
seven years passed before she saw his
face again, though in that time she had
wandered almost all over the Empire.
And she had nursed a woman with
smallpox during Iter ministrations of
mercy, so that when he met her, yellow
and pitted and half-blind, he only knew
her by her voice. He had been crip-
pled in the war, and taken prisoner,
but had escaped, and was pursuing the
old life. He adopted a new name, de-
siring to hide his identity, and burying
his hopes of ever winning .the daimio’s
daughter.
Bent and scarred she saw him at last,
on a dark summer night, standing at
his door waiting for some poor stu-
dents who could not afford to pay for
an art education. It seemed to com-
fort him in his loneliness to see those
lads, in their thin patched garments,
squatting or lying around the fireplace,
drawing or coloring under his teaching,


and giving him their love and homage.
For a follower of Hokusai was always
a name to charm with.
Ah, room of many memories! With
the quiet, even tones, the pictures rise
before me. I see him standing look-
ing away over the harbor, and an old
Italian love-song floats through my
brain.
“ ’Tis calm at sea, ’tis calm at sea,
And night and I want only thee—
Caiissitna ! Carissima ! ”
There is a soft footstep, and she
stands before him and murmurs his
name.
“ Ah, my brother, the yods were good to thee
in that hour . . . I seem to nee thy face
transfigured, to feel thy terms of endearment .
. . dear heart, dear heart after all these
years thou hast come to me ! and in the warm
dark, the forms melt into one ; the deeps of
love blot out the world ! ”
She draws away from him at last,
and t'hey enter the little poor house
together, and there in the light he sees
her face. The dark, sweet eyes are
dimmed, ajid the clear satin skin and
roses are gone, gone for ever. She
wears no loops of shining hair, and
jewelled pins, but the austere head-


of the Sisters of Mercy. . . .
I seem to see the light now falling on
his face, heavy in cast, lined and worn,
with a scarred cheek. He kneels
upon the ol.d cushions, and pours forth
a pleading, passionate flow or
words. . . .
“ It is flood-tide with thee, my brother
. . beyond the poor flesh thou seest the un-
dying Love which, springs from the Eternal ,
. . the Supreme Vision . , . thine for
an instant of time — no more
Her answering tones are low, and in-
tense in feeling. With all their gentle-
ness I feel something that will stab his
heart. . . . She is going back over
the years. . . . She has met many
souls in her travels. . . . Why
does he start and gaze at her so wildly?
First one name, then another, drop
from her lips. Into that atmosphere
of love comes a discordant note. The
air is heavy with pain. . . .
“Pardon, pardon, oh beloved. They
Were but flowers by the way. I had
not known thee then, queen of my
heart. . . . Forgive; ’tis all past.
. . . Forgive, my wife that is to
be.”
“T cannot. Thy friend always,


nothing; more. . . . But when it is
eventide I will be with thee and close
thine eyes.”
1 seem to know that in the hush
there are sad tears falling ....
falling
“ Brother, didst thou not Inow it ?
• . . ‘ Only God ran satisfy a woman.'
Her love is rooted in Purity, and we offer —a
stained record . . . and kill her lore .
. and her faith in man ... I see the
dense darkness fall upon thee, oh, fellow artist,
the darker for the glimpse of glory. My God '
. . who should know if not l who have been
through the same ? ”
“In all the years that followed he
never saw her again till the end came,”
the priest was saying, as he placed the
three rolls back in the casket, “but she
was never far away. Often a shadowy
presence seemed to hover around him,
and a light footfall, that he knew; but
in the hour of death his head lay on her
breast, and soul met soul. She lived
for many years after, and trained many
unfortunate girls to be Sisters of Mercy
like herself, and lose sight of their sor-
rows in the larger service.”
He unrolls before me the fourth
painting. It shows a low-'toned sun


set, with deep purple cloud stretching
over the arch of ,the sky, and a large
grey heron flying low toward the sink-
ing sun. I here is a tense power in
the great bird; his head well held back,
the breast well put forward, the wings
full,-stretched, but the eye that should
be so bright and 'keen is dim, and the
lid half-fallen. This is a dying bird.
The grey feathers of the breast are
ruffled, and deep red blood-drops fall
on the high grass. He that should
wing his way among the clouds will
soon lie among those green sheaths in
the stillness of Death.
“In the last year of his life he painted
this for her, and gave it to my care.
She often came and looked upon it. He
made himself worthy of her in the end.
. . . The rest was peace.”
The casket is closed and put away.
He has given me his benediction, and
I have left the temple that is set on a
hillside, and glows in the sunset like a
jewel of Heaven.
Mary, lily of purity, under dear skies of
the South, will it ever he said of me that I was
woi thy of you in the end ’ ? Gan I hope to
Lis against your heart in the hour of death ? .
. . . Why did not Rochefould say, ‘ Only


God can satisfy a man,’ for it is the Divine
that we lave in a woman, and when she falls
from that ice are desolate. ... If Mary
could forgive the errors of earlier years, would
Ihe satisfied ? Before God and, my said, I
would not.
“ My love, my queen, I would not have you
stooqi to me Aa//, if you can
receive my thought, I would not he churlish .
. . . I will wish for you a man noble in
heart and deed, who shall bring purity to meet
your purity, to fill your life with the joys of
human companionship 1 only wish
you happiness ! ’ ’
The night falls swiftly 'over the har-
bor, like a pall of soft indigo velvet, and
long ribands of yell.ow and orange
girdle the horizon.
I think of him, my brother in spirit,
whose life has been so strangely like
my own, and how the eventide found
him wounded, dying, yet breasting to-
ward the light, the Light of that other
World, where for a time the conflicts are
over. Am I as strong ? Ay, I hope so.
But oh, my God ! The long and weary
years before me alone always alone !
And I might have had all !
Couiage, my soul!


Century
Typ.
Adelaide










