

PRICE SIXPENCE.


-v
V
' f ..*■ '


2^7-1
THE OCEAN COMMUNICATIONS
AUSTRALIA,
AND THEIR REQUIREMENTS,
BEING OBJECTIONS AND SUGGESTIONS ON SOME PROPOSED MODES
OP PROVIDING POR THEM.
Having already objected to the formation of the proposed British
and Australian Steam Navigation Company, on the ground that it
would not be adapted to meet the general requirements of Australia,
a concise statement of the nature of those requirements which are
imperative, and also of some of the collateral advantages which
might be afforded by a company formed to promote Australian
interests, will not be inappropriate. The objections above named
were to the following effect: —
1. It is a misdescription of the proposed company to entitle it
“British and Australian,” all the colonial portion of the project being
exclusively Victorian in character; it proposes to deal only with the
Victorian government in its mail contracts, it makes Melbourne the
only Australian port to which it will send its vessels, it provides
for government immigration to Victoria alone, and its projectors
assert “ that it will secure to the city of Melbourne the position of
depot for the passenger traffic of all the Australian colonies,”
2. Although the facilities for collecting capital, which shares of
small value offer, may be to some extent relied upon as likely to be


effective, there are weighty reasons for doubting the soundness of
that course as proposed in this case. If this company is to succeed
it will require the continued support of both the colonial and im-
perial governments ; an intermittent assistance, or an inadequate one,
will be utter ruin to its usefulness, and without in any way detract-
ing from the value of small shareholders they are not the persons to
bring the required influence to bear on behalf of the company in
cases of emergency or difficulty. Such influence must be obtained
by securing 'permanently a certain proportion of proprietors of wealth
and standing, whose representations will have weight with the
governments, whose private and mercantile connections may be
relied upon to contribute a considerable business support, and whose
stake in the company will be sufficient to induce them to exert
their powers. This class of shareholders is not to be secured by
£1 shares.
3. The amount of capital reserved for the colonial public is not
sufficient to prevent the company becoming, even from the com-
mencement, an English one, and as Australian interests are more
likely to be conserved in Australian hands, inasmuch as colonial
requirements are best known to colonists, an English company is
not the desideratum of the time. We want a company ready to
be the willing instrument of all the Australian governments in an
enduring effort to make Australia the outlet for British emigration,
a result° which would amply repay the temporary shelving of pro-
vincial pride, to admit of co-operative action for the purpose of
bringing it about. This object will be a very secondary one for
English shareholders • they will look exclusively for profit, and the
larger such profits can be made on a minimum of capital, the more
successful, in their estimation, will be the enterprise, even without
any perceptible change having been effected on the destination of the
thousands of our countrymen who annually leave the shores of
Britain, too frequently to strengthen hostile hands, while the attain-
ment of it will be farther than ever from our grasp, if this or any
other English company occupies the route on terms dictated, and
only rendered possible, by local and most prejudicial jealousies.
4. It is by no means certain that the proposal to pass the Cape
without calling is judicious. Is it wise under the circumstances to
refuse even a small amount of profitable business, which the Cape
undoubtedly can offer 1 Is it wise to pass a midway station, which
would afford opportunities for re-adjusting the machinery, refilling
the coal bunkers, communicating with or hearing of the vessels pro-
ceeding in the opposite direction ? Is it wise to reduce the power of
the machinery, thereby reducing the speed, for the purpose of avoid-
ing such opportunities ? Is it wise to carry coals for the purpose


of saving 255. per ton, to the exclusion of cargo at say 60s. or 80s.
for the same space ? And is it safe to lighten such vessels of 5000
tons of fuel in the most stormy latitudes '{
5. It is proposed to continue the objectionable practice of paying
for mail services by a fixed subsidy. Now, the effect of this system
between England and Australia has been, and must always be to
induce the contractors to give the smallest possible consi del ation in
return. Why should they invest more capital, or otherwise exert
themselves, if the amount to be received is not in proportion to the
work done ? It is not to be expected that they will do so, and the
alternative is to reverse the position, by making the subsidy depen-
dent on the work, not the work on the subsidy ; and though it may
possibly prove more costly, it must, if so, be equally more effective.
6. The proposed vessels are too large for the probable traffic,
for it is certain that the expected 850 outward passengers will
not be forthcoming every month, at an average fare of £3B 16s. sd.
per head ; and the same remark applies, with scarcely less force, to
the 800 homewards monthly, at £3B 2s. Gd. ; yet these numbers
only half fill the ship.
7. The high fares proposed will not divert any large number of
emigrants from the American to the Australian route ; far more
effectual arrangements are possible, and ought to be insisted on. Were
the speed and numbers said to he expected , obtainable, it would be
quite practicable to make the outward fares £25, £l5, £lO, and
£B, and the nearer the approximation to such rates the greater will
be the probability of obtaining full ships.
8. Although the project meets with support on all sides, on the
ground that, with no stoppages, full power steam-ships will make
the passage in forty-one days, strangely enough, the fact that the
proposed vessels will actually be less powerful in proportion than
some auxiliaries, the Great Britain for instance, is entirely ignored.
Compared even with the Great Britain, the proposed ships are at a
decided disadvantage in this respect; for, in addition to her superior
qualifications as a sailing vessel, her engines of 520 horse-power,
bear a far more respectable proportion to the requirements of the
ship than do the proposed 1200 horse-power to the work which
appears to be expected from them. If the Great Britain's quickest
passage is fifty-five days, in what time may vessels proportionally
■one-third weaker be expected to perform it ? Under all the circum-
stances, if the proposed vessels make as good passages as the Great
Britain , their owners will probably have to be satisfied, and so will
the public, without those collateral advantages which a successful
application of the mail subsidy on this route would give.


These colonies and the mother country are now paying about
£400,000 per annum for mail and immigration services ; they have
paid, during the last ten years, something like £3,000,000 and no
material improvement in the means and cost of transit has been
effected by this expenditure : on the contrary, it is quite possible
that the government contracts for immigration purposes may, in
some cases, have actually caused an increase in the price of third-
class outward passages. This most unsatisfactory result has been
brought about by permitting each colony and each department to
make its own arrangements, while a very moderate amount of sys-
tematic combination and co-operation would either have saved a
large sum or have secured a better equivalent for its expenditure.
Had these enormous funds been disbursed as they might have been,
in laying an open way before those who are willing but not able to
come, instead of paying dearly for a mail service by one route, and
for a few select but expensive immigrants by another, we might by
this time have had a weekly mail in less than forty days, and with
it an annual increment to the population of these colonies of fully
50,000 industrious and productive settlers. Such a way cannot be
provided for many years if each colony continues to take an inde-
pendent course, for no one of them is yet able to undertake the
work, because no one of them has the required means or trade, while
the means and trade of all the colonies united would ensure early
and complete success.
Under these circumstances, and believing that it is our interest,
and ought to be our ambition to raise these communities to , the
dignity of a great Australian nation ; that that end is only attainable
by a general recognition of the principle and a cordial acceptance
of its obligations; it becomes a public duty to oppose the for-
mation of the British and Australian Steam Navigation Company.
If it succeeds, the success must necessarily be so moderate and so
local in character, that many of its present supporters, having com-
mitted themselves to it because they feel something of the kind
should be done, without inquiring if nothing better is possible, will
jfeoret that they did not look at the matter in a more truly national


spirit ; for it will be a greater obstacle than all existing ones to the
attainment of that position which, as Australians, we all desire Aus-
tralia to occupy in the eyes of the great mass of emigrating Britons :
if it fails, it will so shake the public faith in such enterprises, that
years must elapse before any effort of the kind can again be made.
It will be readily admitted by all those persons who have given
that attention to the subject which it merits, that more rapid and
less costly means of communication between Great Britain and her
Australian dependencies would tend very greatly to benefit the
latter. Fully satisfied in his own mind of this fact, and in some
degree sensible of its great importance, the writer began about three
years since to devote his leisure to the consideration of the case, with
a view to ascertain, and if possible to meet its demands; and, upwards
of two years ago, having concocted a scheme exactly similar in its
leading features to the one above referred to, it was submitted to a few
O '
gentlemen of eminent financial ability. The opinion which that
course elicited was not encouraging. It amounted to this : the idea,
good in itself, worked out in this manner, should that be possible,
will result in heavy loss to all concerned, or, as was observed at the
time, “ the expected great public benefit may prove to be a great
national calamity.” The project was thereupon reserved for more
careful consideration and reconstruction. Further investigation
showed that all the colonial funds which are applicable to such pur-
poses would not be too ample, either as a consideration or as a means
for the work ; that obtaining the use of these funds involved general
consent and co-operation between the colonies j that such consent
might be expected, if based upon a right to demand a strictly just
share of the resulting advantages; that any materially smaller
portion of such funds, such as that which may be at the command of
one colony, would scarcely be sufficient to afford a very moderate
support; that the colonies cannot gene; ally co-operate if their local


interests are individually ignored ; and, that if they are driven from
co-operation, they may, and doubtless will organise a competing
establishment, most dangerous and detrimental to the interests ot
the original enterprise.
In the Australian Ocean Transit Company, whose formation is
herein suggested, the foregoing principles would be carried out in
meeting the requirements of the united colonies, which are as
follows:
First: Passenger transit to each colony must be provided sufficiently
economical ot both funds and time to induce, and sufficiently frequent
and extensive to accommodate a largely increased immigration to
Australia without seriously affecting the shipping interests in any
one cf the Australian ports. Most persons acquainted with the
condition and prospects of Australia will admit, that a large and
suitable immigration is the best guarantee for our continued and
increased prosperity. Such being the case, and our great local
attractions not being sufficient to counter-balance the costly and
tediously obstructive voyage, we must not deceive ourselves by
imagining that our requirements on this head are so uncommon that
a good advertisement will satisfy them. America and all the British
colonies are everywhere alive to the value of that surplus British
population, which annually seeks new lands wherein to build new
homes, and we who are endeavouring to develope in our island-
continent a powerful southern nation, can least of all afford to miss
such invaluable aid. Personal and provincial considerations cannot
be valid arguments against a national effort to obtain so great a
general benefit* Once divert the great stream of Euiopean emigration
to Australia, and all the interests of every class in each of these
colonies and in others which will be rapidly added to their number,
will at once be more substantially prosperous than at any previous
date ; all the exertion and every sacrifice which any colony can make
will be most amply compensated. To effect this object, such portions
of the immigration votes of all the colonies as may be necessary
might be legitimately applied, but it would be folly to expect such an
application of them to be consented to without a clear understanding
that the funds would be honestly used to facilitate immigration to
the colony providing them, and such an arrangement is quite as
practicable as it would be just and equitable. It is impossible that
any company having this object in view can succeed, if it does
not receive as much of the various immigration grants as it
can profitably employ on moderate conditions, in addition to as
liberal a mail subsidy as any ever given. Further, the trade is not


sufficient, and must, be very considerably increased before these
results can be obtained by competition, in our present condition
combination alone can secure them. With the aid of the mail and
immigration funds, the time and cost of passages to Australia in
steamships of first-class size and power may be so closely assimi-
lated to those of the American route, that they will not deter the
intending emigrant from selecting Australia for his home ; and as
these funds have been, are, and must be expended, it is not too
much to assert that we require such results from their expenditure.
Second ; A mail service in no raspect less efficient and reliable
than the existing one is indispensable. With regard to the mail
service, any change which does not guarantee equal punctuality with
existing arrangements, or compensating advantages to all the colonies
for any retrogressive step however slight or temporary is simply
impossible, except perhaps to the present contractors. A new
company must exhibit an invincible determination coupled with
suitable arrangements to overcome this difficulty which will prove
to be one for a short time only. When the trade is sufficiently
developed to employ vessels of ten or fifteen thousand tons, thirty-
five-day passages will not be uncommon ; but for the present, as our
whole resources would not give a moderate return on such vessels,
we must endeavour to increase those resources by all the means
at our disposal, combining our energies to secure their more
effectual application. The mail subsidy might, if no other considera-
tions interposed, continue to be judiciously expended as at present,
but it admits of a more useful application. It is a payment for the
conveyance of the mails, that is to say, for the space occupied and
the speed required by them. If this be true, it is clear that little
more than speed can be justly charged to the subsidy, and if that
subsidy now giving speed on the Suez route, where few passengers
offer, can be made to afford equal speed on the Cape route which
does not now possess it, and by which thousands of passengers would
travel, so great a public benefit would evidently result from the
change, that it could scarcely be demurred to even with a temporary
addition of four or five days to the course of post, especially when
it is remembered that by so using this subsidy in conjunction with
immigration funds, the rates of passage money and the length of
the voyage can be reduced to such an extent as very materially to
facilitate emigration to Australia ; while without it, to the serious
detriment and hindrance of these colonies, the time and cost of
transit must remain generally unimproved.
Third : Facilities for placing merchandise in the markets contem-
poraneously with the arrival of the correspondence relating thereto,
is highly desirable. Although, as a rule, it would perhaps be


impossible to place any productions in the markets to which they are
consigned at too early a date, there are several to which peculiarly
strong inducements for prompt delivery attach, owing either to their
great value or to the deteriorating effects of continued close stowage
on their quality. Without referring to the numerous instances which
•might, be adduced in support of this proposition from our import
trade, our exports generally, and those of gold, copper, wool and grain
in particular, supply ample arguments to establish its general correct-
ness. Hitherto our exports of grain to Europe have been most
insignificant, but we are now entering on a new era. We have proved
our ability to raise wheat of the very finest quality, we can do so in
considerable quantities, and we must not exclude ourselves from an
unlimited market because a long sea voyage deteriorates its original
condition. If our wheat is to take the place it ought to occupy in
Mark Lane, if our metals and other products are to be realised, with
a minimum loss of interest on their enormous annual value of nearly
.£20,000,000, and if facilities for transmitting them as rapidly as our
correspondence would enable us to draw against them at thirty days
instead of sixty, such facilities are most unmistakeably required.
Fourth : Provision for steam transit on other ocean routes, such
as those to India, China, and Panama, As any company estab-
lished for such purposes would receive great public support, by
which it would secure large profits on the European route, it
might fairly be required to exert its powers, if called upon to
do so and guaranteed against actual loss, on any ocean route
which, though barely profitable in the first instance, being advan-
tageous to the interests of Australian commerce it may be desirable
to occupy, thereby opening to the colonists and to the company
new springs of future prosperity, which left to ordinary enterprise
would long remain unwrought.
Fifth ; In addition to the foregoing absolute requirements, there
is another, which, if it is thought desirable, such a company might
most materially help to meet, and that is, coast and harbour defences.
It would be quite possible, with the mail and immigration contracts,
to find employment for a number of fast timber-built steamships,
capable of carrying a sufficient humber of heavy Armstrong guns, to
render them most formidable opponents to any war vessels ever likely
to visit these waters, and in conjunction with the company’s other
vessels, a large reserve of first-class men might be secured for defen-
sive purposes. On any capital which might be invested in these
vessels, it would, however, be absolutely necessary for the colonial
governments to pay 5 or 6 per cent, interest, if required, to make up
a dividend of 10 per cent. Should the vessels be needed for war
purposes, they might be exchanged for their ascertained value in


government debentures, and taken back by the company when the
exigency had passed, also at a valuation. Suitable vessels, fit to
carry heavy guns, would cost about £IOO,OOO each, and the maxi-
mum cost for interest to the united colonies for each of the vessels,
not being less at one time than four in number, would be £6OOO per
annum.
Practical effect might be given to these arrangements by establish-
ing a Colonial Company, with power to raise share capital to the extent
of £3,000,000, securing equal influence to all classes of investors by
dividing it into £lOOO, £lOO, and £lO shares. A local committee,
consisting of one representative of each class, should manage the
local affairs of the company in each colony and in England, and
each committee should nominate one member of the central board.
The indispensable requirements would be generally met by main-
taining on the European route, vessels of the largest class ; in suffi-
cient numbers ; propelled by one horse-power to each four tons
measurement, or to each square foot of sectional displacement ; by
endeavouring to deliver the Australian mails either way in thirty-five
days, conveying government immigrants, in numbers proportioned to
the size of the ship, at 6s. per head per diem, the individual charge
not to exceed £l3 10s., any fixed portion or all of which might
be paid by the governments ; by keeping the passenger fares at the
lowest payable rates, increasing the accommodation as required, and
reducing the fares as the profits of the company and numbers of
passengers increase, according to a scale to be agreed upon; by
running the vessels to Sydney, Melbourne, and such other ports as
may offer sufficient inducement alternately, making Port Phillip
Heads the point of arrival and departure from and to the westward
for all vessels not bound to Adelaide or Hobart Town; and by con-
tracting to do these things for an indefinite period; details to be
varied from time to time with the consent of both parties, but the
contract not to be terminated without ample notice from either,
under a heavy penalty.
The consideration for these services should be; as much of the
government immigration business on the terms proposed, as the


Victoria
50
500
5000
£150,000
New South Wales...
50
500
5000
150,000
South Australia
10
100
1000
30,000
New Zealand
10
100
1000
30,000
Tasmania
10
100
1000
30,000
Queensland
10
50
500
20,000
company may be able to transact; and £IO,OOO for each mail de-
livered in thirty-five days either way, to be reduced or increased by
£250 for each day more or less respectively, such reduction not to
exceed £SOOO, should the voyage have been actually commenced.
Before asking government assistance or that of British capitalists
it would be advisable to test the disposition of the colonists by
opening subscription lists for shares, on the understanding that no
expense is to be incurred without the consent of the local committee;
that the subscribers will use their influence to obtain the acquiescence
of the local governments in the terms proposed, as soon as the
colonial capital is subscribed ; and that in the event of unfavourable
replies from the governments collectively, or the enterprise not
being vigorously prosecuted within a reasonable period (say twelve
months) the whole of the deposit, less the aforesaid expenses, is to
be returned.
It would be erring on the safe side to decline to proceed with a
smaller colonial proprietary than a general distribution of the
following shares would give, the whole to be paid up in two years
from the date of commencing operations: —
£lOOO £lOO £lO
Shares. Shares. Shares. Amount.
If larger sums offer, the necessary balance will be so much the more
readily raised in Great Britain.
The mail and immigration contract might be entered upon with
six vessels, each of 5000 tons gross measurement, and 1250 horse-
power, at a cost of £1,200,000, and the probable average financial
result of the first two years, on the terms proposed, with a monthly
mail and a working capital of £1,500,000, ‘has been estimated
approximately thus :


RECEIPTS.
Passenger Traffic — £ £
Out 50 Ist Class at 50 0 Twelve Trips 30,000
„ 200 2nd ~ 30 0 72,800
*6OO 3rd „ 12 10 „ 90,000
Home 50 Ist ~ 75 0 „ 45,000
„ 100 2nd „ 50 0 „ 60,000
„ 300 3rd „ 25 0 „ 90,000
Freight—
Out 1,800 tons at 80s. ~ 86,400
Home 12,000,000 lbs. wool at Id 50,000
~ 1,200,000 oz. gold at 3d and coin 20,000
5,000 tons copper at 40s. 10,000
100,000 bushels wheat at Is 5,000
Sundries out and home per annum 8,600
24 mails in 45 days at £7500 each 180,000
£747,000
EXPENDITURE.
Fuel, 100 tons per diem at 33s 180,000
Interest on £1,500,000 at 8 per cent 120,000
Depreciation and insurance on £1,200,000 at 10 per cent ... 120,000
Provisions 100,000
Wages 90,000
Commission, salaries and contingencies 65,000
Balance to reserve, or otherwise .. 72,000
£747,000
While the company ought scrupulously to avoid all interference
with the Australian coasting trade, there is no reason why its powers
should be confined to the westward European mail route, and
it may be named “ The Australian Ocean Transit Company,” to
admit of and indicate a future extension of its operations. The
course being now quite clear, we shall greatly err if we allow it to
be obstructed by any imperfect establishment, which proposes to
operate in a less comprehensive manner than the exigencies of
* Chiefly government immigrants.


the case demand; and we shall, under the circumstances, be quite
justified, or rather, we are bound to refuse to treat with any new
company which is not based upon a disposition to co-operate with
the colonies generally, in establishing a first-class mail service; in
providing most liberal arrangements to induce immigration and to
expedite valuable freights, and in fostering to the utmost the trade
and commerce of all Australia in any or all directions. In short,
the colonists and the company should cordially co-operate in every
possible way to develope the trade and resources, to promote the
interests, and to increase the prosperity of each and all of the
Australian settlements. Such a company would merit all the sup-
port of all the colonies ; for the colonies would be sure to obtain
from it, in its own interest, a more liberal policy than any number of
competitive companies could for a long time offer, or than any one
company, supported by any one colony, can ever supply.
Prahran, near Melbourne,
2nd September, 1862.




