

■<) - J •* * * • -J*
ShMuWM mwgJM , *®\ M a .- T. , r_ 1 ,;. v ;■■■;,■. r - - - L "i;. .'/*. ' *£
(ffiSi/it/'fj01>^0^/ SffiiT?Hy*^»V*>51MiA?yott * j* w-?w*f{vB'■ <i Wffij-f-:ffiT&ferasL2^mW^%5 tt
J$ di$JP J§& v^;^;M'j..- :^
■’-*•' ■ .2®# J»i*-. : -i■•: "■ : ;■.' ~:-‘:^ : :-i : c: ;-^,. ■;■ (i ?:
if *ff$SS SB -J^^S'^ : ■ :T “^ J /;.:^;:'^;-- / ■ ■•:■;; : j^^'/f-;4:-‘?3 ---?ii^'i
* ~<LJ |ap r *■ *--X* f / ; /. .v;
Hp mW^
' ‘iS'yi/fS /j K & * *“Vi> > * vj >H * 12*5 ill M L>J*l/ S ll-Cc5 J
S'tmr ' 4 ’ ~
*:V5 i 5h^ : '
(®i /,• -f^jTjr^^k'


- - *r <jSSr^*S jjjy -> S1> > !Mfc^|^^p^Sifc^w^^,^ffi^y!^gi^^^^p> -^B
i> iSE-wfe jm'wwKt i' 11 fc ~‘^fr?%<MPZSai > it . ■^F* p iAiaBwSa3BS^H^^—^d^K/fzL^^^
?£¥**_ .. m*z $,/**} * jt- • ■ r '* k •** -m ■rt*- 3 r liiMrtn t«rf* ■<^py #^ffK^^^^rofi>l^ttCj?"w %^«^MBKiA^*>^BKtfS/j : Jr xiiPv-.' w i »; » *vh jj^J 1 * W jRm> >
iftfS?~' .- -- 1 4d3SpiS*T^i Cl* yjte JWBfc *»h y* jPtt ■-'•*






10 **
|)orti|mt (^allern
MEMOIRS OF
APPENDICES :
Constitution -/let.
Ifistoiry olj tip Souflan
SYDNEY:
Published by the Southern Cross Publishing Co.,
96 Pitt Street.
Printed by W. M. Maelardy, 319 George St.




CONTEITTS.
Sir John Robertson, M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
Hon. W. B. Dailey, M.L.C. 13
Hon. Alexander Stuart, M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
Hon. Sir Henry Parkes, M.L.A. 29
Sir James Martin, Knight, Chief Justice ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
William Charles Wentworth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
Thomas Sutcliffe Mort ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51
Revd, John Dunmore Lang, D.D. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 57
Hon. Sir Edward Deas-Thompson ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 65
Hon, Sir Charles Cowper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 71
The Most Revd. John Bede Folding, Archbishop of Sydney ... ... ... ... ... 79
Hon. Sir Alfred Stephen, C.8., G.C.M.G., Lieutenant-Governor ... ... ... ... 87
Hon. William Macleay, M.L.C.... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
Hon. Sir John Hay, K.0.M.G., President Legislative Council ... ... ... ... 99
Right Revd. Frederic Barker, D.D., Bishop of Sydney, Metropolitan... ... ... ... 107
Hon. James Norton, M.L.C., Postmaster General ... ... ... ... ... 113
Hon. George R. Dibbs, M.L.A., Colonial Treasurer ... ... ... ... ... 121
Sir Patrick Alfred Jennings, K.0.M.G., M.L.A. ... ... ... ... ... 131
Hon. John Macarthur ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 143
Hon. William Joseph Trickett, M.L.A., Minister for Public Instruction ... ... ... 149
Hon. Edmund Barton, M.L.A., Speaker of the Legislative Assembly ... ... ... ... 157
His Honor Justice Faucett, Judge of the Supreme Court ... ... ... ... 167
Hon. James Squire Farnell, M.L.A., Minister for Lands ... ... ... ... ... 171
Hon. William Forster, M.L.A. ... ... • ... ... ... ... ... 177
Constitution Act .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 185






'■' v "
YV. Del . rPC.y P.worc &V Newmai


THE HON. SIR JOHN ROBERTSON-
M.L.A.; K.C.M.G.
IHgr a.NHOOD suffrage must have been an active and real fact among tliose
Goths of old time who chose their chieftain-elect by popular acclamation,
UK ' and caused their leaders to spring fortli from the masses, all-armed, as if by
/ * magic,—the necessary product of the time. No monarch’s chair of state
G could be much firmer than the warrior’s throne of the hero, ringed round
with glint of steel and sheen of sword, thrown aloft on the shields of the
fighting men. Rude and primitive as the process was, it was effective in singling out
with unerring directness the “ strong man ”of his hour and age. The same influence
o o o
has exerted itself among all primitive states and peoples. The man who expresses best
the popular sentiment, and best represents the popular aspiration and ideal, is cast to
the surface by a natural law which can only exercise itielf freely under such circum-
stances. Such a man is the subject of the present memoir. Sir John Robertson
mirrors and reflects in his own character and person, better than any one else now
before the country, the distinctive features and representative characteristics of the
typical Australian politician. He has been identified with the first faint glimmerings of
the dawn of our constitutional history, and is now one of the few remaining links that
bind us to our initial efforts at Responsible Government, There are but few of our
first legislative generation left. Day by day during these later years some old familiar
face and figure has passed from the political stage, spoken its last lines, and vanished
into the shadow of the wings. Some few enjoy the dignified leisure of private life,
while others have successfully sought the safe haven of official dignity ; but Time, who
has mercifully silvered the sable of our veteran’s youth, has dealt less lightly with most
of Sir John’s early legislative colleagues. The first chapter of our history is rapidly
turning its last pages, and perhaps we are yet too close to the men and their work to
estimate both at their just value, which must necessarily lie more in the future than in
the present and in the past.
The story of the life that occupies our attention has been told and re-told often
enough to strike one now with an easy sense of familiarity, as of an oft-told tale ; but
it is, as we have said, pre-eminently characteristic and photographic of what we conceive
to be a prototype of Australia’s representative public man. Sir John is almost a native
of the colony, having arrived at such an early age as to make his four years of infancy
in England of little practical moment in this connection. He was of mixed parentage,
his father being Scottish and his mother English. The fourth of a family of six
children, he was born on the 15th October, 181(>, at Bow, in Essex. Four years after,
his father took advantage of the facilities offered to emigrate to this colony, where the
future apostle of land legislation landed just sixty years ago. His early years were spent


at school in Sydney, partly at Dr. Lang’s Scots College, in Jamieson Street, and partly with
that well-remembered instructor of many of the colony’s best men, Mr, Cape. Sir John
was one of Dr. Lang’s first pupils, as he was afterwards one of his staunchest friends. Both
have often since stood shoulder to shoulder in many a hardly-fought battle in the political
arena ; the solemnity of the Chamber has often been broken by the ripple of laughter which
greeted one of Sir John’s jocose allusions to the schoolboy days of some distinguished
fellow pupil under the venerable doctor ; and on the veteran churchman’s demise in
1878, his old friend and pupil was one of the pall-bearers at the public funeral in his
honour. On leaving school, young Robertson joined his parents up country, whither
they had proceeded to engage in the then general pastoral pursuit. His time was spent
on the Hunter and about the Liverpool Plains, near Boggabri, where his name yet
lingers in local legends not unconnected with stray cattle and Robertson’s Mountain.
This kind of life does not appear to have suited the active mind of the young man,
however, for at the age of sixteen we find him working as an ordinary hand on the
ship “ Sovereign,” on his way to England. Here, by an accident, he met and was
entertained by Lord Palmerston, who gave him a letter of introduction to the colonial
governor on his return. This fact does not appear to have further influenced his
career, for we trace him for two years subsequently following the profession of the sea,
which he only left to return to pastoral pursuits in New South Wales after visiting a
great part of Europe and South America. He now settled down to his calling in the
north-west, marrying at the age of twenty-one, when the active current of his life took
a fresh course. Ever energetic and in motion, his native intelligence and mental
alertness prompted him to take an active personal interest in other subjects outside the
immediate ones of stock and stations. Politics were beginning to shape themselves in
New South Wales, and accidents, apparently trifling in themselves, guided and influenced
the course of events in a manner which shows us clearly enough now the ferment of
men’s minds. This was about the time when the masterful influence of William
Charles Wentworth, the patriot who gave New South Wales its Constitution, first
began to make itself effectively felt. While young Robertson was keeping his night-
watches on the cattle-track out among the sombre eucalypti in the then far interior of
the colony, Wentworth was perfecting his scheme for that political system on which
the obscure back-block squatter was to leave such an enduring and unmistakable
impress. But before matters had yet attained a definite shape, the coming politician
had already assumed a position of local leadership. His clearly-expressed views on
public matters forced his personality strongly before the notice of his contemporaries,
and the settlers in the northern districts of the colony naturally regarded him as their
leader and spokesman. It was in this capacity that we next find him in Sydney,
advocating the rights of the squatters before the then Governor, Sir George Gipps. Sir
George having, in the interests of the native population, restricted the squatting
enterprise within certain limits, its delegate was sent down to petition His Excellency
in the matter. Mr. Robertson called a public meeting, and stated the squatters’ case.
A petition was- drawn up and presented, and was completely successful. It is remark-
able that Sir John, whose name is now so intimately identified with free-selection
should have been one of the first squatters in the colony, and the first to lead the


squatting element as a distinct class in the community. From this time onward he
became more and more identified with the discussion of those stirring political ques-
tions, which, as the old imperious and Imperial influences decayed, and the individuality
of thinking men made itself felt, came daily and hourly under notice. It was about five
years after Mr. Robertson’s visit to Sydney that the first metropolitan election took
place, resulting in the choice of Wentworth and Bland, in 1843. About the same time
the public desire for Representative Government began to take definite shape. The
right of a free people to make its own laws, and the necessity existing for the framing
of such laws by persons having an intelligent and personal, not merely official, interest
in their operation, recommended themselves to the popular mind, and Mr. Robertson
was not slow to assist in the forming of men’s opinions on these vital subjects, by his
fervid and energetic eloquence. His ready and effective speech, with his force of per-
sonal character, and that clear practical common sense and foresight which he has always
so markedly possessed, placed him at once in the forefront of those who gave these
matters their study. The public-spirited and able young agitator was just the type of
man that the age and country seemed to call for, and it is no matter of wonder to find
him so easily and naturally assuming that position of native leadership since held by
him for so many years, and honoured with such consistent and continued ability.
The inception and realisation of Responsible Government belongs properly to the story
of other lives ; it may suffice here to say that when the Constitution Act was passed by
Wentworth in 1853 and finally ratified by the Imperial Parliament in 1856 —when the
Bill giving the right to the people to elect their own representatives became law, Mr.
Robertson was one of the first to receive a requisition to come before the electors as a
candidate for the new and Reformed Parliament, and the first to issue an address to his
constituenc} T . This historic document brings out in high relief the main lines of the new
Constitution and his own policy. On reviewing Sir John’s long career it will be found
that, whatever the startling and occasionally pantomimic surprises its vicissitudes may
present, he has at least adhered to his first principles with a strict and undeviating
fidelity. His has been the great good fortune to see most of the chief features of his
first address inscribed on the statute book of the country above his autograph as their
author ; while, with all, his name has been most intimately connected. Among the
measures to which more particular allusion is here made are those relating to the
administration of the Public Lands, Electoral Reform, National Education, and the
Abolition of State Aid to Religion. With the first of these the name of Sir John
will always be most intimately identified, and his life is the history of our land law in
itself. He was elected for the constituency of Phillip, Brisbane, and Bligh to this the
first Parliament under Responsible Government, numbering fifty-four members. Sir
James Martin, W. B. Dailey, W. Macleay, Thomas Holt, and Daniel Henry Deniehy
were amongst his contemporaries, and one of the first cares of the young representative
was to perfect the Constitution he so much appreciated. At that time the electoral
qualification was a limited one, and elections were decided by open voting. The
necessary reform came two years after, and the colony has been taught to look to Sir
John Robertson as one of the principal movers towards the establishment of the Ballot-
box, Manhood Suffrage, and the proper re-adjustment of the boundaries of the electorates,


all of these points being covered by his hrst address. Two years after his election we
find him Minister for Lands and Works in the Cabinet of Sir Charles Cowper, where
for some time Mr. Dailey was his colleague as Solicitor General, and Sir James Martin
as Attorney General. From about this time his public career proper may be said to
commence.
Unquestionably the magnum opus of Sir John Robertson’s political life is comprised
in his efforts to settle the land legislation of the colony. One of his first acts as a
legislator was to advocate that principle of free-selection which he seems to have
-adopted as a fixed idea. At that early date the land question did not present the
endless and almost inextricable maze of vexed questions, arising out of class prejudices,
intensified evils, and vested interests, that has grown up round it during the past
quarter of a century. In 1856, the question was the very simple one as to what was
best to be done in the public interest with the vast amount of estate
constituting the birth right of the country. The popular “earth hunger” was as
strong then, doubtless, as it is now and ever was. The natural desire of the early
colonists to claim a share in the soil and a field for their enterprise was quite as active
within its then limits as it now is with its enlarged scope, but decreased opportunities.
It is scarcely the place, perhaps, in a brief biographical notice, to discuss the deeper
philosophy of legislation, much less to examine critically the merits of any particular
question. But the names of our political pioneers, from the very fact of their beino-
such, are so inseparably connected and intimately identified with our constitutional
growth and development, that it is difficult to dissociate the one from the other.
Neither is it fair to turn on the lives of colonial politicians the all-searchino- o-fare of
a O o
that mercilessly scrutinising criticism properly kept in reserve for the political giants
of the world’s history. The canons by which the lives of a Gladstone or Disraeli are
judged are too refined and delicate for the policies of antipodean statesmen. The
difference is rather one of kind than of degree, but to us who are most nearly affected,
the builders of the Constitution of a young and growing country are more
interesting objects of study than the guiding lights of the confusing and conflicting
interests of more ancient and historic commonwealths. But the particular question
with which our present subject is most closely connected is one that, at the
present juncture, interests States both old and new. The theories surrounding
the central idea of the nationalisation of land are focussing the attention of all
thinking minds, and the attempted solution of the problem in New South Wales and
Australia generally is a case in point of almost unique importance. It is not often that
such an experiment is tried, nor such an opportunity afforded the student of following
its processes. It cannot but be regretted that such an occasion for correcting and
profiting by the mistakes of old-world land legislators should have been so largely
wasted, but that this untoward result has proceeded rather from maladministration than
from any radical error in the policy of the father of our land legislation, even his
bitterest political enemies have admitted. The enormous dowry in the shape of public
estate taken up by Governor Phillip in 1788 was lavishly bestowed from the first.
The principle of popular ownership with the State as trustee seems to have been lost
sight of ah initio , and the best energies of the ruling powers appear to have been directed


to the perpetuation of old-world abuses through the building-up of larger estates by
the few to the exclusion of the many. Our four first Governors, with a population of
a few hundreds, alienated 47,678 acres of territory, and from that up to 1831 the public
lands of the colony were given away with a liberality which can only accompany the
disposal of the property of others than the giver. In the year named, grants were
abolished, and auction sales at five shillings per acre upset price substituted, the colony
being divided into counties and parishes for the purpose. Three years after this, and
forty-six years after the foundation of the colony, with the free population less than
10,000, the number of acres alienated was upwards of 3,500,000. In 1839, the later
Squatting Act was passed, practically establishing the pastoral tenants of the Crown.
In 1846, these had their leases fixed at fourteen years. In 1842, another Act, relating
to Avaste lands, and raising the price to Ul per acre, Avas passed, the auction system
universally established, and the lands divided into county, suburban, and town lots.
In 1844 the Pastoral Association was formed, and in 1818 there were 1865 squatters
in Ncav South Wales. Up to this time no provision had been made for other than
large holdings. The capitalist and man of means might go out on the lands of the
colony and take up large areas, Avhile the poorer yeoman Avas debarred from the exercise
of a similar privilege. It Avas here that Mr. Robertson rose superior to class prejudice
and cliquism, and boldly advocated the poorer settler’s right to select his homestead
freely over the waste lands of the colony. He met the first Land Bill introduced by
the Ministry after his election with a proposal tending to this act of justice, but the
class-feeling growing from the sharply-defined caste distinctions of the day, prevented
honorable members from seeing the matter as the clear-headed representative put it.
Nine members voted with him in his proposal to alloAv the unsurveyed lands to be
thrown open for free-selection, but by the use of those parliamentary tactics of Avhich
he has ahvays been such an accomplished master, he gained his revenge and saw the
Ministry ejected from power. His quarrel Avas virtually that of justice against
monopoly, and it Avas with a view to break the latter that he voted with the Ministry
in its proposal to increase the rents of runs. Sir Charles Cowper’s second Ministry
Avas formed in 1857. Mr. Robertson joined that astute politician as his Minister for
Lands and Works, remaining in office from January 13, 1858, to September 30, 1859.
One of their chief measures was the passing of the Electoral Act as described; the
Ministry being defeated on their Education Bill soon after. The Forster Cabinet which
succeeded prepared a bill embodying to some extent, though timidly and hesitatingly,
Mr. Robertson’s ideas on free-selection ; but the proposal was never discussed, the
Ministry being defeated after five months existence. Mr, Robertson now came to the
front as the leader of Land Reform, and Avith the legend ‘‘Free-Selection before Survey”
emblazoned on banneret and shield, entered the lists to fight the battle of honest
settlement against selfish cliquism and grasping monopoly. Taking office on March 9,
1860, he at once struck the key-note of his policy by introducing an original and
masterful Land Bill, Avith that central idea as its distinctive and characteristic feature.
Mr. (now Sir John) Hay, present President of the Legislative Council, opposed the
principle by a specific motion, and Avas successful by a narrow majority. Knowing the
popular feeling, and trusting in the justice of his theory, Mr. Robertson at once and


confidently appealed to the people. The result was a veritable triumph ;he and his
Cabinet were re-elected, with an overwhelming majority, and the Bill was re-introduced
and carried. Even then the measure met with tremendous opposition from the
autocratic Upper Chamber, until the Minister resigned and had himself nominated to
the Council, where he in person piloted his Bill through the quicksands and perils ol
interest and selfish conservatism, thus affirming the radical principle which has ever
since been the law of the colony. The Act finally passed the Legislature on October
18, 1861, and came into active effect January 1, 1862. Whatever may be thought now
of the working of the Act, there can be no doubt that the Bill did good work in its day
and generation. It was the only legislative barrier against the rapidly-growing system
which bade fair to place the colony with its resources in the hands of the members of a
limited circle to the utter exclusion of industry and enterprise. Judging the usefulness
of the New South Wales Land Act of 1861 by the condition of the public lands to-day, the
success of that great measure is indeed open to question. Though its avowed scope and
object was to settle the people on the land, and to raise up a yeoman class composed of
the holders of small settlements and a farming population, it can scarcely be said to have
proved an unalloyed success, A far greater portion of our territory is comprised within
the boundaries of our princely squatting estates than is covered by the holding of the
bond fide selector, or the agricultural clearing. But this fact in itself goes to prove the
necessity for Sir John’s measure. The tendency in this colony has always been towards
pastoral rather than towards agricultural pursuits. Grazing and sheep farming pay
better than tillage, and the shearing season has been found a more reproductive harvest-
time than that of corn and cereals. To engage in the pastoral industry with a full
measure of success large areas are necessary, and it was the tendency to form these that
constituted the chief danger threatening our future as a colony. The Land xVct with its
facilities for free-selection in the interests of small capitalists has acted at least as a salu-
tary check to this perilous tendency, and made its growth a matter of time. Had the
Bill been administered according to its spirit from the first, and its abuses peremptorily
stopped with a strong hand as soon as they began to declare themselves, there is little
doubt that the honest intentions of its author would have been effectually carried out.
This popular tribune has always been a consistent and pertinacious advocate of the
measure embodying the first blow struck by him for the inalienable rights of the people.
Sir John Robertson has been at the head of four Cabinets, which took office
respectively on March 9, 1860, January 12, 1870, February 9, 1875, and August 17,
1877. Besides these honours, he was Minister for Lands and Works in the Cabinet of
Sir Charles Cowper, January 13, 1858 ; Secretary for Lands in the fourth Cowper
Ministry, February 3, 1865 ; held the same office in the fifth Cowper Ministry, August
17, 1870 ; was Colonial Secretary in the Martin Cabinet, December 16, 1870 ; and
finally, represented the Parkes Ministry of 1878, in the Upper House, afterwards taking
the portfolio of Public Instruction, in June, 1880. His various terms of office, therefore,
extend over a longer period of years than those of any other politician in New South Wales,
or, indeed, in Australia. He has throughout shown a loyalty to his late political chief,
Sir Charles Cowper, not often witnessed in our political circles, and on one occasion (in
1870) he withdrew from the Premiership in his favour. The Cabinet of which he was


a member in 1861 passed a measure to stop the granting of State Aid to Religion in
the colony. The next duty to which his first address committed him was discharged
in 1860, when we find him supporting the measure of Mr. Henry Parkes, providing
for the regulation of Public Schools education. In this act his generous political spirit
was again apparent. Pie did not hesitate to support his opponent and rival in perfecting
and passing a measure which formed part of his distinctive political platform —a fact
which stands out in refreshing and strongly-contrasted relief against that background
of captious opposition and obstructive egotism forming the motif of the careers of other
colonial politicians. While a member of the Parkes Ministry of 1878, he had another
opportunity of adding his influence to the consummation of his theory on the subject of
public education, when the present Public Instruction Act became law. While thus
signalising his public life by its intimate relationship to the most important measures
that have passed our Legislature, it is not to be supposed that Sir John went through
the parliamentary ordeal without his meed of criticism and censure. One noticeable
instance occurred in connection with the fifth Cowper Ministry. On its defeat by the
opposition led by Sir James Martin, in 1870, the Premier appointed himself, with the
concurrence of Mr. Robertson as his principal colleague, Agent-General for the colony
—a step the intelligence of which was received with a storm of criticism. But this was
lost sight of in the event that immediately followed, when Mr. Robertson was found
gazetted as Colonial Secretary in the Cabinet formed by the late leader of the Opposition
which had ejected him from office. This is one of the anomalies —amounting to a species
of political immorality, to which all concerned appear to have been parties —which even
an ardent apologist would find it difficult to satisfactorily explain. No contortional
feat in a harlequinade could be more startlingly successful —as a contortion ; but
considered as the act of a responsible political leader, it is almost beyond the reach even
of censure. Such an act could only be paralleled by the person who committed it ]
and such a parallel was provided by the action of Sir John Robertson himself in taking-
office in 1878 with his rank political opponent and rival, Sir Henry Parkes. This step
may be excused on the ground of expediency, but scarcely on that of political morality
or political faith. The latter action was moie disastrous in its consequences than the
former, inasmuch as it eliminated the one great element of political usefulness —a
capable and active opposition —from the political life of the country. The train of
consequences which directly followed, and which were so clearly exposed and denounced
at the last general election, were the direct result of this crushing of the political instinct
and public spirit. Since that time we have had no organized political parties in the
Assserably, and the consequence has been as it must always be under such a condition
of things. This second transformation was led up to by a series of stirring occurrences.
The Robertson Ministry of 1875-77 was defeated in March of the latter year, and
succeeded by that of Sir Henry Parkes. That Ministry was defeated in its turn on the
famous five-mile area question, raised by Mr. Garrett, and arising out of the Lands Act
Amendment Act. Sir John again took office in August of the same year, but was
compelled to appeal to the country in December following, owing to the popular
dissatisfaction with the Immigration Vote and Agreements Validating Act, and the
frequent and unfruitful changes of Government. This election resulted in the defeat of


both leaders in the Metropolitan Electorates, though both were immediately chosen for
country constituencies, Sir Jolm being elected for The Bogan and Mudgee. He sat for
Mudgee, but was ministerially defeated as soon as the House met. The Farnell Ministry
then took office, occupying it for twelve months. On its defeat on the Land Question,
Sir John was again sent for, but failed to form a Ministry. After repeated failures, Sir
Henry Parkes also gave up the task. The Farnell Ministry carried on the business,
but was again defeated, when, to the astonishment of his following, and the disappoint-
ment of his friends outside the House, Sir John coalesced with Sir Henry Parkes, the
two dividing the honours and emoluments of office amongst themselves and some of
their followers, and forming the famous Parkes-Robertson Cabinet of 1878. By this
step, Sir John stultified himself as a political leader, abdicated his chieftainship, and
crushed the faith of a large and distinct class in the community. The full force of this
act was still more apparent a year or two later, after the Milburn Creek scandal, when
Sir John found himself virtually leading a Cabinet, each one of the members of which,
three years before, opposed every one of his measures, and formed the strength of the
Parliamentary Opposition while he held office. This circumstance, and his previous
defection, form a charge that nothing can altogether palliate. Its very enormity,
however, is part of the character of the man, whose very mistakes have been open and
unconcealed, and in keeping with those legislative acts that own him for their author,
and which were always boldly conceived and masterfully carried into practical effect.
There is little that is petty about his history, though it is not quite free from much that
is censurable. The people who have profited so much by his worthy legislative labours
may, perhaps, visit with a generous forgetfulness those lapses in his political career.
In 1877, Sir John Robertson received a well-earned recognition of his efforts in
the order of Knighthood of S.S. Michael and George, which reached him at the same
time as that of Sir Henry Parkes. It has been said that the change of the old
popular soubriquet , which was a tribute to his honesty, to the title of knighthood, did
not find favour with the democratic voters of West Sydney, but Mudgee appears to
view the fact with more complacency. Since his election for that constituency in 1877,
he has continued to ixypresent it. On appealing to the country on the proposed Land
Bill of 1882, he was again elected as its member, with Messrs. Buchanan and A. G.
Taylor. The new measure was, however, unhesitatingly condemned by the people, and
the Parkes-Robertson Ministry gave way to the present Stuart Cabinet.
From the foregoing, it will be apparent that Sir John Robertson’s career has
proceeded pari passu with the development of our constitutional history. The dates of
its chief events are epochs in his public life, and the one lends light and shade to the
other. That public life has been full of colour and character, presenting very few half-
tones and no neutral tints whatever. All things about the man, even his mistakes, are
clear and well-defined. It is difficult to guage with strict accuracy the vast influence
for good of such tough fibre, interwoven so completely as it has been through and
through the variegated woof of our colonial political life. The national character of a
young country like this is widely tinged and deeply impregnated with that of its
political rulers. Their individuality insensibly impresses the public spirit which
commits itself to their care. The strong virility of Sir John Robertson has established
him from the first in the front rank, and his individual personality has never since failed


to impress itself on the opinions and political faith of his followers, as well as on the
entire political life of the country. On the whole, it must be admitted that his general
influence, apart from his acts, has been for good. He has ever been a staunch friend,
always in the face of expediency or prudence, though sometimes in the teeth of justice.
As a political leader he has never committed himself to those mock oracular deliverances,
meaningless and vapid in themselves, by which some politicians defraud the popular
faith and throw dust in the eyes of the people. He has never stirred up class differ-
ences to bolster up a weak position, nor revived those rabid sectarian cries and old-
world bitternesses, so much out of place in Australia, to strengthen failing political
power. His liberality has been consistent throughout, and his disregard of class
differences is only equal to his contempt for those who profited by them. Though
never despising party tactics, his career has been singularly free from petty subterfuges
and whining cant, ever taking his reverses and defeats manfully. As a speaker, he has
always been eloquent, prompt, and effective. Throughout his life and work Sir John
Robertson has amply justified the popular choice of a leader in the very beginning of
Responsible Government. In reviewing both from their commencement, the observer
cannot but recognise the great and varied use both have been to our political history,
at a time when it was of the first importance that the general character of its impressions
should be good. In sounding the heart of the country he will find, far down in its
depths, a deep strain of tenderness for the noble old veteran whose face and form are so
familiar to every unit in the community. When most of the callow statesmen and
immature politicians of to-day, who essay to gain a perilous notoriety by criticism of
his work, have found their proper and native level, the feeling of the country will be
glad to glance back at the history of the past, illustrated as it was by the virile life
and manful efforts of this “fearless and intrepid leader of the people.”






f
y. .,, 'acleoo Del. FpjOy Photo bY Boyd.


THE HON. WILLIAM BEDE DALLEY,
Q.C.; M.L.C.; ATTORNEY-GENERAL.
CULTURED taste, and a refined and delicate intellectuality amongst public men,
'■‘Mm it' they do not constitute an absolutely requisite alloy for the formation of a
desirable public spirit, are at least essential to its due development and per.
X* feet growth. Without such gentle and graceful concomitants as these the
T rough gem would ever remain unpolished and uncut, however pure its native
ray. It would be like a picture after one of Michael Angelo’s designs,
presenting huge proportions and gigantic figures, bold and striking in conception and
execution, and vigorous and massive withal : but wanting that softer tenderness of
sweet colouring and magical blending and intershadowing of rich lines which mark the
offspring of the palette of the gentler Raphael. The harsher and stronger characteristics
of public life are the most natural accompaniment of its birth and early growth. It
takes its first definite shape and early character from these, which are to the complete
whole what the roughly-sketched lines of a cartoon are to the finished picture of the
mcestro. The exigencies of political life, especially in its first throes, have a tendency
to bring the £k practical ” element most violently to the front, to the exclusion of those
keener and more delicately-tempered qualities which are perhaps too exquisitely cut and
finely edged to do pioneer work among the rough material out of which the first casts
of the future political life and public spirit are hewn. When, however, we find the first
requisites for practical work energising almost side by side with the refining and per-
fecting influence thus glanced at, it augurs well for the excellence and perfection of the
final result. Such an influence gilds and transfigures the harsh lines of public life,
softens its asperities, removes its crudities while lessening its imperfections, and
lends it an appropriate grace and finish. In its absence the strain of public life
would be coarse and ravelled : and public life itself void of that light and sweetness
which add to its attractiveness while increasing its utility as a perfect whole.
In the gentleman who forms the subject of this sketch the latter gifts and graces
find a worthy exemplar and representative. He supplies this want in our political
world in a marked and efficient manner, throwing, as he does, the halo of his graceful
and delicate genius round the political life of the colon}".
William Bede Dailey is a native of the colony, having been born in Sydney in
1831. He studied at Lyndhurst and the old Sydney College, now the Grammar School,
at both of which excellent institutions, affording the best scholastic training of which
the colony then boasted, he bore himself with honor and distinction. At the age of
twenty-five, in 1856, he was called to the Bar. The colony was just passing through
the transition state from the Imperial regime to Responsible Government as the talented
young advocate emerged into manhood. The new constitution was the general topic of


thought and conversation, and public meetings, at which the great and novel question,
with its many sides and multitudinous side-issues perpetually came up for discussion,
were frequent wherever the population aggregated itself into numbers. The polished
intellect ot the coming man was immediately fascinated by this all-engrossing subject,
and a few crisp and stirring speeches, brilliantly expressed and eloquently delivered, at
once had the effect of thrusting Mr. Dailey forward as the mouthpiece of that native
sentiment of patriotism which thus first found tangible expression. The eloquent
young barrister was enthusiastically received by the Wentworths and Cowpers of the
day, who cordially opened their ranks to welcome him. From the first he actively
identified himself with the various phases of that period of transition, and his splendid
oratorical talent kept him well abreast of events within the Chamber as well as before a
public that idolised him outside. In 1857, when Sir Charles Cowper was called on to
form a Ministry to take office in the room of the Parker Cabinet, just defeated on its
Electoral Bill, Mr. Dailey was one of his warmest supporters. Some changes being-
effected on the death of Mr. Robert Campbell and the retirement of Mr, Martin, he was
offered the Solicitor-Generalship, taking office on November 15, 1858, two years after
he was admitted to the Bar. This honor was forced upon him against his will, by the
exigencies of party politics ; in 1857 he retired in favor of Mr. (afterwards Judge)
Hargraves. From this time he seems to have given himself up almost entirely to tl e
arduous duties of his profession, until in 1861 he went with Mr. Henry Parkes to
England as lecturer and Emigration Commissioner. On his return he resisted every
temptation to re-enter the political lists, and continued to devote himself to his legal
practice. His career henceforth becomes the record of his public speeches and literary
efforts, until February, 1875, when he became Attorney-General in the Robertson
Ministry, holding office to March, 1877. When Sir John Robertson again accepted
office in August of that year, Mr. Dailey received the Attorney-General’s portfolio. On
returning to political life, he did not again enter the Legislative Assembly, but took his
seat in the Upper Chamber, on Februar} 7 9, 1875. During a portion of the term of
office ot the Parkes-Robertson Ministry he resigned his seat, but was re-appointed in
December, 1884, when he accepted office again as Attorney-General in the Stuart
Cabinet, which office he still holds. Mr Dailey has long since been accorded the
*/ CD
position and rank of one of the leading men at the Bar of New South Wales. His
talents as an advocate are only 7 equalled by those he has displayed in any other sphere
in which he has evinced a desire to excel, and the forensic skill and eloquence as a
pleader of his best days are not to be easily equalled in the annals of the Australian law
courts. Some of the most celebrated cases in our law reports have seen Mr. Dailey
engaged, and as a public prosecutor his impeachment of criminals has always been
scathing and frequently effective.
But it is to the speeches and writings of Mr. Dailey that we must turn, rather than
to his legislative acts, to estimate his position among the public men of the country.
His career has been a literary rather than a political one, although his influence on
politics in the direction just indicated has been clearer and more definite than that of
any other colonial politician. His name appears rather as the author of much of the finest
native literary work ol the colony, than against the entries in its Statute Book, and he


litis been a devotee of Calliope and Polyhymnia rather tlian of Clio. A scholarly and
epicmean leisure appears to have suited his cultured and graceful taste better than the
lough exeitioii of the political arena. That leisure has been happily illustrated by
much valuable literary outgrowth, which has wreathed and intertwined itself about his
pleasant retuement like the convolutions ot some lea'y vine, rich in its fruitage of
purple clusters, ever betraying his retreat to the numerous admirers of his literary
character, as might the carolled stave ot some vine-embowered, rose-crowned Anacreon.
Such contributions to our literature, fleeting and irregular and often sketchy as they were,
have ever been welcomed by the literary taste of the colony, which would undoubtedly
be much gratified by their republication in one or more representative volumes. To an
exquisite taste and a faultlessly-fastidious charm of diction he adds, in his literary style,
a matchless giace and a magical skill in the choice of words and in the framing of
phrases, forming for the pearls of fancy and scholarship as they fall, precipitated in
glittering chrystals from his jewelled pen, a setting which is unrivalled in the appropriate
richness of its chasing. The clear-cut thoughts and sharply-defined ideas with which
his literary productions sjiarkle, are like those gems of rare and purest water round the
fretwork of which the genius of a Benevenuto Cellini might love to express itself in
the wonders of that exquisitely delicate and magically artistic craft which has made the
work of his hand and his name immortal. Mr. Dailey is never happier than when
wreathing the flowers ot his graceful fancy round some person, or fact, or phase on which
he loves to throw the light of his brilliant appreciation. As Nature abhors a vacuum,
so may he be said to shrink instinctively from anything out of harmony with the canons
of strict literary taste. He has a rich exuberance of the imaginative faculty, and a
quick and glistening play of fancy, which catches the lights and shadows of its subject
as the prismatic hues are caught and mirrored in the vapours of some sparkling sunlit
fountain. Withal, he has an incisive wit, and an effective gift of mordant sarcasm, the
rapier-like thrusts of which are none the less keen and piercing because, like that of
Harmodius, the blade is sheathed in rose-leaves. Against this weapon, used as its
possessor yet knows how to wield it, if his hand has not lost its cunning, the mask of
hypocrisy and the plate-armour of ignorance are alike ineffective with the triple panoply
of impudent self-assertion and of vulgar, overbearing conceit. Such coverings as these
have been again and again mercilessly ripped up by his exquisite irony, and their
wearers overwhelmed with confusion by one of his cutting and incisive attacks. To
this is added an ever-bubbling vt-in of humour, enabling him at once to seize with
mercurial rapidity the ridiculous side of an opponent’s theory or position ; and the
happy faculty he possesses of instantaneously chrystallising his impressions into faultless
sentences gives him an almost unapproachable power in debate. Of most of these
brilliant gifts the younger generation has seen but little. For years past their brilliant
trustee has been but seldom before the country whose public life he is so well fitted to
adorn. It would be hard to estimate the full influence for good such a man might have
exercised over the public life of the country, had he seen fit to assume and retain his
proper place in its councils —a place, as we have seen, freely accorded him by both the
House and the country from the first
Mr. Dailey was a frequent and noticeable contributor to Punch in its palmy days


of twenty years ago. It was in the columns of that periodical, which then attracted the
contributions of the best writers the colony held, that his well-known “ Political
Biographies ” appeared. These sketches are, in the.r way, works of art. In a strain of
humourous satire he draws his character portraits of Dr. Lang, Messrs. Robertson,
Cowper, Plunkett, Martin, and others, directly reversing their characteristics, and
throwing light on the men themselves by a close consideration of those peculiar
qualities which they in the most marked and signal degree did not possess. Thus he
praised the present Chief Justice, who never wrote a line of verse in his life, for his
single-minded devotion to the Muses, while he eulogised the reverend Doctor on his
new edition ot Mabillon’s Benedictine Annals. Mr. Cowper is censured for his dangerous
frankness and his confiding simplicity, while Mr, Darvall is praised for his awful
sphynx-like calm and air of grand repose, proceeding from a genial tolerance of all
shades ot political opinion that chanced to differ from his own. “ Political Snobs ” was
the title of another series of papers contributed to the same periodical about the same
time, both of which are largely quoted from in that useful little compilation, Barton’s
11 Eoets and Prose Writers of New South Wales.” During these earlier days, he was a
collaborateur on the press with the late Daniel Plenry Deniehy, between whom and the
subject of this memoir a warm friendship at one time existed. It was pleasant, after
the lapse of nearly twenty years, to find Mr. Dailey two years ago, on the occasion of
the annual St. Patricks Banquet in the Town Hall, pay a well-merited and worthy
t forgotten memory. On that occasion he unveiled the “ pale
image of one of Australia s most gifted sons in such a way as to give once more a place
in the national remembrance to a general sentiment of admiring and affectionate
recollection which had then taded almost entirely away. The discharge of such an office
is one of the privileges of genius. In reviving this sacred memory Mr. Dailey made
use of the following words “ Before I close the few remarks which I have been glad to
make to you, let me ask you on this festival of memories of genius and tenderness to
fondly and sadly remember the name, and recall the pale image of one who, though born
on this soil of ours, was surpassed by no man amongst you in his love for Ireland, and
I think 1 may say, without being suspected of extravagance, at least by those who knew
him, of one who might have easily occupied the highest places among the most gifted
and honoured of modern Irishmen. It was my inestimable privilege to enjoy for years
his most intimate friendship to hang for hours upon the music of a speech which, to my
ears at all events, has never fallen from the lips of any other man ; and 1 have heard the
best and greatest of those whose grace and power, whose meditated and whose impro-
vised eloquence, whose epigrammatic brilliancy, and whose sustained grandeur have
most impressed, astonished, and delighted mankind. I ask you to remember one whose
loss was a misfortune to us and a calamity to literature —of one whose genius was
unhappily limited by the poverty of his fortunes to a stage altogether unworthy of his
power, and who passed away from us, leaving no one behind him who could presume
even to measure the proportions of his intellect. 1 ask Irishmen from a sense of gratitude
foi his tenderness to their country, and Australians from a proud remembrance that he
was their countryman (cheers), to cherish the memory to-day and for ever of incom-
parably the most gifted Irish Australian of our history—Daniel Henry Deniehy (loud


and prolonged cheering). If on such occasions as this you honour and cherish such
noble memories, you build up by your tenderness the most enduring monuments —you
preserve fresh for your children the finest examples of culture and devotion —} on soften
the asperities of life—you discourage imposture 4 in the corrupted currents of this
world,’ and you do your best to retine, to elevate, and to purify society.” In this way,
by one of the most graceful public acts of a public man in these colonies, was a fast
fading memory elevated to its proper niche in the annals of the country. No man in
the community could have paid this just tribute so fittingly as Mr. Dailey, and the
tender feeling with which the duty was discharged was in perfect harmony with the motive
which prompted it. In the Sydney Morning Herald from time to time literary articles over
the well-known initials £ ’ W.8.D.” appeared, and notably amongthese was a series of reviews
on the successive volumes of Mr. John Morley’s edition of the English classics. All of
these papers, with one on Swinburne, and notably a paper on Walter Savage Landor,
were beautifully and artistically done. These at.least, if re-published, would make an
acceptable addition to our colonial literature. Another noticeable product of his pen
was his “ Roundabout Paper on Spanish Cathedral Builders,” —a delightful and
thoroughly appreciative sketch of a picturesque feature of a picturesque country and
age. In this he seems to have let his own peculiar tastes revel and lose themselves
amongst the mazy wildernesses of that wealth of old world association to which his
subject gave him the key. The article is a most charming and attractive picture of old
world mysticism and architecture and art. A notice of the life of John Henry Newman,
on the occasion of his elevation to the Cardinalate, also appeared in 1879 in the Sydney
daily Press, and from that scholarly and appreciative contribution colonial readers
gathered some worthy conception of, as has been said, “ the man in the working of
whose individual mind the intelligent portion of the English public is more interested
than in that of the most active intelligences of the age.” Again, on the death of Henry
Kendall in 1882, a kindly and generous notice from the pen of Mr. Dailey—the best
tribute that was rendered to the poet’s memory —appeared in the Sydney Mail , and the
writer, who visited Kendall in his last illness, was one of the most active participators
in the efforts to do honour to our first poet’s memory. To notice everything that
proceeded from his prolific pen would, however, be an endless task. Since Mr, Dailey’s
resumption of the active duties of political life his pen has been practically idle, but his
speeches in the Upper House and his labours in the Cabinet during that time display
another side of his character. On the rejection of the Land Bill of the Parkes-Robertson
Government in 1882, Mr. Dailey identified himself closely with the Stuart party,
materially assisting that gentleman in the formation of the present Cabinet. On his
re-appointment to the Upper House he accepted his present office of Attorney-General,
and took an active part in the re-election of his colleagues. Just at that time the public
mind was deeply agitated about the manner in which public affairs had been conducted
latterly by the Parkes Government. A feeling of widespread dissatisfaction was felt
throughout the country with its land law proposals in particular. Eventually the
election, which resulted in the almost unanimous rejection of the ministerial party,
narrowed itself down to a contest for East Sydney between Dr. Renwick, the late
Minister for Mines, and Mr. Copeland, the Minister-elect. Mr. Dailey warmly supported


his colleague, and at a great meeting in the Protestant Hall, on January 20, 1882, that
gentleman made one of the best and most effective political speeches ever delivered in
the colony. That speech literally laughed the late Ministry into oblivion. It sounded
the tocsin of the revival of true politics in the colony, recalling the old traditions of
bygone political contests, when there were giants in the land. In opening his address
to the vast audience which hailed with delight his return to the active duties of political
life, Mr. Dailey said : —“ lam glad and proud to stand before you this evening, and I
think you will not deem me a trespasser upon your patience when I tell you why at
this particular time I feel a larger degree of pleasure in appearing before you. My
political relations with this great city have always been of a pleasurable character. At
its hands 1 received the earliest and proudest distinction of my life. I was elected its
representative when I had done nothing to deserve so great an honour, I terminated
my relationship to it by ray own act. It is now just five-and-twenty years ago —
almost to a day—for I stand so near what is to me almost a sacred anniversary—that
finding on the following day, the 10th January, 1858, my dear friend and old political
leader (Sir Charles Cowper) about to be rejected, and myself to be elected in his place,
I drove to every public place in the electorate, and implored my friends to save me the
humiliation of being preferred to him, and to vote for the man whose talents and
services were of such infinitely higher value to the country. I cherish the memory of
that easy and delightful sacrifice as one of the proudest and tenderest recollections of
my life —(cheers) —as one of the possessions which I shall hope
‘ Never to let die away,
And fade into the light of common day.’”
Reviewing the events which led to the change of Ministry, and commenting
on the state of political life as it existed just before the revulsion ot
popular feeling, he continued, —“ For the first time for very many years in
this country we have had the inestimable privilege of having a general election
in which was necessarily submitted to the country a clear, unmistakeable issue
on a great and vital question of capital importance —(applause) —in which every man,
woman, and child in the country was directly interested, and which had to be judged
on its merits. The question was in this (as it is in all countries) the very greatest that
could occupy the public mind. It admitted of no distracting side issues for the confu-
sion of men’s minds and the degradation of political action. (Cheers.) The theologico-
political element was powerless, (Laughter and cheers.) It was a solid substantial
question, in the determination of which there was no room for shadows or spirits —(loud
laughter) for defrauding mystery or for supernatural contrivance. (Continued
laughter.) The political Monk Lewises found that their mystic literature of parties was
treated with contempt. (Laughter and cheers.) In the great centre which gives you
as citizen the gentleman who is now your First Secretary, there is a keenly humorous
phrase which describes the excessively holy men who use creeds for their own purposes.
(Laughter.) They are described as the people who ride on the riggin of the kirk.
(Loud laughter.) I refer you to my friend the Colonial Secretary for the translation.
(Laughter.) One of the philological advantages of the late change of Government is
that he can explain it to you. (Laughter.) It is an accomplishment which, however


otherwise gifted he may have been, his predecessor could not have pretended to possess.
(Loud laughter.) Well, we had numbers of these ecclesiastical equestrians —(renewed
laughter) —these riders on the riggin of the kirk—here, who at once made the most
ingenious and desperate efforts to distract public attention from the real issue.
(Laughter and cheers.) They pointed out that the Land question did not truly and
really mean the protection of the free selector and the security of the squatter ;
that it had nothing at all to do with the fraud of the dummy, or the infamy
of the blackmailer ; but that the question really meant the perilous supremacy of the
Jesuits and the infallibility of the Pope. (Roars of laughter.) These leading theological
principles, however, were, as you are aware, not generally accepted. (Laughter.) The
question put before the country was —Will you have the bill of the Ministry and the
men who introduced and supported it, or will you defeat the one and fling out of public
life the other ? You have the answer of the country. (Cheers.) The gentleman who
stood on this platform last night was rejected by you with ignominy, and dying from
your indignation to the remotest part of the country—(cheers)—was there treated in
a precisely similar way. (Cheers.) It will be remembered that during the election
Dr. Renwick divulged some of the real or pretended secrets of the Cabinet
touching the Land Bill, which he affirmed reflected the opinion of Sir John
Robertson alone, of the whole Ministry. Mr. Dailey thus dealt with the
matter: —“Last night he (Dr, Renwick) spoke of the Land Bill and of his
connection with it. . , . What did such advice mean ? It means this, that they
dared to go to the Governor and ask and obtain at his hands a dissolution on a
measure which they had secretly denounced to each other, and declared to be
worthless (cheers). It meant this, that they plunged the whole country into the
confusion of a general election in order to sustain a measure which they must have
believed fatal to the public prosperity if it had been passed (cheers). If the candidate
who stood on this spot last night is to be believed, that is what he and his colleagues
actually did. But lam compelled to declare to you that Ido not believe him, and I
I shall tell you why I do not. I cannot and will not believe that my friend Sir John
Robertson would have been a party to such a proceeding. Lie is a courageous, out-
spoken, generous man (cheers). He has true Parliamentary instincts. He has a right
conception of public duty. This question is the question of his life. His place in history
is fixed by it forever. lam asked to believe that he knowingly and falsely came
down to Parliament with a bill which he knew his colleagues held in abhorrence and
would be glad to see mutilated by Parliament. I refuse to believe it (cheers). For
this would have been a piece of unworthy conduct to which his life itself gives the lie.
The speech was received with a splendid demonstration of popular enthusiasm.
All its points were at once taken by the apt audience, and at its conclusion an ovation,
not of mere vociferation, but intelligent and exuberant appreciation, proved that the
hearers were quite in accord with the speaker. Soon after the Ministry assumed office,
it became Mr, Dailey’s duty, as representative of the Government in the Upper House,
to make a financial speech in that Chamber, while moving the Inscribed Stock Bill,
which he did in such masterly style, and with such signal success and distinction, as to
excel even himself. His skilful manipulation of figures, and his scientific massing and


Marshall in o' of facts anil particulars, were the theme of universal comment Still later,
O I .
and only a short time ago, it fell to his lot to introduce the Land Bill of IJSB-4 to the
Upper House, which he did in a speech on its second reading, in which he paid his old
friend and colleague, Sir John Robertson, a high compliment on his labours in the past.
Twenty years ago a capable critic thus described Mr. Dailey and his remarkable
gifts: —“With unusual quickness of perception he combines great command of language,
irresistible humour, and all the minor essentials of oratorical success. As an impromptu
humourist he has never been excelled in this country. His humour is an instinct, and
not a result of study. In fact, he possesses no faculty for study or elaboration of any
kind. So much is this the case that it is questionable whether any amount of
elaboration would at all improve his powers. There are men of letters who, while
totally devoid of all humour in their conversation, can yet manufacture with pen and
ink the finest and most delicate specimens of this delightful quality. But it is probable
that, were Mr. Dailey to attempt this kind of manufacture, his humour would
evaporate in the process, and nothing would be left but a bare network of
elegant sentences.” There is no flavour of the student’s lamp about his literary
work. His critic continues : —“ Recollecting that Mr. Dailey owes nothing
to the liruce labor , and yet that, whether writing or speaking, he displays an
elegance of style that would please the most fastidious critic, we may fairly conclude
that the gifts which Nature has bestowed upon him are not often met with, even in
much wider circles than our own.” Another critic once said of him that he possessed
“ a mind of so much instinctive grace and brilliancy, so much tact, as to manifest
genius, and genius of a charming nature.” His chief gift is, perhaps, his winning and
attractive grace of speech. Had Hymettus been his birthplace, and his the honey-
laden lips of fable, no greater charm or more magical marvel could surround his clear
and vigorous thought and gracefully-woven sentences.
“ When he speaks
The air, a chartered libertine, is still,
And the mute wonder lurketh in men’s ears
To catch the sweet and honeyed sentences.”
All his utterances have a distinct Attic flavour, and whatever his subject, and however
foreign to his tastes it may appear to be, he has the signal faculty of lighting his theme
with that electric radiance which transmutes and tranfigures what it touches. As we
review his great gifts and his wonderful powers, his keen sense of public honour and
his instinctive intolerance of whatever may tend to degrade public life and public
institutions, his love of his native land, his undoubted fitness for political leadership,
and his unquestioned influence, we cannot refrain from expressing regret at this juncture,
when his retirement from public life is again whispered of, that his presence should ever
be lost from the councils of his country.




W.Macleod Del. c
r/fOAf PffOTO BY GOFjUS .


THE HON. ALEXANDER STUART
M.L.A.; PREMIER AND COLONIAL SECRETARY.
IRf S the constitution of New South Wales became established and assured, the
pMI need for men of marked original talent, such as our first legislative decade
presents, gave way to a demand for representatives with executive ability and
lir s P ecial Tlie system which the members of the first House of Assembly
I so happily moulded soon gave rise to State interests that rapidly outgrew
themselves, and gave occasion to the greater questions of State policy which
form the real political science. The first and chief of these was that of revenue and
finance. From the beginning our financial record has been almost uniformly a
brilliant one. As we have seen, the rapid increase in revenue and the magical growth
of the young colony’s wealth were urged as our chief claims to responsible Government
and free institutions. In law, too, we have had brilliant specialists trained and
educated to their profession within the colony, just as from time to time the progress
of events has disclosed the fitting men to be entrusted with the administration of the
other great branches of the State executive. The Honorable Alexander Stuart is one
of these specialists, and from the first he has taken his place among the most skilful
administrators of the public funds that have presided over our Treasury. His name
does not appear amongst our early colonial records. He had nothing to do with the
first constitutional throes of our history, and its early agitation and struggles were
innocent of his complicity. He has come to the front during the past ten years, and
taken his place amongst those who carry out and administer the designs of the original
creative thinkers and workers. The chief value of Mr. Stuart’s work lies largely in
the fact that to him and his party is due the rescue of political life and public spirit
from the low level to which it had sunk during the four or five years previous to his
taking office. To him and his party is due the credit of this revival, and had the
Stuart Ministry only existed long enough to assure this a great public service would
have been performed. Their record, however, bristles with practical work, and their
schedule of results is unique amongst colonial Cabinets. An earnest desire to do some
tangible work has characterised all their acts, and if some of their measures are not
wholly superior to censure, their good faith as a Cabinet is at least above criticism.
The facts of Mr. Stuart’s public life are necessarily meagre. His political career—
to which we desire to confine ourselves—only began in 1874. But his whole life has
been devoted to pursuits in harmony with that branch of political economy in which
he has since gained his laurels. Alexander Stuart was born in Edinburgh, in 1825.
O'
He spent his early years in that city, and was educated there. At an early age he left
school for the counting-house, and deserted the Latin grammar of his scholastic course
for the ledger of the merchant. At Leith, Glasgow, and London, his commercial


character was formed, and these varied opportunities of enlarging his range of observa-
tion were further added to by a trip to India. At the age of twenty-six years he came
to Sydney, in 1851, and entered the Bank of New South Wales as assistant secretary,
where he continued for four years. In 1855 lie entered into partnership with Mr,
Robert Towns, of the firm of Messrs. Towns and Co. —a leading Sydney merchant. It
will thus be seen that his whole life has been spent in dealing with finance and figures,
in which, with his great aptitude, it must be admitted he is an accomplished adept.
Mr. Stuart has always been a worthy and representative member of the Church of
England, and it was in this capachy that he first came to the front in 1878, during the
agitation then set on foot by the National, Secular, and Free Education League. As a
churchman, he advocated State-aid to religious education, and the denominational
system as approved of by the Primate. Fie opposed the principles of the League, and
his well-known character and influence gave his utterances in the Synod and on the
platforms considerable weight with his party. Under their auspices, he was elected to
Parliament for East Sydney, in 1874. Two years afterwards, on the appointment of
Mr. William Forster as Agent-General for the colony, he succeeded that gentleman as
Colonial Treasurer, joining the Ministry of Sir John Robertson, February 8, 1876.
While in this position, he signalised himself by his masterly dealing with finance, and
his evident fitness for the post generally. His life-long training qualified him for his
work at once, and stamped him as a financial specialist in politics. The Ministry of
which he was a member continued in office till March, 1877, when it was succeeded by
the Parkes Cabinet. Next year Mr. Stuart went to England. This was his second
voyage home, the previous one having been made in 1862. On his return in 1879,
he returned to his place in the blouse as member for Illawarra, and in 1882
he led the attack on the Parkes Government, which resulted in the latter’s
rejection from office. Mr. Stuart was called on to form a Ministry, and the present
Cabinet came into existence. Of its members, Mr. Dailey was a colleague of the
Premier in the Robertson Ministry of 1875. Mr. Cohen had been an ornamental
Treasurer in the Farnell Cabinet, in which Mr. Farnell was Premier and Minister for
Lands ; Messrs. Reid and Trickett, ) 7 oung members ; Mr. Dibbs, a proved politician ;
Mr. Wright, new to office ; and Mr. Abbott, an aspiring junior, who had thrust himself
forward by sheer force of personal self-assertion. The Ministry has held office since
January 1883, and has passed several important measures.
Mr, Stuart’s political life narrows itself down to the three or four years he has
been in office as Colonial Treasurer, and then as Premier and Colonial Secretary. He
took no leading part during his first terra of office in the conception of any novelty in
legislation, and it is to his speeches that we must turn to gather an idea of his political
character. As was said, he made his first public speeches in connection with the
Education Question. The Secular League, under the leadership of Mr. Greenwood —
sometime a Minister of the Baptist persuasion—strongly advocated the withdrawal of
State aid from the then existing Denominational Schools. The Church party as
strenuously opposed the proposal, and the two parties joined issue. Mr. Stuart came
to the front as a leader of the Denominational party, and his speeches on the subject at
that time are part of the literature of the secular movement, which was not successful


until some years after. He has always taken an active interest in the Land Law,
as it bore on the question of revenue. He was one of the first to point out that the
revenue derived from the sale of public land was not a permanent income. He averred
that the surplus ol £4,000,000, which lay at the Treasury in 1877, was, in a sense, a
false asset. It was his theory that revenue, raised by the total alienation of the public-
estate, served no better purpose than to accustom the State to a high standard of
expenditure and a large outlay, the evil effects of which 'would be felt when the land
was so far alienated that this temporary increment would begin to drop off. The evils
of heavy taxation and low credit pictured themselves graphically to his mind as
necessary consequence of this state of things. He discerned the fallacy, too, of parting
with the colony’s capital, as was done under the system of auction sales, instead of
establishing a judicious system of leasehold with annual payments, of which the
continuance might be depended on, with the State as proprietary trustee. He insisted
that such a system would give the required return without the certainty of its actual
stoppage, and thus provide a means of revenue which might always be calculated upon
as an ever-increasing asset. Viewing the matter purely from a financial point of view,
which was the one that best recommended itself to his particular capacity and aptitude,
he thus singled out the great defect in our land law system. These views he
consistently advocated, until he had an opportunity of pressing them to some purpose
when the Land Bill of the Parkes Government was tabled in 1882. The taxation pro-
posals on wool and coal, put forward by Mr. Treasurer Watson, gave him the text for
his policy. It was taken up at once by the common sense of the country, and to this
fact, immediately considered, is due the defeat of the Land Law of the late Cabinet.
In his election address to his constituency, Mr. Stuart put forward his views still more
boldly, and it was at once recognised, when the matter had fairly fallen under the
incidence of popular opinion, that the Stuart policy was the correct one in the
impending crisis. A. strong party in the House, and later on, a solid body of candi-
dates in the electorates, ranged themselves under his leadership, with the result that
the advocates of the proposed measure were beaten all over the country, and the
present Stuart Ministry formed. One of the first measures of the new Cabinet was
the stoppage of auction sales, —a bold act, which was not without its immediate effect
on the colonial money market. These auction sales had been the means of circulating-
large sums of money for the time being, with the consequence, as Mr. Stuart had
pointed out, of inducing a feeling of false commercial security. Few persons accus-
tomed themselves to look below the surface of things as they existed, and the cessation
of auction sales produced a result in financial circles that went far to cause strained
relations at the time. To this was added the prevailing drought, which almost ruined
the prospects of the wool-clip; and the failure of the Oriental Bank coming soon after
did not tend to re-establish public confidence. The opponents of the Stuart policy did
not fail to thrust these facts upon the public notice as practical arguments against the
measures taken. A certain delay in tabling the Land Bill was also a source of trouble
to the Ministry. In the meantime, however, they had placed the whole question of
the land laws in the hands of a Committee of Enquiry, composed of Messrs. Ranken
and Morris, whose duty it became to prepare a report on the working of those laws up


to the present time. The subject in a complete form was thus laid before Parliament,
and the wa) cleared for the Crown Lands Bill of 1883. This measure has not given
complete satisfaction throughout the country, bnt when the complex network of vested
interests with which it has had to deal is considered, it must be looked upon as a
ministerial success. The land question in New South Wales in 1884 is not what it was
in iB6O, and the vast interests which have grown up during the intervening period
require much more tact and skill in their adjustment than did the simple question
which propounded itself a quarter of a century ago. This land question has been a
block to general legislation in the colony for years past, and successive Ministries have
been wrecked over this important measure. All other matters have hitherto been com-
pelled to remain in at least partial abeyance until the great question was disposed of,
with the result that large arrears of legislation and short parliamentary recesses have
become the rule. The passing of this measure should have the effect of removing some
of these undesirable features, and helping along legislation generally, if it does not
entirely succeed in fixing the land law of the country.
During the recess, July, 1883, members of the Ministry visited officially several
parts of the country, and, amongst others, Mr. Stuart went with certain of his colleagues
to Illawarra. While there, he made some disclosures as to the probable policy of the
Cabinet, and replied to some of the charges made against the Ministry since it assumed
power. One of these speeches, which throws considerable light on the particular work
of the Stuart party, was thus reported at the time : —“ It is clearly and unmistakably
our intention, on the very first possible opportunity, to bring in our Land Bill. Let there
be no mistake about that. Our enemies have charged us with three things, as it appears
to me : to have laid it to our charge that we never intended to bring in the Land Bill,
that we intended to shirk this question ; again, they have charged us with being utterly
incapable of bringing in a Land Bill ; and then they have charged us that, even if we
have the capacity to bring in the Bill, it could never be a satisfactory one. Well, we
intend to disappoint them on all three points. We intend to disappoint them in the
first, that we never intended to bring in the Land Bill, because we do intend to bring
in the Bill, and the only reason why we have not brought it in before is that we want
to make it a measure worthy of the acceptance of the country. We have been charged
under this head, with relegating the duty which lies upon us as Ministers to the two
gentlemen whom we chose to as a commission on this question. Now, what is the
fact ? We never thought of asking those gentlemen for a land policy. Our object was that
the whole country, before we put forth our land policy, should clearly and unmistak-
ably understand what the land policy of the past has been, what it has been productive
of, wherein it has failed, and wherein it was necessary to apply remedies to the evils
that exist. I point fearlessly to the report of those two gentlemen, Messrs. Morris and
Ranken, in order to convince any person who may choose to read it that they have
accomplished this good. They have shown to the people that the indictment which
we brought against the late Land Bill was a true indictment, and that it was high time
a thorough change in our land system took place. This was the object we had in
appointing that commission—not that we wished the commission to travel out of the
true path merely to favour our opinion, 1 say this much with regard to our Land Bill


—I may give you a certain glimpse into the nature or character of it ; and that is, it
will be our endeavour, first of all, that it will be founded on equal justice to all. It is
not our intention to take up any one class of the community and favour it to the
exclusion of others. The land does not belong to the squatter nor to the free selector ;
it really belongs to the whole of us put together, and the reason we are anxious to
settle people upon the land is that, while we wish those already settled on the land all
prosperity, we desire, by increasing the prosperity of both classes, to press forward the
prosperity of the whole nation, and the greatest facilities we can possibly give for the
settlement of the various classes are amongst the principal objects which we have in
view in the Land Bill which we are engaged at this very moment in bringing to a state
of preciseness before placing it before the country. It is on this question that we are
prepared to make our stand; we perfectly understand that if we are unable to deal
with the question we are unfit to be in the position which we are in.” These
utterances have since been fully borne out by events. Never in the history of
the colony has a legislative session such a record of work to show as that of 1883-4.
The I .and Bill was introduced in due course and fairly carried through both Houses,
and this important measure, which has been the ruin of so many Ministries, and
retarded general legislation for so long a period, is thus disposed of for some time.
The Civil Service Bill, regulating that important state interest, has also received
attention. In the Legislative Assembly no less than 92 public bills and 33 private
bills have been dealt with, while five public and four private bills have been initiated
in the Legislative Council. Of the public bills introduced into the Assembly, no less
than 34 have been assented to, as have also 26 of the private bills, besides the Appro-
priation and Loan Bills. Among other measures are the Fire Brigades Bill, the
University Extension Bill, the Seamen’s Law Amendment Bill, the Public Watering
Places Bill, the Necropolis Act Amendment Bill, the Constitution Act Amendment
Bill, the Customs Duties Bill, the Tobacco Bill, the Metropolitan Magistrates’ Act
Amendment Bill, the Oyster Fisheries Bill, the Sydney Corporation Act Amendment
Bill, the Sydney Municipal Loan Bill, the Mining Act Further Amendment Bill, the
Imported Stock Act Amendment Bill, the Additional Conditional Purchases Declara-
tory Bill, the Mining Leases Validating Bill, and the Gunpowder and Explosive Rates
Bill —a mass of legislation that has never been effected in any previous session.
The question of the federation of the Australasian colonies, which has occupied
the attention of most colonial thinkers, has also come up for treatment at the hands of
the Stuart Ministry. The characteristic caution of the Premier has delayed the
definite settlement of the views of New South Wales in this important matter, which
covers interests far too vast and too momentous to make any delay for reasonable con-
sideration a subject for censure or regret. The Recidivistes question has also been
touched upon, as well as that of the colonisation of New Guinea. These latter matters
were still under consideration when Mr. Stuart was suddenly stricken down with
paralysis a few weeks ago.
Mr. Stuart is at the present time Premier and Colonial Secretary in the existing
Ministry. The unfortunate stroke of illness which so suddenly deprived the country
of his services, evoked a widespread feeling of regret and sympathy throughout the


colony. It wa? recognised that an earnest servant of tne public was the sufferer —one
whom the country at large has accustomed itself to regard as a faithful guardian of its
interests. The essence of Mr. Stuart’s popularity consists in the fact that to him in
great measure is due the revival of the political life of the country, which had given
such pitiful evidences of stagnation and decay during the previous four years. Though
not a heaven-born leader, or too markedly decisive in act or disposition, Mr. Stuart has
earned the trust of the people. They believe in his good faith, and in his ability.
Without any of the shining qualities or brilliant gifts of his principal colleague, or the
talent for leadership of his predecessor, he possesses, nevertheless, good sterling
qualities of mind and head. No speaker, he is effective in debate. While his voice is
unpleasant and his gesture grotesque his argument is solid and convincing, and his
logic unquestionable. His demonstrations are mathematical processes. During his
term of office he has laboured with an energy and persistence which is not often
equalled in the service of the State, and his physical collapse is but the natural penalty
of overwork. During the first days of his illness enquiries as to his progress were
incessant, and now that his convalescence is assured a gratified feeling is general. It
. o o o
is the popular trust that the honourable gentleman, who has not spared himself in the
service of the public, will soon be entirely restored to that health which he has been
so signally instrumental in restoring to the body politic of the colony.




I "
W.f/fACLEOD Del. P/joa? Photo bY BoYd.


THE HON. SIR HENRY PARKES
M.L.A.; K.C.M.O.
-—rv\ i . v
'' PP fHE story of Australia, as told in the lives of its public men, contains strange
I, chapters of personal struggle and success —of defeat and victory —of disaster
and of triumph. The practical element is strong in our colonial legislatures,
"i§i aR d it is but natural that it should be so. It is the cruder qualities of
strength and endurance which tell first in young communities, and amongst
our records may be found the life story of many a man who, from the
humblest beginnings, by the exercise of inborn qualities and marked abilities, has
forced himself to the front in a signal and unmistakable way. It is a most difficult
task to trace some of these life-stories. To do so, the writer must go behind the scenes
and see the preparatory apprenticeship of his subject, before he deals with his life as it
is. Men are what circumstances make them; and it is the early circumstances and
minuter details in a young man’s life that mould the character in the light of which the
«/ c jo
actions of the maturer years must be studied. In the able and distinguished gentleman
whose name is at the head of this memoir we have, for these and other reasons, the
most difficult life of all that go to make up the public world of the colonies. In dealing
with it, we will content ourselves with placing its facts and figures before the reader.
To those who desire to read inter alia the colouring and shadowing of these leading
lines must be sufficiently familiar. They are matters of colonial history. It is
extremely difficult to assess, with any degree ot exactitude, the actual personal
influence of any one of our colonial politicians. To a great extent, indeed, these
Australian colonies have grown and prospered of their own innate strength and vitalitv.
Few countries owe so little to statecraft. The broad lines of our charter are not our
own, and the record of executive politics is not unvaryingly a bright one. Indeed, it
may not unfairly be doubted if our administrations have not at times been obstacles to
progress, as many of our administrative acts have, not unnoticeably, been steps in a
retrogressive direction. Few men in our history have exercised such a distinctly per-
sonal influence over colonial politics, for good or evil, as our present subject. The
exact value of that influence it would be hard to sum. But however questionable its
results may have been, his part in the politics of New South Wales forms no inconsid-
erable chapter in her history.
The career of Henry Parkes presents a striking example of what has been done in
Australia by the exercise of some determination and energy, much tact, and self-confi-
dence backed by ability. In its first lines his story is much the same as that of
thousands of other immigrants who have landed on our shores. Born in Stoneleigh.
o o /
Warwickshire, on May 27, 1815, he lived in England up to the age of twenty-four
years. Most of this time was spent in hard manual labour ; none of the happy


accidents of fortune favoured Ids youth. Such meagre education as lie received he
owed primarily to the village school of Kenilworth, and then to the Mechanics’ Institute
of Gloucester. At the age of eleven he left school, and entered at once on the practical
business of life in the ironworks about Birmingham. The workshops and foundries
where the mechanic laboured were then, as now, the scenes of animated political and
socio-economical discussions, and these appear to have first opened the mind of the
young apprentice to the greater world that lay about him. The outlook was narrow,
and its contracting influence has never entirely left him. His political views, with
certain modifications, are still to a great extent those of the hard-headed mechanic
rather than of liberal culture and highly-trained statecraft. At that time the Chartist
agitation convulsed the democracy of the manufacturing districts, and Henry Parkes
was a fervid believer and upholder of that specious novelty. The frequent discussions
and his own taste for reading soon gave the young workman a certain familiarity with
current social topics, and educated him to an understanding of the leading political
questions of the day. These he took up with ardour, and his taste in this direction
did not desert him when he left for New South Wales in 1839. He has himself
repeatedly told the history of his early days here. Not without some pardonable pride
he has again and again dwelt, in his speeches, on the circumstances surrounding his
first years as a colonist. If his manner of life had been devoid of light and sweetness
at home, it was not at once improved in New South Wales. When he obtained
employment, it was in the humblest and most laborious capacities, and he knew poverty
in most of its unpleasant and unwelcome phases. He worked in the iron-store of Mr.
Burdekin in these early years, and afterwards in the foundry of the Messrs. Russell,
Afterwards, he was appointed to a subordinate post in the Customs ; but shortly after
his appointment a letter, written by him, appeared in the Press, detailing some of the
inner working of the department. He was suspended, and soon afterwards sent in his
resignation. We next find him established in business as a toy-maker in Hunter
Street, where he soon made himself known to the little world of the Sydney of those
days by his turning ivory mandarins and evolving political theories with an equal
address and facility. The little shop became the scene of as animated discussions as
were the Birmingham workshops and Chartist committee-rooms of his boyhood, and
the toy-maker of the shop soon became notorious as the politician of the streets and
public places. Here, too, he wooed the muses ; but with something less than
indifferent success, as his two volumes —“ Stolen Moments,” and “ Murmurs of the
Stream” —unhappily remain to witness. This, however, appears to have been but a
distraction from the more serious business of politics. In 1848, when Mr. Robert
Lowe, afterwards Lord Sherbrook, offered himself for election in Sydney, Mr. Parkes
gave him his active support. Just about that time the agitation against transportation
was in progress, and Mr. Parkes w r as one of the members of the council of the Austra-
lian League formed to carry out this object. This league had its origin in 1835, in an
association formed to co-operate with members of the Imperial Parliament in regard to
the affairs of the colony. Repeated meetings were held in Sydney to advocate the
cessation of transportation, which ceased in 1840. From time to time after that date,
however, attempts w r ere made to revive the degrading custom, and it was at the public


meetings in connection with these that our subject first brought himself prominently
before the notice of his fellow-colonists as a public speaker. We next find him
essaying journalism. In 1850, he originated the Empire. At that time the Sydney
Herald was the only daily paper in New South AVales. It was the organ of the
moneyed classes in the community, and reflected anything but the opinions of the
masses. The want of some organ of public opinion proper was urgently felt by the
people, who were continually at variance with their practically irresponsible rulers; and
the desire which was daily shaping itself for a more liberal Constitution demanded
coherent expression through the Press. The squatting element was organising itself,
and had secured every avenue of approach to the ear of the Council. With the co-
operation of friends, Mr. Parkes essayed to remedy this state of things, and the Empire
appeared as a thrice-a-week paper, afterwards daily. It rapidly rose into favour as the
organ of Liberal opinion, and some of the colony’s best men contributed to its columns.
Sir Thomas Mitchell, Messrs. Deniehy, Martin, Butler, Evelyn, Forster, Frank Fowler,
and Robert Lowe were frequent and noticeable contributors, and their terse and
vigorous leading articles struck at once a fresh note in the political history of the
colony. It is hard to estimate now the great value of Mr. Parkes’ venture at that
critical time, but though the new journal was an unquestioned boon, its contingent
expenses caused its founder and proprietor to discontinue his connection, after a useful
editorship of seven years. Meanwhile, it had served the purpose of bringing its origin-
ator still more prominently before his contemporaries, and as one result of this state of
things he is seen in 1853 unsuccessfully contesting the representation of Sydney under
the old system, with Mr. Thurlow. He was more fortunate, however, in 1854, when
his friends brought him out in opposition to Mr. Kemp, and succeeded in sending him
into the House by a large majority. The amendment of the Constitution was the topic
which moved men’s minds at that time, In 1842 a meeting, the largest in Sydney,
was held to petition the Imperial Parliament for self-government. That petition set
forth that 10,000 free subjects of the Crown, holding property to the extent of
£30,000,000 —with an annual increment of £2,soo,ooo—with a commerce in ten years
amounting to £22,500,000 —and raising a revenue of £350,000 yearly —were, notwith-
standing their heavy taxation and high revenue, without representation in the
Legislature. Previous to that, the principal of elective representation was laid down
in public meeting. In 1843, news was received that an act had passed the Imperial
Parliament six months before, granting a House of fifty-four members, thirty-four to
be elected by the people. The first election took place in June of that year, Messrs.
Wentworth and Bland being successful. Owing to the exertions of the former, the
Imperial Act was superseded by the present Constitution Act in 1856, and Mr. Parkes,
who had given the liberal party a loyal support, was re-elected as one of the four
representatives of Sydney under Responsible Government. Before the passing of the
Bill, however, lie strenuously opposed some of its original principles,—notably, the
creation of hereditary titles, with electoral privileges, and a non-elective Upper House.
At a great meeting held at the Royal Hotel, in August, 1853, Mr. Parkes was one of
the speakers, with Messrs. Deniehy, Piddington, Darvall, Mort, and others, against
Mr. Wentworth’s theory. The objectionable features were afterwards abandoned.


While making his mark in politics, Mr. Parkes’ commercial career was not a success-
On two occasions he retired from the legislative arena to pass through the Insolvent
Court, but was afterwards re-elected for Kiama. In 1858 he gave valuable assistance to
the passing ot the Electoral Act, and in 18G1 went to England with Mr. W. B. Dailey as
Immigration Commissioner. In 1863 he returned to the colony, and again returned
to politics. The Cabinet of Sir James Martin was defeated by the Free-trade party in
1861, but in less than twelve months Mr. Martin returned to office. Mr. Parkes had
been opposed to the Protectionist theories of Mr. Martin when Premier, and it was on
a motion by him that the next Ministry was defeated. They joined their forces,
however, and a Cabinet was formed, with Mr. Martin as Premier, with his friends
Messrs. Eagar and Wilson, and Mr. Parkes as Colonial Secretary, with his friend Mr.
Byrnes and others. This Ministry is looked upon as one of the strongest in our
history. It held office for two years, and passed the amended Municipalities’ Act, as
well as our subject’s grand work, the Public Schools’ Act of 1866. That Act
provided for national and denominational education in State and Church Schools under
a nominee Council. Schools in connection with the religious denominations were
assisted from the funds of the State, the author of the measure laying it down
arbitrarily as a first principle, that religion should not be left unprovided for in the
educational system which his Act was destined to bestow on the country. Mr. Forster
and others strenuously opposed this dictum , and maintained that the State system
should exclude religious teaching, and make education entirely secular. Mr, Parkes
passed his measure in 1867, it having been introduced in the previous year. This measure
is the one with which the author’s name most intimately connects itself. He made its
subject his study, and devoted considerable attention to every phase of the great
question of popular education. He availed himself largely of the discoveries of others
in this direction, and his Bill embodied most of the most advanced principles of
popular education. In 1868 Mr. Parkes, as Colonial Secretary, was one of the Cabinet
which received the Duke of Edinburgh on his visit to New South Wales. He
continued in office to September, 1868, when, owing to a difference of opinion between
him and his colleagues over their treatment of his friend Mr. Duncan, Collector of
Customs, he withdrew from the Ministry. About two years afterwards he resigned his
seat in Parliament, for reasons not unconnected with financial troubles, but in 1871
was again elected for Mudgee. The Martin-Robertson Ministry was defeated in 1872,
on the motion of Mr. lorster, who failed to form a Ministry. Mr. Parkes was sent for,
and took office with Messrs Piddington (who was succeeded by Mr. G. A. Lloyd),
Farnell, R. P. Abbott, Sutherland, Butler (succeeded by Mr. George L. Inncs), Allen,
and Samuel as his colleagues. This Ministry lasted from May, 1872, to February,
1875. During its term of office the post of Solicitor-General was abolished, and those
of Minister for Justice and Public Instruction and Minister for Mines created. During
tliis period the retirement of Sir Alfred Stephen from the Chief Justiceship placed that
high office in the gift of Mr. Parkes, and the appointment was made under
circumstances of the most distressing duplicity. Mr. Edward Butler, the leader of the
Bar, who, according to the tradition of English practice, had a right to expect the
appointment, and whose great abilities certainly entitled him to any legal honour the


colony could bestow, was passed over in favour of an equally able man, Sir James
Martin. By this move Mr. Parkes cleared the political chess-board of a dangerous
opponent, but forfeited the respect of many of his former friends. The night before
the appointment was made Mr. Butler made an eloquent speech in defence of the
Ministry, while his leader was planning his sacrifice as a master move in party
politics. The colony lost nothing by the appointment, but the circumstances
surrounding the action of Mr. Parkes in this unfortunate matter were such as to
degrade political honour and ruin public faith. Mr. Butler at once resigned his
post of Attorney-General. The Ministry retained office for over two years longer,
when it was defeated by a motion of Sir John Robertson, censuring their release of
the notorious bushranger Gardiner. For two years Mr. Parkes sot in Opposition,
leaving the leadership to others, until March, 1877, when he again took tbe lead, and
defeated the Government. This Cabinet only lasted some five months —from 22nd
March to 17th August, when it was superseded by that of Sir John Robertson. On
the overthrow of the Government in December, both leaders were defeated for the city
constituencies. It was on the hustings at East Sydney on that occasion that Sir
Henry Parkes made his much-criticised declaration, that by his rejection “ the door of
his political life was closed forever.” A few weeks afterwards he was elected for
Canterbury, one of his staunchest political friends, Mr. Hill, being sacrificed in his
favour. When the House again met, and the Robertson Ministry was defeated, Sir
Henry Parkes was called on to form a Cabinet. After several ineffectual efforts, in
which he tried every section of the House, he failed in the task, and gave it up in
despair. The country was at this time weary of the interchange of power between the
two leaders, and turned with hope and confidence to the third party, led by Mr.
Farnell. That gentleman’s Cabinet lasted twelve months, and on the rejection of its
Land Bill in December, 1878, and the consequent ministerial defeat, Sir Henry Parkes
was again called on to assume the direction of political affairs. This would have
proved as hopeless a task as it had been twelve months before, but for the masterly
stroke of strategy played by the astute leader on that occasion. For some reason,
which can only be interpreted in one way, both Sir Henry Parkes and Sir John
Robertson threw over their old antipathies, and suddenly began to discover strange and
rare beauties in each other, which had, singularly enough, altogether escaped them
before the crisis declared itself. Though each had consistently opposed and even
derided the personal characteristics and public policy of the other, they coalesced and
formed the “strong Ministry” of 1878. To say that this step took the public by
surprise would be to do it but scant justice, but the simplest explanation of this
singular occurrence seems to lie in the fact that, at this particular juncture, political life
in New South Wales had thoroughly and effectually exhausted its resources. No
period in our political history is so barren and poverty-stricken as this. No original
ability characterised the personnel of the House ; no elevation of tone marked its
proceedings. The rich vein of legislative talent that ran through the Wentworths, the
Cowpers, and the Martins of our history, had tapered down to a very fine
thread indeed. At this period of unexampled prosperity in our financial
record, public life, with its honours and rewards and emoluments, had degenerated


from an accordance with the simple rule of the survival of the fittest, to
become the prize of the most successful adepts in the arts of chicanery and petty intrigue.
The Milburn Creek and Darling Harbour scandals, the horrors of the quarantine mis-
management, and the bitterness of sectarian antagonism were some of the foul weeds
which grew from the rank political soil of this period of our history. The Parkes-
Robertson coalition of 1878 deadened the political life and extinguished the political
spirit of the country. Inside the House, measures were passed and acts performed
without question and almost without discussion ; outside, amongst the people, a listless
indifference was the rule. A period of political demoralization had set in. Party
government gave place for a purely personal and almost arbitrary rule. Questions of
the most vital importance had no chance of being fairly dealt with on their merits.
The shameful and degrading confession was often heard from honourable members that
their support of the Government was not owing to a belief either in the justice of their
policy or of individual measures, but because of the impossibility of finding a Cabinet
to succeed the Ministry of the day. At this period of stagnation the Legislative
Council alone stood between the people and the Ministry. A servile and incapable
House passed measure after measure only to have them returned by the Upper
Chamber. The public spirit of the country seemed to have retired from the popular
Assembly to take refuge amongst our nominee legislators. The Legislative Council’s
Powers Declaratory Bill—a bold stroke of policy on the part of the Premier which
could only have been attempted under the existing circumstances —belongs to this
term, and evidences clearly enough the state of politics at the time. By its rejection
the only check on the vagaries of the Ministry was retained. At the general election
in 1880 the Ministry was re-elected to power, but the 'personnel of the House under-
went a decided though not complete change. In 1881, under the new Parliament, the
Ministry of Sir Henry Parkes passed the Public Instruction Act now in force, enforcing
secular and compulsory education, and withdrawing the administration of that portion
of the public service from the care of the old Council, to place it under the Minister for
Public Instruction—a post taken by Sir John Robertson, who had hitherto represented
the Ministry in the Upper House, without a portfolio. This measure was not passed with-
out considerable commotion throughout the country. In its introduction Sir Henry dis-
phayed his usual consummate tact, and availed himself of a favourable opportunity. The
late Archbishop A Anglian, with his suffragans, having issued a joint pastoral against the
denominational system of education, the Premier seized the occasion to fan the antagonism
to clerical utterances which the public were eager to display, and dexterously profiting of
the popular cry, introduced his famous measure. Though in this he deliberately went back
on the principles of his own measure of 1866, and introduced the secular element into
the system of public education, the Bill was passed with enthusiasm. State-aid was
immediately withdrawn from all denominational schools, the measure itself being
described by its author as “a death-blow to the calling of the clergy.” In the Milburn
Creek affair of 1881, his action in respect of his colleague, Mr. Baker, then Minister
for Alines, did not evince much chivalry or nobility of spirit. He unhesitatingly sacri-
ficed that victim to secure the safety of his Cabinet, and his conduct in connection
with Mr. Garrett’s part in that matter, and Sir John Robertson’s resignation, will


scarcely bear critical examination. Jn December, 1881, Sir Henry Parkes left tlie
colony on a trip to England. He preluded his departure with a series of speeches in
which, after repeatedly reviewing his own early career, he contrasted his personal
glory with that of the first Napoleon, greatly to the latter’s disadvantage, and drew a
prophetic picture of the state of Sydney after another ten years of his Premiership.
Sir Henry was well received as the Premier of New South Wales both in the United
States and in European circles. At one time or other he was the guest of most of the
celebrated men of the day, and at several banquets in his honour he asserted the claim
of New South Wales to home recognition, claiming somewhat effusively that the
colonies had nothing to learn from the old country. He visited Stoneleigh, his birth-
place, and was honoured with a public reception. On his return to the colony —where
his colleague, Sir John Robertson, had acted in his absence —he was entertained at a
public banquet on a grand scale. Shortly afterwards, in November, 1882, his Ministry
was defeated on the Land Rill. He appealed to the countr} 7 , but was ignominiously
rebuffed at all points. Sir Henry was forced to seek election at Tenterfield, while
most of his colleagues were excluded from the House altogether. The feeling of the
° o o
country had undergone a thorough revulsion, and the old political spirit began to
revive. In 1883 Sir Henry Parkes made another visit to England, but in a more
private and unobtrusive capacity. While there he succeeded in floating a syndicate
with a large capital for investment on mortgage in colonial securities. On his return
recently the character of his reception differed materially from that accorded him on
the previous occasion. His customary tact, too, seems to have deserted him with his
popularity, to judge from his public utterances and acts since his arrival. Up to the
present time Sir Henry formed one of the Opposition, under the, leadership of Sir John
Robertson. He is a member of the Cobden Club, and received the order of colonial
knighthood in 1877. In 1880 he was rejected as a candidate for the University Senate.
He has been Premier of three Cabinets, and Colonial Secretary in another.
Just as the present sheets are going to press, Sir Henry again announces
his final retirement from political life, in a farewell address to the electors of
Tenterfield. After alluding to his thirty years of legislative labour, he reviews
the present state of politics in the colony with no friendly criticism, and with
a heavy charge against the Parliament and the Ministry he once more declares that
the doors of his political life are closed forever. It would be rash to assume
that this is a final declaration. The public of New South Wales has received no
encouragement to place implicit reliance on the assurance thus given, and there
are many who would be glad to see his excellent talent for party leadership still
longer devoted to the service of the country. Sir Henry is evidently smarting
under a keen sense of disappointment at his deprivation of that popularity
which is the life-breath of his political existence. His first remarks on returning to
the colony the second time were a series of insults to the honesty and intelligence of
the electors, who saw fit to cleanse the vitiated political atmosphere of a few years
back. He declares in effect that his patriotism revolts against the state of things in
the political world at the present time ; but instead of endeavouring to reform the
excesses of which he complains, he withdraws his influence altogether. This course


argues a want of candour and sincerity not at all out of harmony with the general
tenor of his political character, and which will form the chief blemish on his political
reputation. Sir Henry is entitled to rest, but he does not seek it gracefully. This,
however, has excited no surprise. In the whole course of his political career nothing
becomes him so well as the manner of his leaving it. But notwithstanding all, he will
<D O 7
leave behind him the reputation of having been the most successful exponent of
political character in these colonies.
To trace the personal as well as the political career of Sir Henry Parkes would be
a thankless and invidious task. Considering him simply as a public man, it is
extremely difficult to link together any systematic concatenation of distinct successive
acts of good service to the colony at large. During the many years he has been before
the country he has alternated from the highest pinnacle of popularity to the deepest
profound of public disfavour. His political career is a closely-knit tissue of successful
artifice. He has never scrupled to sacrifice a friend or a principle to the exigencies of
party politics; and now, after twenty years, he stands in the unique position of having
no personal friends. As a commercial man he was not a success, and as a bard he was
a failure. He is a man of strange associates: fanatics, freethinkers, and mysterious
organizations were successively his instruments. He was the first to introduce the
supernatural element into colonial politics, under the guise of the notorious Kiama
ghost; he publicly affronted one of the foremost scientists of the day in the person of
Mr. Proctor ; he persecuted the late William Forster unrelentingly, because, it is
said, that gentleman criticised his early verses adversely; and finally, he introduces to
the colony a syndicate of money-lenders. His career has been remarkable to a fault.
His signal ability, unequalled tact, his faculty for leading men and marshalling the
popular forces—all these fitted him for the part of a political leader. He has displayed
a greater genius for party politics than any man, perhaps, in the whole of Australia.
11 is opportunities for good have been unapproached. From his first step in the colon}"
his career has been one of personal progress and advancement. From first to last his
is the most difficult and contradictory life of all our colonial representative men.




W. Macleod, Del From Photo by Newman.


SIR JAMES MARTIN.
KNIGHT; CHIEF JUSTICE.
mm ERHAPS the strongest evidence of the vitality of our free institutions in
New South Wales is to be found in the readiness with which the new
j Constitution adapted itself to the wants of the colony, and called forth the
Jjju best qualities of the best colonial talent to meet its early exigencies. From
the first the requisite class of men stepped forward from the ranks to
take up the responsibilities and duties of self-government. The practical element,
lying at the base of all true stability and progress, contributed its tough fibre to the
new national life, and the rarer and more delicate qualities of culture and polish were
not wanting to give it a desirable finish. Professional culture was ably represented
from an early date by men who received their professional training and form within
the colony itself. We have already dealt in these pages with lives through which
the practical strain, with its marked influence on the colonial political system, was
most noticeable and characteristic. We have now to take a life-story from the other
side of our public life. Sir James Martin may be looked upon as the representative
figure of professional life within the colony. He has been identified with our law
courts all his life ; it was in the discharge of the duties of his profession that he first
came before the notice of the people ; and now, at the climax of his distinguished
and honourable career, he fills and dignifies the highest post to which the members of
a profession with all the prizes of public life in its hands can aspire to in New South
Wales. Springing from the people and educated amongst them, his career is another
striking instance of the possibilities of a life in the colonies, and a sterling proof of
what can be achieved by ability and application, backed up by opportunity and
directed by a laudable and worthy ambition. From the humblest beginning, as he
himself claimed nearly twenty years ago, he had to fight his way against opposition
at every step ; and his career may be placed before any student of colonial history as
a representative and practical lesson of energetic self-reliance.
James Martin was born May 14, 1820, in Middleton, Cork, Ireland. In
the following year his parents emigrated and settled at Parramatta, where
they lived till 1834, removing thence to Sydney. Their son received his
first schooling in Parramatta, and on going to Sydney he studied under
Mr. W. T. Cape, whose name as a successful instructor of Australian youth
has already been mentioned in these pages. On leaving the Sydney Grammar School
he was articled to G. R, Nichols, the leading attorney of the day, who enjoyed the
peculiar privilege of practising in the higher courts. Mr. Martin was admitted as
attorney in May, 1845, and he at once entered on the practice of his profession,
diversifying it somewhat, however, with literary labour a year or two later. The Atlas,


which was established in 1844, received his first contributions, and he edited that
journal for some time in 1846. As we have seen in a preceding memoir, he was one of
the leading writers on the Empire in 1851. His first appearance in the active political
world dates from 1848, when, being elected under the old Constitution of 1842 to
represent the counties of Cook and Westmoreland, he was unseated on petition. A
new election was granted, however, resulting in Mr. Martin’s return without the votes
being recorded. In 1851 he was again re-elected, and next year he was one of the
Committee appointed to prepare a Constitution for the colony. That Committee
consisted of Messrs. Wentworth, Donaldson, Deas-Thomson, Plunkett, Macarthur,
Cowper, Lamb, Murray, Douglas, and our present subject ; and as a consequence of its
deliberations two bills were drafted, granting a Constitution to the colony and a Civil
List to Her Majesty. Next year another Committee was appointed by ballot from the
Legislative Council, in pursuance of a despatch received from the Secretary of State
for the Colonies. In this second Committee the names of Messrs. Macleay and
Thurlow were substituted for those of Messrs. Lamb and Douglas. The report
recommended that the members of the Upper House should receive hereditary titles,
securing to their descendants a special elective right. These provisions excited violent
opposition, and a public meeting was held, as already described, at the Royal Hotel to
condemn them ; by this meeting the famous Constitution Committee was first
appointed. The efforts of our subject and his contemporaries being finally crowned
with complete success in 1856, Mr. Martin was once more elected for his old
constituency. A pronounced Liberal, he joined the Opposition against the first Cabinet
under responsible Government, led by Mr. Donaldson ; and on its defeat in August,
after a career of two months, he joined the first Cabinet of Sir Charles Cowper as his
Attorney-General, being called to the Bar a day or two after. His appointment was
the signal for a storm of personal opposition on the part of the Conservative element
in the Assembly. The young Minister was ungenerously and mercilessly assailed by
his opponents, who reflected bitterly on his personal career. In defending himself,
Mr. Martin spoke as follows : —“ He was surrounded,” he said, “by those who had
raised themselves to high position by their own honourable exertions —true sons of
the soil, not in the narrow sense in which the term was generally understood, but in
the sense of the old Roman satirist, who applied the expression to those who owed
their success in life neither to wealth, nor pedigree, nor fortune. With these and him
there were many things in common. He asked them, and he asked them confidently,
not ungenerously and unjustly to desert him on this occasion. From his outset in life
till that time, he had to achieve everything for himself, and from the humblest
beginning he had fought his way almost to the highest point to which, in this colony,
it was possible to attain. At every step he had been met with opposition, and had
been compelled to make good his ground, and whatever he had achieved he owed not
to the favour or affection of any man. He had never cringed, nor fawned, nor played
the sycophant, and if his conduct was open to condemnation, it certainly was in a
contrary direction. The lesson of self-reliance, of which he trusted he might be
pardoned in regarding himself as an example, would not, he hoped, be shorn of its
in the moment of final triumph. As he had borne up


against and overcome many obstacles of greater magnitude than the present, he trusted
that he should successfully bear up against this one also, and that, in the stand which
he then took, the generous and spontaneous sympathies of the House would go along
with him, and that the only effect of the present storm would be, like those of the
physical universe, to leave the atmosphere of public life purer than before.” His
defence, though ineffectual, was a noble one ; in October the Ministry was defeated, on
the ground of his holding office, after a stormy career of thirty-six days. The
Conservative Parker-Donaldson Ministry, which succeeded, was defeated in September,
1857, on the Property Qualification Clause in the Electoral Bill, and Mr. Martin again
took office as Attorney-General in the second Cowper Ministry. He resigned, however,
in November, 1858, but was re-elected to Parliament under the new Electoral Act
of the Cowper Ministry in August, 1859, as one of the four metropolitan
members, his colleagues being Messrs. Cowper, Parkes, and Black. He continued
a private member, devoting himself to the duties of his profession with
until 1863, when he succeeded his late leader as Premier, with the present Judge
Faucett as his Solicitor-General, and the late William Forster as Colonial Secretary,
J. H. Plunkett representing the Government in the Upper House. The task which lay
directly in the way of the new Ministry, and of its Treasurer Mr. Eagar, was the
re-adjustment of the finances of the colony. Just before their accession to power the
late Colonial Treasurer had announced a deficit of £400,000. Both the Premier and
the Colonial Secretary were in favour of protective duties, and in 1864 the Treasurer
tabled a financial proposal with a view to increase the revenue, embodying Protection
as a distinctive feature. The Assembly passed the measure covering the new scheme,
but it was thrown out by the Upper House, and a general election ensued. The issue
was fought out on the question of Free Trade as against Protection, and a party cry in
favour of the former was raised all over the country against the Ministry. Great excite-
ment was evinced, and much interest manifested in the result of the struggle. Mr.
Martin published a masterly and exhaustive address on the leading topics of the day, in
the form of an election address to the various constituencies he had represented, in the
course of which he delivered himself of some opinions on the prevailing topic which are
sufficiently noteworthy. In dealing with the socio-economical principle underlying the
the theory of Protection he said : —“ I thought then, and I think now, that this most
magnificent territory, teeming with the elements of every kind of wealth—mineral,
pastoral, agricultural—was intended for other purposes than a sheep walk, like a vast
Asiatic steppe, or a mere commercial emporium, like some small city of the middle
ages. With a territory larger than the greatest European kingdom, and a population
no greater than a sixth-rate European town, I thought that there was an ample field
to which the starving thousands of the mother country might be removed —to the
great relief of that country —to the great advantage of this. I knew that the skilled
artizan of Britain could not be honestly asked to come to a country where the
necessaries of life were dear, and the articles in the manufacture of which he was an
adept were imported at a price with which he could not compete ; and I felt that his
position was not mended by the opportunity afforded of taking his wife to some remote
gunyah on the Namoi or the Darling, or settling down on some alluvial patch, the


fruits of which might, at any time, be reduced in price below the cost of their production
by imports from foreign countries. There is a limit to the number of shepherds and
bullock drivers, dock labourers, porters, warehousemen, and mercantile clerks that are
required, and there are many other occupations equally desirable and equally
ennobling. I knew that the greatness of England arose not from commerce, not from
manufactures, not from agriculture alone —but from all combined. By the opportunities
which a wise legislation afforded for every kind of industry and enterprise, those small
islands became the habitation of the greatest and wealthiest people on the globe. The
coal, the iron, the copper, the lead, the wool, the fertile soil, which constitute the
foundation of England’s greatness, are here as well as there, and in a larger measure ;
but while the British Islands support their thirty millions, this colony is unable to
maintain in comfort four hundred thousand. I knew that such a state of things was
most unnatural. I knew that, however lucrative it might be to supply cotton silks to
the nobility of the Sandwich Islands, and shoddy cloth and Brummagem rubbish of all
kinds to the simple savages of Oceanica, but a very small number could participate in
those advantages. We might by trade of that kind constitute a rude, barbaric, bastard
sort of Antipodean Venice, with nothing of the greatness or grandeur of its prototype ;
but we could never by those means reproduce here a manly, vigorous, numerous British
population. 1 wished to see this country largely peopled with such a population. And
with that object I strove rather that every one should be comfortable than that a few
should be rich—that there should be fair scope for every man to follow himself, or to
bring up his children to, that pursuit to which his judgment or his fancy inclined him ;
and that no man should be found starving in a land of plenty, or begging, and begging
in vain—
A brother of the earth
To give him leave to toil.”
These remarks have a peculiar significance as coming from our present subject,
and are a strong plea for the justice of his Cabinet’s measure. But the effort
to stem the tide of popular opposition by the force of clear reasoning and an
honest statement of good faith was unavailing. The Ministry was defeated in the
House, though its late leader had been re-elected for the Lachlan. Mr. Cowper
succeeded again to office, and essayed to rescue the involved credit of the country by
the passing of the ad valorem duties, but the proposal had the effect of again re-calling
Mr. Martin to power in 1866, when he coalesced with Mr. Parkes, who had previously
opposed the Protectionist policy of the Martin Ministry of 1863. To this Cabinet is
due some sterling social reforms, —among others, the Municipalities’ Act, and the
establishment of Reformatories and Industrial Schools. As has been previously
recorded, the Public Schools’ Act was passed under Mr. Martin’s auspices as Premier,
and the idea of a Permanent Defence Force for the colony and the fortification of the
harbour was first activelv entertained. The Cabinet received H.R.H. the Duke of
•J
Edinburgh on his visit to the colony in 1868, on which occasion the Premier received
the honour of knighthood. This Ministry retired from office in 1868 on a vote of
censure moved by Mr. Robertson. From December 1870 to May 1872 Sir James
Martin was again Premier, with Mr. Robertson as his principal colleague. This


Cabinet was succeeded by that of Mr. Parkes, who, in November, 1873, appointed Sir
James Martin as Chief Justice of the colony.
Sir James Martin has been an elected representative both under the old Council
and in Parliament, and has five times held office as Minister of the Crown, each time
as Attorney-General, and on three occasions as Premier. No legislative act of any
consequence connects itself with his name, except that establishing the Sydney Mint,
which dates from before his career as a constitutional representative as we now under-
stand the term. His administrations, however, were invariably characterised by
decision and determination, and his advocacy of Protectionist principles show clearly
enough that he did not shrink from the test of practical politics. When it is
remembered that the question of finance, which imperilled the existence of the Martin
Ministry in 1864, and finally proved its destruction, is one that ever since that time has
been consistently shirked by successive politicians, it will be seen that the Premier of
the day had at least a fair share of moral courage to grapple with the subject. No
candid or real effort has ever been made since to regulate the matter, if we except Sir
Charles Cowper’s ad valorem duties. Cabinets have been content to leave this vital
question to solve itself, while they allowed the country to lull itself into a false security
with the proceeds of the sale of the public lands. Without digressing to express an
opinion on the relative merits of Freetrade or Protection, which is beside the subject of
the present memoir, it cannot justly be denied that the effort of the Cabinet of the day
to re-adjust the financial affairs of the State was a bold one, and certainly looked like a
stroke of courageous and statesmanlike policy. To Sir James Martin belongs also the
credit of that far-sighted and skilful railway policy, which had for its leading feature
the extension of the rails without delay to the southern border, so that the legitimate
trade of that portion of the colony should not be mis-directed from its course, and
diverted to Melbourne. This step secured the Riverina wool-traffic, and gave Sydney
merchants the benefit of a trade which they were on the point of losing by the enter-
prise of their Victorian brethren. As leader of the House, the present Chief Justice
was somewhat despotic and peremptory, and his masterly power in debate placed him
well above most of his legislative contemporaries. His coalition with Sir John
Robertson in 1870 showed at once his utter contempt for public opinion and the sense
of the House. This step, by its complete subversion of every recognised canon and
received rule of parliamentary or party procedure, reversed every tradition and
principle which should guide the actions of public men in public life. Though totally
opposed the one to the other, these gentlemen, the leaders of distinct and antagonistic
parties, joined each other in forming one of those Coalition Ministries of which our
history has seen one or two such startling and demoralising examples. It is not too
much to say that by this step the Premier forfeited much of that popular confidence so
essential to the successful career of a leading public man. Asa lawyer, Sir James has
always been distinguished as one of the ablest and keenest men at the Bar of New
South Wales. Since his call in 1856 his career was an unvarying and brilliant success.
From the first he took a leading position, and established himself at once in his proper
place in professional and public confidence. The storm of opposition which greeted
his first appointment to the Attorney-Generalship was too ungenerous and ungracious to


have a permanent effect, and though Sir John Hay carried his resolution in the Assembly
party politics soon corrected the wrong done the rising young barrister. He was an
effective and eloquent pleader, with a serviceable command of good nervous English
and vigorous Saxon, and a manner decisive and marked enough to give weight and
import to his words. This quality also came to the front in his journalistic career.
He edited the Atlas when in his twenty-sixth year, and during his term that journal
was noted for the outspoken character of its utterances on public questions. The
conduct of several of the Governors- —Gipps and Fitzroy particularly—was
commented and reflected upon with a vehemence and freedom which contrast
strongly with the opinion since expressed by the writer from his high judicial seat on
the duties and privileges of the public Press. He unsparingly lashed the vices and
scandals of the vice-regal establishments, and cauterised the sore places of the then
social system with an unflinching hand. His “ Parting Word,” addressed to Sir George
Gipps, is a scathing review of that official’s unpopular administration ; while his
strictures on Sir Charles Fitzroy would, to-day, infallibly convict him on his own
interpretation of the law of libel, in the fullest meaning of the term.
Writing of Sir James Martin nearly twenty years ago, a critic who was
thoroughly familiar with the literary and oratorical style of every man then known
in the colony, has this about his literary character: —“ Without possessing any
distinctly literary faculty, Mr. Martin has all the qualifications of a clear, vigorous,
and eloquent writer. His compositions are evidently those of a man who has studied
oratory. We seem to hear them rather than to read them. They are suggestive of
loud tones, flashing eyes, and animated gesture —with an audience in front and busy
reporters in the gallery.” The words are photographic of our subject’s style during
the full tide of his public career. His was then an essentially active life. Whether in
the law courts or in the Assembly, his faculties were always in working order, but
rather en rapport with the intelligences about him, which he sought to guide or
actively influence, than occupied with abstract theories or occult trains of thought.
Yet as a student he did not burn the midnight oil in vain. He has a thorough
mastery of the principles and practice of law in all its branches, and his judgments
from the Supreme Court Bench are uniformly marked by sound logical reasoning and the
clearest grasp of his subject,—but, if anything, as is generally considered by laymen, by
too much of the narrower technique of law. He identified himself closely with the
framing of the Constitution, working side by side with Mr. Wentworth in that great
labour. As we have seen, his name appears as one of the committee of the Council
who advocated the formation of a hereditary legislature. Though he commenced his
public life as a Liberal, he has long since retreated within the lines of a rigid
Conservatism, so far as that term applies in the colony, and he has lost much of that
sympathy with the upward efforts of the masses to which he appealed so confidently
on his first taking office nearly thirty years ago. His career as Chief Justice has been
uniformly distinguished by great ability, legal knowledge, and unfailing dignity ; and
in that high office his conspicuous talents shed a creditable lustre on the colony from
whose people he sprung, and the liberality of whose free institutions his career so
aptly illustrates.




W. Macleod.Del.


WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH.
frar he records of the lives of public men form an unerring political history, which
jy|a fixes at once their own place in the annals their careers illustrate, while
chronicling in their proper order and sequence the various steps and epochs of
M that history with which these lives associate themselves. The public lives of
such men are thus compiled by their own acts, and to transcribe a public
career accurately is simply to reproduce these. The public acts of a public
man are the facts which establish his position in the public records, and to limn a
political character in colours which conceal or disguise his part in the chapter of events
is to falsify history. In these memoirs the public lives of public men alone are dealt
with, and these are considered only as throwing light on their public careers, and
defining their standing as public men. A candid historian, who adheres faithfully to
his records, has no responsibility for the events his pen records other than may be
attached to the fact of his transcription ; and the characters and portraits of his history
are not so much his work as that of his subjects themselves. Similarly, in these
biographical memoirs, a pen-portrait is painted of our public men in colours drawn
from their own lives, the responsibility for which, for good or evil, is not that of the
writer but of the subject, who lived his own life, and by his own acts fixed his own
place in public history. No man in our annals has done more, by his personal acts and
personal influence, to thus establish his position in Australian history, than the great
man with whose career we deal in this memoir. From his earliest youth' William
Charles Wentworth kept himself before the public of New South Wales and Australia
generally, and, until the active term of his useful career was over, his place in colonial
public life was a marked and leading one. Act by act, and step by step, he built up
for himself a reputation which, as it was compact of events of the highest import and
interest to the country, was, by necessary consequence, the greatest of any our public
history affords. The full scope of his life and its work can scarcely be adequately
estimated now. A glance back at the old Imperial days of the colony
during its first generation, and a contrast between the public opinion and
free institutions of to-day, and the vile degradation of a large section
of the early population, the cringing servitude of another class, and the
autocratic intolerance and cruel oppression of the civil and military officialdom,
will give the best idea of the scope of the life-work of the first of Australian
Liberals. He attacked from the first the barriers that had raised themselves between
class and class, feeling assured that, until these were removed, little could be done
towards the enfranchisement of the community as a whole. His personal force of
character and clear insight into the wants of the people, gave him a masterly influence


over his contemporaries, and enabled him to command their co-operation in the great
work of raising the general social and political level. An unfailing friend ol the
oppressed and straggling lower orders, he earned the trust ol that section of the
people in a signal degree ; and with the two-fold influence he thus secured, he felt
himself fully equipped for the struggle on which he had entered. With indomitable
persistency and unquailing determination he persevered in his work, watching it grow
by slow degrees from the first step which gave the emancipists citizens’ privileges, to
the final consummation of his endeavours in the passing of the New South W ales
Constitution Act by the Home Legislature in 1856. Mr. Wentworth will continue to
form the archetype of political excellence in the colony —a standard for all who cherish
political ideals to look up to, and a model which the future politicians of Australia
need not hesitate to imitate and follow. Disinterested in his ambitions, and progressive
and liberal in his views, he undeviatingly followed out the ideal he recommended to
himself to pursue, labouring to create a pure and healthy political atmosphere in which
the future of the colony might work itself out to its ultimate fruition and destiny. In
his political career he sacrificed none of his political ideals for private or party ends,
and in this he may be lauded as an enduring model for all colonial statesmen.
William Charles Wentworth, incomparably the greatest Australian in our
history, was the son of D’Arcy Wentworth, for some time superintending
surgeon at Norfolk Island. He was born there in 171)1, and was sent to England
to school at seven years of age. He returned to Sydney a few years later,
his father having left the island in 1805, when the original settlement was
broken up. The latter subsequently held several honourable positions in the
colony, —amongst others those of Principal Surgeon, Roads Trustee, Treasurer
and Superintendent of Police, and Magistrate of the territory. When young
Wentworth was about twenty-two years of age he formed one of a party of three —
Messrs. Blaxland and Lawson being his comrades—who discovered the pass over the
Great Dividing Range of the colony to the interior plains. The three travellers
proceeded for twenty days over the untrodden and rugged intricacies of the Blue
Mountains, and having at length discovered a practicable pass, they descended into what
are now known as the Bathurst Plains beyond. The pioneers suffered considerably by
this hazardous tour, but they opened up a great highway for trade and civilization by
their achievment. Young Wentworth again went to England in 1817 to read for the
Bar. He entered himself as a student at Cambridge, and whilst there, in 1819, he
published his “ Description of the Colony of New South Wales,” which, though a hasty
production originating in the suggestion of an acquaintance, did good service by inform-
ing the English public as to affairs at the antipodes. The book was ably written,
from a practical stand-point, and ran through three editions in five years. Four years
afterwards he competed for the Chancellor’s Medal for the best English poem on
Australasia, and though the palm of success was awarded to W. Mackworth Praed,
whose name afterwards became so well known in literary circles, Wentworth’s effort
came next in merit and was awarded second place. Having returned to Sydney, after
leaving Cambridge and being called to the Bar in England, he was admitted here in
September, 1824, and at once entered on a successful career in the only profession then,


as now, fairly open to a man of liberal education in the colonies. Up to this time both
branches of the profession had the right of audience in the Supreme Court, but on his
admission Mr. Wentworth (with Dr. Wardell, who was called at the same time) moved
fora division of the Bar. Messrs. Allen, Chambers, Norton, Carling, Rowe, and Moore
appeared for the other branch, and Chief Justice Forbes ruled in their favour, under the
Charter then in force. In 1827, however, the division was made by order of the
Judges, the then practising lawyers being allowed the option of the branch of the
profession they would adopt. In the year named he also started the Australian , the
second paper established in New South Wales, with material specially brought out by
him for the purpose. The first issue appeared October 14, 1824, Dr. Wardell and
Mr. Wentworth being co-editors. At that time society was in a very inchoate state in
the colony. The Imperial system, with its irresponsible authority, and the convict
element, with all its degrading disabilities, vegetated rankly side by side. As a young
native, with generous instincts well directed by enlarged experience, young Wentworth
was not slow to detect the anomalies of the time, and he consistently sided with the
oppressed and persecuted of the community. One instance in particular, in 1826, in
which Governor Darling largely figured, gave Mr. Wentworth a distinct place in the
minds of the people as their champion and protector. From that date his public career
may be said to have commenced, and next year we find him entering upon his long
agitation for “ Trial by Jury.” Up to 1824 all cases were tried by military jurors, and
in October of that year, at Liverpool, the first Civil jury was empanelled at the instance
of Chief Justice Forbes. In February following the first jury was employed in the
Supreme Court, but the emancipists took exception to the compilation of the lists.
Mr. Wentworth, with Dr. Wardell, appealed for them, but the application was disallowed
as being irregular, and the privileges sought for were not secured until 1833. In January,
1827, meanwhile, a great meeting had been held in Sydney under the auspices of the
Patriotic Association, of which Mr. Wentworth was a leading member, to consider the
general question. On that occasion Mr. Wentworth spoke strongly in favour of the
principle, and moved the adoption of a petition in its favour. The meeting was an enthu-
siastic one, and some strong sentiments were expressed, Sheriff Mackaness, who presided,
being subsequently removed from his position for not exercising his right and stopping
“ language offensive to Church and State.” The petition was entrusted to Sir James
Macintosh for presentation, but though he adduced the testimony of several colonial
authorities of weight, he was unsuccessful. The system of military juries, both in the
Quarter Sessions and Supreme Courts ,was rivetted on the colony by an Imperial Act of
1829. Another attempt was made next year, on the accession of William IV. An
address of congratulation to the Throne having been moved by public meeting, Mr.
Wentworth proposed as an amendment that a full participation in the benefits and
privileges of the British Constitution should be asked for New South Wales. Mr.
Lethbridge seconded the amendment, which was unanimously adopted by the assemb-
lage there present. The Full Court decided three years later that, under the Statute
6th George IV., all free persons were entitled to all the privileges of freedom, thus
settling the question so long at issue. During the lifetime of his friend Dr. Wardell,
the two men were always side by side in the courts and on the platforms, but on his


death Mr. Wentworth retired to a pastoral life to some extent ; but we find him in
1838 at another public meeting’ protesting against the expenditure of public money,
and urging a petition to Governor Bourke on the subject, though, as a rule, the policy
of that liberal and progressive official found him a cordial admirer With Sir George
Gipps, who followed in the vice-regal office, he came into collision in reference to the
purchase of land in New Zealand. Acting in concert with the temporary Consul there,
Mr. Busby, and others, he had acquired ten millions of acres in the Middle and two
hundred thousand in the North Islands, paying £2OO each, and life annuities of £IOO,
to the chiefs w T ho ceded. In 1840 a Bill was introduced to revise these claims, with the
result that they were disallowed, it being held that British subjects had no right to
form colonies of themselves, and that the Maori natives, as an uncivilised people, had
no proprietary privileges or right of legal transfer. Mr. Wentworth personally
advocated his case, but without success, and the Bill was passed.
We come now to the chapter of our history that embraced the chief
work of Mr. Wentworth’s life, and tells of the rise and growth of our
Constitution. With that Constitution his name will always connect itself. In
the first public meeting ever held in Australia to consider the question of
popular privilege the names of D’Arcy and W. C. Wentworth —father and son
—are the first mentioned. That meeting was held in October, 1825, to
consider an address to Governor Brisbane on his departure from New South Wales.
Mr, Wentworth was one of a deputation of five appointed to present this document,
which is remarkable as embodying the first distinct expression of public opinion on
political topics. It claimed the recognition within the colony of the constitutional
principle of representation with taxation, and suggested the establishment of a House
of Assembly, to consist of 100 members. The next step was taken at the meeting held
in 1827, just referred to, when the same plea was put forward side by side with that
for trial b) T jury. Twenty-four persons, representing one million sterling, signed the
requisition asking that this meeting might be called, and the gathering was the largest
yet held in the colony. Petitions were adopted, on the motion of Mr. Wentworth, for
presentation to both Houses of Parliament, and sent home through Mr. Blaxland.
Three years afterwards, in February, 1830, a similar meeting was held with the same
object, and on the accession of William IV, in 1831, as has been said, another effort
was made in the same direction. Two years afterwards a further attempt was made to
press the colonial claim for constitutional privileges on the notice of the Home
Authorities, a meeting being again held in the Sydney Court House with that object.
A petition, the adoption of which was moved by Mr. Wentworth and seconded by Mr.
Lawson, was framed, asking for a House of fifty members, and asserting the colonial
claim to the disposal of colonial revenue. At this meeting a paid Agent-General for
the colony, to be chosen by householders was first proposed, the Governor being
memorialised to cause £I,OOO to be appropriated for the purpose. Another meeting,
under the auspices of the Patriotic Association, was held in 1835, to discuss the form
of the proposed Constitution, and the qualification of members and voters. At this
meeting it was proposed to form an Upper and Lower House, while another proposal
advocated the fusion of both into one House of fifty members, forty to be elective.


The next popular assemblage for this purpose we find recorded in 1841, when a
meeting under the presidency of Dr. Bland again petitioned the Queen for the extension
ol the constitutional privilege of representation to the colony, alleging that the
Legislature as then existing was neither capable nor desirous of representing the
community. Other meetings were held throughout the colony, and similar resolutions
proposed. The following year, 1842, witnessed one of the most important gatherings
yet held to advocate the popular claims. The petition adopted, as elsewhere described,
set forth the statistics of the colony in such a striking and unanswerable manner as to
form a strong argument for the granting of the sought-for privileges. At length, on
January 5, 1843, news was received in Sydney that, yielding to the demands of reason
and justice, and the clearly-expressed desire of the people, the Imperial Parliament had
at length passed an Act —July 29, 1842 —conferring a Constitution on New South
Wales. Thus, after a persistent and vigorous agitation of over fifteen years, the efforts
of Mr. Wentworth and his co-workers were so far recognised that a Representative
Council was granted to the colony. This Council consisted of fifty-four members,
thirty-six of whom were elective, and eighteen being Crown nominees. Four of the
former were allotted to the new settlement of Port Phillip, and of the nominated
members six were such by virtue of their office, —the Colonial Secretary, Colonial
Treasurer, Auditor-General, Attorney-General, Commander of the Forces, and the
Collector of Customs. A freeholder of £2OO or a £2O householder enjoyed the electoral
privilege ; £2,000 or an annual income of £IOO qualified jor member of Council ; and
its duration was fixed for five years. Seven years later the elective principle was
introduced into Tasmania, and South and West Australia, while Port Phillip was
erected into an independent colony under the name of Victoria. The Act also reduced
the electoral qualification in Victoria and New South Wales, and a Civil List was
established for the latter colony ; power being given at the same time to Her Majesty
to detach other territories of New South Wales, above the thirtieth degree of latitude,
on the petition of householders. Meanwhile, in 1843, the first election under the
Constitution took place in Sydney, five candidates being nominated. On June 15,
Messrs. Wentworth and Bland were returned by a large majority over Messrs.
O'Connell, Cooper, and Hustler, the rival candidates. The system of open voting was
used, and a great riot ensued in which life and property were sacrificed. In August
following the first Parliament was convened, being inaugurated by Mr. Deas-Thomson
Colonial Secretary. Mr, Macleay was chosen Speaker, being then in his seventy-seventh
year. The first session witnessed the passing of an Act to inquire into the working of
the Land Laws, a Debtors’ Act, and a measure giving a preferable lien on wool, and
retaliating mortgages of live stock —the two latter greatly relieving the pressure of the
times. During this first session, as may be supposed from his previous interest in the
constitutional agitation in which he figured so largely, Mr. Wentworth was no
unnoticeable figure in these early legislative proceedings, and it is noticeable that about
this time his hitherto fervid liberalism began to show signs of tepidity. Like many
another popular tribune who has identified himself with the early struggles of democracy,
he receded as that element advanced, and gradually toned down into a mild Conservative,
with symptoms of occasional excess. This was clearly evidenced during the latter


stages of the next great movement towards Responsible Government, on which he
entered some years later. Under the Imperial Act of 1843 the Executive was vested
in a nominee Ministry, controllable to some extent, it is true, by the votes of the
elective majority, but practically irresponsible in so far as place and power were
concerned, and not amenable to the voice of the people. In 1851 Mr. Wentworth tabled
a motion in the Council, under which a petition to the Queen was adopted, praying for
a Constitution similar to that of Canada, and requesting the entire surrender of all
revenues and legislative rights to the colonial Legislature. In a protest which was
entered on the minutes of the House the Council solemnly insisted and declared that all
offices of trust except that of Governor, should be conferred by the colonists ; that the
public lands and all the Departments should be subject only to the colonial Legislature;
that the Imperial Parliament had no right to tax the colonists ; and that plenary
powers should be conferred on the colonial Legislature. As the necessary and logical
outcome of this a committee was appointed in 1852 to prepare a Constitution, the first
name being that of W. C. Wentworth. Next year a despatch was received from the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, ratifying the resolution of Council of 1851, and
conveying Her Majesty’s wish that the Council should establish a new Legislature on
the basis of an elective Assembly and a nominee Council. A second committee was
then appointed by the Council, on the motion of Mr. Wentworth, consisting of the
mover, Messrs. E. Deas-Thomson, J. Macarthur, J. H. Plunkett, C. Cowper, J. Martin,
C. S. Donaldson, Macleay, Thurlow, and Murray, to prepare the new Constitution.
The report of the Committee was brought up in due course, when it was found to
embody a recommendation that the members of the Upper House should receive
hereditary titles and constitute a colonial nobility whose descendants, though not
members ipso facto , should have the privilege of electing representatives from among
their own class. This proposition w r as unanimously condemned, and large and
important meetings of the leading Liberals of the day were held to protest against this
irresponsible Upper House of colonial peers. The Constitution Bill was condemned
as utterly defective, and the people bound themselves to oppose by every leggl means
the formation of a second Chamber not based on popular suffrage. Notwithstanding
this protest, however, Mr. Wentworth, who had thoroughly identified himself with
his Bill and its anti-democratic provisions, moved the second reading on August 16
in a masterly and statesmanlike speech, and carried his measure by a majority of
thirty-four to eight, after a debate of seven days. Three days afterwards a great
meeting was held at Circular Quay to condemn the measure and petition the Queen to
refuse her assent. The Constitution Committee was declared in permanent session to
secure a popular Constitution. On the Bill going into committee in the Council,
however, the hereditary clause was eliminated, and that nominating members to the
Upper House for life was amended. On December 21, amidst considerable enthusiasm
and much cheering, this great measure passed its third reading by tw r enty-seven to six,
and the Constitution of New South Wales, owing to the exertions of William Charles
Wentworth, was practically an accomplished fact. Two Chambers were established—
a Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly, the former to consist of not less than
twenty-one British subjects, not more than one-fifth of whom should be servants of


the Crown, to sit for five years, after which their membership should continue for life.
The Assembly consisted of fifty-four members, to be elected for five years. All free
colonists were entitled to vote, subject to a property qualification. In 1858 the
number of members was increased to seventy-two. Thus the labours of a life-time)
and a life-work of which any patriot might be justly proud, were brought to a
triumphant and perfect close. From this time our history as a distinct and free
community commences ; and it will never be forgotten that the great fact which placed
Australia for the first time amongst nations was the achievement of her worthiest
native-born son. In the year following, the author of the Bill and Mr. Deas-
Thompson were sent home by the colony to watch the progress of the great measure
through the British Legislature, but before they departed the former was the recipient
of a splendid popular demonstration of acknowledgment and public gratitude. A
full-length portrait of Mr. Wentworth was painted in oils and placed in position in the
Legislative Assembly, and a service of plate was presented to him by the country.
The mission of the delegates was successful, and in 1856 the measure passed into law.
On May 22 in that year the first Parliament met under Responsible Government in
New South Wales.
While the subject of this memoir was thus occupied in building up in the
legislative records of this colony a monument to himself which should last beyond the
dreams of prophecy, he was also engaged from time to time in other labours in the
public interest. His life was compact of these labours, and it may be justly said that
his every thought and energy were expended in the service of his native land. In
1842 the great work of the establishment of the University of Sydney was conceived
by his active and far-seeing mind, and with that ardour which he threw into all his
undertakings, and the electric power he possessed of influencing his contemporaries, he
pushed that labour on to an ultimate success. On October 2, in the year named, he
made an eloquent speech in his place in the Council in favour of the project, and saw
the Bill passed in 1850. His services in this connection were worthily recognised by
the wealth and culture of the colony, a splendid life-size statue of Mr. Wentworth
being placed within the Great Hall of the University to mark the public appreciation
of his efforts. The statue was unveiled in 1862, while the person thus unusually
honoured was still alive. On that occasion the present Chief Justice, then Premier,
delivered a eulogistic address on the life and work of the recipient of this distinction,
in the course of which he spoke as follows ; —“ The next and the last of his public
acts I shall on this occasion advert to, is the establishment of the Sydney University.
With that noble institution his name is for ever associated as its founder. Whatever
may be the fate of our political institutions, how great soever may be their vicissitudes,
here, at all events, is an institution likely to endure. Hitherward, in future times, will
turn the steps of those who feel the promptings of a generous ambition. Conquerors
in the realms of mind, they will go forth into the world, vivifying the dull elements
around them, and arousing, as by an electric shock, the sons of toil and trade and
commerce to a conception of the true glories of the Universe. To the man who, in
this early stage of our history, placed these splendid opportunities within our reach,
it cannot be thought remarkable, even if he had done nothing more, that the honour


of a public statue should be ottered. Accordingly, eight years ago, his friends,
comprising not only those who had witnessed but some who had aided him in his
labours, met together on the eve of his departure from the colony for a time, and
determined that, in acknowledgment of his many services, that honour should be
conferred upon him. The announcement was made at the moment of his embarkation
amidst the cheers of his friends, and the disapprobation of a few who regarded him as
an enemy to the country. He who had done so much for the people, and had often
been greeted with their loudest huzzas, had before that encountered their hootings and
revilings ; but no one knew better than he the inconstancy of popular favour. But,
although they break their idols as often as they make them, the people in the long run
learn to do justice to their benefactors, and Mr. Wentworth has enjoyed the singular
good fortune of living to see conferred on him an honour which is usually witnessed
only by a man’s posterity, and to see it conferred with the assent and amidst the
applause, not only of those who have ever been his friends, but of those who were
the most bitter of his opponents. He has outlived the envy, hatred, and malignity
which inevitably cross the path of every man who becomes eminent in public life ; and
now, in his green old age, with his mind still clear, and his faculties still unclouded, he
has been allowed a foretaste of the posthumous renown which awaits him ”
Mr. Wentworth was at this time again in the colony, having returned in 1861.
He Avas received with another popular demonstration, political opponents as well
as friends meeting to do him honour. He only remained till the close of 1862,
however, during which time he filled the office of President of the Legislative
Council on the vacation of that office by Sir William Burnett, who left the Chamber
followed by all its members, thus dissolving the Council. His family accompanied Mr,
Wentworth to England in 1862. He remained at home till his death, March 30, 1872, at
Merleigh House, Wimbourne, Dorsetshire, It had been the great patriot’s wish in life
that he should be buried on Australian soil, and in accordance therewith and the desire
of the country, his remains were brought out to the colony and accorded a public
funeral, by order of Parliament, May 6, 1873. A concourse of 15,000 persons
attended at the obsequies, which were conducted by the late Bishop Barker. Sir
James Martin delivered a burial oration, and the remains were interred at Yaucluse, by
the shores of the harbour, and amongst the people to whose services his life-work
had been devoted. Beside the labour and its results of the life of William Charles
Wentworth, the careers of other public men, however worthy, pale into insignificance.
He is the foremost figure of colonial public life, and though his efforts were ably
seconded and assisted, William Charles Wentworth was, throughout, the moving and
guiding spirit of his day and generation. His life is one with which every Australian
colonist should be proudly familiar, as of the greatest man in our history. Not alone
New South Wales, but every colony of the Australian group, owes its responsible
government and free institutions to his exertions. No statues or monumental brasses
are necessary to perpetuate his memory. The worthiest and most enduring
monument to William Charles Wentworth will be found in the historical records of
his country.




W. MACLEOD , DEL. F f i 0M Ph0T0 Br Fn £EMAN


THOMAS SUTCLIFFE MORT.
HILE the constitution of the country is building itself up, and the men who
took an active part in its inception are, as we have seen, writing their names
lip legibly enough, each one in his own peculiar characters, across the pages of
our history, it is not fair to lose sight of that great interest, the magnitude and
j) importance of which formed our strongest claim for self-government and free
institutions. We have seen how, from time to time, the commercial progress
of the colony was quoted in its successive stages of almost magical increase and
development, by those who wished to see Australia colonised by a free peojde in a free
country. Commerce has been the backbone of the colony from the first, and the
mainstay of its existence and prosperity. Its record in New South Wales has been
one of almost monotonous brilliancy, —and the few dark spots only seem to burnish
the lustre of the complete whole. With free ports and free trade our merchants have
established Sydney as the emporium of the south, and the seat of successful enterprise.
Houses whose business extends all over the civilised world —whose argosies are on
every sea, and whose names are registered on the revenue books of every port —have
grown up and flourished side by side with the growth and progress of the colony itself.
Not a few of those names are known in the political world of the colonies as well as in
commercial circles, while some have worked for the general good of the colony quietly
and unobtrusively enough, while laying in their own way the foundations of their own
commercial fortunes. Prominent among these latter is the name of Thomas Sutcliffe
Mort, —a sterling type of Australia’s representative commercial man. His life, like
all that stand out in marked relief from the background of our social or
political life, was one of unceasing work and activity. His career is one record of
labour. But his labour bears the distinctive character of being directed in such a way
as to benefit and enrich, or at least develop and open up, the resources and capabilities
of the colony in which he elected to cast his lot. His commercial record is a pure and
clean one, and his character for honour and high-minded probity is above and beyond
rejjroach. In all these respects his character is so strongly marked as to make him a
model and exemplar of commercial life in Australia, and a representative figure
amongst colonial mercantile men.
The life of Thomas Sutcliffe Mort presents a graphic picture of the career of an
Australian colonist, and of the great influence for good wielded by a modest and
unassuming, but public-spirited and energetic private citizen. His large views and
courageous enterprise are factors to which, though the views and enterprise of one man
who was not a politician or a public leader of the people, the colony that he served, and
which delighted to honour his memory, is greatly indebted in many remarkable ways.


If only as a model commercial man, a commercial community like our own would be
impelled to honour his unsullied record ; but as that of one who ever subordinated his
private aims to subserve his country’s interest, his name should never be forgotten by
those who cherish the memory of the master-builders of the fabric of the colony’s
greatness.
Thomas Sutcliffe Mort was born December 23, 1816, in Bolton, Lancashire,
England. After the usual term spent in the acquirement of an ordinary commercial
education, sufficient to fit him out for the part his talents destined him to play in after
life, he entered the counting-house of a firm of warhousemen in Manchester. When
about twenty-three years of age, on application being made by the house of Messrs-
Aspinwall, Brown, and Co., of Sydney, for a clerk, his name was suggested for the
vacancy, and having accepted the engagement young Mort arrived in Sydney in 1838,
and at once entered on his duties. He remained in the firm’s employ, and in that of
their successors, Messrs. Gosling, Brown, and Co., for about five years, until 1843,
when they were involved in the financial disaster and distress which seriously threatened
the future prospects of the colony in that year. This dark spot in our commercial
history was productive of very serious consequences at the time, and only the elasticity
of a colony that possessed all the essentials of success within itself could have recovered
so rapidly from such a crushing blow. This disaster was owing to an indiscriminate
rage for speculation which prevailed about this period, and the stoppage of the sale of
land, consequent on the price being raised from twelve to twenty shillings per acre.
Great facilities had been given by the new banking and loan institutions for obtaining
the use of money; a mania for purchasing cattle and sheep had swept the colony of most
of its available capital a few months before, and English exporters were willing to give
enormous credit to secure the sale of their commodities. A feeling of false prosperity had
carried the hitherto successful ones into excesses of wild extravagance and expense, and
when the crisis came the bubble broke without a note of warning. The Bank of
Australia was the first to fail, and as it was then the leading institution of
its kind it involved most of the leading houses of the day in its downfall. The
new Insolvent Act was devised by Mr. Justice Burton —hence called “ Burton’s
Purge”—to relieve the general pressure in 1842, and an idea may be gained
of the extent of the prevailing distress from the fact that some seven hundred
names appeared in the bankruptcy list, as having availed themselves of its provision
within twelve months of its passage through the Legislative Council. A great meeting
was held in 1843, to take into consideration the alarming and depressed state of the
monetary affairs of the colony, and to devise measures of immediate relief. Mr.
Wentworth took a leading part in these measures, and it was deemed advisable to allow
the Bank of Australia to realise on its securities by submitting them to public lottery.
On the failure of the firm with which he had been connected since his arrival in the
colony, Mr. Mort decided on making an effort to carve out a future career for himself,
with the result that we find him soon afterwards engaged in business as an auctioneer.
His association with the late firm had made him many friends, who were attracted as
much by the winning manner as by the business capacity of the young man, so that
he did not want for a connection on embarking in business, into which he threw


himself with all that ardour and energy which, up to the closing scene, marked his
active and useful life. One of the broad results of his business-like tact, and one
which had no small influence in developing and opening up a ready market for our
staple commodity, was the establishment by him for the first time of an organised system
of public wool sales in Sydney. The wool-grower on the far-away squatting station in
the interior, whose market had hitherto been a precarious one at the best, was now
enabled to count on a safe outlet for his raw material. From this beginning sprung
the great wool-broking firm, now known as that of Messrs. Mort and Co,, and which
at the present time is deservedly second to none in the whole of Australia. Henceforth
every step in the commercial enterprise of the colony is illustrated by his name. To
enumerate the public undertakings with which he was connected would be to catalogue
the acts of years. When the first railway within the colony was spoken of in 1849,
Mr. Mort was one of the promoters of the first experimental line between Sydney and
Parramatta. As far back as 1841 he had taken up shares in the Australian Steam
Navigation Company, then the Hunter River Company, and in this way he
connected himself with the two great carrying enterprises of the colony. The gold
discovery at Ophir in 1851, which seemed at first to revolutionise the colony and
galvanize it into new life, brought out anew the ready tact and adaptability of Mr.
Mort, who threw himself at once into the new condition of things with a determination
to turn it to the best advantage. He formed the first company for working auriferous
lands under the name of the “Great Nugget Vein Mining Company,” and it is in
connection with this enterprise that an event happened which at once marked his place
in the confidence of the public. At that time people were not so inured to the costly
delays in mining enterprises as they now are. Very primitive notions prevailed as to
the facility with which the precious metal could be picked up, and rapid fortunes made
by all interested. Those who cherished these fancies were not a little disappointed at
their non-fulfilment, and openly expressed their dissatisfaction. Mr. Mort immediately
met the shareholders, and gave his explanation, offering to at once take up the
liabilities of such as wished to withdraw from the enterprise and its risk. His generous
proposal at once disarmed distrust, and removed the last trace of dissatisfaction ; it is
needless to say that the fulfilment of his offer was not claimed. Five years after the
discovery of gold, his ever wakeful attention was directed to a new object, and, in
conjunction with Mr. Hawdon, Mr. Mort bought some 14,000 acres of land in the
Moruya district on the South coast, about two hundred miles from Sydney. This he
called Bodalla. He spent £IOO,OOO on the property, buying his partner’s share in
1860. He devoted it to a series of experiments in the direction of such operations as
were conducive to settlement. Plis extensive dairy business—the largest in the
colonies —goes on there, the quality of its products being said to be equal to the Home
exports. The whole estate now consists of some 38,000 acres, the returns are very
large, and the whole constitutes a model settlement which is the wonder of the colony.
A rural population forms the tenantry of the estate, which has been of incalculable
advantage in promoting farming enterprise. In 1857, Mr. Mort visited England,
where he indulged in a complete rest and holiday for two years, returning in 1859. On
his return, refreshed and re-invigorated by his well-earned recess, he took up the


subjects of silk, cotton, and sugar cultivation. The last named in particular interested
him deeply ;he sank nearly £20,000 in the development of this industry. A legal
dispute arising out of the sale of station property —the famous Wentworth v. Lloyd
case —occupied his attention for some four years after his return, Mr. Wentworth
moving that the sale be declared void on the ground that the auctioneer, Mr. Mort, had
an interest in the transaction. On appeal to the Master of the Rolls in England, it
was held that Mr. Wentworth was aware of Mr. Mort’s interest in the purchase when
the sale was effected, and a verdict delivered in April, 1863, completely cleared away
the aspersion on Mr. Mort’s business character. To continue the long catalogue of
public spirited enterprises with which his name connects itself, it may be briefly
mentioned that in this and the preceding years commenced his interest in the
Queensland Peak Downs Copper and Waratah Coal Mining Companies, in the floating
of both which large undertakings Mr. Mort took a leading part. The Newcastle coal
industry received a great impetus from this enterprise, while the value of the ore taken out
of the former mine has amounted to upwards £1,000,000 sterling. During the latter
years, too, he gave his assistance to the encouragement of steam vessels for the harbour
and coasting trade. The Dry Dock at the head of Port Jackson was also initiated by him
about this time, and is one of the greatest works of its kind on this side of the line. The
dock itself is four hundred feet long, being cut entirely out of solid rock. The workshops
cover over five acres, and nearly one thousand men are employed when in full operation.
The branches comprise every branch of the engineers’ and metal workers’ trade —iron and
brass founding, boiler making, locomotive, engine and shipbuilding trades all being
largely represented amongst the army of workmen and artificers who labour there.
Several large steamers well known in the colonial coasting trade were turned out there.
As was usual in Mr. Mort’s undertakings, the place was the theatre of a vast
expenditure, another £IOO,OOO being spent in its perfection. In 1873, these great
works were floated into the “ Mort’s Dock and Engineering Company, Limited,” and
on the founder’s invitation most of the responsible employes became shareholders, thus
establishing the common tie of a common interest between the capitalist and the labour
he employed.
Not the least among the great undertakings of Mr. Mort’s life was the last in the
long list, —that of the exportation of Australian beef and mutton to the English market.
The enormous increase of stock within the colony had been so great, that at certain
periods of our history the value of sheep and cattle was merely nominal. In 1843,
when the financial crisis at which we have glanced occurred, sheep had so far fallen in
price as to be worth but sixpence to eighteen-pence per head, and cattle bought at six
guineas were selling at 7s. 6d. It was at this time that the process of “boiling down”
was resorted to, as a means of turning the overstock to some account. Mr. Henry
O’Brien, of Yass, an old colonist and an extensive proprietor of flocks and cattle,
finding that stock had depreciated in value so for as to be almost valueless, resorted to
the experiment of killing and boiling down the carcasses to extract the tallow. The
expedient succeeded, and had the so far satisfactory result of raising the value of sheep
to ss. per head, for their tallow alone. Since that period numerous boiling down
establishments were formed all over the colony for the extraction of tallow for the


London market, from the carcasses of sheep and cattle which the population of the
colony had been hitherto too small to consume. This plan, however, was only a
temporary success, and though it had its advantages for the time being, and for years
after, it was not to be supposed that stockowners would be willing to sacrifice their
assets in such a wholesale manner when a market for their beef and mutton existed in
England, where the large population labours under a chronic scarcity of animal food.
The difficulty of course lay in transporting the meat to the home market under such
circumstances as would ensure its preservation and acceptance. In 1843 Mr, Mort
had made an attempt already to export cured animal food in the ordinary way, but
without that measure of success essential to form a vigorous industry. He now threw
himself again into the project with renewed energy, with the difference that he hoped
to land the meat in England in the same fresh condition as it was placed upon the
Sydney market. In this venture Mr. Mort was assisted by the scientific ability of Mr.
E. D. Nicolle, who had joined him in establishing the Sydney Ice Works some years
before. The undertaking in the hands of these two gentlemen is thus described in a
specially prepared Press report: —“ The project now was to land the meat as sound,
and fresh, and natural in appearance as if it had been killed at the place of delivery.
Mr. Mort’s knowledge of the prospects of pastoral industry enabled him to forecast a
magnificent future for a trade of this sort. Mr. Nicolle’s experiments were constant,
and he received from Mr. Mort a generous confidence which placed all this gentleman’s
resources at his disposal. The first point was to invent a cheap means of producing
artificial cold, and this difficulty was, after many trials, overcome by the experimental-
ists in discovering the possibility of the repeated use of the same ammonia. In this
respect Messrs. Mort and Nicolle went ahead of European science. According to the
first authorities in the old world ‘meat frozen was meat spoiled.’ But partial freezing, it
was found, would never do, the meat becoming so rapidly bad when exposed. Mr. Nicolle
at last demonstrated that in Australia at any rate meat could be thoroughly frozen —that its
qualitv was not thus injured —and that it kept longer after thawing than did other meat
after being killed. Feeling convinced that the results of Mr. Nicolle’s experiments in this
particular had made the project practicable, Mr. Mort entered upon it with enthusiasm. A
large establishment rose upon the margin of Darling Harbour, and it was connected with
the railway. Costly machinery, in duplicate, was erected, and the ‘ freezing chamber ’
was covered with five miles of iron piping, through which the liquid ammonia was kept in
circulation. A series of most interesting experiments shewed that the freezing power
could be successfully applied to game, fish, and various sorts of fruit, as well as to live
stock ; and it was a novel sensation to find oneself suddenly transferred from the sultry
atmosphere of an Australian summer’s day to a region of ice and snow, abounding in
oxen and sheep, poultry, wild game, and fish, butter and milk, all as hard as rock, their
natural qualities kept in complete suspension until the time should come to thaw, cook,
and consume them. The belief that the process injured their quality was shewn over
and over again to be unfounded. Mr. Mort then erected slaughter-houses in the
Lithgow A"alley, amongst the Blue Mountains, on the Great AFestern Line of Railway,
9G miles from Sydney. This site was chosen to save cattle their journey over the
mountains, which much injured their quality. The buildings and yards were on the most
complete plan conceivable. AVhen both establishments were finished Mr. Alort invited,


on September 2, 1875, a large number of colonists to make an excursion to Lithgow
Valley, beginning with an inspection of the freezing works at Darling Harbour. The
party proceeded by special train from the freezing works to the \ alley, and there sat
down to a luncheon composed of varieties ot fish, game, and meat, all ot which had
been frozen for considerable periods before being cooked, Lhe whole repast was a
thorough success, and congratulations were showered upon the chairman and Mr,
Nicolle from all sides. The Premier, Mr. John Robertson, made a speech full of
laudation of the undertaking. Mr. John Hay proposed ‘ Success to the Enterprise
in terms similarly enthusiastic. In reply to these congratulatory speeches Mr. Mort
said, —‘ There shall be no more waste ! Yes, gentlemen, I now feel that the time has
arrived, or at all events is not far distant, when the various portions of the earth will
S’ive forth their products for the use of each and all ; that the over-abundance of one
country shall make up for the deficiency of another ; the superabundance of the year ot
plenty serving for the scant harvests of its successor ; for cold arrests all change*
Science has drawn aside the veil, and the plan stands revealed. Faraday’s magic wand
gave the key-note, and invention has done the rest. Climate, seasons, plenty, scarcity,
distance will all shake hands, and out of the commingling will come enough for all,
‘for the earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof,’ and it is certainly within
the compass of man to ensure that all His people shall be partakers of that
fulness.’ ” The speech was frequently interrupted by bursts of applause, and with it
the new industry fairly launched itself. The next stage was the filling up of a vessel
—the Northam —to take home a shipment of Australian beef and mutton for the
London market. Together with the sum of £BO,OOO which Mr. Mort had expended in
this costly enterprise, the squatters of the colonies, who were so closely interested in
the result of his experiment, subscribed a further sum of £20,000 to carry the project
out. This last part of the undertaking, however, unfortunately fell through. The
metal of the machinery proved to be unable to withstand the action of the chemical
agent employed, and the result was that the Northam s machinery broke down, leaving
the ultimate realisation of the project to other hands. A great and permanent good was,
however, done to the colony by the results already attained, Sydney being supplied
with ice from the works at Darling Harbour, and country dairy produce was brought
to the doors of city consumers at the lowest rates and in the purest condition. The
failure of his experiment severely affected Mr. Mort, who had given himself up to his
task in the most hearty manner from the first. He did not survive long to repeat his
operations. A few months after the Northam failure he caught a cold at a funeral at
Bodalla, where he was then staying, and died on May 9, 1878. His funeral took place
quietly at Bodalla, in accordance with the principles of the Funeral Reform
Association of New South Wales, of which he was a member. His death was
mourned as the loss to Australia of one of its most useful and public-spirited sons.
About five years after the death of Mr. Mort a fitting tribute was paid to his
memory by the erection of a statue in recognition of his services, in Macquarie Place,
Sydney. That statue is a faithful and life-size copy in bronze, by Conolly, of Florence,
of what the original was in life. It stands in the midst of the city, and forms one of the
first striking objects that meet the eye of the stranger in the land which his great and
unexampled services have done so much to open up and develop.




W .MaCLEOD , DEL .
*
(MA.Jhi4{0ll/^ / II s


THE REV. JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D
in New South Wales have acted no small part in shaping the
early history of the colony. Names of public-spirited ministers of religion
|i|p have been among the foremost in the roll of progress and in the lists of
% ' public life. Their very profession, in the first days of the colony, gave them
4 a standing and leadership which have since been assumed, in due process of
development, by members of other learned professions, and notably that of the Bar.
But for many years the learned professions were practically unrepresented in point of
influence save by the Church, and the extent to which this element in colonial society
tempered the rude growth of the colony, harshly forced as it was by the civil and
military officialdom of the period, is now almost incalculable. The name of many a
popular Divine will be tenderly and gratefully recollected as often as we are called
upon to turn back to the records of our political growth and formation. Among the
rest, Marsden, Therry, and many others claim a place on the colony’s bead-roll of great
names. And not the least of these is that of the late Reverend John Dunmore Lang,
Minister of the Scots’ Church in Sydney, and for many years an elected representative
of the people. Perhaps no clergyman in our history has distinguished himself for his
active and energetic participation in the struggles of the colonists for free institutions,
and his unremitting and zealous interest in all public questions, more than the late
Dr. Lang. From the date of his arrival in the colony up to his retirement into private
life —a term covering the whole of that stirring time known as the transition period of
our history —he is found intimately and closely identified with every public movement.
His sympathies were ever with the people, —so much so that they not infrequently
brought him into violent contact with the more influential classes. But his active
mind brooked no rest, and as he himself has written, he was desirous from the first to
promote the welfare and advancement of his adopted country in every possible way.
He claimed, more than thirty years ago, to have been most closely and personally
connected with the general history of the colony, and with the progressive development
of its intellectual, moral, and political system. No observer of the growth of that
system can close his eyes to the influence such a character as that of our present
subject must have exerted in its moulding and formation. No student of colonial
history can afford to ignore the part therein taken by John Dunmore Lang. And it is
not too much to say, as he himself asserted, that, “ although his course may have been
somewhat unusual and erratic, the candid reader will come to the conclusion that it lias
been uniformly the result of a sincere desire to promote the best interests of the
Australian Colonies.” Whatever faults of hastiness or undue impulse his career may
present are faults rather of head than of heart, and the good-will and earnestness of


purpose which characterised almost every important step in his public career are
sufficient guarantee, if any were needed, for the good faith of his intentions.
John Dunmore Lang was born at Greenock, in Scotland, August 25, 1799. Both
his parents were Scottish, and their family, true sons of the Kirk, had suffered in past
times for the cause of the Solemn League and Covenant. When young Lang was
about seven years of age, his parents removed to Largs, in Ayrshire, where he attended
the parish school for some years, until he was old enough to go to the Glasgow
University. He elected to devote his talents to the Church, like so many others of
his young educated countrymen, and, after spending four years in the ordinary
academical course, he proceeded to his humanities and divinity. About this time, in
1821, his younger brother Mr. George Lang came out to Australia in connection with
the Commissariat Department, and his accounts seem to have directed the attention of
the young divinity student to Australia as a fitting field for pioneer missionary labour.
About twelve months later, having obtained the degree of Master of Arts, and, having
been ordained to the ministry by the Presbytery of Irvine, the young cleric left
Scotland for Australia, arriving in Sydney in May, 1823. At that time the colony
was governed by Sir Thomas Brisbane, a scion of an old Scottish family in the
neighbourhood of the parents of our subject in the west of Scotland. Thirty years
afterwards, in summing up the character of that Governor’s rule in New South Wales,
he re-called with some feeling the time when, returning from the parish school in the
north of Ayrshire, he was proud to be noticed by Sir Thomas Brisbane and asked the
meaning of some line in Ovid or Virgil, It is to be presumed that the Governor was
not allowed to remain unmindful of this early patronage, for we find that, on the
arrival of young Lang’s father, Mr. W. Lang, in January 1824, he received a grant of
two thousand acres of land and the assistance of twenty assigned convict servants from
the Government of the colony. In 1824 the Scots’ Church in Jamieson Street,
Sydney, at which Dr. Lang officiated up to the time of his death, was built and opened
for service. From that centre Dr. Lang radiated his influence among his co-religionists
throughout the colony, from Brisbane to Port Phillip, establishing congregations and
missions wherever his countrymen congregated. He identified himself almost
exclusively at first with his fellow-countrymen in Australia, and acted as their friend
and adviser in every emergency. He interested himself largely in procuring the
emigration to the colony of large numbers of Scotch mechanics ; though it would
appear that, in the first instance, this was done with an ulterior view. Some five or
six years after his arrival in the country, Dr. Lang conceived the project of establishing
a college in S} T dney for the preparation of young men for the Presbyterian ministry,
and for general educational purposes. Governor Darling having refused the use of
convict labour and other facilities for this purpose, Dr. Lang undertook a voyage to
England in 1830 —his second —for the purpose, where he obtained from Lord Goderich,
the then Secretary of State for the Colonies, an order on the Colonial Government for
£3500, on condition of a like amount being previously spent on the undertaking by its
promoters. This concession was afterwards amended by Lord Goderich permitting
£ISOO to be paid for the passage of a party of Scotch mechanics, to be selected by
Dr. Lang to the number of fifty or sixty, who were to erect the proposed buildings and


rep a}’ their fare out of their wages. In accordance with this arrangement some sixty
Scotch families —stonemasons, carpenters, blacksmiths, plasterers, and others— arrived
in the colony by the Stirling Castle , in October, 1831. The reverend Doctor claimed
to have another object also in view in projecting this scheme ot immigration.
“ Previous to this period,” he says, “there were only two classes in the colony —the
free emigrant gentlemen settlers, with their large grants ot land ot from one to two
thousand acres of land or upwards, their flocks and herds, and their numerous convict
servants. These were, in their own estimation at least, the aristocracy of the colony.
The other class consisted exclusively of the emancipated convict labourers and
mechanics, who were congregated chiefly in the colonial towns. In such circumstances
it appeared to me that the formation of a middle class in the colony was indispensably
necessary to its moral welfare and social advancement. ’ This scheme met with
considerable opposition within the colony, however, and the projector was compelled to
make another voyage to England in 1833. In 1835, having returned to Sydney, he
initiated the Colonist newspaper, “ for the furtherance of the moral and intellectual
development of the colony.” This journal he carried on with characteristic vigour,—
so much so, indeed, that successive actions for libel were the result. One of these
actions was taken by the emancipists, to whom Dr. Lang consistently opposed all his
talents and influence, as we shall presently see. In this case the writer defended
himself in an address to the court of remarkable point and vigour, and, though the
judges granted the rule, the prosecution was withdrawn. In a subsequent case the
Colonist attacked some of the more glaring social vices of the day, coupling them with
well-known names ; for this the editor was fined £IOO, which was immediately
subscribed and paid by the public. This was by no means the last of the libel actions
in which Dr. Lang and the Colonist figured, for in 1851 we find Dr. Lang undergoing
an imprisonment of four months, with a tine of £IOO, for a criminal libel on a political
opponent named Mr. Thomas Icely, who, he alleged, had acquired a considerable
competency by dishonesty and fraud. He continued to conduct his journal throughout,
however, in a vigorous and outspoken manner, carrying a large section of the public
opinion with him in all his actions at law. In the last-named case, both his fine and the
law expenses were paid by a shilling popular subscription. In 1836, for the fourth
time, Dr. Lang made another visit to England, bringing back with him, under
engagement to his brother, Mr. Andrew Lang, about two hundred and fifty Geiman
vine-dressers for Hew South Wales ; these emigrants, however, were induced to settle
on their way out at Rio de Janeiro, so that the colony lost their valuable services. A
large number of missionaries from Berlin accompanied Dr. Lang on this voyage to
Sydney, and established an Aboriginal Mission at Zion’s Hill, near Brisbane, in 1838.
While at home on this occasion Dr. Lang also procured the deportation of upwards of
four thousand Highland herdsmen for the colony.
On the passing of what is known as the Constitutional Act of 1842 as already
described by the Home Legislature at the instance of Lord Stanley, then Secretary of
State for the Colonies, Dr. Lang was elected in 1843 as one of the members of the first
Legislative Council for Port Phillip. He thought it advisable at a later period of his
life" 3 to give some explanation of the “ extraordinary circumstance of his occupying so


unusual a position for a minister of religion in the British Empire,” and in doing so he
gave two reasons which furnish the key to a great deal of the reverend representative’s
public career. Firstly, he says, his object was to “put a stop, if possible, to the
enormous preponderance of Irish Roman Catholic immigration, which was ruining the
country in its best and dearest interests and, in the second place, “to secure for the
colony a general system of education, suited to its circumstances, and adequate to its
wants.” As a precedent he pointed to the fact of Bishop Broughton occupying the
position of nominee member of both the Legislative and Executive Councils up to the
year of his own election, and in this way he answered the objections of the politicians
of the time. The district of Port Phillip, under the Act, was allowed one representative
for the town of Melbourne, and the rest of the district live, or not less than three
members. The contest was a spirited one, and ended in Dr. Lang’s election for the
district by a large majority. The first Legislative Council elected by the people
numbered some of the best men of our history in its ranks, and writing of its constituent
parts some years later Dr. Lang lias the following striking expression of opinion, which,
in the judgment of many, has been largely borne out: —“For general ability, for extent
and variety of information available for the business of legislation, for manly eloquence,
for genuine patriotism, and for energetic and dignified action, I question whether the
first Legislative Council of New South Wales, under the Constitution of 1842, has ever
been surpassed by any Legislative Council out of England in the British Empire. The
great superiority of the first Legislative Council of New South Wales to those that have
hitherto succeeded it, is a remarkable fact in the history of the colony.” When it is
recollected that such names as those of Wentworth, R. Windeyer, Robert Lowe,
Cowper, and others were included in the list the encomium will scarcely be considered
unmerited. As a member of this Council Dr. Lang took an active part in the discus-
sions that resulted in the passing of the Lien on Wool Act, elsewhere referred to This
measure tended to relieve to some extent the prevailing financial pressure, by
empowering the embarrassed stockholder to give an available mortgage to his creditor
on his forthcoming clip of wool, thus rendering him independent of the necessity of
selling altogether. The bill was disallowed at home, because the principle it involved ?
of mortgaging growing crops, was not in accordance with English law. As- however
the Colonial Act was in force until formally disallowed at home, the effect was secured
by again passing the same measure and allowing it to remain in full force until the
second veto arrived. One of the first of our subject’s individual acts in the Council was
to table a motion to the effect that proceedings in Council should commence by public
prayer. This was rejected by nineteen votes to eleven. As the result of another
motion of his in reference to the Elective Franchise, a Select Committee was appointed
in 1844 to consider the general subject of Franchise and Representation, Dr. Lang being
Chairman. The Committee recommended the extension of the franchise to tenant-
farmers and squatters, whom the existing Act excluded. Several other suggestions
were made as to the number of members for the electorates of Sydney, Cumberland, and
Camden, Durham, and Northumberland. These suggestions, however, were not carried
into effect, and the Electoral Bill of 1851, which ignored them, was bitterly condemned
by their author in consequence. That measure was strongly supported by Mr.


Wentworth, who had been on the Committee of 1844, and who, up to that time, had
always favoured a popular franchise. His modification of his views on this occasion
gave rise to an aversion on Dr. Lang’s part, which the latter never lost an opportunity
of expressing in the strongest and most trenchant manner. He was also the first to
move for the establishment of the Twopenny Postage Rate for the colony, which,
though vetoed by the Governor, Sir George Gipps, became law under his successor.
But by far the most important of Dr. Lang’s acts as a popular representative, and the
most enduring in its effect on the future of Australia, was his proposal for the separation
of Poit Phillip from New South Wales, and its erection into a distinct and independent
colony. His motion to this effect, which was heartily concurred in by all the Port
Phillip members —six in all —received only one vote from amongst the other members
for New South Wales proper —that of Mr. Robert Lowe, now Lord Sherbrook in the
English Peerage. As the Port Phillip members were, however, unanimously in favour
of the project, Dr. Lang suggested that they should send a joint petition on the subject,
through the Governor, to Her Majesty the Queen. The suggestion was concurred in.
Dr. Lang drew up the petition, which was signed, presented, and forwarded accordingly;
and nine or ten months afterwards a favourable reply was received from Lord Stanley
(afterwards Earl Derby), then Secretary of State for the colonies, in 1845. It was not
till July 1, 1851, owing to the opposition of Earl Grey, that the separation was
effected, and Port Phillip proclaimed a distinct colony under the name of Victoria.
Dr. Lang also moved for a geological survey of the colony in 1845, which was
negatived on division by fifteen votes to ten.
In 1846 the subject of this memoir made another voyage to England,
avowedly with the object of checking the progress of “Downing Street misgovernment”
as evidenced in the arrival in the colony of Irish immigrants in considerable numbers.
This species of “ Papal Aggression,” as the reverend gentleman styled it, was only to
be checked in his opinion by the encouragement of Protestant immigration in larger
numbers. In this matter Dr. Lang discovered a tincture of religious or national
prejudice in his own character which, in one so strongly marked as his, could not fail
to impress to a proportionate extent that portion of the population that came under his
personal influence. Fortunately for Australia, these differences are now rapidly dying
out ; in fact, they only remain to give evidence of their decay when momentarily
fanned bv designing persons for their own ignoble ends. Dr. Lang’s part in this
sowing of the seeds of difference was purely a conscientious one, however, and as such
it occupied no small share of his attention. Before proceeding home on the present
occasion he made two extensive tours in the northern and southern divisions of the
colony respectively, with a view to qualify himself to point out to intending home
emigrants, from actual personal observation, the extraordinary capabilities of Australia
as a field for settlement. The results of these observations he embodied in two volumes,
entitled respectively, Port Phillip , or the Colony of Victoria , and Cooksland, in North
Eastern Australia. On his visit to the Moreton Bay district for this purpose, in
November, 1845, he was struck by the healthy appearance of some cotton plants which
he found growing, merely as an article of curiosity, in the garden of a colonist in
Brisbane. As Dr. Lang had seen the plant under cultivation in the Brazils, and had


also visited the cotton-growing States of North America, he pursued his enquiries in
the matter, arriving ultimately at the conviction that cotton cultivation was well
adapted to the soil and climate of that portion of Australian territory, ihis idea took
such masterful possession of his mind that on his arrival in England he submitted
several specimens of colonial cotton to experienced judges in Manchester and Glasgow,
and had the satisfaction of learning that the quality was much superior to that of
American cotton. His intention was to establish a workable cotton-growing interest
in the northern part of the colony, which would give endless employment to the
thousands of the mother-country who might seek the means of livelihood in Australia,
With this view he made application to select one hundred Scotch families from the
neighbourhood of Glasgow, to be assisted from the Immigration Fund ; but this request
was refused. However, he succeeded in obtaining from the Under-Secretary of State
for the colonies an admission that an equivalent in land for the expense of the passage
out would be allowed for all emigrants he might take out with him, and he accordingly
selected two hundred and fifty, who sailed from London in 1848. Two other ships
followed on the same errand in 1849. It is, however, necessary to add that the
principle of land grants to the immigrants was not recognised, so that the cotton-
growing scheme, in a great measure, fell through, though the then unformed colony of
Queensland received a considerable impetus by the accession of Dr. Lang’s six hundred
Scotch immigrants. The projector of the scheme met with considerable opposition
from the authorities in carrying it out, Earl Grey going to the extent of advising the
immigrants to proceed at law against their leader, for breach of agreement in connection
with the land grants. The advice was not accepted, and the immigrants in a memorial
expressed their great obligation to Dr. Lang, and their entire confidence in his
arrangements. Shortly after his return to the colony in 1850, a vacancy having
occurred in the representation of the city of Sydney, Dr. Lang was elected to the
position, and one of his first acts was to move for an enquiry into Earl Grey’s charges.
The Committee of Enquiry was disallowed, however, by the vote of the majority. The
charge of making money out of his immigrants was again preferred against him in the
Press and in the Council, and a resolution to that effect passed in the latter, whereupon
Dr. Lang issued an address to the electors, offering to resign his seat if they approved
of the Council’s proceeding. A public meeting was held, at which large numbers of
persons expressed their continued confidence in their representative, who was thereupon
induced to resume his seat, and at once entered on his part in the struggle which
culminated in the passing of the Electoral Act of 1851. As we have seen, that
measure did not harmonise in any way with Dr. Lang’s suggestions in 1844, and his
idea that representation should be based on population met with but scant favour at
the time. It was about this time that he found himself cast in damages and imprison-
ment for four months in the Icely libel case. During this term the election came on
under the new Act, and Dr. Lang was nominated a candidate for the representation of
Sydney, while still a confincc in Parramatta gaol. At the election, September, 1851,
he was elected a representative for the city at the head of the poll, Messrs. Lamb and
Wentworth being his colleagues, and Messrs. Longmore and Cowper the defeated
candidates. On that occasion Dr. Lang polled the largest number of votes —1191 —


recorded up to that time in the colony. At the declaration he made a speech to the
assembled electors, which was thus reported at the time : —“ He congratulated his
fellow-citizens on the position which the city had taken up as the heart of the whole
Australian Group. The heart of the colony was in right action, and the blood it would
send into the limbs and branches of the other colonies would infuse life into the whole
political system. Personally, he thanked them for the certificate of character which
they had given him, and which, he doubted not, would serve a future purpose, not only
in the colony but in England, if it should be his fate to go once more home. They
were all aware of his efforts to arouse public feeling at home, in order to obtain justice
for the colonists of the Empire generally; but in making those efforts he had aroused
the wrath of the Colonial Office against himself. Some comments had appeared in the
London Daily News , stating that his election last year had been accidental, and that
the constituency took no part in the extreme views he held, particularly as to the right
of a colony to entire freedom and independence. He had risked his present election,
however, on a strong expression of that opinion. It was from no feeling of disloyalty
that he professed these opinions. God forbid that he should feel disrespect for the
authorities of the old fatherland! But while he yielded to no man in respect, in vener-
ation, for the constituted authorities of the mother country, he would never hesitate to
express his conviction of the right of any colony of the Crown as soon as it could stand
on its own legs, to entire freedom and independence. He held that a common language,
a common literature, a common law, and a common religion, constituted an infinitely
stronger and more binding tie than those which kept them now under the domination
of Downing Street ; and whenever the day came that they should have a flag of their
own floating over the splendid series of colonies founded in Australia, he felt confident
that Great Britain would rejoice with them, and would say, ‘ Many daughters have
done virtuously ; but thou, Australia, hast excelled them all.’” In February following,
having resigned his seat in the Council, he left the colony again on another visit to
England.
Dr. Lang’s chief work was the separation of Victoria, mainly due to his
exertions in 1843. At a later date, in 1848-49, he advocated the same course
in respect of the Moreton Bay settlement, giving as reasons its adaptability as a
centre of trade and commerce, and its differently-marked natural features to New
South Wales. By his part in this matter Dr. Lang has written his name in large and
bold characters over the broad page of his adopted country’s history. We have seen
that his efforts to establish a cotton-growing industry in the northern colony were not
attended with marked success, but his exertions went far to prove the suitability of the
soil and climate for the foundation of such an interest. In fact, his repeated travels
about the country, and his intelligent observation of all that came under his
keen-sighted notice, were of great value in numberless ways. He never tired, by pen
and speech, of inciting the people to a due estimation of their proper privileges, and
long before that event happened he had paved the way, to a considerable extent, for
Responsible Government and the free institutions of the present day. He recognised,
too, from the first, the remarkable influence over the history of the colony the
discovery of gold was destined to exert, and the resolution to be effected by an event


which, in Mr. Wentworth’s words, “ precipitated the colony into a nation,” That
discovery neutralized the squatting element, which till then had barred progress, and
gave a more active party wealth and influence. Dr. Lang’s part in the efforts made
from time to time to provide better facilities for popular education was also no
inconsiderable one, and he supported tire report of the Committee of the Council,
under Mr. Robert Lowe, in favour of the National System, in 1844. In 1832, just
after returning from his first voyage to England, he founded his Australian College,
which has turned out some well-known public men of the present date. The Sydney
University attracted a share of his attention, but his effort to have that institution
affiliated to the London University was unsuccessful.
It is scarcely to be supposed that such a stirring life as that of Dr. Lang could
have been lived without some false steps. That sectarian blemish to which reference has
been made, unworthy of notice in a less worthy man, did much to leaven the masses of
the community. Within his own Church, too, he was engaged in various disputes, and
his action in 1842, in publicly renouncing all connection with the State and State
Churches of the colony as a minister of religion, gave considerable offence in
certain quarters. His brethren looked upon this step as an act of contumacy,
and deposed him from the ministry nine months afterwards. In 1865, however,
having still continued in his calling in the meantime, he and his followers
amalgamated with the other body in the general union, and fraternised with
their separated brethren. His action in respect of the emancipists is, perhaps, the chief
charge against him as a public man. He consistently opposed himself to all efforts for
their endowment with civil and political privileges, and the humane policy of Sir
Richard Bourke and the agitation of Mr. Wentworth and his compatriots for the
effacing of the lines that separated the emancipist from the free colonist, met in om
subject an uncompromising opponent. Dr. Lang last appeared in public on the
hustings in support of the candidature of a member of the Robertson Ministry,
in 1877. He died in Sydney, at his residence adjoining the Scots’ Church
where he officiated throughout his colonial career, on August 8, 1878. The public
funeral which was accorded his remains was largely attended by most of the public
men of the colony, and a great concourse of people.
As a writer, Dr. Lang displayed an unceasing activity. His “ History of
New South Wales ” —which is, however, rather a biography than a history—is marked
by outspoken opinions on persons and events of the day, and is full of keen and critical
observations on his contemporaries. It is, withal, ludicrously virulent at the expense
of his opponents, and he never fails to visit with his sarcasm those who incurred his
ire. Besides the Colonist newspaper, started by him in 1835, he initiated the Colonial
Observer in 1851 and the Press in 1851, Among his other publications are the
following: —“Aurora Australis,” a collection of sacred verse; “Emigration;”
“Origin and Migrations of the Polynesian Nations;” “Transportation and
Colonisation;” “New Zealand;” “Religion and Education in America;”
“ Phillipsland ; ” “ Cooksland ; ” “ Eine Deutsche Colonie in Stillen Ocean;”
“Freedom and Independence for Australia ;” and “Queensland.”




W. Macleod,Del . From Photo by F/ewmar.
*r y


THE HON. SIR EDWARD DEAS-THOMSON
C.8., K.C.M.G.
IvUM the day that the first indication that such a thing as public opinion had
begun to shape itself in Australia, till it at length produced its natural
result in the recognition of the political rights of the people, our history is
w one record of antagonism between the early colonists and the representatives
y of Imperial authority. The first officials were not in harmony with the
people whose domestic affairs they irresponsibly controlled. From the
Governors downwards —with some bright exceptions —the official element was not only
foreign, but antagonistic in sympathy and ambition. The Secretaries ol State for the
Colonies —noticeably Earl Grey, who held that position at the most critical period of
our history —were entirely opposed to those laudable aspirations towards popular
privileges and local self-government that asserted themselves from time to time in public
meetings and petitions to the Home authorities. Every step towards colonial enfranchise-
ment was retarded as long as possible, and every attempt on the part ot growing
Australia to help itself and to further its own legitimate interest was checked as soon as
it made itself apparent. We have seen in these memoirs how the right of trial by jury
was persistently opposed, and the degrading custom of convict transportation insisted
upon in the face of the clearly-expressed desire of the majority —composed as it was of
the wealth and intelligence of the colony; and it was not until the dissatisfaction of the
Australian public with its nominee legislature had led to strained relations between the
colonies and the mother-country that the right of self-government by the people was at
length reluctantly and tardily accorded. In the minor affairs of the young common-
wealth the same state of things ruled in a more harassing and immediate degree. Very
few of the names of our early Governors are remembered with any trace of popular
regard. The names of their subordinate officers linger still more faintly among our
traditions. Such names as those of Bourke and Macquarie will represent the former.
And no better exemplar of the brilliant exceptions to the general type of the old Imperial
official can be desired than the gentleman with whose career we now deal. Sir Edward
Deas-Thomson was a courtly type of the old school of colonial officers,Jmt his particular
claim to be mentioned in these pages consists in his marked and continuous fellow-
feeling with the people of this colony. He was one of the founders of the Constitution
that swept away the system to which he belonged, and that fact is sufficient ot itselt,
had he no other claim to colonial recognition, to give him a place in our records. But
Sir Edward so far sank his original character, and so completely cast in his lot with the
colony where so many of his class were strangers, as to command for himself a represen-
tative place in colonial history.


I lie life ot Edward Deas-Thomson is that of an official under the Imperial regime »
until the passing of the Constitution Act, in which he took a prominent part. He was
born in Edinburgh, June 1, 1800, and received his education at the ancient High
School of that city, at Harrow, and finally at Caen, in Normandy. His early years
were spent in a mercantile counting-house, and, later on he assisted his father, who held
the position ot Accountant-General of the Navy, in introducing the system of double
entry into the accounts of that branch of the service. At the age of twenty-six he
visited America, returning in 1827. He was appointed by Mr. Huskisson Registrar
of the Orphan Chambers at Demarara, but almost immediately after he exchanged into
the position of Clerk of the Council in New South Wales, arriving in Sydney,
December 24, 1828. live years later lie married the second daughter of Governor Sir
Richard Bourke, and in 1837 he was advanced to the responsible post of Colonial
Secretary and Registrar ol Records, being also appointed a Member of the Legislative
and Executive Councils. In the first of these offices he succeeded Mr. Alexander
Macleay, who was preceded by Mr. Frederick Goulburn. The first Council under
the old Constitution Act of 1842-3 was inaugurated by Mr. Deas-Thomson, as
Colonial Secretary, his place in the Council being an accessory of his office. During
the whole ol the term, extending from the date of his appointment to that office, up to
the establishment of the present Constitution and Responsible Government, he con-
ducted the routine official duties of his post with uniform discretion and ability.
As a representative of the Imperial Government in the early days of New South
Wales, Sir Edward Deas- Thomson held great power in his hands. The careers of some
ot our colonial Governors, as was said, show clearly enough how the personal disposi-
tion and temper ot the official rulers of the colony advanced or retarded the country’s
prospects, and affected the colonists generally. In those days of irresponsible govern-
ment the executive power lay entirely in the hands of nominee Imperial officers ; and
for many years ot his career Sir Edward, as Colonial Secretary, held the most powerful
position next to that of the Governor. In this responsible post he stood between the
people and rulers who had little or no sympathy with the popular sentiment and
aspiration. His courtesy and suavity tended to soften and temper the officialdom of
the period, and the strongest evidence we could have of his liberal principles—so rare
in an Imperial officer of his time—is to be found in the part he took in the framing of
the Constitution. His name has already been chronicled in these pages as one of the
committee who drew up the first draft of the present Constitution of the colony. By
the first Constitution Act of 1842-3 he was appointed a permanent member of the old
Legislative Council in virtue of his office as Colonial Secretary. In that capacity he
was, as it were, Premier of the nominee Ministry which conducted the business of the
country. But when later on, in pursuance of Mr. Wentworth’s famous motion, a select
committee of the Council was obtained to prepare a new Constitution, which should
remove that nominee Ministry from office, and vest the Executive functions in respon-
sible Ministers forming a Cabinet amenable to the votes of the majority of a purely
Elective Chamber, this old Imperial officer was one of the foremost upholders of the
popular claims. He worked side by side with Mr. Wentworth throughout this contest,
and on the final passing of the Constitution Act of 1853 through the Legislative


Council he was deputed, together with Mr. Wentworth, to accompany the measure to
England, and watch its progress through the British Parliament. Just about this time
he obtained leave of absence from his official duties in the colony for two years, on
account of ill-health, and was appointed one of the Commissioners for the colony at
the Paris Exhibition in 1855. At the same time that Mr. Wentworth received the
popular testimonial that marked his departure for England, a similar movement was
set on foot to do honour to Mr. Deas-Thomson. A sum of £2,250 was collected, of
which £I,OOO were applied for the purchase of a presentation service of plate, while
the remainder was devoted by the recipient to the founding of the Thomson Scholar-
ship in the University of Sydney, and to procure a portrait of the donor. During
the absence of Mr, Deas-Thomson from the colony Mr. Riddell held office as Colonial
Secretary in his stead. On his return in 1856, he retired from office after twenty-eight
years’ colonial service, on a retiring pension. When the iicavs of the passing of the
Constitution Act by the Home Legislature was brought back by the colony’s delegates,
preparations were at once made for the popular elections, and Mr. Deas-Thomson was
one of the first asked to come forward. His friends desired him to put himself in
nomination for a Sydney constituency, but this honour he was compelled to forego
on account of ill health. He was, however, appointed to the Upper House, where
he represented the Government of the Parker Ministry as President ol the Council.
Although the founding of the Sydney University was properly the work of Mr.
Wentworth, Mr. Deas-Thomson took a great interest in that great achievement. Mr.
Wentworth brought his first motion on the subject before the Council, —“ For
instituting a University in the colony for the promotion of literature and science, to be
endowed at the public expense ” —on September 5, 1849. An Act to incorporate the
University was passed soon afterwards, Mr. Deas-Thomson lending willing aid on
both occasions. As a result of this action, the Sydney University was duly inaugurated
three years afterwards, October 11, 1852, Mr. (afterwards Sir Charles) Nicholson and
Dr. Woolley delivering the addresses. Mr. Deas-Thomson was one of the first
members of the Senate. This first Senate consisted of Messrs. A. J. Hamilton, E.
Broadhurst, J. B. Darvall, Stuart A. Donaldson, A. Denison, J. Macarthur, F. L. S.
Merewether, B. O’Brien, J. H. Plunkett, W. C. Wentworth, E. Deas-Thomson, Justice
Therry, Rev. W. B. Boyce, Right Rev. C. H. Davis, and Sir Charles Nicholson, The
last-named gentleman was elected first Chancellor of the University in 1854. In 1857
the first degrees were conferred, Messrs. A. Renwick, C. Sutling, and W. Sutling
being admitted as Bachelors of Arts. The M. A. Degree folio Aved in 1859, Messrs. M.
Burdekin, W. C. Curtis, R. M, Fitzgerald, E. Lee, D. S. Mitchell, W. C. Windeyer,
T. W. Johnson, and T. Kinloch receiving that honour. The LL.D. degree^was first
conferred in 1860 on Messrs. J. S. Patterson and G. H. Stanley ; the LL.B. degree in
1867, on Mr, F. E. Rodgers ; that of M.B. in 1867, on Mr. P. Smith ; and that of
M.D. in 1868, on Mr. C. F, Goldsbrongh. A committee of gentlemen in England
Avas appointed to select the professors, who arrived in 1852, By Royal
Charter, February 7, 1858, graduates of the Sydney University were admitted to the
same degrees and precedence as those of the British Universities. In 1865 Sir Edward
Deas-Thomson Avas elected Chancellor of the University, which position he retained


until April, 1878, when he retired through ill-health. He was knighted as a
Commander of the order of S.S. Michael and George in 1874, and received the
distinction of Commander of the Bath in 1856. After his final retirement into private
life he lived quietly in Sydney until his death, 16th July, 1879.
The record of Sir Edward Deas-Thomson’s career is that of one of
those life-stories that built themselves up side by side with our history
as a whole, from its earliest beginnings to its fullest development. As
a young man he saw the first efforts at an existence which he lived to
see strengthened with all the elements of a vigorous national life. It does not
often fall to the lot of one man to cover so many phases in a country’s history, and to
follow the working out of an experiment which has only been paralleled in a few
isolated instances throughout the whole range of human record. The colony that
commenced with the few scores of persons who accompanied the “ First Meet ” was
yet in its infancy when he landed in S} dney as a young man in 1828. At that time
none of the names that now are most familiar in our annals were known to fame. Mr.
Wentworth was just beginning that honourable career of distinguished and lasting
services which lifted New South Wales from the condition of an obscure and struggling
oO c! 5
penal settlement to the position of a free State with every indication of a brilliant
future. The wildest dreams of the enthusiast could scarcely foresee at that compara-
tively recent date the magical development of which the young Imperial official was to
be an interested and not inactive observer. Unlike the bulk of his class, he looked
upon the colony as his home, and formed his domestic circle with a view to permanent
settlement. He became a colonist in the strictest sense of the word, and identified
himself with the rest of the community to the extent of making their interests his own.
It would be hard to sum up the actual influence of his personal and official character
on the young colony, which a few years later on was placed so completely in his hands
as Colonial Secretary. Circumscribed as his action necessarily was by his position, he
was prevented from taking a prominent public part in the early struggles for popular
privileges. His influence was rather a tacit than an active one. But in the state of
things that obtained at that time, his quiet and unobtrusive efforts for the public
interest must have lent that influence an effect beyond any power of assessment now.
His almost unlimited official power was never abused, and never turned aside to minister
to his own aggrandisement, or to make use of the many opportunities for private profit
which would have suggested themselves to a less public-spirited and conscientious
person in his position. And when the time came for the open assertion of his popular
sympathies he evinced them, as we have seen, in no unmistakeable way-
in the framing and passing of the Electoral Bill of JB5l, Sir Edward Deas-
Ihomson took a prominent, if not the leading, part. Though its provisions were
supported by Mr. Wentworth and Mr. Donaldson, it was not acceptable to the electors
of the centres of population. These numbered three-eights of the whole voting-
population, and were allowed six members, while the other five-eights, distributed
through the colony, were accorded thirty representations. Dr. Lang in particular took
a strong part in opposition to this measure, which was, notwithstanding, as already
described, duly passed into law. At the election which followed some light was thrown


on the subject by Dr. Lang himself, who spoke of the electoral power in the hands of his
Scottish fellow-colonists in deciding popular issues. The Bill as passed was an
attempt at decentralisation, —nn effort to give each portion of the colony a proportionate
voice in public affairs. Whatever may have been the other and more immediate objects
of the framers of the measure, it had the effect of introducing to the Legislature the
O c!)
body of representatives who devised and passed the Constitution Act of a year or two
later. As Colonial Secretary at the time the measure of 1851 was passed, Sir Edward
Deas-Thomson was charged with the care of that Act in the old Council, and the
adverse feeling with which it was naturally enough regarded by the voters of the
electorates of Sydney, Sydney Hamlets, and the County of Cumberland reflected itself
in some measure on him. A great deal may be said both for and against this measure ;
but in examining its provisions it should be remembered that the circumstances of the
colony in 1851, the tone of public opinion, and the spirit of its rule, were widely
different from those of the present date, after nearly thirty years of Responsible
Government.
Sir Edward Deas-Thomson was originally a nominee executive officer of the
Imperial Government. In that capacity his official duties were largely those of every-
day routine, in the same way as are those of the Under-Secretaries of the various
departments under the present condition of things. Asa Civil Servant, however, Sir
Edward is the representative type of that numerous and important class in the
community, —a class so large and widespread as to form just now a noticeable power and
influence in the State. It was one of the dreams of the elder patriots who fought for
responsible government in the old days, that the new state of things would set aside
the various offices of the State as prizes to the intellect, ability", and energy of the
colony. The legislative independence they sought for was to throw open in the various
branches of the public service careers of distinction and usefulness for native talent,
instead of having those appointments filled by imported officials from the old country.
Writers on this subject thirty or forty years ago were fond of drawing airy pictures of
an independent State, governed by its own laws, fostering its own products of
nature and mind, and sending native representatives of its ability and culture to
represent its interests abroad. On the other hand, caustic critics of a certain class and
of a later date have not scrupled to point out how, in some measure, the actual Civil
Service system of the colony has fallen short of this high ideal after thirty years of
existence, in the hands of political leaders who have, perhaps, proved themselves too
amenable to the claims of relationship or political partizanship, or who have failed to
grasp any tangible conception of the ideal the founders of the system recommended to
themselves. This indictment seems to require no evidence other than that supplied by
the observation of every day to bear it out. It must be admitted that, considered as
an opening for native energy, and a nursery of native talent and ambition, the Civil
Service system of the colony is not a success. Very few indeed of its positions have
been awarded as prizes for culture and intellectual excellence —as refuges for the
literary leisure of those who worked at the foundations of an Australian literature, for
instance, or as the fostering agencies of talent as it has manifested itself in any one of
its forms in Australia. In the hands of political leaders of culture and sympathy, the


political institutions of a young colony like New South Wales should be directed
in such a way as to directly foster and encourage such abstract excellence. It is,
perhaps, one of the necessary results of the preponderance of the practical element
amongst our pioneer legislators that abstract ability should have been so completely
ignored. The vulgar prejudice of the self-made man against the artistic side of life,
with its accessories of literature and music and art, would seem to have communicated
itself to our colonial institutions. The most competent authorities on such subjects
lay it down as an incontrovertible principle that it is a first duty of the State to
encourage and foster, by every means, the development of those arts which soften life
and tend to solidify the State itself. The records of older States than ours show how
far that principle has been recognised. To such State interference and encouragement
in England is attributable some part of the glory of not a few of the most brilliant
intellectual periods in British history. It is the original literary and artistic genius of
a country that impresses the popular sense with those vigorous and well-defined
national characteristics which lie at the root of all national life and progress, as it is
the first factor in the formation of that distinctive national character which it should
be the highest duty of the State to form and conserve. To set apart some small part
of the offices in the gift of the State as preemia and rewards for literary and artistic
excellence and achievement is a duty which the State owes to native talent. The
history of literature in Australia is one drear story made up of sad personal episodes,
—lit up brilliantly enough from time to time by such electric flashes of native genius as
have but served to show unencouraged capacities and improved possibilities ; but
invariably merging into the same mournful refrain of misery and neglect at the close.
In this particular the design of the proposers of the first colonial Civil List does not
appear to have been borne out.




**
V ,
‘ T Xr* :< i .
v £ y ■<
4; ' ■ ■
# V* -I i.
- •_.- > *■ - .4#* ■:>:- -. ,
W, Macleod Del. From Photo ey Newma/v.


THE HON. SIR CHARLES OOWPER,
K.C.M.G.
which mellows down the firmer and harsher lines of the characters of our
J iJyi, public men, and blends the bright lights and strong shadows of the
individuality of each into the gracious and harmonious softness of the
0 complete whole, is a necessary factor in estimating the places of our
representative men in our history. Those strong features of character which
in their time repel as well as attract, are, after all, the features that compelled
contemporary attention and forced their possessor to the front in his day and generation.
It is not till each line falls into its own place in the due lapse of years that the just
proportions of the whole are manifest. Contemporary party feeling is too keen, and
the actions of party leaders are too vividly before the minds of their opponents to allow
an unbiassed opinion to form itself either in the minds of friend or foe. The more
active the life the more acute is contemporary sentiment, and consequently, the greater
is the difficulty in assessing the value of the services of a party leader at their true
value. Judging the late Sir Charles Cowper now, in the light of his complete record,
it must be conceded that he was a prominent and useful figure in Australian public
life. On the establishment of Responsible Government he took his place in the first
rank of those who took up the burden of constitutional responsibility, and proved that
the colonies had not been enfranchised before their time. He took the most active part
in the business of practical politics that immediately followed, evidencing from the first
the possession of those instincts and talents that distinguished the capable party leader.
Scarcely any of the great questions in our political history were decided without the
assistance of Sir Charles Cowper, and his name associates itself naturally with the first
steps in the responsible political life of the colony with which he was associated nearly
all his life. His connection with the anti-transportation agitation, which occupied a
larve portion of his public life before responsible government, did much to educate and
form public opinion at that early stage. The general pressure brought to bear by the
popular sentiment on this question did as much to hasten the new constitution as the
more direct efforts of those who made the attainment of that great object their particular
aim and ambition. Throughout the whole of his career Sir Charles Cowper worked
consistently on the popular side, and in the same ranks with the early patriots.
Charles Cowper was the son of the late Archdeacon Cowper, and was born at
Drypool, Yorkshire, April 26, 1807. At the age of two years his parents came out to
Australia, and the education of young Cowper was conducted at home and by private
tutors until he entered the Commissariat Department under Commissary-General
Wemyss. Soon afterwards, at the age of eighteen, he was appointed a clerk in that
department by the then Governor, Sir Thomas Brisbane. Governor Darling appointed


him next year to the Secretaryship of the Church and School Lands Corpo-
ration, in which position he continued until its dissolution in 1833. The property of
the Corporation reverting to the Crown in that year, in pursuance of a condition in the
original charter, Governor Sir Richard Bourke offered him another position on the
trust, which was declined, Mr. Cowper electing to embark in squatting pursuits. He
took up some sheep stations on the Murray and in the Argyle district, and for several
years continued to give his attention to sheep-farming and agriculture. He was
appointed a Justice of the Peace in 1839. The active business of politics, however,
appears to have distracted him from his rural pursuits after a few years, for we find
him in 1843 contesting the electorate of Camden for a seat in the Legislative Council
of the colony. At this time, as we have seen in a preceding memoir, the new Constitu-
tional Act had just come into force, establishing the elective principle for the first time
in Australia. He was opposed by Mr. Roger Therry, Attorney-General, who was
nominated by Mr. James Macarthur, a late nominee member, against Mr. Cowper, who
was not considered a Government candidate. Mr. Macarthur’s strong local influence
secured the victory for his candidate by ten votes. Before this Mr. Macarthur had
himself been requested to put himself in nomination for the Cumberland electorate,
where his election was considered certain. On the result of the Camden election
becoming known, however, Mr. Macarthur’s part therein was so strongly disapproved
of by a large party of the electors that they nominated Mr. Cowper against him for the
Cumberland electorate, and secured the election of that gentleman by a large majority.
From the beginning of his career as a public representative Mr. Cowper showed himself
fully abreast of the array of talent that shed such a lustre on our first Legislative
Council, and his zealous interest in public matters was apparent when any subject of
moment came up for discussion. As a public man he took a leading part in the
agitation of a proposal for the construction of railways in 1846, and assisted in the
formation of a Railway Company of which he was elected Chairman. This Company
handed its interest over to the Government some years afterwards. In the same
year he commenced his public connection with the agitation against the revival of
transportation, which continued for nineteen years afterwards until the cessation of
the practice throughout Australia was announced to take place in 1868. Through-
out the whole of these proceedings Mr. Cowper was prominently before the
public as an opponent of the revival of the degrading practice. From its first settle-
ment New South Wales had been a penal colony, and the first protest was that made
in public meeting by the citizens of Sydney in 1835. A political association was then
formed to overlook colonial affairs, and correspondence was opened up with Mr. Bulwer
of the British House of Commons, by the members. It was not till five years after-
wards that Governor Sir George Gipps announced to his Council that transportation
had ceased on August 1, 1840, not without a protest on the part of a public meeting of
persons interested in its continuance, in the preceding year. After the vice-regal
announcement another convict ship arrived in the port, November 18, 1840, and two
years afterwards another meeting of what was termed the “ banditti ” party was held
to advocate the revival of transportation. Their influence had so much weight
1 & ?
eventually, that when the whole question was brought before the Council in conse-


quence of a despatch from Mr. Gladstone, then Secretary of State, a committee which
was appointed on the motion of Mr. Wentworth to report thereupon spoke favourably
of the system and advocated its revival. The finding of the committee provoked a
strong feeling amongst the body of the public, to whom the practice of transportation
was distasteful, and several opposition meetings resulted. The first of these was held
in the old City Theatre, Sydney, in October, 1846. Mr. Cowper presided at this
public assemblage, and moved a resolution to the effect that, “ The meeting had heard
with the deepest feelings of alarm and regret that it was proposed to renew transpor-
tation to this colony,” and that they “could not conceive any circumstances under
which such a measure would be desirable or justifiable.” The Rev. John McEncroe?
whose name appears honourably in all these early struggles for the popular right,
seconded the motion in a speech which attracted considerable attention at the time, and
a petition was at once drawn up for presentation to the Council. Such was the fervour
of public opinion on the subject that in four days the names of two thousand persons
were appended. The petition was presented at the close of the session and on the last
day of the Council’s assembling before the prorogation. The same spirit that prompted
the finding of the select committee’s report, however, still ruled the action of the House
on this occasion, and the motion for the printing of the document was negatived.
Meanwhile the report referred to had been adopted and was about to be sent to England
as representing popular opinion in the colony, when another meeting of the anti-
transportation party was convened, and a memorial to the Governor adopted,
requesting his Excellency to transmit with that report an official copy of the petition
of the people, and to use his influence to prevent the colony from being again made a
penal settlement. Sir Charles Fitzroy replied favourably, but assured the deputation,
while promising to forward the petition, that he had no influence in the matter. In
November of the same year a general protest was made against the continuance of the
practice of assigning convict labour, which was the real reason for the advocacy of
transportation by a certain class. In February of the following year, 1849, we find
Mr. Cowper assisting at another monster meeting of the colonists in the \ ictoria
Theatre, to still further protest against the revival, and particularly against Mr.
Gladstone’s despatch. Mr. Robert Lowe and the Reverend Mr. McEncroe also
addressed the crowded meeting on this occasion, and a petition was adopted stating
that “ they felt bound, humbly but firmly, to represent to Her Majesty that it was
their duty and their determination, by every legal and constitutional means, to oppose
the revival of transportation in any shape.” The hands of the metropolitan meeting
was strengthened by similar proceedings throughout the colony, all bearing in the
same direction, and on the same day as the Sydney meeting, February 13, a similar
demonstration was held in Melbourne with the same object. A fact which lent some
weight to the agitation was the receipt of news about this time that a shipload of
convicts intended for Australia was detained in an English port owing to an outbreak
of epidemic disease on board. In the month following, March 9, with a view to follow
up the course thus effectively entered on, a further meeting was held with the same
general object in the Victoria Theatre, the Mayor presiding. At this meeting, as
before, Mr. Cowper, with Mr. Lowe and Dean McEncroe, was again the principal


speaker. His was a familiar figure at all the popular gatherings which excited the
colonial mind at that time, when a much more active and healthy public opinion
existed than marked a later period, even after Responsible Government had become an
accomplished fact. In June, 1849, a large meeting of four thousand persons was held
at the Circular Quay to protest against the misrepresentation of the Council on this
question. On June 8, in that year, another convict vessel, the Hashemy. the first in
ten years, arrived at Sydney with upwards of two hundred convicts. Three days
afterwards the demonstration referred to was convened, under the chairmanship of
Mr. Robert Campbell, who acted in the place of Mr. Robert Lowe. 4he
popular excitement was so intense and the commotion so great on this occasion,
that the guard at Government House was doubled and the guns of a ship of war in the
harbour were trained on the place of meeting. Mr. Lamb moved a resolution to the
effect that the people of the colony solemnly protested against the transportation of
British criminals on the ground that the will of the majority was against it ; that
numbers had emigrated on the assurance of the British Government that the custom
had ceased for ever ; that it was unjust to sacrifice the social and political interests of the
colony for the pecuniary profit of the few ; and that the revival of the practice would
tend to alienate the loyalty of the British subjects in Australia. Mr. Lowe seconded
the resolution, and Messrs. Henry Parkes, G. A. Lloyd, J. R. Wilshire, Grant, Peek,
Flood, and Dr. Fullerton also addressed the meeting. A deputation of six persons
presented the petition to the Governor for transmission to England, and requested that
the ship in port might be sent back. This was refused, and on June 18 a meeting was
held, at which a resolution was passed praying Her Majesty to remove Earl Grey from
her Counsels. Next day the convicts were landed, and despatched into the country,,
and it was promised that they would not be engaged in Sydney or in the county of
Cumberland. During the course of the same year, 1849, a despatch was received from
Home stating that transporation to New South Wales would be again adopted, but
that it was not intended to send any convicts but such as were considered deserving of
tickets-of-leave on their arrival. On September 16, 1850, another large meeting took
place in the old Barrack Square, Sydney, to enter yet another protest against the
continuance of transportation in any shape. Some six thousand persons were present,
and every section of the community was largely represented. The New South Wales
Anti-Transportation Association was formed on this occasion. January, in the
following year, saw the subject still warmly discussed and agitated, and a public
meeting held to form a great league to put a final stop to all transportation throughout
Australia. Delegates were appointed to travel the country for the purpose of keeping
alive the feeling throughout the colony. The Anti-Transportation Association merged
itself into the General League, and repeated meetings tended to elicit still stronger
expressions of public opinion on this all-important question. On July 29, 1851, we
again find Mr. Cowper presiding over a meeting of this Australian League, called
to consider Earl Grey’s conduct in continuing transportation to the colony. A petition
was adopted, stating that the “ petitioners felt compelled, humbly but firmly, to repre-
sent to Her Majesty in person that the subterfuges, evasions, equivocations, and
breaches of faith practised towards these colonies by Earl Grey had unhappily


destroyed all confidence in his Lordship’s adminstration of colonial affairs.” Messrs.
Cowper, Parkes, Kemp, Archdeacon McEncroe and others spoke on the occasion.
In the following year another anti-transportation movement was made in consequence
of Earl Grey’s determination to continue transportation to Tasmania. A conference
of delegates of the League was held in that colony, in which it was decided to petition
Her Majesty again in the matter. Transportation to Tasmania ceased next year,
February 10, 1853, and on January 26, 1865, amidst great popular rejoicing, it was
announced that in three years’ time transportation to Australia would cease altogether.
The last convict ship arrived in Western Australia January 10, 1868.
From this account of the proceedings in connection with the transportation question
it will be seen that the career of Mr. Cowper had not been an inactive or useless one.
At the same time he had been taking his part in the legislative proceedings of the colony,
and we find him in 1851 defeated at the Sydney election, Dr. Lang, Mr, Lamb, and
Mr. Wentworth being the successful candidates. Mr. Cowper was at once nominated
for Durham and for Cumberland, being elected for the former constituency. From that
time to the passing of the Constitution Act of 1856 his active career as a representative
continued, except during a brief interval when he left the Council to attend to his duties as
Chairman of the Railway Company. Before this he assisted in the formation of the Naval
Brigade and Volunteer Force, and introduced his Acts establishing the Affiliated Colleges
within the University of Sydney, and incorporating the Sydney Grammar School. When
the Railway Company handed over its trust to the Government, Sir Charles Fitzroy offered
Mr. Cowper the Commissionership of the City of Sydney, at a salary of £IOOO per
annum ; this, however, was refused. As we have seen, his name appears in the Select
Committee List of those appointed in 1852 and 1853 to prepare the new Constitution,
which was adopted, however, during Mr. Cowper’s temporary absence from the Legis-
lature. On the promulgation of the new Constitution in 1856 it was not forgotten that
Mr, Cowper had been one of those to whose special efforts the recognition of the popular
privileges was owing, so that it is no matter for surprise to find him elected at the head
of the poll for the metropolitan constituency at the first election under the new order of
things. It was generally expected when the old nominee executive of Mr. Deas-Thomson
left office to make way for the representatives of more popular institutions, that Mr.
Cowper would be first called upon to form the new Ministry. The Governor, however,
sent for Mr. Stuart Donaldson, whose Cabinet lasted from June 6 to August 25, 1856.
Mr. Cowper was offered the Colonial Secretaryship in the Ministry, but this office he
declined, and at once proceeded to move a vote of want of confidence, which was promptly
carried. On the resignation of Mr. Donaldson, Mr. Cowper was at once sent for. He
took office as Premier and Colonial Secretary; with Mr. Robert Campbell as Treasurer;
Terence Aubrey Murray, Minister for Lands and Works ; Mr. Martin, Attorney-
General ; and Mr. Lutwyche, Solicitor-General. Immediately on the assumption of office
by the new Ministry they were met by a motion of want of confidence, moved by Mr. John
I lay, who of late years has on more than one occasion made very flattering reference to Mr.
Cowper’s political services. This motion was levelled against the Attorney-General, Mr.
Martin, who had only just been called to the bar. The attack was successful, and the Cowper
Ministry resigned October 2, 1856. Mr. Watson Parker succeeded to the Premiership,


the mover of the motion of want of confidence taking the portfolio of Lands and Mr.
Donaldson that of the Treasury. In September, 1857, the Ministry was thrown out of
office, and Mr. Cowper again came into power, allying himself in his Cabinet with Mr.
R. Jones, Colonial Treasurer; Mr. Murray, Lands and Works ; Mr. Martin, Attorney-
General ; Mr. Lutwyche, Solicitor-General. Some changes took place during the term
of office of this Ministry : Mr. Jones was succeeded as a Treasurer by Mr. Robert
Campbell, who died during his tenure of office, and was followed by Mr. Weekes ; Mr.
Murray resigned, and Mr. Robertson took the Lands, while Mr. Flood assumed charge
of the Works Department ; Mr. Martin’s resignation was followed by the appointment
successively of Mr. Lutwyche and Mr, Bayley ; Mr. W, B. Dailey and Mr. Hargrave
successively occupied the office of Solicitor-General. In 1858 the Electoral Act of this
Ministry was passed, according manhood suffrage, and introducing the ballot box and
the division of the colony into electorates on a population basis. The career of this
Ministry presents one continuous record of sterling legislative work, and is marked by
some of the most important measures in our political history. Besides the Electoral Act
just glanced at, with its broad measure of reform, the Municipalities’ Act was framed and
carried by Mr. Cowper, thus paving the way for the establishment of some forty inland
municipalities. In October, 1859, the Ministry was defeated on a motion of censure
moved by Mr. William Forster on the Education Bill of the Cowper Cabinet. The
measure as submitted contained proposals of a denominational tendency to which Mr.
Forster objected. That gentleman formed a Ministry, which was defeated on the Upper
blouse Electoral Bill, and resigned in March following. Mr. Robertson succeeded,
forming a Cabinet with Mr. Cowper as Colonial Secretary. The former soon afterwards
retired from the Premiership in favour of his late chief, who continued in that office for
over three years, from April 2, 1860, to October 2, 1863. This Ministry consisted of
Messrs. Elias Carpenter Weekes, succeeded by Thomas Ware Smart, Colonial Treasurer;
John Robertson, Secretary for Lands ; William M. Arnold, Secretary for Public
Works; John F. Hargrave, succeeded by J. B. Darvall, Attorney-General ; John F.
Hargrave, Solicitor-General ; and Charles Cowper, junior, Clerk of the Executive
Council.
On more than one occasion Land Bills were introduced by the Cowper
Government, but they were too moderate to meet with the necessary support. He
then took into his Cabinet Mr. John Robertson, the leader of the Free Selection
Party, when the Land Bill which has regulated that great colonial interest for
over twenty years was passed, as already chronicled in a previous memoir. In
1857 a Land Bill had been introduced by the previous Cowper Government, but with-
drawn. The abolition of State Aid to Religion was effected by the Cowper Ministry in
1862. The Ministry was defeated in October, 1863, and succeeded by the Cabinet of
Mr, Martin, which was defeated in 1865 on its Protectionist proposals. Mr. Cowper
amain succeeded to office, and, with a view to stem the financial distress which
threatened the public treasury, introduced his famous ad valorem duties. This
Ministry consisted of Messrs. Smart, Samuel, and Burdekin, successively Treasurers ;
Darvall and Plunkett, successively Attorneys-General ; Robertson and Arnold, succes-
sively Ministers for Lands ; Arnold and Smart, successively Secretaries for Public


Works ; and James A. Cunneen, Postmaster-General. The Ministry lasted till January,
186(1, when it was defeated on the motion of Mr. Parkes, condemnatory of the new
duties which had passed into law. After this date Mr. Cowper retired from public life
for about four years, until invited by Mr. Robertson to assume the Premiership
of the party in office since 1869. Mr. Cowper was Premier from January 13, to
December 10, 1870, his colleagues being Messrs. Samuel, Forster (succeeded by Mr.
Robertson), Sutherland, Manning, Salomons, Egan, and Robert Owen. On December
6, 1870, Mr. Cowper took the position of Agent-General for the Colony, and on the
defeat of the Government, a few days later, he went to England to enter on the duties
of that responsible office. He held that post until 1875, when his infirmities began
to make themselves more keenly felt. His constitution rapidly broke up, and he died
in England October 20, 1875.
Sir Charles Cowper was Premier of five Ministries, and Colonial Secretary in
another. As a Minister of the Crown in the colony his name is connected, as we have
seen with some of the most important measures }'et passed into law amongst us. He
married in 1801, Eliza, second daughter of Daniel Sutton, Esq., of Wivenhoe, near
Colchester, in England. Sir Charles Cowper had given the name of Wivenhoe to his
home in the county of Camden, which was afterwards settled on Lady Cowper by a
subscription of the people of New South Wales, as a mark of their appreciation of Sir
Charles’ political services. He had six children, the eldest son being the present Sheriff
of the colony and his brother the Dean of Sydney. Sir Charles Cowper received the
honour of knighthood in 1872. During his tenure of office in 1858, Mr. Cowper came
into collision with Mr. Plunkett in his capacity as chairman of the Board of National
Education in an affair which attracted some attention at the time. The matter was,
however, at length amicably settled. Mr. Plunkett afterwards joined him as his
Attorney-General.
No one who reads the history of our first attempts at experimental self-govern-
ment can fail to be struck with the large part filled by Sir Charles Cowper in the early
work of legislation. He was peculiarly fitted by temperament and taste for the’part
of a political leader, and his work in that capacity will compare very strikingly
indeed with that of any of his contemporaries or of those who came after. It
was his good fortune to be associated in the work of governing the colony with
some of the best names in our legislative records, and he connected his name
with most of the chief articles of our present political creed. One at least of
these early colonial legislators, whose name has often appeared in this memoir side
by side with that of Sir Charles Cowper as that of an effective advocate of popular
claims, —Mr. Robert Lowe, has since distinguished himself in the wider arena of
British politics, and his elevation to the Peerage as Lord Sherbrook is the reward of
his labours in the Home Legislature. That a colonial politician, trained amongt our-
selves, should have thus succeeded in the keenest competition with the leaders of
English thought is an evidence as to the type of men who laid the foundation of our
own legislative independence. Among these Sir Charles Cowper has uniformly held a
prominent place. As a political leader he always commanded a following in the
Assembly, and his record of good practical legislation, embracing as it does almost


everything that is essential in our present code, remains to testify that his successive
terms of°office were not the result of political scheming and lust of power and
its emoluments, but of the real instinct of the born politician. Such a long tenure of
office as Premier must, of course, have necessarily subjected him to considerable
criticism and much legitimate opposition. Like that of all practical politi-
cians, his career is not entirely faultless in the eye of the austere and hyper-
critical critic ; but when all the circumstances of political life in the colonies are
duly estimated it will be conceded that such steps as his acceptance ot the Agent
Generalship in 1870, and his ad valorem duties of 1865 are very small blots indeed on
his political record. Sir Charles Cowper had the faculty of making and preserving the
staunchest political friendships. Judged by his practical work and his long term of
office, as well as the undoubted ascendency he always possessed and exercised over his
contemporaries, he will be looked upon as one of the most effective political leaders
in our history. His character and disposition won to him many private as well as
public friends, while within his own domestic circle these more personal traits were
manifested in his writing every day to Lady Cowper, and seldom missing a mail when
any of his children were from home. W hen Chairman of the Railway Loaid he vas
in the habit of leaving Sydney in all weathers to spend the Sunday at his country
seat, Wivenhoe, with his family. The difficulties of this journey, which in unfavour-
able weather would necessitate his driving axle-deep through bad roads, and leaving
Wivenhoe considerably before daylight on Monday to arrive in town in time for his
Board Meeting, contrast strongly with the railway facilities we now enjoy, and which
Sir Charles was prominent in securing. This is not the least of the services rendered
by him to the country whose interests he served so long.




iV’- ■’',” ~. •! • ■-; > ?, : i'.-
r-'f-im / ■'-%/ //•■ ■■
s ■• # '
W. MACLEOD DEL,


THE MOST REV. JOHN BEDE FOLDING
D.D., 0.5.8., ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
m 0 sociological thinker, and no observer of the conditions which surround
v|J|p| the first impulses of a young state towards national life, can afford to ignore
that broad element of higher culture introduced into the colony of New
j'C South AVales by the various ecclesiastical establishments which have been
( 5 founded in Australia. The leaders of these organisations, at least, have
been uniformly men of light and leading, polished by scholarship and trained to
thought, and representing quite another element in life than either that of politics or
commerce. Purely abstract in their influence and its tendency, they have supplied a
factor of a peculiarly abstract character, which, acting in harmony and at the same
time with the many other influences which energised together amidst the first crudity
of colonial society, has resulted with these in producing the national life of to-day in
the stage at which we now find it. In their hands, to a great extent, was placed the
domestic peace of the colony. Coming from older lands where sectarian prejudice and
ill-feeling —the growth of ages —unfortunately abounded, and meeting on a common
footing on a common soil, there was no reason why these differences should not remain
at home with the poverty and misery which so many emigrants from the over-crowded
labour-fields and cities of the old world happily left behind. It is, however,
in some measure true that such has not been the case. Circumstances have arisen from
time to time to show that this curse of older countries has been to some extent
inherited by ourselves. Every true well-wisher of Australia and all who desire to see
every obstacle to national progress removed must rejoice to think that this unwhole-
some feature is rapidly effacing itself from the minds of the people as it has long
since disappeared from their public institutions. This happy departure is in no small
degree owing to those who presided over the various sections of religious belief in the
past. Their personal characters have been all-powerful for good and evil in this
particular. Among the names most entitled to the praise of this good work is that of
the venerable gentleman who presided so long and so worthily over the Catholic
Church in Australia. During forty years John Bede Folding, the first Archbishop of
Sydney, dwelt and laboured amongst his Australian people in peace and goodwill
with all sections and classes of the coramunitv.
f
John Bede Folding was born at Liverpool, England, November 18, 1794, of
English and German parentage. His education commenced at home, and was
continued from the age of eleven years, at St. Gregory’s College, Downside, near Bath.
In his sixteenth year he entered the Monastic Order of the Benedictines, and was in-
vested with the habit of his community on July 16, 1810. One year later he made
his religious profession, and bound himself finally to the monastic life. In after years


he was advanced to the responsible charge of the Noviciate, and invested with the care
of preparing young aspirants for the Church and the historic order to which he
belonged. About three years before his death, lie received a touching reminder of
these early days in a jubilee greeting from four of his old novices, all of them occu-
pying dignified positions, and one of them—Dr. Ullathorne, Bishop of Birmingham—
having been at one time an active and zealous missioner himself. During this period
the young ecclesiastic was also engaged in annotating Husenbeth s edition of the
Bible. For eight years after his religious profession he occupied himself in undergoing
a thorough and special course of training for the priesthood, availing himself mean-
while to the fullest extent of those treasures of erudition which the most learned body
of men in the Catholic system—the Benedictines—had at their command. On March
4, 1819, he was ordained a priest, and he celebrated the first duty of his clerical office
on the festival of the founder of his order, March 21 following. He still continued
his labours in the retirement of the cloister, training his novices and preparing other
young students for the service of his Church, until he was nominated by I ope
Gregory XVI. to the charge of a branch of the Indian mission at Madras. This
pastoral charge, however, Dr. Folding declined, and he was allowed to again turn to
his retirement. Up to this time the Catholic Church in Australia had been under the
episcopal charge of the Bishop of Mauritius, and it was not till 1831 that the project
was entertained of erecting it into an independent pastoral mission. In the year
named, however, Pope Gregory XYI. again called on Dr. Folding to assume the active
functions of his calling, and placed him at the head of his Church in Australia, with
the title of Bishop of Hiero-Cmsarea, and Yicar Apostolic of New Holland and Yan
Diemen’s Land. The Papal Bull making his appointment was dated May 2, he was
consecrated Bishop on the festival of S.S. Peter and Paul, June 29, and he arrived in
Sydney on September 13, and was inaugurated September 20, 1835.
The first incident in the history of Catholicism in Australia of which we have any
record is the celebration of the first religious offices in a house in Harrington Street,
Sydney, by the chaplain of a French surveying expedition which touched at Sydney in
I 802. Three years before that the Rev. W. Harold, formerly parish priest of Reculla,
near Dublin, Ireland, was transported to the colony lor having taken part in the Irish
rebellion of 1798. The Rev. F. O’Neil was also sent out on the same charge in 1800,
but was pardoned shortly afterwards, and left the colony in 1802. Ihe Rev. James
Dixon, who arrived at the same time and under the same circumstances, was accorded
permission by Governor King in 1803 to exercise his ecclesiastical functions, he having
been emancipated in the meantime. At the same time an order w ? as issued calling on
all professing Catholicism throughout New South Wales to attend at Government
House, Parramatta, April 20, 1803, and a notice appeared in the Sydney Gazette
conveying the regulations for the services allowed. The first public service under this
permit was held at Parramatta by the Rev. J. Dixon on May 24, 1803. In 1808 that
gentleman left the colony. The first clergyman authorised by his Church to discharge
the duties of his office in Australia was the Yen. Archpriest O’Flynn, who arrived
August 3, 1817 ; but on his arrival he was at once met with an order to depart, as he
failed to produce any formal permission from the Imperial authorities for the exercise


of his functions. He left in November following, and the matter having been brought
before the House of Commons, the step was condemned, and, on the motion of Earl
Bathurst, two Catholic chaplains, duly accredited and appointed by the Government at
definite salaries, were forthwith sent out to the colony. The action of the Home
Government in this matter was indirectly the result of the exertions of the Venerable
Archpriest 1 berry, who had met the returned missioner and was by him placed in posses-
sion of the circumstances, and other information relative to the colony. That gentleman
at once determined to devote his life to the work of his Church in Australia ; and he,
with the Rev. Phillip Conolly, arrived in Sydney in April, 1820, as duly appointed
chaplains. One of the first undertakings upon which these earnest men entered was
the erection of a suitable place of worship, and a meeting was called in July following
at the Sydney Court House, under the presidency of the Rev. P. Conolly, to devise
measures for the erection of a church. At this movement every class in the population
liberally assisted, and Governor Macquarie promised to set aside a sum from the public
funds equal to the amount subscribed. At this meeting St. Mary’s Cathedral originated,
July 1, 1820, the foundation stone being laid by the Governor on October 20 in the
following } T ear. The first Catholic school was established in 1822, and other missioners
arrived soon after. The Rev. W. Ullathorne, D.D., afterwards Vicar-General, now
Bishop of Birmingham, and J. McEncroe, afterwards Archdeacon, arrived in 1832.
The Catholic chaplains, however, were not accorded in the fullest measure the right to
minister to the Catholic body without limitation. Archpriest Therry, indeed, protested
so vehemently against an order from the Governor relative to his interference with
Catholic children in the orphanages, who were to be brought up in the Protestant
religion, that a rupture ensued, and for twelve years, from 1825 to 1835, the free
exercise of his ministry was denied him. Later on, however, he was publicly thanked
by two Governors for his services to the colony, and rewarded with grants of land.
Such was the course of events in connection with Catholicism in the colony, up to
the date of Dr. Polding’s arrival. He entered at once with fervour and energy on his
difficult missionary labours. Sending to various parts of the colony the five or six
priests who had accompanied him, he reserved to himself Sydney and the surrounding
country. During the first years of his government he lived as an humble, hard-
working missionary, spending himself in unceasing labours amongst that portion of
the population that owned him for their spiritual guide and leader. He was in the
vigour of health and strength ; and, animated with that serviceable zeal that animates
to good work in trying contingencies, he was ever ready to sacrifice both health and
strength for his people. An idea of his position and task at the time may be gleaned
from his own words : —“ Little could be done except to keep from entire decay so
much of the form and spirit of religion as had been preserved by our zealous prede-
cessors,” With this end in view he would ride at the call of clerical duty from Sydney
to Albury, and even to the remotest parts of the present colony of Victoria. Speaking
the panegyric delivered after his death in Sydney, in 1877, his eulogist thus alluded
to these early labours : —•“ When gold was first discovered, and when so many
thousands of men flocked to the goldfields, and when lawlessness and violence
threatened, he was there as the messenger of peace, led not by an unholy thirst for


gold, which he despised, hut in the discharge of the duties of his sacred calling. On
June 29, 1836, Dr. Folding consecrated St. Mary’s Cathedral, live years afterwards
he returned to England and proceeded thence to Rome, where he was appointed Arch-
bishop of the newly erected See of Sydney, and Metropolitan ot Australia, July 20,
1842. On the same occasion he was created a Count of the Holy Roman Empiie by
the reigning Pontiff, and appointed a Bishop Assistant to the Papal Phrone. Ihe
news of this step excited considerable interest in the colony, which was increased when
the Archbishop returned to Sydney to take possession of his See, March 9, 184.j. Ihe
Right Rev. Dr. Broughton, then Bishop of the Church of England in the colony,
publicly protested on behalf of himself and his successors, Bishops of Australia, and of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, against the institution of the new archiepiscopal See
within the limits of the Diocese of Australia. His Lordship further protested against
and dissented from any and every act of episcopal authority by any person whatever,
by virtue of any right derived from an assumed authority ot the Bishop of Rome
enabling him to institute any episcopal See within the said Diocese. 1 his protest was
embodied in a notarial document, drawn up by His Lordship s Registrar, and issued on
March 25, 1843, “ being the festival of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
in the Church of St. James, the Apostle, Sydney,” with .the signatures of the assembled
clergy appended. This proceeding, however, did not produce any effect either then or
in the future. The new Archbishop devoted himself quietly and unobtrusively, and
in that conciliatory spirit which he always evinced when no principle was at stake,
to the duties that he was appointed to fulfil. The event had the one good effect of
making religious differences no longer public questions. In the succeeding year,
March 17, 1844, His Grace the Archbishop of Sydney dedicated the church of St.
Patrick, Sydney, and presided at the Synod of his Church held in Sydney the same
year ; four years later he again visited Rome. The Right Rev. Dr. Davis wais conse-
crated Coadjutor Bishop in 1848, and left England in time to administer the diocese in
Dr. Folding’s absence. On the Archbishop’s return he brought out with him a
number of priests and Sisters of Charity for the increasing church work of the colony.
In 1859 he presided at the Melbourne Synod. On two occasions after that, in 1865
and 1870, he again left Australia for Europe on the business of his archdiocese : but
on the second voyage, which he undertook at his then advanced age to attend the
(Ecumenical Council of the Vatican in that year, he was compelled to break his journey
at Aden, and return to Sydney. The tropical heat proved too much for a frame
exhausted by a long career of missionary labour in the Australian bush, and acting on
medical advice he renounced his intention of attending the A atican Council and
visiting Rome again on that occasion.
To give a detailed account of the work of Dr. Folding would be to transcribe the
progress of the Catholic system in Australia. His early career was one long record of
labour. In dwelling on this portion of his episcopate his panegyrist, before quoted, has
the following passage : — u He feared not to enter into the dense and trackless bush in
which so many have perished ; an invisible hand seemed ever to guide him. He
feared not to spur his horse into the rushing torrent, when a suffering or dying child
required his presence. What plain or mountain or valley is theie in the paits of


Australia then inhabited where the tones of his voice were not familiar to every ear, his
features to every eye ? What forest has he not travelled ? What stream lias he not
crossed ? How often was he not obliged to rest at night under the wide-spreading
branches of the eucalyptus, with the saddle for a pillow and the earth for a couch !
How often was he not forced to partake of the rude and homely fare of the lonely shep-
herd ! How often did he not suffer the pangs of hunger and thirst ! Whithersoever he
passed a blessing seemed to remain.” These words of one who was, by his profession and
belief, entirely in sympathy with the prelate whose virtues this deliverance was intended
to record, convey a picture of his missionary career with graphic but modest fidelity.
It is a remarkable fact that every family whose hospitality he shared during these
journeys has treasured, we are told, some good or kind word spoken by him. “He
loved to minister even to their temporal wants, and often dressed with his own hands
the wounds of those who suffered.” Hut while thus engaged in the ordinary duties of
his profession, he did not neglect the interests committed to his charge. One by one,
under his fostering care, new churches were built and new dioceses formed, schools
erected, and the numerous institutions that the Catholic system associates with church
work grew up around him. The diocese of Melbourne was formed in 1848, Dr. Goold
being consecrated Bishop on August 6of that year, at Sydney, His Grace Arch-
bishop Folding, assisted by the Bishop of Adelaide. In 1876 Melbourne was constituted
an archdiocese. Dr. Murphy had been consecrated Bishop of Adelaide at Sydney by
Archbishop Folding four years earlier, September 8, 1844, being the first Bishop so
consecrated in Australia. The Sees of Hobart Town and Ferth were established in
1842 and 1845, Port Victoria in 1849, Dunedin 1869, Brisbane 1859, Bathurst and
Maitland 1865, Goulburn 1867, Armidale 1872, Auckland 1873, Ballarat 1874,
Sandhurst 1874, and Wellington 1848.
For some years before his death the distinguished and venerable prelate had retired
from the more active duties of the episcopacy. He had been assisted by his Vicar-
General, the Very Reverend Archpriest Sheehy, in the discharge of the executive
functions of his office, until it was deemed advisable to provide for the archiepiscopal
succession by the appointment of a Coadjutor Archbishop. On December 16, 1873,
Roger Bede Vaughan—who had commenced his ecclesiastical training in 1853, in the
o o , o
same college of St. Gregory, at Downside, which his predecessor had entered just about
fifty years before —arrived in Sydney with that distinction. For three or four }mars
both prelates worked together side by side, the younger man strengthening the failing
hands of the elder, till his death. That event took place March 16, 1877, at the
Presbytery of the Church of the Sacred Heart, Darlinghurst. A public funeral was
accorded the remains of the departed prelate, after the usual lying-in-state. The
various services brought together in the temporary Catholic Cathedral most of the
representatives of clerical and lay Catholicity throughout the colonies. The funeral
procession was the largest ever witnessed in New Soutli Wales, upwards of twenty
thousand persons assisting. A chaste marble monument in the Catholic Cemetery,
Petersham, marks the place where the remains of this venerable prelate are laid.
The life of the late Most Reverend John Bede Folding was the type of that of a
successful and worthy missionary. His work remains to speak for him. However


opinion may differ on doctrinal or abstract questions amongst a progressive and liberal
population like our own, there is no room for difference as to the actual labour and its
results of this most devoted son of his Church. The influence of such a character as
his, ceaselessly striving after an abstract excellence and working in the light of the
consciousness of a high moral duty, could not fail to favourably impress the characters
of colonists engrossed as we are with considerations of the practical and concrete.
From whatever direction such an elevating influence comes, it is an acceptable one to
all who watch the formation of national character. Apart from his religious tenets
John Bede Folding had gained and retained the respect of every branch of the Austra-
lian community. His personal character, no less than his self-sacrificing earnestness,
invited confidence and esteem. This was always evinced by his own immediate
people whenever opportunity offered, but perhaps on no occasion was such
an unanimous and popular demonstration of general sympathy and respect shown to
this distinguished and venerable gentleman -as on that of the destruction of his
Cathedral church of St. Mary, June 29, 1865. Every class in the community hastened
to evince its feeling of personal regard for the representative sufferer from that
calamity. At the memorial service held in Sydney a few weeks after this
patriarchal prelate’s decease another demonstration of a similar nature occurred.
At that service all the bishops of the provinces he had founded, with repre-
sentatives of every rank and creed, gathered with the Catholic population
round his vacant chair to do honour to his stainless memory. Dr. Fold-
ing’s disposition was of a nature to make friends. To all he was gentle
and conciliating. His kindly and gracious air dispelled discord, and invited
charity and peace. But to his own people his presence breathed benedictions. All
parties partook sympathetically of his large-hearted liberality. His pastoral letters to
his archdiocese, while firm and scholarly in tone, and rigid enough in enforcing what
he held as principles, counselled peace and forbearance, and taught his hearers that,
“by a name swallowing all distinction of origin, they were Australians,” His vener-
able figure, with its attractive mildness, and its singular sweetness and kindliness, —
his silvery hair, and the reverend honours of his gray head —and those winning
personal characteristics once so familiar to all old Australian colonists, will linger long
in the recollection of those to whom his gentle memory is a tender thing. And in the
remembrance of many besides the people of his own faith the name of John Bede
Folding yet finds an honoured place.




I II
i * ' V-. ’
W MACLEOD DEL.
From PHOTO BY NEWMAN.


THE HON. SIR ALFRED STEPHEN,
C.8., G.C.M.G., LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR.
the Ca^n o s which have helped to form and shape the commonwealth
||S|| of New South Wales, perhaps none has been illustrated with such notable
P l 'wP names as the legal profession. No profession presents such an unfailing
record of good service, and in no branch of colonial life have the interests of
the colony been so faithfully or so signally served. Almost all of those who
have distinguished themselves in our political history, or who have been most before
the public in the struggle for popular privileges or in the effort to fulfil the country’s
destiny, have been connected with that profession, more or less. On the other hand,
the members of no other calling have had the concerns of the colony so far committed
to their care. The legal profession offered the best scope for colonial talent, just as it
provided appointments in the early days for men of culture and training from home.
These latter brought with them the liberal traditions of their class, and imported an
element of culture which, in the first days of the colony, might be looked for in vain
elsewhere. When representative government was conceded these gentlemen took the
foremost places in the young commonwealth as a matter of course ; and their training
and influence went far to mould the political as well as the social life of the young
colony. One of the first of this desirable class to come out to these colonies was Mr.
John Stephen, father of Sir Alfred Stephen, with whose career we now deal, and who
proceeded to Tasmania at the same time that his father took his first office in New
South Wales. From the date on which Sir Alfred landed in Tasmania up to the
present time, bis course has been identified with that of the progress of these colonies, in
which, from his first official act to his latest, he has evinced such an able and effective
interest. Sir Alfred Stephen has been a servant of the public both under the old
Imperial system and under Responsible Government, and his long career in the colonial
service has brought him into more or less intimate relationship with every step of our
social and political progress. Such men as he, by their official acts and personal
influence, have as much to do with the growth and actual development of the colony
as those who are most actively concerned in framing the acts and laws by which that
colony’s progress is guided, and its capabilities and capacities developed. They are
entitled to as much public credit and recognition for their more solid services, as are
their contemporaries who come before the public to merit their acclamations and receive
their meed of applause. The record of Sir Alfred Stephen in our history is one that
connects itself in a most intimate degree with the growth of the legal system of the
colony.
Alfred Stephen was born in the island of St. Christopher, one of the Leeward
Group, West Indies, on August 20, 1802. He was educated in England, first at the


Charterhouse School, London, under that Dr. Raine to whom Thackeray refers, and
afterwards at the Honiton Grammar School, in Devonshire. At the age of thirteen he
visited the Barbadoes with his father, Mr. John Stephen, who held the post of Solicitor-
General of the Leeward Islands. Young Stephen remained in St. Christopher for some
years, during which time he was second lieutenant in the militia corps ot the island,
but afterwards returned to England and entered himself as a student-at-law, reading
first with Sergeant and then with Sir James Stephen. He was called at Lincoln’s Inn
in November, 1823, and commenced practice as an equity draftsman, marrying in 1824
the daughter of Mr. Matthew Consett, a prosperous London merchant. In the same
year he left England for Tasmania with his father, who, August 1824, arrived in
Sydney as first Solicitor,-General to the colony and Commissioner of the Court of
Requests. That year his son was appointed Crown Solicitor of Tasmania, which
position he held until 1832, when he re-visited England with his family. When on
his way home he was gazetted Attorney-General of Yan Diemen’s Land, to the
duties of which office he returned in the following year. In 1838 he married his
second wife, daughter of the Rev. W. Bedford, D.D., senior chaplain of Tasmania, and
in April of the following year he was advanced to the second puisne judgeship in New
South Wales by Governor Gipps. He took his seat on the Bench on May 7, 1839.
From this time until his retirement from the Chief Justiceship of the Supreme Court in
1873 —a space of over thirty years —Sir Alfred Stephen has been honourably connected
with the administration of justice in New South Wales.
We have already glanced at the progress of the agitation begun in 1827 by Mr.
Wentworth and his friend Dr. Warded, and which culminated in 1833, by decision of
the Full Court, in the complete recognition in its fullest sense of the principle of trial
by jury. The colony had been in existence over fifty years before that point was
reached. The first court held in the colony was very crude in its constitution, and dealt
in an exceedingly simple and summary manner with the offences of the prisoners. During
the first six years of the colony’s existence no fewer than ninety-five persons perished by
process of law, sixteen only of whom were guilty of murder. The first victim to martial
law was a lad of seventeen years, executed for robbery two months after the colony was
founded. This state of things continued until 1800, when Judge-Advocate Richard At-
kins arrived to introduce something like method into this judicial madness. The second
Judge-Advocate of the colony was Elias Bent, who arrived with Governor Macquarie
in 1809. During his term of office a new Charter of Justice was published by which
three regular courts were established —the Governor’s Court, consisting of the Judge-
O 'CD O
Advocate and two magistrates, taking cognisance of “ pleas of land or subject matter
of action that did not exceed £50”; the Supreme Court, comprising a Judge appointed
by commission under the King’s Royal Manual, and two magistrates appointed by the
Governor ; and the Lieuteiiant-Governor’s Court, which sat in Tasmania. Judge
Barron Field arrived in Sydney in 1817, but prior to this date, in 1811, a civil
court was appointed to be held in the first month of each quarter, and facilities
specially provided for the recovery of small debts. The first action ever tried in the
colonies was brought against the captain of one of the prison transports who had been
entrusted with money for some of the convicts ; the plaintiffs were successful, 1790,


J he foundation stone of the present Supreme Court of New South Wales was laid on
une 4 ’ and in 1822 the first colonial attorney, Mr. George Allen, father of Sir
G. Wigram Allen, was admitted to practice. The first Chief Justice of New South
Wales, Mr. Francis Forbes, arrived March 5, 1825, and the first session of the
Supreme Court in its criminal jurisdiction was held three months later, under a new
Charter of Justice received in April preceding, Mr. Saxe-Bannister, first Attorney-
General, conveying it to Sydney. The first Sheriff, Mr. John Mackaness, with the first
Registrar of the Supreme Court, Mr. F. S. Mills, and the first Master in Chancery,
Mr. J. Carter, were also appointed in 1824, as well as the first Solicitor-General, Mr.
John Stephen. F rom this year also, which marks a new era in the administration of
justice, dates the first mention of the separation of the legal profession, as already
recorded. Mr. Judge-Advocate Wylde was also appointed temporary judge during
that year. As we have seen, the first jury was empanelled at the instance of Chief
Justice Forbes in October, 1824, and the first Quarter Sessions held in Sydney, The
first Supreme Court jury was sworn in the case of King v. Cooper, February 12, 1825,
and on that occasion the emancipists first appear as a distinct class claiming the right
to be em oiled on the jury lists. With a view to having this question settled an order
was served on the Sheriff requiring him to show cause why certain names submitted to
him should not be included in these lists. The Solicitor-General,—father of Sir Alfred
Stephen—appeared for the Sheriff, Mr. Wentworth and Dr. Wardell representing the
emancipists. The Chief Justice decided that the application on affidavit was irregular,
and that when a simple remedy—open in the present case—was available, “ the°high
prerogative writ of mandamus could not be applied for.” Mr. John Stephen was
appointed Assistant Judge of the Supreme Court in 1825, and the Supreme Court
building was formally opened by proclamation next year. In 1826, also, Judge
Stephen s appointment was confirmed under the King’s Commission, Mr. Holland suc-
ceeding him as Solicitor-General. Mr. Justice Dowling, Assistant Judge of the
Supreme Court, afterwards Chief Justice, and father of the present District Court
Judge Dowling, arrived in 1827, Mr. Baxter, Attorney-General, and Mr. Foster,
Solicitor-General, following in the same year. The latter was succeeded by Mr. Samp-
son in 1828, and, Sheriff Mackaness having been dismissed, Mr. McQuoid succeeded
him in that office, being himself followed by Mr. W. Carter next year. The Supreme
Court buildings in King Street were finally completed, August 28, 1828. The edifice
now entitled St. James’ Church was originally intended for use as a Court-house, but
the design was afterwards altered by the addition of a spire. In 1829 the division of
the profession was effected, Crown-Solicitor Moore and Registrar Manning’ of the
Supreme Court appointed, and the first Act of Council passed, October 11, establishing
trial byjury in civil cases. In 1831 Messrs. Edward McDowall and John Kinchela, LL. d",
were appointed Solicitor-General and Attorney-General respectively. In 1832 Judge
Burton, author of the New Insolvency Act, arrived from the Cape of Good Hope with
the appointment of Supreme Court Judge of New South Wales, and Mr. John Hubert
Plunkett from the old country with that of Solicitor-General. In 1835 Mr. Justice Burton
found it necessary to warn unqualified persons from acting as solicitors or conveyancers.
In 1836 Judge Dowling was appointed Acting Chief Justice in the absence of Judge


Forbes, who visited England on sick leave, and on his retirement next year Ju ge
Dowling’s appointment was confirmed. Mr. J. Walpole Willis, who was afterwards
removed (in 1842) from the Bench on the official report of the Superintendent at Port
Phillip that he did not possess the public confidence, arrived as second puisne judge in
1838, and on his appointment to Port Phillip the present Lieutenant-Governor of New
South Wales succeeded to his position. Five years after his arrival in this colony, on
the death of Sir James Dowling, he became Chief Justice, in 1844, and two years after-
wards (August, 1846) received the honour of knighthood for distinguished legal service
in Tasmania and New South Wales. The high judicial position thus attained he
continued to fill with zeal and efficiency till his retirement in 1873.
The early administration of the law in New South Wales was marked by consider-
able harshness and severity. In a penal colony, where a convict element formed a large
partion of the population, perhaps this was necessary. Certainly we have no record of
any error having been made on the side of undue mercy. The lash continually
resounded through the settlement, and men were hanged on what would now be looked
upon as trivial charges. How far this severity was accountable for the crime of these
early days is not a difficult calculation. Unhappy wretches were driven by cruelty
into the bush, and as one result of this state of things—its progress may be traced step
by step in the records —we find that at the Criminal Sessions in Octobei, 1822, thirty-
four persons were sentenced to death, principally for bushranging. Some of the better
authenticated stories of the period are indescribably horrible. As late as 1839 we have
mention of the execution of a man in Sydney for having stolen property in his possession,
and five years before six men were hanged together for being concerned, in their capacity
as assigned servants, in an uprising against the brutal illtreatment of their master, who
was struck off the Commission of the Peace for his atrocities. Desperate as things had
become, however, the administration of justice was so improved by the importation of
fresh judges and legal officers from time to time, that after the first half-centuiy things
assumed a fairer aspect. The advent of such men as Judges Forbes and Dowling to
the former of whom in particular the judicial system of the colony owes so much—
promised a period of better things By the time that Sir Alfred Stephen assumed the
Chief Justiceship some system had been introduced, and the subsequent record presents
a much brighter aspect than the period that witnessed the excesses just glanced at.
Sir Alfred° continued to apply himself to the duties of his office with unremitting
attention, and his name is connected with every subsequent step in the development of
court business. He found it part of his business on many occasions to make long and
troublesome journeys by coach on circuit duty in those days, but his capacity for hard
work always found him at his post, and enabled him to get through a large amount
of labour. AVhile so engaged, meanwhile, it is not to be supposed that Sir
Alfred confined himself so narrowly to his judicial functions as to overlook the
social progress of the colony, and hold himself aloof from its political interests.
He has at all times taken an active part whenever his position allowed him to
do so, and when prevented from actively participating in public business, Sir
Alfred has always been a keen critic and a close observer of its details. T his fact
was recognised in 1856, when Responsible Government began. He was then appointed


a member of the Legislative Council, and nominated president. As, however, an active
participation in politics was held to be unbecoming in a Supreme Court Judge charged
with administering the laws he might help to make or oppose in his character of
legislator, he resigned the Presidency of the Upper House in 1857, and his seat in that
Chamber next year. In 1862 he was created a Companion of the Order of the Bath, and
ten years later, during the period which elapsed between the departure of Earl Belmore
and the arrival of the succeeding Governor, Sir Hercules Robinson, he held the office
of Administrator of the Government. In the following year Sir Alfred resigned the
post of Chief Justice, being succeeded by Sir James Martin. In 1874 he was created
a Knight Commander of the Order of S.S. Michael and George,—an institution of
which the Statutes of 1868 and 1869 were specially repealed in May, 1877, and so
altered as to expressly provide titles of honour as rewards for important services to Her
Majesty, “within or in relation to any of Her Majesty’s colonial possessions.” In 1875,
His Excellency having proceeded on an expedition to Fiji, some misunderstanding
arose owing to a claim made on behalf of the present Chief Justice to the Administra-
torship. On the question being referred to the Home Government, the matter was
decided by Sir Alfred Stephen definitely receiving the permanent appointment of
Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales. On March 8, 1875, he was appointed
again to the Legislative Council, to the proceedings of which he brought an amount of
goodwill and capacity in no way impaired by his length of judicial service. He was
unfailing in his attendance in his place in the Council, and always active and earnest in
his interest in the business which occupied that Legislative body, till the departure of
Sir Hercules Robinson for the Governorship of New Zealand, in March, 1879, when he
again entered on the active discharge of the duties of his office as Lieutenant-Governor.
r~)
While so acting Sir Alfred Stephen came in opposition with a large section of the
the people of the colony over what was known as the Sodwalls case. Two boys having
been condemned to death for a capital offence, great exertions were made to procure a
remission of the sentence. Enormous popular pressure was brought to bear on the
Executive without success, and an effort was then made to induce Sir Alfred to
exercise his prerogative of mercy as Governor. For a considerable time all efforts in
this direction were fruitless ; but at length the matter was compromised by the execu-
tion of an aboriginal condemned under similar circumstances, and in whose behalf
the same efforts had been made, while the sentence of the two boys was commuted. On
the arrival of Lord Augustus Loftus, the present Governor, Sir Alfred retired from
Government House, and was again appointed to the Legislative Council, where he
continued his career of usefulness.
While in public Sir Alfred Stephen filled the distinguished offices the duties of
which he has discharged so ably, he lived a life of private usefulness which should not
be passed over without mention. Thus, for instance, we find him for many years
filling the responsible and by no means merely honorary post of member of the old
Council of Education which formerly had charge of that branch of the' public business
of the colony. While in that position Sir Alfred devoted himself to its duties with
that scrupulous and diligent exactness which is the distinguishing note of his career as
a representative public man. For many years the gentlemen forming this Board had


the regulation of the important State interest of public education exclusively in their
hands, until the department was placed under the care of a responsible Minister in
1880. Sir Alfred has also been prominently connected with many of our public
charities, and every philanthropic movement has invariably found in him an earnest
and willing supporter. A large portion of his colonial life was passed as Solicitor-
General and Attorney-General in Tasmania, where he begun his career. In that colony
the services rendered by him to the government of the day were neither few nor unim-
portant, as may be inferred from the fact of their having paved the way for his elevation
to that position on the Supreme Court Bench in the premier colony which he so ably
tilled and adorned. As a judge in New South Wales Sir Alfred gained golden opinions.
His legal knowledge, clear and incisive reasoning, and his experience of men and
legal intricacies, joined to his unflagging energy and his unfailing courtesy, earned him
the respect and esteem of all whose business led them to the law courts, as well as of the
people of the colony at large. His scrupulous care in conducting the business of our
courts has been repeatedly acknowledged both by the legal profession and the Press,
and recognised generously by the public. Since his elevation to the Chief Justiceship
he has witnessed many personal changes in the province over which he had the honour
to preside. Sir T. Nodes Dickinson took his seat in 1844. In the year 1845, Mr.
Roger Therry was raised to the Bench as Resident Judge at Port Phillip ; he was
translated to a Puisne Judgeship in this colony in the following year. Mr. Edward
Wise, distinguished outside legal circles by his interest in colonial literature, was
appointed Judge in 1860. This gentleman collected all the literary work of colonial
writers, and presented his valuable collection to the Public Library of the colony at his
death. Mr. Alfred Cheeke was elevated to a Puisne Judgeship in 1865. He had been
successively Crown Prosecutor and Commissioner of the Court of Requests before
this appointment. George Hibbert Deffel, Master-in-Equity since 1857, was made
Commissioner in Insolvency in 1865, His Honor Judge Eaucett being elevated
to the Supreme Court Bench in the same year. In the year following Mr.
Arthur Lodd Holroyd was appointed Master-in-Equity, which position he has
but recently resigned, Mr. Barton being his successor. Since the retire-
ment of Sir Alfred Stephen, Judge Windeyer and Sir George Long Innes have
both been raised to the Supreme Court Bench, while Sir William Manning’s appoint-
ment dates from 1876, and that of His Honor Judge Hargrave, who has since retired,
from 1865, in succession to Mr. Justice Milford, who took his seat on the New South
Wales Bench in 1859. While the legal business of the colony grew, however, and the
judicial system thus developed itself, no attempt was made until very recently to pro-
vide suitable Law Courts for the proper accommodation of the rapidly-increasing legal
work, the old and miserably inadequate building in King Street, of which the founda-
tion stone was laid when Sydney was a mere village, being still used as the Supreme
Court of the colony. Ihe attention of Parliament has been directed to this matter,
however, and the erection of new Law Courts should now be an undertaking of the
immediate future.
To present anything like a complete record of the judicial work performed by Sir
Alfred Stephen during the long period he occupied a seat on the Supreme Court Bench


of the colony, would be to report most of the cases tried by him. In this connection
it may suffice to say that most of the well-known cases in our criminal annals have
been heard before him, while he has been an equally indefatigable worker in the Civil
Court. As a criminal Judge Sir Alfred bore a character for patience and most pains-
taking attention to the details of the cases over the trial of which he was appointed to
preside, but he has also earned the character of having been inflexibly severe and
unmerciful in his sentences. Long terms of imprisonment appear to have been
believed in by the late Chief Justice while administering the law to criminals. The
exemplary effect of the penalties of the law on the rest of the evil-disposed members
of society seems to have been the first object in his sentences, greatly to the exclusion
of any consideration of their personal relation to the particular offender. In the number
of the capital sentences passed by him on transgressors of the criminal code, he
surpassed any of his judicial contemporaries. This seeming harshness may, however,
have been but the natural effect of his early judicial training in the convict days of the
colony. At that time mercy was the last thing thought of by those charged with
the administration of the law. Unrelenting severity marked all their dealings with the
convict element, and the early records are full of instances of the result of this mode of
treatment. On one occasion a poor woman detected in stealing a flat iron, hanged
herself in her dwelling in the extremity of her terror of the law. In the difficult
task which the early officials of the colony had to preserve order amongst a prison
population, perhaps such austerity was necessary ; and it is not a matter for surprise if
some of the high judicial officers of the Crown, trained under this early system, have been
influenced by its methods late into their own judicial career. Though severe, Sir
Alfred has always been a just and fair-minded judge, particularly in those cases of a
civil nature which have come before him. His scrupulous care in the discharge of his
functions is manifested in a habit which he always cultivated and exercised, of prepar-
ing most careful reports of his judgments for publication through the Press. This
custom, doubtless, has had much to do with that wonderful gift of memory which Sir
Alfred very pardonably prides himself on possessing. In the debate in the Legislative
Council on the action of the Government in despatching troops to the Soudan, he has
just given another instance of the freshness and vigour of his mental powers, in a speech
which would do honour to a political leader in the strong flood-tide of his career.
The colony of New South Wales has been signally fortunate in its judges. The
Supreme Court Bench of the country will compare very favourably under all due
conditions with that of any other similar institution so far as the ability of its leading-
exponents is concerned, —while in point of purity of record it may fairly claim to be
second to none. Scrupulous care has at all times been taken to preserve the exercise
of the judicial function perfectly free from the vaguest suspicion of political bias ; and
this fact, in a young country like our own, and under the peculiar combination of
circumstances which surrounded our early national development, has had much to do
with the purity of the law’s administration, as well as with the personal record of those
selected to fill judicial positions. But though the colony has been so far fortunate, it
must be admitted that our present system is not calculated to command the best legal
talent for the Supreme Court Bench. While the emoluments of the judicial office are


less than those of a barrister in full practice, it is scarcely to be expected that judicial
vacancies will command the best talent at the Bar. A check on the constitution of the
Bench is thereby removed. The highest places in the profession are therefore left
unreservedly in the gift of the Premier of the day,—and however wisely and judiciously
the great latitude thus allowed may have been used in the past, there is no guarantee
that the tone of the Bench may not be lowered by unworthy political appointments, as
rewards of party service, in the future. It is essential to the best interests of justice
in a society like that of the colonies that the strictest care should be taken to preserve
its administration from the faintest shadow of a suggestion of suspicion. In countries
where democracy obtains in its fullest extent, this is one of the chief dangers to which
public institutions are exposed. Their very liberality opens the way to subtle abuses
of a kind which are as insidious in their growth as they are difficult to eradicate, iden-
tified as they are with popular privilege. If we have hitherto had nothing of the kind
to awaken distrust in New South Wales it is largely due to the class of men who have
occupied and adorned the higher judicial offices of the country. For unfailing honesty
of purpose and inflexible and rigid public purity, their record cannot be excelled. Of
such invaluable officials Sir Alfred Stephen is a prominent and representative type.
His unsullied public career would enrich the records of any commonwealth, while to a
young State like this its example and lesson are invaluable. Decorated by his Sovereign,
and honoured by the Government of the country he has served so long, he still occu-
pies the highest social and official dignity next to that of Yiceroyalty, in his capacity
as Lieutenant-Governor,




*
]/]/. Macleod, Del. From Photo by Freeman


THE HON. WILLIAM MACLEAY,
M.L.C.; PRESIDENT LINN^EAN SOCIETY.
Ipgr he new Australian continent, with its weirdly strange fauna and flora, so
lull, different in many respects to those of other lands, has always afforded a field
fr of most exciting interest to the scientific enquirer. Old theories have been
demolished and entirely new trains of scientific thought opened up by the
researches of earnest and devoted men in these novel and difficult walks.
New light has been thrown on old questions by scientific observation and
discovery in Australia, and fresh data provided to form the basis of new deductions
and further developments of patient skill and research. It would be a subject for
surprise if the broad field which Australia offers for the scientist were not cultivated by
scientists amongst ourselves. The names of Baron Maclay, Strzelecki, Mueller, and
many others represent members of the scientific world of Europe who were attracted to
Australia by the scope it offered for the prosecution of their enquiries ; but the record
of scientific labour also contains such names as those of Clarke, McCoy, Tebbutt,
Tenison-Woods, and more than one representative of the Macleay family, which go to
testify that our colonists have not been neglectful of the wealth of scientific lore that
lay at their doors. No better plea for the encouragement of such research could be
made, even to the most practical and matter-of-fact mind, than the circumstance that it
was science, through such votaries as the Rev. W. B. Clarke and Strzelecki, that first
showed us our future as a gold-bearing country. Both of these scientists foretold our
mineral wealth long before any hopes were entertained of our making that nationa
progress which these colonies have since witnessed. The voyage which led to the
discovery of the eastern coast of Australia by Captain Cook was undertaken in the
interests of science ; and it is but natural that a country abounding as ours does in
rare and curious natural forms should prove an enticing field to workers in the various
scientific branches. No name in these colonies is more identified with the interests of
natural science than that of the subject of the present memoir. The Hon. Alexander
Macleay, uncle of our present subject, and his cousin, William Sharp Macleay, both
took an active interest in all matters appertaining to scientific enquiry and research.
The names of all three are well known in scientific circles in Europe and America.
The taste for natural science seems to have communicated itself in a masterful degree
to every member of this old colonial family, to whose hands the interests of that study in
Australia appear to have been peculiarly entrusted. It is gentlemen of wealth and
influence such as these who have the privilege of nursing and protecting the first
beginnings of science in a young and practical colony like ours, where too much
attention, by the very nature of things, will for some time continue to be given to the
commercial side of life, and too little to its liberal and intellectual development.


William Macleay was born June 13, 1820, in Caithness, Scotland, and was
educated at the Academy of Edinburgh and subsequently at the University of that city.
At the as;e of nineteen he was induced to come out to Australia, to his uncle, Mr.
o ' '
Alexander Macleay, at that time Colonial Secretary of New South Wales, Like most
of the young men of means of the time who landed in Sydney with a view to try the
chances of fortune as they presented themselves at that date, William Macleay embarked
in squatting pursuits, and taking up a run on the Murrurnbidgee, he occupied himself
for upwards of fifteen years in sheep-farming and stock-breeding at his station. His
personal qualities, and his interest in matters forming the subjects of public discussion,
together with the influence lent him by his near relationship to the late Colonial
Secretary, his uncle, —who vacated his office in 1837, —gave him prominence amongst
his immediate neighbours, with the result that at the last election of members of the old
Council in 1854 Mr. Macleay was duly elected for the Lachlan and Lower Darling, for
which he also became member under the Constitution of 1856 ; his cousin, Mr.—now Sir —
George Macleay, being elected for the Murrurnbidgee. Mr. Macleay continued in Parlia-
ment without intermission for twenty years from the date of his first election in 1854.
During that time his career as a popular representative was one of unceasing usefulness,
brightened by a large liberality of opinion and disposition which displayed itself on
many fitting occasions. He took a special interest in the extension of the railway line
to the southern border of the colony, so that the wool trade of the large and prolific
pastoral districts of which that part of the country is mainly made up might be directed
to their proper point of export, instead of being diverted to Melbourne.
It is more particularly as a devotee and student of natural science that Mr,
Macleay is best known amongst colonists. Though his political career was such a
staunch and straightforward one, and his twenty years of public service are
acknowledged and remembered, his name connects itself more naturally in the popular
mind with the interests of scientific progress and culture within the colony. In this
particular Mr. Macleay shares an honour with his uncle and cousin. The former, the
Hon. Alexander Macleay, before being appointed by Earl Bathurst as Colonial Secretary
of New South Wales in 1825, in succession to Mr. Frederick Goulburn, had been well
known and appreciated by the scientific world as honorary secretary to the Linnsean
Society. He was one of six gentlemen to whom George IV. granted a charter for the
purpose of founding this learned British association. During his term of office in
the colony he gave every attention to the encouragement of scientific interests. He
laid the foundation stone of the first Free Public Library in New South Wales
February 14, 1843. His eldest son, William Sharp Macleay, inherited his tastes and
proclivities. Throughout the greater part of his colonial career, dating from his arrival
in 1839, he occupied the responsible position of one of the Trustees of the Australian
Museum. It was with the aid of his counsel and assistance that the Act for establishing
and endowing the Australian Museum was introduced and passed into law. He was
especially noted as a naturalist of a very high order. He took the greatest and most
lively interest in everything appertaining to his favourite study and pursuit, and to his
habits of careful observation and studious investigation science owes much of its
present information on subjects which had hitherto offered considerable room for doubt


and question. He added largely to the catalogue of known species of insects, and it
was as an entomologist that he particularly excelled. His collection of insects was said
to be the largest in the Southern Hemisphere. Our subject himself was no less closely
identified with the progress of scientific investigation in Australia. He was the first
president of the Australian Linnaean Society, which was originally established in
Sydney under the name of the Entomological Society, April 17, 1862. For many
years he was connected with the Australian Museum as Trustee, and in that capacit}'
he was always foremost in developing its usefulness. His earnest interest in his subject
placed him in the position of being able to contribute more to the present success of
that noble institution than, perhaps, any other person connected therewith outside his
own family circle. The Australian Museum was first projected in Sydney by a number
of gentlemen interested in the promotion of science in Australia, and was founded in
1836, Mr. Alexander Macleay being first President. In 1875, shortly after the
resignation of his seat in the Legislative Assembly by Mr. William Macleay, that
gentleman undertook his expedition to New Guinea, in company with Captain Onslow.
This undertaking was, perhaps, the chief service rendered to science by Mr. Macleay,
and served to direct the attention of Australian colonists more closely to a territory
which latterly has been the subject of much discussion. That a large tract of country
like New Guinea, with its 250,000 square miles of area, should have remained so long
unnoticed by Australia is due in great measure to the fact that so little was known of
its capabilities and internal resources. The first record we have of its discovery dates
as far back as 1526, when Don Jorge de Menenis, a Portuguese, touched at the island,
and spent three or four weeks examining its character. He named the new territory
Papua. Tw r o years afterwards another Portuguese navigator, Alvarez de Saavedra,
landed on the island, and reported favourably on its gold-bearing character ; he named
it Isla del Dra. New Guinea first appears under its present name in the chart of
Juigo Ortiz de Retz, a Spaniard, who coasted the northern shore-line for two hundred
and fifty miles, in 1545, and called it Neuva Guinea. The island remained unvisited by
any of the earlier discoverers of note for half a century after the visit of De Retz, until
1606, when Luis Yaez de Torres coasted it for three hundred miles, landing at various
places. After him, Schouten visited New Guinea in 1616, Dampier in 1699,
Bougainville in 1798, and in 1770 Captain Cook sailed along the coast, but was
prevented from landing by the hostility of the natives. New Guinea was visited by
Forrest in 1775, D’Entrecasteaux, 1792, Bampton, 1793, and Briston in 1806. The
first attempt made at forming an European settlement was that of the Dutch ship
Triton , under Staboomree, in 1828. He took possession, in the name of the Dutch
Government of all the territory from 141 degrees east longitude to the sea in 1828.
The humidity of the climate, however, and its general unhealthiness, necessitated the
speedy break-up of this settlement. The record of active modern exploration in New
Guinea commences with the expedition of Captain D’Urville, in the Astrolabe , in 1840.
This was followed by the visit of H.M.S. Fly, five years later, under Captain
Blackwood, who surveyed one hundred and forty miles of the south-east coast.
Lieutenant Yule of H. M. Schooner Bramble , laid down the coast-line from the
termination of Blackwood’s survey, 1846. Captain Stanley, of H.M.S . Rattlesnake ,


with Lieutenant Yule, in the Bramble, surveyed the south-east peninsula of New
Guinea with the tract marked on Bouganville’s chart as Louisade, and decided
that the latter was an island, June, 1848. The first suggestion on the part of
Australian colonists to settle in New Guinea was made in 1864. Public attention had
been attracted by the accounts received from time to time of the great unsettled island
to the north of Australia. From the reports to hand it was expected that New
Guinea would prove a land of gold-fields and mineral wealth, A company was formed
in Sydney in the year named, for the purpose of undertaking an expedition to colonise
New Guinea. Many leading and wealthy colonists gave in their names, and large sums
of money were promised, but, on the new company discovering that the express
sanction of the Imperial Government was required for such a movement, the
organisation dissolved. Eight years afterwards an expedition was undertaken by a
mining party for the purpose of exploring and searching for gold. They left Sydney
in January, 1872, in the brig Maria , but were wrecked off the coast, some of the
survivors being eventually rescued by the Basilisk. The expedition of H.M.S. Basilisk,
under Captain Moresby, left Cape York January 24, 1873, reached Bramble Bay, New
Guinea, February 8, discovered and named Port Moresby and Fairfax Harbour,
February 20 ; on this trip the blacksmith of the Basilisk reported that he had found
gold in quartz a few miles inland. Captain Moresby left Cape York on his second
voyage, on March 20, 1873 ; discovered and named after his second lieutenant, Hayter
Island, April 24 ; on the same day Captain Moresby unfurled the British flag on
Hayter Island, and formally assumed possession of it and New Guinea in Her Majesty’s
name and by right of discovery. In the following year the Colonial Secretary of New
South Wales, Mr. (now Sir Henry) Parkes, sent a Cabinet minute to Sir Hercules
Eobinson, suggesting that steps be taken towards the colonisation of New Guinea,
under the sanction of the Crown ; to this communication no answer was returned by
the Llome authorities. On May 11, 1875, a large meeting was held in Sydney in favour
of annexing New Guinea. This proposal excited considerable attention at the time ;
the proceedings assumed at one period the dimensions of a popular movement.
Mr. Macleay entered heartily into the project, and took the matter up with
so much ardour, that he had the Chevert fitted up at his own expense for a
voyage of discovery and scientific observation to the south-east coast of New Guinea.
Mr. Macleay, accompanied by the late Captain Onslow, personally conducted this expe-
dition, the progress of which was anxiously watched by all interested in the resources
of the unexplored territory. The occasion of the departure in the Chevert was made
one of public concern by the rank and position of the gentlemen who attended the
demonstration which celebrated that event, May 15, 1875. The Chevert reached
New Guinea in due course, and returned to Sydney in September following, when Mr.
Macleay published a long and interesting account of his trip in the Sydney journals.
The account gives a minute description of the manners, dress, and habits of the natives
so far as they came under the observation of the expedition, and by its means the
Australian public were placed in possession of the first authentic information on a
subject which may one da} 7 be of vital interest to our colonies. Mr. Macleay brought
back with him a large collection of specimens of the natural products of the country.


In connection with New Guinea and its exploration it may be here mentioned that
several other similar expeditions have visited the island since that of Mr. Macleay,
notably those of Mr. Andrew Goldie, the botanical collector of a London firm, who
made two or three excursions into the interior in 1876, 1877, and 1878. In the second
of these he discovered and named the Goldie River, a large stream, besides finding
undoubted traces of gold. Two large and safe inlets, which he named Millport and
Glasgow Harbours, also rewarded his search in 1878. He has described the interior as
far as he had penetrated as splendid grazing country, covered with many grasses
identical with those of Australia, well watered with numerous small rivers, and dotted
with stunted eucalj’ptus. The flora he describes as of great splendour, while the fauna
does not display a similar variety, except in the class of birds. The coast is set down
as unhealthy, while the hostility of the natives and the insalubrity of the climate,
except in the elevated lands of the interior, are in his opinion the chief obstacles to
white settlement. Signor D’Albertis visited New Guinea in 1876, and travelled about
four hundred miles up the Fly River. Lieutenant Powell conducted a scientific
exploration in 1877, and Baron Maclay and Chevalier Bruno undertook an expedition
in 1879. Since then we have been gradually collecting information until the attempted
annexation of New Guinea by Queensland and Germany recently. The action of the
latter in claiming the northern halt of the island and assuming possession has effectually
stopped any Australian aspirations in that direction.
On the return of Mr. Macleay from his New Guinea expedition in 1875, he was
nominated by the Ministry of Sir John Robertson to a seat in the Legislative Council,
which he still continues to hold. Though on several occasions offered portfolios he
never accepted ministerial office. He was married in June, 1857, to Susan Emmeline,
second daughter of Sir Edward Deas-Thomson. Mr. Macleay was for some years
Captain of No. 1 Battery, Volunteer Artillery, and was also a member of the Commis-
sion appointed some years ago to put the colony in a state of defence. He is a holdci of
the gold medal struck in 1875 pursuant to an order of Sir Charles Cowper made five years
before, to commemorate distinguished services in connection with the stamping out of
bushranging prior to 1866. Of these, gold medals were given to private colonists and
silver medals to the meritorious amongst the constabulary. On the obverse side is the
head of the Queen, with the words “ The Colony of New South Wales,” while on the
reverse is the Australian Coat of Arms, below which is the name of the recipient of the
medal, and a wreath of flowers, the whole being surrounded by the words “ Granted for
gallant and faithful services.” The gold medal was given Mr. Macleay in recognition
of his courage in resisting and repulsing an attack of the gang of the notorious
bushranger Gilbert, at Plumb s Inn, near Goulburn, December 19, 1864. He is also
the recipient of a gold medal from the International Fisheries Exhibition of London,
for his book on the Fishes of Australia.
As member and president of the Linnaian Society, Mr. Macleay has been a liberal
and munificent patron of scientific studies in the colony, lo some extent the Society
owes its continued existence to his exertions and support. Up to to the present time
its meetings were held in rooms in Elizabeth-street, but Mr Macleay has just added
another to his many donations in the form of a house at Elizabeth Bay, where he


provides everything necessary for meeting and for study, as well as for experimental
research. Another bountiful provision has been made by him to assist persons of
scientific tastes in the pursuance of their studies. In order to obviate the many
inconveniences and obstacles placed by poverty and narrow means in the way of young
students, he has set apart a sufficient sum of money to endow four fellowships of £4OO
each yearly, so that they may follow up their studies at the Sydney University after
obtaining their B.Sc. degree. Some conception of the princely nature of this provision
may be gathered from the fact that the capitalised value of these perpetual scholarships
must be nearly £40,000. This, with the house placed at the disposal of the
Linntean Society, at least goes to show that Mr. Macleay has done much to foster and
develope the institution with which his name and that of other members of his family
are so intimately associated. Such munificence does an honour to the distributor of
such public-spirited bounties more than anything that it is in the power of political
rewards to bestow.
During Mr. Macleay’s career in the Legislative Assembly, he distinguished
himself by his progressive views and the broadness of his representative spirit. Class
differences, and those who built up political power thereon, found no supporter in him.
On one occasion in particular his conduct in this respect, when unfortunate
circumstances had blinded the public eye to the claims to fair play of a large section of
the community—an occasion to which it is not desirable more particularly to refer —Mr.
Macleay earned an honourable name by advocating simple and unprejudiced justice-
All through his career he has been noted for his superiority to the petty aims and
ignoble devices of the class politician. He has thus earned for himself a character
which will always be an enviable one in colonial political circles —that of a gentlemanly
and public-spirited legislator. By the example he has given of liberality and generous
appreciation of effort in the direction to which his tastes more particularly incline, he
has set an example of the discharge of a patriotic duty which might be more generally
followed by those who owe their wealth to the colony. This duty lies at the doors of
all who have the means to fulfil it ; and the country has a right to look to its wealthy
men to prosecute the good work in which Mr. Macleay has so nobly taken the initiative.
There are other branches of liberal culture in New South Wales languishing for want
of similar encouragement. Without such generous assistance abstract excellence can
never flourish, and until this is forthcoming the material progress of the Australian
colonies will be quite unworthy of its ultimate destiny.




M .# j?k$
; ' -6.
4 ! ■■ ‘ ••
*.»•. »~ ' - r
. * / ■ ■ .
• ,*- »
if#
j®P
W.Macleod Del. From Photo be Freeman


THE HOJSI. SIR JOHN HAY,
K.C.M.G., PRESIDENT OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
\ OST of the great interests centred in Australia have from time to time sent
| their representatives to the front to co-operate together in the legislative
PIIF' work of the country. In this respect every branch of colonial life has
/W A recognised its public duty, and performed its share of the public work. We
have seen how both the legal and the clerical professions laboured together
in the early days to lay the foundations of the present bod} 7 politic, and
shape and systematise it in its character and operation. Commerce and the legal
profession have done their part, and the first Crown officials have in their own way left
their mark on colonial development and history. Besides these, however, the great
land and wool interests have not remained unrepresented in our history, but from both
of the two great divisions into which these industries are divided —the squatting and
selecting—men of character and ability have stepped forward at intervals to represent
their class in the public history of their country. We have seen in the life of the author
of the Land Act of 1861 a representative of the free-selecting portion of the community?
and we now propose to deal, in this memoir, with the career of a prominent and
representative squatter and woolgrower, in the person of Sir John Hay, President of
the Legislative Council. That gentleman began to be identified with squatting pursuits
within the first year of his arrival in the colony, and though of late years he has not
been so closely bound up in pastoral affairs, he has throughout his parliamentary career
participated actively in any legislative action having reference to the settlement of the
Land Laws of the colony. Sir John Hay has always shown himself a representative
squatter in this respect ; he has always upheld the claims of the squatting interest, and
presented a determined opposition to the encroachments of indiscriminate free selection.
From the time of his first entry into Parliament in 1856 he has been a representative
of character and influence, and an observant and prudent public man.
John Hay was born in Scotland, at Little Ythsie, Aberdeenshire, and educated at
King’s College, Aberdeen. Here he was more than ordinarily successful, and succeeded
in carrying off each year the highest honours of his Alma Mater. He took his degree
at the University in 1834, and then proceeded to Edinburgh with the intention of
devoting himself to the study of the law. After two or three years so spent, however,
he was attracted by the accounts of the new settlement in Australia, and in 1837 we
find him relinquishing his legal studies and foregoing his ambition in that direction, to
try his fortune in the southern hemisphere. He arrived in Sydney in the year 1838,
and at once proceeded to acquire the necessary information as to the resources and
capabilities of the country in which he had elected to cast his lot. Asa result of this
observation we find him before the close of the year named, settling at Welaregang


station, about seventy miles above Albury, on the Murray River. He seems to have
at once seen the splendid future that awaited the pastoral interest in Australia. The
magical increase of sheep and stock, and the splendid commercial industries that thus
opened themselves up, gave wool and hides a value that did as much for the financial
credit of the colony as the gold discovery of a later date. Mr. Hay remained on his
station for eighteen years, devoting himself laboriously to the work of his run, and
laying the basis for his future success. While living here he did not neglect public
questions. The sparsely populated country along the Murray over forty years ago
offered very little facility for the discussion of the great public questions that were
then agitating Australia. The questions of self-government and popular privilege were
settled to all practical intents in the larger centres of population. But within his
circumscribed circle Mr. Hay attracted the attention, and finally the confidence of his
hearers for his sentiments on the subjects that formed the current topic of general
conversation, with the result that, when Responsible Government was at length
declared, Mr. Hay offered himself with no misplaced confidence to the electors of the
Murrumbidgee for their vote and interest in his candidature for the position of their
constitutional representative in the first Parliament. Before thus offering himself he
had placed himself in a high place in local popular favour by his opposition to the
Border Duties over the Murray. He advocated Free-trade in this instance, and took a
leading part in the discussions that were held on that subject. His place in these
controversies brought him well before the public, and established his reputation as a
man of ability and force. The result was that, on his offering himself for election in
1856, with Mr. George Macleay, the old representative in the effete Council, both
gentlemen were returned unopposed, on April 2of that year. Among the fifty-four
members who formed the first Legislative Assembly in New South Wales, Mr. Hay
was one of the most prominent. This fact was shown on the first Cowper Ministry
taking office, when Mr. Hay was chosen to move the vote of censure, September 17,
1856, which resulted in the defeat of that Government. This, the first noticeable public
effort of the honorable gentleman, was chiefly against the appointment of Mr. James
Martin to the Attorney-Generalship, under circumstances which we have referred
to more at length elsewhere. After a protracted debate extending over seven days,
Mr. Hay’s motion was carried by twenty-six votes to twenty-three, September 24. The
short career of the two first Cabinets since the new House met, —they lasted two
months and one month respectively —cast some little doubt on the working of the new
Constitution on its novel popular principles, but the history of the succeeding
Cabinets removed this source of dissatisfaction. Mr. Cowper, on the defeat of his
government, shared the belief referred to, and advised His Excellency to dissolve
Parliament and proceed to a fresh election, though the popular Assembly had only
been in existence some four or five months. Sir William Denison, however, declined
to acknowledge that the governing power of the House had been entirely exhausted by
the two first failures, and refused his assent to a dissolution. The Premier thereupon
tendered the resignation of himself and colleagues, and the Governor sent for the mover
of the resolution that had thrown them out of office, and called upon him to take up
the responsibility of forming a new administration. Mr. Hay declined that honour in


favour of his friend Mr. Watson Parker, who represented Parramatta in the Assembly,
and had previously been Private Secretary to His Excellency Sir George Gipps. Mr.
Hay was deputed by the Governor to request that gentleman to undertake the onerous
duty, and on October 2, when the liouse again met, Mr. Cowper’s announcement of his
resignation was at once followed by Mr. Watson Parker making known to the House
the fact that he had succeeded in forming a Ministry. In this Cabinet Mr. John Hay
took the portfolio of Minister for Lands and Works, and Mr. Stuart Donaldson, who
had formed the first Ministry under Responsible Government, assumed the charge of
the Treasury. Mr, Parker took the office of Colonial Secretary, Messrs. Manning and
Darvall, who had held office in the Donaldson Ministry, being Attorney-General and
Solicitor-General respectively, and Mr. Deas-Thomson Vice-President of the Executive
Council. The Parker-Hay Cabinet continued to conduct the business of the country
for about eleven months, till on the introduction of their Electoral Act, September 3,
1857, they were met by an amendment oi Mr. Cowper to the effect that the Bill be read
a second time on that day six months. The amendment was carried by twenty-six
votes to twenty-three, and the result having been accepted as a motion of want of
confidence in the public policy of the Ministry, their resignation was handed in,
September 7, and Mr. Cowper again succeeded to office. In 1858 under the new Elec-
toral Act of the Cowper Cabinet the electorate originally represented by Mr. Hay was
divided and during the third and fourth Parliaments he sat for the Murray, which
constituency he continued to serve until 1864, when he was invited to come forward for
Central Cumberland. That electorate he continued to represent until his translation
to the Upper House in 1867.
In a preceding memoir some account has been given of the passing of the Land
Act of 1861, and the growth of the squatting interest prior to that date. The public
career of Sir John Hay has been so largely identified with the discussion of that great
question —at least during his term as an elected representative—that a sketch of his
life would be incomplete without some further reference here. As we have noticed, he
entered on pastoral pursuits almost immediately after arriving in the colony, and for
eighteen years he has worked as a squatter on his own station. By the year 1838 the
squatting interest had become fairly established in the country. The first Land Board
was constituted January 10, 1826, for the regulation of land grants. It numbered as
its members Messrs, Steward, Lithgow, and Dumaresq—Lieutenant-Governor, Auditor
and Civil Engineer respectively. Reference has been already made in these pages to
the indiscriminate and reckless manner in which the public lands were lavishly granted
away in the earlier days ; this commission was framed for the purpose of systematising
the process as far as possible, and affording some guarantee that the persons so favoured
were prepared to use the grants given them in a legitimate manner, and not merely for
purposes of trade, as was too often the case. This system continued to 1831, when
definite regulations were framed by the Home Government to control the disposal of
colonial territory. By these regulations the system of granting land was done away
with. An upset price was put on the various descriptions of land open for purchase,
the lots being then disposed of to the highest bidder. The first immediate result of
this innovation was the creation of an appreciable revenue from these sales, which


gradually increased as settlement extended. The regulations were proclaimed August 1,
idol, and during the next live months upwards of three thousand pounds were received
from this source alone. This sum swelled to vast proportions in the couise of a few
years. In 1836 the total amount of land revenue raised from these auction sales
amounted to £132,606 ; while for the six years from 1831 to 1837, the gross receipts
from the sale of the public estate were £439,652. This large sum of money, arising
from a new source, placed the financial credit of the colony for the time on a new
basis. But, though this immediate result had its temporary advantages, it was not by
any means a wise policy. While the system of selling the public land was greatly
superior to that of giving them away ; and, while it is perhaps true that for the time
being the only way to promote settlement was for the State to part with its
proprietorship in the land, the system should never have been allowed to develop into
anything beyond what it really was —a temporary expedient. By the absolute sale of
the public estate, which should always remain vested in the State in trust for the
people, these early regulations, framed and ordained in the Colonial Office in London,
created a precedent for a practice which has only been partly corrected within the past
twelve months. That a population of 85,000 persons should have spent £132,000
yearly in the purchase of land at a time when the upset price was five shillings per
acre—as in 1836 —shows the rapidity with which the public estate passed from under
State control for ever. Under this arrangement the capitalist acquired vast territorial
possessions, and founded estates, rivalling in a few years those of Europe with their
centuries of growth and development. For the present increment the future rent was
foregone, and an old-world abuse perpetuated, settlement eventually retarded, and the
financial future of the colony imperilled. By these regulations the squatting
industry was first established in New South Wales. Sir Richard Bourke, who was
Governor at the time they came into force, imposed a yearly license fee of ten pounds
on each squatter, for the purpose of excluding undesirable persons ; to which was
added, on the suggestion of the squatters themselves, a small capitation tax on cattle,
sheep, and horses, to provide for the maintenance of a border police. This
arrangement lasted for some years. The growth of the new interest brought into being
by its provisions was marked in 1837 by the prosecution of Messrs. Hughes, Eales,
and Maclntyre, for conspiracy to prevent Crown Lands being sold at a higher than the
upset price ; defendants were fined £lOO each. Two years afterwards it was found
expedient to raise this upset price from five to twelve shillings per acre, the Squatting
Act being passed the same year. During the term of Government of Sir George
Gipps the squatting conditions were somewhat amplified by the condition that besides
the assessment tax and license fee, the squatter was compelled to periodically add to
his run an area of three hundred and twenty acres, at twenty shillings per acre.
This excited considerable discussion, and the Pastoral Association of New South
Wales was formed, April, 1843, to protect the squatters and their privileges. Two
years afterwards this Association petitioned the Home authorities to pass an Act to
regulate the squatting interest. In dealing with the squatters, Governor Bourke
considered the natural pasture beyond the boundaries as common, open for purposes of
pasturage until required for purchase or settlement. “If Sir Richard Bourke’s


squatting system had only been let alone, the squatters would have been contented
with their yearly licenses, and no impediment would have been placed in the way of
the permanent occupation of any portion of their runs for agricultural purposes
whenever a purchaser for such purposes should appear. But the injudicious procedure
of Sir George Gipps, in attempting to subject the squatters to a species of indefinite
taxation, virtually compelled them to band together for the attainment of certain
objects which were inconsistent with the real interests and advancement of the colony.
These objects were: —Ist, Regular leases of their squatting stations ; 2nd, fixity of
tenure ; and, 3rd, right of pre-emption.” An Act was passed and ratified in 1846,
embodying all these concessions. The squatting element was thus firmly established
in the colony, and, while it cannot be denied that its existence developed the country’s
pastoral capabilities, it must be admitted that, at the same time, it placed an impassable
obstacle in the way of agricultural settlement. The action of Sir George Grey caused
the squatters to band together into a prosperous and influential class for their own
protection, and, thus organised, they felt their power and used it most effectually. In
the early days of the colony this was, after all, the only way in which the waste land
of the colony could be utilised. No small capitalist —agriculturalist or sheep farmer —■
could afford to risk the hazardous experiment of trying his fortune in the back country.
This could only be attempted by the speculator, who was prepared to invest his means
on a large scale, taking his chances of the seasons and other drawbacks, and waiting
the return of his capital without present embarrassment. The pioneers, who went out
into what were then the back-blocks of the colony, and courageously and persistently
laboured to develop its pastoral resources, were deserving of every encouragement and
protection in their enterprise. The ill-advised attempt of the Governor to replenish
the colonial treasury had quite a contrary effect ; and the natural reaction of an
energetic and self-reliant class secured the squatting element in an entirely new position
by the passing of the Land Act in 1846.
It was, of course, to be expected when the people at large obtained a voice in the
Government in 1856, that popular attention would be promptly directed to this growing
squatting influence. Measures having as their object the regulation of the Land
Question were amongst the first introduced into the new Parliament, and the excited
discussion the matter received showed the amount of interest felt on this important
subject, Mr. Hay was always a foremost figure in every movement having reference to
the Land Question. He took his stand as a representative of the squatting element,
with which his own interests were so closely connected, just as Mr. Robertson
represented the popular side of the great question. Mr. Hay opposed himself to Mr.
Robertson in all the efforts made by the latter to fix the land legislation on a free-
selection basis, and throughout the whole of his action in connection with his theories
on the land question he found in Mr. Hay a determined and consistent opponent. This
fact placed him also in opposition to Mr. Cowper, as the leader of the Robertson party.
When the late Land Act of 1861 was introduced by Mr. Robertson in the previous year,
and the clause read which embodied the vital principle of the Bill —that relating to the
right of free-selection over the unsurveyed lands of the colony —Mr. Hay proposed a
specific motion against its adoption. Party feeling ran high in the House at that time,


and the squatting interest viewed with some alarm the evident determination of the
popular representatives to break up the monopoly which had hitherto locked up the land
of the colony and retarded settlement. On a previous occasion, when the fate of a
Ministry had depended on its Land Bill, both squatting and selecting representatives
united their forces to eject the Ministry from office. But on the present occasion it
became a distinct contest of class against class, with the result that the resolution of
Mr. Hay against the free-selection clause of the Land Bill was carried by a majority of
thirty-three votes to o\vemy-eight after two night’s debate. The Ministry of the day,
however, felt themselves so much in accord with the great body of the voting public on
the question that they appealed to the country on their free-selection policy, and, as
already described, triumphantly carried the day. The new House met, January 10?
1861, and it was at once seen that the great bulk of the squatting representatives who
had made themselves conspicuous by their opposition to the thirteenth clause had been
rejected by their constituents in favour of candidates who held opinions more in
harmony with the popular ideas. Mr. Hay was one of the few whose personal
popularity had returned him to Parliament, notwithstanding his strong opinions on
this subject. When the rejected clause was again proposed it was carried along with
the rest of the Bill, and duly passed into law. Since that time Mr Hay has lost no
opportunity of proving his consistency to his class and party, and his support of the
Fencing Bill, of which the conditions were so framed as to bear heavily on the free-
selector, showed that his opposition to the Land Act of Sir John Robertson had not
been weakened by its non-success. On October 14, 1862, Mr. Hay was elected to
the Speakership of the Legislative Assembly, in succession to the Honorable Terence
Aubrey Murray, In the next Parliament he was again elected to that position, which
he continued to hold for three years till his failing health compelled him to relinquish
its onerous duties, October 21, 1865, Though more than once invited to take
Ministerial offices on occasions subsequent to the resignation'of the Parker Ministry, he
uniformly declined. Mr. Hay continued in Parliament for upwards of a year after
resigning the Speakership of the Assembly. On June 26, 1867, he was appointed a
member of the Upper Plouse, and in July, 1873, on the death of Sir Terence Aubrey
Murray whom he had succeeded in the Speakership of the other Chamber, he was
nominated President of the Legislative Council ; and in 1877 he received the honour of
Knighthood, as Commander of the order of S.S. Michael and George. Sir John Hay
still continues to hold the position of President of the Legislative Council.
The public career of Sir John Hay resolves itself into that of a representative of
the great pastoral interest of the colony. This gigantic industry has done more
towards our internal development than anything else, the gold discovery alone excepted.
The vast territory of Australasia is likely to be unfitted, for many years to come, for
the business of agriculture, pure and simple. But our colonies have become celebrated
for their flocks and herds, and their broad pasture lands. Our climate is specially
favourable for the breeding of fine-woolled sheep, and the capabilities of Australia as a
meat-producing country are practically unlimited. The almost magical increase of our
live stock seems to point to this continent as one of the great breeding-grounds of the
world. That being so, the class that has the future of these great interests in its


hands, and which has been instrumental in building it up in the past, must continue to
be looked upon as an important and essential one in the community. Too much
credit cannot be given to the hardy pioneers of the old colonial days, who paved the
way for the future of the pastoral industry of Australia. But it has always been
recognised—theoretically, at least —that their privileges and claims were subservient to
the demands of settlement, and, as the agriculturist and the settler advanced, it
was originally intended that the squatter, who had the temporary use of the great
unclaimed pasturages of the interior, should give way to the needs of advancing
civilisation. But this theory has long since been lost sight of. With increasing
prosperity the squatting element has secured increased power, strong enough in all
instances to secure to itself the full enjoyment of its rights, and, in some cases, that of
its unacknowledged privileges. Such men as Sir John Hay, whose steady record as a
public man gave him weight and influence in the councils of the country, have been the
most useful in furthering the interests of the squatting community. His personal
character has done much to weaken that class prejudice which existed between the
antagonistic squatting and selecting classes. He has been content to fight the battles
of his party in the Legislature, without carrying them into daily life. When successful,
he has been so without excess ; and when his theories have been rejected he has shown
himself ready to abide by the issue. In his colonial career he presents an
excellent example of those racial virtues of energetic self-reliance and prudent
practicality with which so many of his Scottish fellow-countrymen have so worthily
illustrated the personal and political life of the colonies. These national characteristics,
blending with the rest that go to make up the colonial type, have together with these
latter produced those sterling results which have marked our national progress hitherto,
and which, as our social and political institutions solidify themselves, will yet achieve
greater work in the direction of national development in the not too distant future.






- « *' t /
MACtEODi OEL. From PHOTO BY NEWMAN
,7:^.


THE RIGHT REV. FREDERIC BARKER
D.D., BISHOP OF SYDNEY.
fel tranSCribin S ves the public men of Australia, the writer finds himself
ijßlj forced, by the very nature of his subject, to diverge at intervals from the
narrow lines of mere biography, to sketch the rise and growth of our colonial
institutions these institutions are still forming themselves. They are
i necessarily shaped and influenced by the personal history of their leading
representatives, and the most prominent of these stamp on the respective
institutions to which they belong, that distinct reflex of their own personal character
which later on will form their characteristic features of individuality and distinction.
Thus, in dealing with a prominent name in the legal profession, the record of its
holder s career associates itself with those other steps and grades of growth and
progress through which the legal history of the colony has passed. Without such
collateral information the exact scope of the life-work of any representative man could
not be fairly reproduced, nor could any adequate idea be gathered from a bare recital
of biographic details, of the real nature of his influence. In this way we have told the
story of the Constitution in the life of some of our prominent politicians, while the
direction practical politics have taken under responsible Government has been traced
in the records of other careers. We now come to another of these representative life-
stories, that of Frederic Barker, late Anglican Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan, to
transcribe whose life-work worthily would be to re-write the whole of the history of
the Church of England in the Australian Colonies. Though not identified with his
late diocese from the time of its first settlement, and not even from the time of its
establishment as an Episcopal See, his labours yet formed the complement and fulfil-
ment of what had been done before his arrival. He took up with a worthy and
effective zeal the burden which his predecessors had laid down, and carried the work of
Australian Anglicanism yet one stage further before he made way for the present
Primate. The thirty years of his Episcopate witnessed such a record of labour and
achievement, as well as of Church extension as has not often excelled.
Trederic Barker was born at Barlow, Derbyshire, in 1808, his father being the
Rev. John Barker, Incumbent of Barlow. He passed through the first stages of his
educational course at Grantham School, from which he entered himself at Jesus College,
Cambridge. He took his degree as Bachelor of Arts when he was twenty-one years of
age, and was ordained in 1831. Soon afterwards he was placed in charge of Upton, in
Cheshire, and three or four years after, in 1835, obtained the parish of Edgehill, near
Liverpool. From this he was removed to his father’s late Incumbencv of Barlow
where he remained till the death of Bishop Broughton, in 1853, left the episcopal See
of Sydney vacant.


The establishment of the Church of England in New South Wales was, of course,
synchronous with the foundation of the colony, ihe first colonial chaplain, who came
out in the “ First Fleet” in 1788, was the Rev. Richard Johnson, a Bachelor of Arts,
of Magdalen, Cambridge. He built the first Church in the colony, a structure of
wattle and plaster, which stood for some years at what is now the corner of Hunter
and Castlereagh Streets, Sydney —in 1793, the cost of which is variously stated to
have been from £4O to £lOO. Service was first performed here on Sunday, August 25,
1793. He embraced the views of the Moravian Methodists, and left Australia in 1802-
The Rev. Samuel Marsden, whose name occurs very frequently in early colonial records,
arrived in the colony in December, 1794, and succeeded Mr. Johnson in due course as
Senior Chaplain. He was the son of a Yorkshire blacksmith, and, after leaving school,
had spent some time in his father’s workshop, but was placed by the Elland Society at
the University and trained for the ministry. To his clerical office in the colony he
unhappily united the civil duties of the magistracy, a combination which did not tend
to increase his usefulness in his legitimate sphere. His efforts were, however,
successful in the main, and resulted in much good to the Church he served. He died
at Windsor, in 1858, and was buried at Parramatta. He was one of the pioneers of
the colony ; his grandson is now Bishop of Bathurst. He opened most of the older
Churches of the colony, — amongst others, St. John s, Parramatta, in April, 1803 5 St.
Philip’s, Sydney, August, 1809 ; and St. James’, July, 1822. The Revs. William
Cowper and Robert Cartwright accompanied Mr. Marsden to the colony on his return
from a visit to England, August, 1809. The former had been curate of Rawdon, and
became incumbent of St. Philip’s, Sydney. He was the father of the present Dean
Cowper and the late Sir Charles Cowper ; he died in Sydney, July, 1858, leaving his
name, through his distinguished son, part of the history of the colony. Mr.
Cartwright was appointed to Liverpool. The Revs. Richard Hill and James Cross
arrived with appointments as Assistant Chaplains in 1818. In 1824 the Rev, Thomas
Hobbes Scott was appointed Archdeacon of New South Wales, with a salary of £2OOO
per annum. This gentleman had been a wine merchant in London, and was afterwards
attached to the British Consulate in one of the Italian ports. In 1819 he had visited
New South Wales as secretary or clerk to Mr. Commissioner Bigge, who had been
appointed to enquire into the state of the colony, A Church and School Corporation
was established by letters patent at the time of Archdeacon Scott’s appointment, by
which the religious interests of the colony were placed under the care of the Church of
England chaplains, and liberal provision made for the maintenance of their
establishment. The Corporation existed until 1833.
In 1825, besides those already named, the Reverends T. Hassall, J. Fulton, S.
Reddall, and G. A. Middleton were also in the colony. The Reverend W. Docker
arrived in 1828, and in the same year Archdeacon Scott returned to England, and was
succeeded by Archdeacon Broughton, afterwards first Bishop of Sydney.
William Grant Broughton was born at Westminster, May 22, 1788, and educated at
King’s School Canterbury. When nineteen years of age he entered the East India House
as a Treasury clerk, and after five years spent in the duties of this office he commenced
his studies for the Church. He entered at Pembroke Hall, Cambridge, and took his


Bachelor’s degree in 1818. Five years after he became Master of Arts. He had been
ordained in 1818, and on leaving Cambridge was successively curate of Hartley and
Farnham. In the former of these parishes the Duke of Wellington was a resident, and
from him, having been fortunate enough to engage his interest, he received the appoint-
ment of Chaplain of the Tower. Soon afterwards his patron offered him the Archdeaconry
of New South Wales and Yan Dieman’s Land, which he accepted. He arrived in
Sydney on September 13, 1829, and was sworn in as a member of council by the
Governor four days later. He travelled about his pastorate a great deal, giving all his
time to the interests of his charge. In 1834 he proceeded to England to engage
further clerical assistance, and thus develope more effectually the resources of the
Church of England in Australia. In September, 1833, His Excellency Sir Richard
Bourke had sent his famous Despatch on the subject of the Churches in Australia to
the Secretary of State for the Colonies. This document set forth the claims of the
various denominations to State Aid, equally with the Church of England, and it is
remarkable as being the immediate forerunner of the Church Act of 1836, which swept
away all distinction of religous belief in the public business of the colony. The
Despatch was to the effect that while it was expedient for the furtherance and promotion
of religion and good government that the Government should extend its countenance and
support to the dispensation of the ordinances of religion, the exclusive establishment
and endowment of any one Church or body of professing Christians in the colony was
equally inexpedient and impracticable, and that as there were three religious bodies
recognised by the State of the Colony, it was necessary to the establishment of peace
and concord to extend the countenance and support of Government to those Churches
indiscriminately. To carry out the scheme thus proposed, of ensuring perfect equality
among the various denominations, Sir Richard Bourke added a number of suggestions
for the approval of the Home authorities. Archdeacon Broughton having arrived in
England, the measure thus sketched, already passed in the Colonial Council, was ratified
by the Home Government, and is known as the Church Act, 7 William I\. Dr.
Broughton was consecrated Bishop of Australia by Archbishop Hornby on February 14,
and on his return was installed in St. James’ Church, Sydney, June 2, 1836. Lp to
this time Sydney had been part of the See of Calcutta under Bishop Heber. His
Lordship at once re-entered on his career of active Church work. The foundation
stone of St. Andrew’s Cathedral was re-laid by Sir Richard Bourke the year after his
return, March 16, 1837. The building was finished in 1868. Dr. Broughton
laid the foundation stones of Trinity and Christ Church in 1840. During the
term of his Episcopacy several noteworthy steps in the growth of the
Church of England in Australasia took place. Bishop Selwyn arrived in
Auckland May 30, 1847 ; the Rev. C. B. Howard was the first clergyman
of the Church to land in South Australia, January 26, 1838 ; Dr. Nixon,
first Anglican Bishop of Tasmania, arrived in 1842 ; the Bishop of Brisbane was con-
secrated°June 14, 1843 ; the first Bishop of Melbourne, the Right Rev. Charles Perry,
D.D., consecrated June 29, 1847, and arrived in January, 1848 ; Dr. Tyrrell, Bishop
of Newcastle, in 1847 ; Dr. Short, Bishop of Adelaide, arrived in 1847 ; the first
ordination services were held in Adelaide and Melbourne in June, 1848 , an Episcopal


Synod comprising the Bishops of Sydney, Auckland, Tasmania, Newcastle, and Adelaide,
was held in Sydney in 1850 ; the Bishoprics of Lyttleton and Perth were formed in
1850 ; and on March 29, 1853, St. Peter’s Church, the first in Port Philip, was con-
secrated. The establishment of the new Bishoprics was a step taken at the instance
of Dr. Broughton, who, seeing the rapid progress of colonisation throughout Australia,
proposed that the diocese of Melbourne on the south, and Newcastle on the north,
should be formed, offering to give up £SOO of his salary of £2,000 as a contribution to
their support, this proposal was accepted to by Mr. Gladstone, who at that time—
-1845 and 1846 —held the seals of office. In 1850 the Church of England, in what
was then hew South Wales, numbered three bishops, an archdeacon, and sixty clerks
in holy orders, with assistance from the State to the annual amount of about £18,175.
In 1843, on the return of Archbishop Polding to Australia with his new title, Dr.
Broughton, as we have seen in a preceding memoir, made a public protest in St.
James Church, Sydney, against his assumption of the episcopal name and office. The
protest was expressed in the following words :
Protkst. “In the name of God. Amen, We, William Grant, by Divine permission, Bishop and
Ordinary Pastor of Australia, do protest publicly and explicitly, on behalf of ourselves and our successors,
Bishops of Australia, on behalf of the clergy and all the faithful of the same church and diocese, and also
on behalf of William, by Divine Providence, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England and
Metropolitan, and his successors, that the Bishop of Rome has not any right or authority according to the
laws of God and the canonical Order of the Church, to institute any episcopal or arch-episcopal See or Sees
within the limits of the Diocese of Australia, and Province of Canterbury aforesaid. And we do hereby
publicly, and explicitly, and deliberately, protest against, dissent from, and contradict, any and every act
of episcopal or metropolitan authority done, or to be done, at any time, or by any person whatever, by
\iitue of any right or title derived from any assumed jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or
authority of the said Bishop of Rome, enabling him to institute any episcopal See or Sees within the
Diocese and Province hereinbefore named.”
This protest was formally read by his Lordship, and subscribed to by the clergy
present, March 25, 1843. Dr. Broughton, who had been made Metropolitan on the
formation of the new diocese, visited England for the last time in August, 1852, and,
after an unpleasant voyage, died there, February 20, 1853, and was buried in
Canterbury Cathedral. A marble monument, with recumbent figure, perpetuates his
memory in his Cathedral Church of St. Andrew’s. He was succeeded, as we have
seen, by the subject of this memoir in the See of Sydney.
Dr. Barker was consecrated in England on November 30, 1854, and arrived in
Sydney in May, 1855. He particularly distinguished himself during the early part of his
career in the colony by the zeal and ardour with which he threw himself into the Church
work of his diocese. Although the colony had grown greatly during the first sixty
years of its history, there was still a great deal of pioneer wmrk to do by an earnest
and w r hole-souled Churchman such as Dr. Barker proved himself. In the prime ot
health, and ol a splendid constitution and physique, he was perpetually exercising his
excellent horsemanship in long tours throughout the country. When it is remembered
that the dioceses of Maitland and Goulburn then formed part of the Sydney diocese,
and that the Bishop made it his business to personally visit and inspect every
development of Church work within his vast cure, it will be seen that these tours were
no trifling undertakings. By his energy and exertion he made himself personally


acquainted with the resources of his diocese, and took care that the spiritual wants of
the scattered settlers were properly attended to, by founding churches and establishing
parishes wherever sufficient encouragement was provided. Here, again, persons of every
shade of belief can unite in their admiration for a man who, with a high ideal and a
supernatural end placed before him, worked earnestly and conscientiously in his vocation.
Hr. Barker possessed a singular faculty for church organisation, and the state of the
colony at the time he arrived offered every scope for its exercise. Not only by his own
work, but by the personal charm of his manner he created a perfect understanding
amongst the scattered units of the ministry throughout his diocese, and thus ensured
that united action and fraternal co-operation which was his great object as an adminis-
trator. He was instrumental in establishing the Church Society, through the
means of which considerable assistance is given to the general work. He gave
special attention to the organisation of bush missions, and to the introduction of the
Sunday School system. Almost immediately on his arrival in the colony he was not
without warning that the State aid which his church had hitherto enjoyed in common
with other communions, under the comprehensive and liberal scheme of Governor
Bourke, was likely to be withdrawn. This fact, which made the work of his office
much more onerous with its increased demands and its decreased revenues than it had
been under its predecessor, only nerved him to redoubled effort. He foresaw that the
rumoured abolition of State Aid must soon, under the incidence of popular opinion,
become an accomplished fact. Deprived of the support derived from the rich grants of
the past, it would become necessary for those engaged in church work to increase
their labours, solidify their organisation, and depend more completely on themselves,
than had hitherto been the case. The late Bishop of Sydney, with administrative
tact, saw this at once, and calculated on turning what might have been a serious
drawback to his work into an assistance and an aid. He undertook to see that
it taught his people the value of self-reliance, and the virtues of necessity,
with the result that a vital interest took the place of a tacit dependence on
State Aid, and a healthy communal spirit was formed. In the year that Dr. Barker
took possession of his See and before Responsible Government was established in the
colony the popular feeling had already began to make itself felt on public questions.
Undecided and indefinite as this public opinion then was, and ineffectual as it almost
always proved in the days of the old semi-nominee Council, in this case, as in others of
more importance, sufficient evidence was given of its growing power and influence. A
very largely attended meeting was held in Sydney to consider the subject of State Aid
to Religion, in 1854, in connection with a proposal from the Governor then betore the
Legislative Council to supplement the Estimates by an additional grant of £17,000 for
ecclesiastical purposes. A petition was adopted and signed, praying the Council to
refuse its assent to this proposition, and instead of it taking the course suggested, to
initiate a measure for the final abolition of State endowments. A discussion resulted in
the Legislature on the presentation of the memorial, but without producing any other-
effect than was secured by opening the question. The House voted the sum asked for
on that occasion, but four years after, when elective representation was secured, the
matter again came up on the Ministry of the day proposing on their estimates a sup-


plementary grant of £14,000 for the support of public worship. These were prelimi-
nary steps to the measure of the Cowper Ministry in 1862-3, when the leader of that
Cabinet introduced and passed his Bill enacting the abolition of State Aid to religion
in New South Wales, July 21, 1863. Long before this, however, owing largely to
the prudent forethought and judicious measures of the Metropolitan, the Church of
England in New South Wales had been lifted above the necessity of dependence on the
State gratuity, and had learnt to walk alone. There can be no question of the intrinsic
justice and policy of Sir Richard Bourke’s measure of some thirty years before, but
the time of pupillage for the Churches had by this time passed away. At the period
when this liberal provision was made, the religious denominations were in a very
much different position to that occupied by them to-day. The population was small,
and the people were poor comparatively, while the work of organisation was expensive
and arduous. At the same time it must not be forgotten that the Churches played a
very active part in reducing the crude social system of the early da}"S to something
like method. No other influence save a religious one could have reached and moved
that residuum of the convict element which in the early days threatened the very exist-
ence of the settlement. As social factors only, the denominations were worthy of their
hire. But it was only just that, when the necessity for this temporary provision
passed away, the existing arrangements should cease with it. It is to the credit of
Dr. Barker’s high administrative ability that he saw and recognised this fact, and met
its consequences half way.
Dr. Barker was twice married. His first wife died in Sydney in 1876, and in
1878 he married again on his third visit to England. On the occasion of his fourth
visit home, just before his death, he was advised to repair to the South of Europe for the
benefit of his health. There he died, at the age of 74 years. Before his death he was
Metropolitan of eighteen Australian dioceses. He was succeeded by the present Bishop,
Dr. Barry, with the title of Primate, who brought to Australia an English reputation as a
scholar and a Churchman. Dr. Barker was always identified with the Low Church party
in Anglican ecclesiastical circles. He bore a blameless personal character, and his splendid
appearance and bearing would have made him a remarkable figure in any branch of
public or professional life. His style was clear and polished, and as simple and
unaffected as it could well be. His diction was vigorous, meanwhile, and plain in
meaning as in tone, though his prepared or written statements were markedly cautious
and discreet in most instances. By virtue of his office he was President of the Synod,
in which capacity he showed firmness and decision, tempered by unfailing courtesy.
He was for nearly thirty years Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan, and steps are
now being taken by Churchmen to perpetuate a memory which will long remain green
in the recollection of the public of these colonies.




w. MACLEOD* DEL,


THE HON. JAMES NORTON
M.L.C., POSTMASTER-GENERAL.
I Si are some names well-known in colonial circles which, even in themselves,
recall whole chapters ot our history. Identified with the colony from the
osih very early days, and handed down to the second or third generation with all
G the prestige ot early associations, they bring back to mind the prominent
figures and crowded incidents of the first few decades of the colony’s record
with vivid and faithful distinctness. Families bearing these familiar names
grow up and become identified in their turn with some phase or side of social life, or
professional avocation. 1 hey easily and naturally, in course of time, come to connect
themselves with these, until such names, each in its own particular way, become
i opiesentative of the class or calling to which their possessors belong. Mr. James
Norton, present Postmaster-General of New South Wales, is one of those whose social
place is thus distinguishable. From the date of his father’s arrival in the colony, the
name has been connected in a marked and typical way with one branch of the legal
profession, and at the present time the gentleman whose career is now before us
represents the oldest firm of solicitors in the colony,—that of Sir George Allen coming
next, that gentleman s lather having been admitted in 1822, Mr. Norton also occu-
pies a representative position in the political world as Postmaster-General, to the
duties of which important office he has brought much unobtrusive skill and ability,
and no small amount of special tact and fitness. His legal career has been no
inconsiderable factor in his training as a legislator, and his interest in public affairs,
extending over nearly sixty years of residence in the colony, has given him a large
insight into popular requirements in connection with the important institution over
which he has the honour to preside. That department offers to the ministerial head
v ho brings the proper qualities to bear, a large scope for their exercise in the direction
of internal organisation. Such a department as that of the Post Office, with its large
interests and heavy responsibilities, should have as much care given to its inner system
as has been effectually given to its outdoor working.
Ihe name standing at the head of this memoir is one of those so familiar in the
first years ot our history, bringing us back almost to the beginning of the
century. In those first days the ranks of colonial life were continually being recruited
by the arrival of early colonists, who in due time laid the foundation of a career of
prosperity which made their names familiar as household words in the earlier colonial
records. The father of our present subject was one of these. The late James Norton,
having been admitted topiactiseas a solicitor in England, obtained clerical employment
on board the ship Maria , which arrived from England with female prisoners on
September 15, 1818. In order to provide legal assistance for suitors and others the


English Government had some time previously induced two English solicitors, Messrs.
Garling and Moore, to expatriate themselves for the purpose of practising their
profession in Sydney. By way of remuneration for this service they were each
allowed a retaining fee of £4OO per annum, but, as it was found that these gentlemen
could not do all the legal business of the colony, the Supreme Court allowed certain
other persons of the emancipist class, supposed to be otherwise qualified, to practise
also in the Courts and as conveyancers. This was prohibited by Judge Burton in
1835, some time after the arrival of Mr. Norton, who had commenced practice
immediately on his arrival, and entered upon a very large business as attorney and
barrister, the professions being then amalgamated. He became the trusted legal adviser
of many of the respectable families and of the institutions of the colony, and he was
the admitted head of his branch of the profession up to the time of his death. A few
years after his arrival in Sydney he married Jane, daughter of Alexander Kenneth
Mackenzie, then Secretary and Cashier of the old Bank of New South A\ ales. Our
present subject, being the eldest child of this marriage, was born on December 5,
1824, in a house which for a long time in later years stood as an old
Sydney landmark. The building stood at the corner of King and Eliza-
beth Streets, and in those early days ranked as one of the most desirable
residences in the then infant town of Sydney, but was subsequently converted
into a well-known hotel under the management of the late Richard Driver.
Those premises were removed a few years ago and replaced by the present Temple
Court offices. He commenced school life with the sons of many prominent colonists
at an infant school in Macquarie Street, conducted by a Miss Williamson. His educa-
tion was continued in an old-fashioned tiled cottage in O’Connell Street, under Mr.
William Cape, the father of the late William Timothy Cape, whose name is so familiar
in the educational records of the old colonial days. Being transferred to the care of
the son at a school situated at the corner of King and Phillip Streets, he went with
him to the Sydney College (now the Sydney Grammar School) on that institution
being placed under Mr. Cape’s care in 1835. Several of his school-fellows here after-
wards took prominent positions in the colony, among them being Sir James Martin,
Sir John Robertson, Geoffrey Eagar, William Forster, John Lacy, Walter Lamb, Sir
George Wigram Allen, the Rev. Canon Stephen, and Judge Dowling. These early
school-days seem to have had pleasant memories for more than one of the “ old boys ”
of these institutions. It is poor Deniehy who writes tenderly “of school-boy years
in the dim, secluded, somewhat sleepy school-room in Phillip Street, in that dear city
of Sydney ; with small, old-fashioned windows enchased with grape-vines and honey-
suckle, and darkened by antique and bowery lemon-trees ; in which, of sunny mornings,
with many a lapsus , we were wont to recite octosyllabic praises of the Groves of
Grongar Hill.” All these old pupils of Mr. Cape owe that conscientious and able teacher
great obligations for early services. After leaving the Sydney College young Norton
was for some time under a private tutor, the Rev. J. H. Walpole ; and he finished the
best education then obtainable in Australia under the Rev. Robert Forrest at Campbell-
town. In the early part of the year 1843 he was articled to his father, and became a
solicitor in 1848 ; shortly after which he was admitted into partnership in his father’s


business. At his death in August, 1862, Mr. Norton continued to cany on his business,
at first in partnership with the late William Parker, then by himself, and at the present
time in partnership with Messrs. Robert Smith, W. 0. Westgarth, and 0. S. Sanders.
Tp to the time ot his death Mr. Norton, senior, took a prominent part in all
public movements for the promotion ol the interests of his adopted country, and, being
universally known and respected, great astonishment was occasioned by the omission
of his name from the list of appointments to the first Legislative Council under the
present Constitution. Ihe omission was rectified by Sir Charles Cowper, who also
offeied Mr. Norton the office of Attorney-General in his administration, which was,
however, refused. He took an active part in that ever-memorable game of skill which
resulted in the defeat of a determined attempt to swamp the Legislative Council, and,
as a punishment for this piece of contumacy, his name, with some others, was omitted
v hen the present Legislative Council was formed. He also took a prominent part
against Mr. M entworth and Dr. Warded, in successfully opposing the division of the
legal profession in 1824. The two branches were not declared distinct in the colony
until thiee years later, when Mr. Norton elected to continue his practice as a solicitor
in preference to entering at the Bar. The life of our present subject was, of course, to
some extent overshadowed by his father’s prominent position, and both during his life-
time and afterwards, the former was so entirely devoted to his professional business
that he was quite unable to take that part in the politics of the country to which he
might have a*pired. 4or the same reason he gave up the idea of entering parliament ;
but what little leisure he allowed himself Avas devoted to such matters of a public
character as his position and advantages gave him an opportunity of dealing Avith.
Some yeais ago, Avhen the first attempt Avas made to introduce stamp duties into the
colony, and as in the study and practice of his profession he had necessarily acquired
a stiong and almost unconquerable dislike to such a mode of raising revenue, more on
account of the tyrannical and unfeeling modes in AAffiich the stamp laAvs were adminis-
tered than of the abstract principles involved, he took every possible means of
inducing membeis of Parliament to oppose the measure. In a lengthy and well-con-
sidered letter which appeared in the Sydney Morning Herald on the day on Avhich the
matter came on for discussion in the Assembly, he pointed out the principal objections
to the proposal as a means ot taxation. In consequence of the arguments urged by
Mr. Norton and by a feAV others working on the same lines, the bill was temporarily
withdrawn, but was ultimately passed Avith extensive modifications, and with a limit
foi its continuance, which was from to tune extended, till throug’h an oversight it
expired A\ithout any attempt at renewal. Ihe system Avas again introduced in 1880,
but oAving largely to his continued opposition, it had been greatly toned down.
In 1874 Mi. Aorton Avas elected a trustee ot the Australian Museum, and was
compelled immediately to take part in the proceedings which resulted in the removal
of the late Curator, Mr. Gerard Krefft. He defended the action afterwards brought,
Avhen, from a curious combination of circumstances, the usual right of appeal from°the
verdict then obtained was denied to the trustees. In 1878 he was appointed a trustee
of the Public Library and also of Hyde, Phillip, and Cook Parks, and in 1879
chairman of the second board of enquiry into the working of the Real Property Office.


After hearing and carefully considering a mass of evidence in this investigation, Mr.
Norton felt it his duty to bring up a report, which, while it met with general approval,
recommended the removal from office of one of his own immediate friends. This
report made many suggestions for the improvement of the new system of Land
Transfer, but though frequently brought forward by persons dissatisfied with the
working of the Real Property Office, the document has never been acted upon. In
1879 he was, with the advice of the Parkes-Robertson Government, summoned to the
Legislative Council, and, on the opening of the next session of Parliament, was
deputed to second the reply to the Governor’s opening speech. Mr. Norton has
always declared his impatience of the frivolous and vexatious waste of time which
has taken place in both Houses of Parliament, and this has doubtless much to do
with his disinclination to long speeches or to speaking at all, unless to throw some new
light on the subject under discussion, or bring some new argument to bear upon it.
Nevertheless, he has not neglected his parliamentary duties. Besides attending special
and standing committees, he has been scrupulously regular in his attendance at sittings
and voting on divisions. While giving a general support to the Government during
whose term of office he was appointed, and to that which succeeded it, on the
introduction of the present Stamp Act he and the other members appointed at the same
time gave great offence by voting for an alteration of a clause which might possibly
have had the effect of making the Bill retrospective ; it was, however, subsequently
re-introduced and passed with the amendments desired by the Council.
In May, 1884, owing to the change which had just taken place in the Stuart
Ministry by the re-organisation of the Cabinet, Mr. Norton succeeded Mr. Trickett as
Postmaster-General, that gentleman assuming ministerial charge of the Education
Department. Though somewhat reluctant to sacrifice his well-earned leisure and that
portion of his time still devoted to business, he accepted the responsibility placed upon
him and took office, thus giving another proof that the governing power of the Stuart
party in Parliament was not yet exhausted. Mr. Norton is the first Minister of
the Crown who has held office without ever having been elected by the popular vote a
member of the Legislative Assembly. From the time of his taking charge of the
Postal Department he has worked continuously at the duties of his responsible office.
In January, 1885, being on a ministerial visit to Tam worth, he delivered at that place
a most interesting address on the history of the growth and development of the postal
system of the colony, which we cannot do better than extract from here. The quota-
tion covers an interesting chapter of colonial history. “ The first post office in Sydney
was established in the year 1810 in George Street, then called High Street, in a very
insignificant building which stood near the Queen’s Wharf, and belonged to Mr. Isaac
Nichols, who was appointed Postmaster, with instructions to board every vessel which
arrived in Port Jackson, to demand all letters and parcels, and to publish a list of the
same in the Gazette , in order that all persons entitled might know that they could call
at his office and obtain them on payment of eightpence for letters, and sixteenpence
for parcels under 20 11), or three shillings over. Town and country letters were all
charged for at the rate of fourpence, and the latter were carried to the country for
delivery by constables or by such private individuals as happened to be going there.


In the year 1825 the first Postal Act was passed, and by proclamation thereunder,
postage rates were fixed, the lowest inland rate being threepence and the highest
twelvepence, and the weight of a single letter was fixed at a quarter of an ounce.
Tenders for conveyance of mails were authorised to be taken, but for two years no one
could be induced to enter into such contracts, and the country mails were carried by
mounted police. ihe franking of letters by a few high officials was also allowed. In
1828 the whole establishment consisted of the principal postmaster, or Postmaster-
General as he was sometimes called ; one clerk, one letter-carrier, and eight country
postmasters, besides a letter-carrier at Parramatta who was paid by the public at the
rate of one penny for every letter delivered. The number of miles travelled by the
mails was 40,560, and the postal revenue amounted to £598 2s. 4|d. In 1834 the
services of the mounted police were dispensed with, regular contracts for mails were
entered into, and it was found two years later that the service which had hitherto been
self-supporting was carried on at a loss, —which has continued to the present time, the
deficiency for 1883 being £64,861 4s. 2d. In 1834—fifty years ago —the postal
establishment of the colony, of which Victoria and Queensland then formed portions,
consisted of twenty-three post offices, with their postmasters, and eleven officials in
the head office. The revenue amounted to £3,735, and the expenditure to £2,784.
The number of letters and newspapers was about 190,000 ; the number of miles
travelled being 2,960. In 1835 another change was made in the postal rates : the
minimum weight of a letter being raised to half-an-ounce, and postage charged at rates
varying from fourpence to twelvepence to distances not exceeding three hundred miles,
and one penny for every extra one hundred miles ; this brought the charge for the
longest mail service, that to Melbourne, up to fifteenpence. Newspapers, if posted
within seven days from date of publication, were free, and all vessels were compelled
to carry mails on payment of one penny per letter, as at present. In the year 1849
the system, magnificent in its simplicity and results, of compelling prepayment of all
letters by stamps, which had then been recently invented by the famous Rowland Hill,
was initiated here. The stamps originally issued, being in a quaint old form taken
from the Great Seal of the colony—which has also since been altered —have now
become rare and proportionately valuable to collectors. Postal rates were reduced to
one penny for town, and twopence for inland letters. The objectionable system of
franking letters was abolished, as it was found seriously to interfere with the revenue.
The first mail conveyed by steam was carried in 1840 by the little steamer Clonmel
from Sydney to Melbourne. In the year 1852 a contract was for the first time entered
into with the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company, for the conveyance of
all Australian mails by sea, and various other contracts have since that year been
made for the conveyance of ocean mails, in consideration of the payment of large
annual subsidies. In 1883 a new system was introduced into the contract made with
the Orient Steamship Company, which is paid a poundage rate on mail matter, with
premiums and penalties for delivering the mails sooner or later than the time stipulated.
In 1855 a part of our mails was for the first time carried by rail. The number of
miles of government railways over which our mails are now carried is 1067, in addition
to forty-five miles between Deniliquin and Moama.” From the speech items quoted


from we gather that “in 1883 the Postal Department numbered 660 officials in the
head office, with 1,064 branch post offices, managed by the postmasters, and a stall of
assistants numbering from one to sixteen. The mail contracts were 673 in number,
the length of the routes being 25,162 miles, and the distance travelled 6,264,300
miles. The matter posted included : —letters, 33,245,400 ; packets, 14,835,900 ;
£326,674. Of these post offices, 416 were also money order offices, issuing 275,592
orders to the value of £963,698 ; while 248 of these did savings bank business to the
extent of £922,803 for receipts, and £93,873 withdrawals. There were at the same
time 368 telegraph stations, transmitting 2,107,288 messages over 17,288 miles of
wire. In addition to all these there is the telephone system. It is estimated that the
daily average of letters, parcels, and newspapers posted throughout the colony
amounted to 168,800.” These figures convey an accurate idea of what the Postal
system of the colony was at the date referred to, when Mr. Norton made his first
public address as Postmaster-General. The whole of this interesting and, in its way,
historical speech convey T s a perfect picture of the social progress of the oldest of the
Australian colonies from the earliest times to the present. Such a story could be told
by none more worthily than by the gentleman with whose career we now deal. His
family, as we have seen, has been connected with the social and professional life of the
colony in the most prominent and representative manner, from the date at which social
and professional life first began to declare itself in the young settlement. hor a
considerable time after its foundation there was no post office in the colony. If we
may rely upon tradition, the first attempt at the establishment of anything of the
kind in Sydney was a wooden contrivance resembling a sentry-box, which, up to a
recent date, was to be seen walled in by that part of the enclosure to the old Colonial
Secretary’s Office, now the office of the Department of Public lustruction, which faces
the Australian Club. In 1810 Mr. Isaac Nichols was appointed by Governor
Macquarie first postmaster in New South Wales, as we have seen. The first mail
steamer, the Chusan , reached Sydney from Southampton, August 3, 1852. To the
information already 7 given, which forms the history of the Department over which the
subject of this memoir presides, it may be supplemented here that the question of a
regular postal communication between the mother country and Australia was opened
in July, 1834, though nothing was done in the matter till several years afterwards.
Two routes were suggested —by the Red Sea and by the Cape of Good Hope
respectively. On February 3, 1837, a fortnightly mail was established between
Melbourne and Sydney, Mr. John Hawdon being the first contractor. The first public
discussion of the question of steam communication between England and the colony
took place March, 1846, when a committee was appointed to collect information on
the subject ; the Singapore route was eventually adopted. On January 15, 1849,
intelligence was received that the Admiralty had advertised for tenders for the
conveyance of mails between Sydney and Singapore. Up to this time the latest home
intelligence was generally five months old. During the same year the contract was
entered into with the Indian and Australian Steam Packet Company. The new
General Post Office, Sydney, was commenced in February 7 , 1866, the first portion


being opened September 1, 1874. Postal cards were first issued in Sydney, October,
1875, by the Hon. J. F. Burns, Postmaster-General. The Post Office building itself,
now being extensively added to, will be, perhaps, the finest erection in the colonies
when finally completed, and quite in keeping with the great department of which it is
to be the head office and centre.
The L egal Practitioners’ Amalgamation Bill, which came on for discussion in
April, 1884, gave Mr. Norton an opportunity of addressing the Legislative Assembly on
a subject which, as we have seen, engaged the attention of the profession in his father’s
time. On the occasion he spoke as follows : —“ I admit that one branch of the pro-
fession is an inferior branch. I feel it and believe it, and there are many
reasons why it should be so. The barrister is not brought into contact
with the influences which may tend to degrade the other branch of the profession ;
he has not to keep elaborate bills of costs, or make up trumpery charges. A charge
of the attorney is made without thinking of anything but how the taxing
officer may be dodged to make the bill of costs pass muster. There are
certain proceedings which might be made cheaper if the work could all be done by one
person, as where there is no argument ; and the work may be done for a less sum than
if the attorney had to pay barrister’s fees. There is a possibility, in certain cases of
solicitors being able to do business a little cheaper if they choose to sacrifice their own
interests. The only ground in favour of the Bill is that the people desire it, as I
believe they do. Ido not think, however, that they are able to judge of the effect of
an amalgamation. The Bill professes to be intended to amalgamate the two branches
of the profession, but it does no such thing. As the honorable and learned member
Sir Alfied Stephen pointed out, certain privileges are given to attorneys, but none
given to barristers as compensation for those taken from them, except the very doubtful
one of taking instructions from clients direct, which I think they can do at present.
If we degrade the Bar, what becomes of the appointment of future judges, who must
come from the leading members of the profession, whether the branches are amalga-
mated or not? If we reduce the standard of the profession, we must as a consequence
reduce the standard of the judges, and Ido not think any one will advocate that. For
these reasons I shall vote against the second reading of the Bill.” These remarks have
a special value as coming from the representative of the oldest firms of solicitors in the
colony, on a subject so closely affecting their interests. The Bill was eventually with-
drawn, and will probably be re-introduced on a future occasion.
Without making any bid for literary distinction, Mr. Norton has been a careful
and valuable contributor to the Press, both over the pseudonym of ‘ l Ecce,”and his
own proper signature. His work in this direction has always been accurate and
reliable, evidencing conscientious thought and consideration for the public interest.
In 1872 the public were greatly exercised over the question of the future water supply
for Sydney. Mr. Norton devoted much time to a careful examination of the water
reserves, and embodied the results of his observations in a series of articles in the
Herald , on their history and then-existing condition. These articles attracted a consid-
erable share of public attention, and lent weight to an agitation then in progress, which
led to the correction of some of the more glaring of the long-standing evils thus


indicated. About the same time he penned, with a good deal of care, a series of articles
on the Blue Mountains, containing descriptions of scenery, anecdotes, and botanical
and other information. These sketches, being published in the Herald, were much
appreciated by intending tourists and others interested. Mr. Norton has been connec-
ted with the Church of England in a representative capacity. His father having been
a member of that Church, was appointed Registrar to the Archdeacon’s Court when it
was first established, and continued still to act after the creation of the See of Australia,
which subsequently became the See of Sydney on the establishment of other Australian
Dioceses. It was therefore not surprising that the son should have taken some interest
in the affairs of his parish church of St. Mark’s, Darling Point, of which he was for
many years a churchwarden, and is still a trustee, or that he should have been elected
in 1869 a Fellow of St. Paul’s College within the University of Sydney. In the year
1870 he was also invited to allow himself to be nominated alderman of Double Bay
Ward, Woollahra, for which he was at once returned without opposition on his acced-
ing to the request of the ratepayers. At the expiration of his successive terms of
aldermanic office from 1873 to 1875 he was again returned in a similar way ; but
though repeatedly invited to accept the mayoralty of his borough he has on all occasions
declined.
Mr. Norton is the eldest of a family of thirteen children, most of whom still
survive, some being in England. The two youngest are in the army, and one of them,
Captain Gilbert Norton, R.A., is with the British forces in the Soudan, where he has
been enabled to do good service in connection with which his name has appeared
rather prominently of late in several of the Home journals. When about nine years of
age our present subject went with his father to live at Elswick, opposite to the residence ot
Dr. Robert Warded, who frequently rode home with them from the city shortly before
his tragic death. As a boy, also, Mr. Norton remembers to have seen the only appre-
ciable fall of snow ever felt in Sydney —a fact which, for its rarity, was noticed by the
three journals of the time —June 28th, 1836. At Elswick Mr. Norton acquired that
love of botany and natural history that has accompanied him late into life, and which
he has been enabled to cultivate, notwithstanding his close attention to the duties of
an onerous and exacting profession. He was twice married —in 1854, to Harriet Jane,
eldest daughter of the late Thomas Walker, of Rhodes, Tasmania ; and in 1862, to
Isabella, eldest daughter of the Rev. William Stephens, of Levens, Milnethorp, West-
moreland, England.




W.Macleod . De l From Photo by Boyd.


THE HON. GEORGE RICHARD DIBBS
M.L.A., COLONIAL TREASURER.
J|PLURJNCt the last thirty years of our legislative history it has been feared on more
#p|, than one occasion that the governing or administrative power of Parliament
had been exhausted by the defeat of Ministers in office. The numerical
strength of the Legislative Assembly is comparatively small, and only a few
| members can come to the front at a time. Some of the Cabinets that have
had a long tenure of power have seemed for a time to collect most of the
strongest elements of the House to their own party, so that the Opposition, while strong
enough to defeat the Government of the day on the votes, has not always succeeded in
putting forward the proper men to carry out its policy. On the defeat of the Parkes
Government at the end ot 1882, after an existence of four years, it was a matter of some
speculation who were to form the new Cabinet. This was more particularly the case
as on repeated occasions during the previous four years members had been heard to
assert their intention of voting with Ministers, on the unworthy ground of the apparent
difficulty of finding others to take their places. When the Stuart Ministry as umed
office, however, it was seen that there existed no ground whatever for this unpatriotic
charge against the public life of this colony. It was refuted more especially by the fact
that the native Australian-born element was largely drawn upon in the formation of a
Cabinet which has the longest list of results to show of perhaps any in our history.
For the first time Australians were called upon to take an active part, in some represen-
tative way, in the government of their own country, and the experiment has not proved
an unsuccessful one. The subject of the present memoir is one of those gentlemen who,
possessing all the ability and public spirit requisite in a Minister of the Crown in this
colony, has also shown that he has the decision and force of character necessary to
discharge the functions of that office well. His has been a prominent figure in the first
native-born Australian Ministry which has taken office in New South Wales, and his
success proves that the lessons of the men who taught us in the past, and engrafted
British institutions on the colony, have not been forgotten or lost.
George Richard Dibbs is a native of the colony, having been born in Sydney on
October 12, 1834. He was the youngest of three brothers, the mother of whom is
still alive at the age of seventy-four, their father being a well-known shipmaster in the
colony. He commanded a vessel for the old firm, —one of the first in the country —of
Messrs. Campbell & Co., late owners of Campbell’s Wharf, Sydney. Captain Dibbs
was born at St. Andrews, Scotland. One of his sons —Mr. T. A. Dibbs—has been for
many years General Manager of the Commercial Bank, which Institution he joined in


1847. George Richard Dibbs was educated at St. Philip’s Church of England School
until his twelfth year, when he went to the Australian College, established by Dr. Lang.
Here he remained for about two years longer, completing his education. On his leaving
school he entered at once on the practical business of life by taking Ids place as a
junior in the office of Messrs. Brown & Co., Wine and Spirit Merchants, of George
Street. There he continued until nearly twenty years of age, when he went into
business with his eldest brother, John. The next few years of young Dibbs’ life were
somewhat marked by adventurous incident. He made several long sea-voyages, —one
as supercargo of the barque Monarch , which was chartered to convey Gregory and
party with stock from Brisbane to the Victoria River, via Torres Straits. About one
hundred miles from its destination the vessel was stranded on a coral reef for nearly
ten days, but was eventually floated, when the voyage was resumed. After fulfilling
its mission the Monarch went on to Singapore to refit, detaining Mr. Dibbs there nine
months, —a period which he employed in inspection and observation, till he left for
Adelaide with a cargo and Chinese passengers, having a narrow escape from destruction
by fire on the voyage. In 1857 he entered into partnership with his father-in-law as
Sugar Refiners and Distillers, building extensive works for the purpose on Berry’s
estate, at North Shore. Owing to severe competition, however, these works were
discontinued and sold to the Colonial Sugar Company. At the end of 1859 he
commenced the business of Messrs. G. R. Dibbs & Co., at Newcastle,
his brother John entering into partnership with him next year. In 1861
Mr. Thorne also joined, and the firm came under the name and style
of Messrs. Dibbs, Thorne & Co., of Newcastle, Sydney, and Melbourne. In 1863
Mr. Dibbs left Newcastle to manage his Sydney branch, and on Mr. Thorne dying
shortly after, the Melbourne business was closed, and the new firm of Messrs. Dibbs &
Co. carried on business in Newcastle and Sydney, until the former branch was closed
in 1865. In September of that year Mr. Dibbs found another outlet for his super-
abundant energy by the establishment of a foreign branch of his business at Valparaiso
for the purchase of flour and the transaction of general mercantile business. He took
his family on a trip with him to Chili in September, 1865, and succeeded in running
into the Bay of Concepcion during its blockade by the Spaniards. Having
obtained seven days’ time by the use of a little diplomacy with the Spanish
commander, he employed it in buying two large cargoes of wheat and flour, and
despatched his vessel which again successfully ran the blockade. The Valparaiso branch
was carried on for two years, when owing to the failure of the Agra Bank he Avas
compelled to give it up and return to Sydney to face his liabilities. The commercial
panic caused by this disaster involved many houses and large firms, and that of Messrs.
Dibbs and Co. was one of the heaviest sufferers. The firm was forced to succumb and
go through the Insolvent Court. Eight years afterwards, however, in 1874, the Messrs.
Dibbs performed an act which redounds to their honor and the credit of their good faith
as commercial men. A circular was issued by them, addressed to all those who had in any
Avay suffered by their misfortune in 1866-7, and although after releasing their estate
from the Insolvent Court they obtained a legal acquittance from all their liabilities,
they informed their late creditors through its means that they then took the first


opportunity to discharge what they had ever felt as a high moral obligation,—to make
good by payment in full the loss which their creditors might have sustained. This
circular was accompanied in every instance by a cheque for the amount in full of such
loss. Such an act as this is the best guarantee we have of commercial probity and
good faith, and noble as it is, it is pleasant to remember that it is by no means the only
one in our mercantile history. These are the incidents that transfigure commercial life,
and raise it out ot the region ot that sordid pursuit of low aims which circumstances
too often conspire to make it. In the year 1868 the head cf the late firm went to
England, where he purchased two ships, and travelled over the continent, besides
visiting Ireland and Scotland, He returned to Sydney after a somewhat lengthy
absence, and soon began to give his attention to politics.
Ihe public career of George Richard Dibbs may be said to commence with his
election to Parliament for the constituency of West Sydney in 1874, in company with
Messrs. Robertson, Hangar, and Cameron, at the general election in that year. The
stirring questions of that election involved the action of Mr. Robertson—afterwards Sir
John in moving a vote of censure against the Parkes Government for its conduct of
the Gardiner affair, and the interest taken by the public in the agitation just openly
commencing for free, secular, and compulsory education. Mr. Dibbs was an advocate
of the principles of the Education League, and was opposed to the action of the
Government in releasing the bushranger Gardiner. He was elected third on the poll,
and represented West Sydney in Parliament for the next three years. During this
time he distinguished himself by the interest he unceasingly took in public questions,
and even as a private member he came to the front as a prominent figure in political
life. So much was this the case, that his vote upon Parliamentary questions was
noticed and remarked upon out of doors, and his action in voting in favour of the
immigration proposals ot the Government gave great offence to the democratic voters
of the West Sydney electorate. The antagonism between labour and capital was
somewhat marked about the time of the general election in 1877, and the vote given by
Mr. Dibbs on the occasion just referred to caused his rejection by that constituency in
that year. Since he lias been before the public he has been connected more closely
than most other public men with the capital and labour question. As a representative
of the great capitalist interest, he has suffered a certain amount of censure from the
advocates of the claims of labour, but his action will scarcely be found on examination
to bear out this temporary censure. In 1882 this matter excited more than passing-
interest, and Mr. Dibbs was a prominent figure in the agitation that went on at that
time. His representative character was so generally recognised that the Trades and
Labour Council, in October of that year, invited him to explain a scheme proposed by
him for the purpose of minimising the evils of strikes for the decision of wages ques-
tions. In the course of his speech before the Council on that occasion our subject
spoke as follows :• —“ In responding to the invitation of your Council that 1 should
meet its members for the purpose of discussing this important question, I may first be
permitted to say that, in my endeavours to establish a sound footing upon which
labour and capital in this colony may in future work, 1 am actuated by no desire to
serve any particular class or section. lam not working in the interest of the employer


more than the employee, but solely in the interests and well-being of the whole
community. I take it that it is possible in our small community to provide a
scheme by which, under carefully drawn rules, it will be possible to prevent strikes
—to minimise, even if it does not wholly prevent them —and upon principles that shall
be outside the taint of the law, and upon the unwritten law of common mutual interest.
I believe, with the aid of the several labour organisations of this city, there can
be arrived at a code of laws, and there can be created a court, from whose decision
no body of workmen, no employer, or body of employers, could depart without
dishonour, and that the pains and penalties which would be the deterrent would be
the voice of public opinion and public exposure of the wrong-doer through the
press. The plan which 1 would venture to propose is based upon no new idea. In
I ranee the principle of reference to “ Prudhomnies ” —wise men —has been practically
carried out for many years. I propose by way of preamble to say that it is desirable to
appoint and elect a council of wise and experienced men, who shall deal with all
disputes and questions arising between employers and employees, the unfavourable
outcome of which otherwise, and but for the operation of the council, would result in
a strike upon the part of the workmen, or a lock-out on the part of employers.
I. That a joint committee of employers and workmen be elected, for the purpose of
drawing up a contitution. 11. That such constitution be adopted by the various trade
organisations, and by the various employers, 111. That upon the adoption of the
constitution, and under a franchise to be therein provided for, a council of “ wise men ”
be elected, to consist of twelve members and a chairman. IY. That six of such
members be elected by the employees from the employers, such employers to possess a
qualification of having not less than ten operatives in their employ. V. That the other
six members be elected by the employers from the ranks of the employees, the latter
subject to certain stated qualifications. VI. The chairman to be elected by the twelve
members, and to be a citizen of Sydney, not engaged in trade or manufacture, or the
employer of labour other than domestic. YII. That such council shall meet for the
despatch of business once in each month. YIII. That in the event of any dispute or
disagreement occurring—by which, unless adjudicated upon by the council, a strike or
lock-out would result—the employer shall continue his works and the employee his
labour, pending the decision of the council. IX. If the question in dispute be
one of wages, the amount involved one way or other shall be paid in to the
credit of trustees selected from the council to a suspense account, pending
the decision of the council. X. To this council shall be relegated every dispute
or disagreement for decision and award, such award or decision to be final.
XL lhat the parties to such dispute may appear before the Council in support or
defence of their claims, in the case of an individual employer in person ; of a
partnership or limited conqoany, or otherwise, where there are several partners, by any
members of such company or partnership, not exceeding three. XII. In the case of
an individual employee, in person ; of several employees, or in the case of an establish-
ment, by not more than three members of such establishment, as representatives of
the whole. XIII. The parties before the Council shall not be restricted to the
ordinary rules ol formal debate, but the facts may be elicited by questions from


members ot the Council, or by either party, due care being taken to maintain
the dignity of the Council. A word or two as to the men from whom the Council
should be chosen. I do not doubt that from the ranks ot the many hundred of the
operatives of this community there are to be found very many men fitted by their
intelligence, study, and thinking powers, and, moreover, governed by a true English
desire for fair play, from whom the employees could select their six representatives on
the other side from the ranks of the employers. Such is the proposal which I venture
to submit to your Council in its representative character. The great evil of the present
day is the entire disunion of the labourer and the capitalist. My experience and
reflection teach me that labour and capital are inseparable in their common interests :
that the owner of labour as a salable commodity, is entitled to the recognition, respect,
and confidence of the owner of capital, who buys the merchandise of labour. And 1
admit that the owner of labour has a perfect right to dispose of the wealth he possesses
for the highest price, and upon the best terms he can obtain for it. And further, if
necessary to accomplish his object, he has a perfect right, moral and divine, to combine
with his fellow workmen, provided that no restraint or compulsion be put upon others
of his class who may see fit to stand aloof. When this principle is conceded freely and
openly by the capitalist there will be fewer strikes, there will arise mutual confidence and
respect, and these two commodities —labour, and the fruit of labour, capital —will be
realised to their highest advantage, to the good of the respective owners, and greatly to
the advantage of society at large.” These suggestions were well received by the Trades
and Labour Council, and the scheme embodied therein w r as widely discussed, and
generally approved of. But like many other schemes of a like nature, which depend
on general acceptance for their materialisation, the proposed Court of Conciliation was
never established. The action of Mr. Dibbs in the matter, however, conclusively
proved the liberality and broadness of his views on the relation between labour
and capital. For some time he remained out of Parliament, till the general
election of 1882, when he was again chosen as representative by the electors of St.
Leonards, which constituency he still continues to represent. As a candidate for the
suffrages of the voters of his electorate he declared himself against the policy of the late
Government, and became one of the party pledged to the platform advocated by Mr.
Stuart. His views on the Land Bill were those of the Opposition, and his own
personal ability and force of character at once recommended him for an important
portfolio when the leader of that party was called upon to form his Ministry. His
commercial experience and his high financial ability fitted him in a remarkable degree
to fill the dignified and responsible post which he was invited to accept in January,
1883, as Colonial Treasurer of New South Wales. In that capacity he has given
evidence of a broadness of view and a well-developed faculty for dealing with questions
of finance which have in no way been detracted from by the withdrawal of some of his
taxation proposals. A heavy task confronted the Stuart party in consequence of their
abolition of auction sales of land, —a fruitful source of revenue for former Ministries.
The false prosperity and fictitious surpluses caused by this reckless system of alienating
the public [lands relieved former Cabinets from responsibility of the gravest character,
while it provided a solid obstacle to the correction of the evils of the previously existing


land system, to any Ministry desirous of dealing’ seriously with that important question.
The Stuart Ministry, however, attacked the subject boldly, and bravely accepted the
responsibility of their courageous action. This responsibility, of course, fell in g’reat
measure on the Treasurer, —the Minister directly answerable for the state of the public
finances. Although the proposed Property Tax was relinquished, it was conceded
even by the opponents of Mr. Dibbs that he acted wisely and well in the stress of the
temporary difficulties induced by the radical and salutary change in the Land policy
of the country. During his term of office he has already made two financial statements,
in the former of which he boldly sketched the policy which the government in which
he had taken office had determined to follow. In the second, made on January 23,
1884, he found himself confronted with the task of defending the public credit of the
colony against the attacks of those who desired to weaken the general policy of the
government through the questioned stability of its public securities. It was alleged
by writers in at least one of the English financial journals, as well as by critics of the
Ministerial policy in both Houses of our own Parliament, that the credit of the colony
had been hopelessly involved by reckless borrowing, and that the assets of the
State were not sufficient to cover our indebtedness. To these charges Mr.
Dibbs in the course of one of the most effective and well-considered of
our Treasurers’ financial statements, made the following crushing reply : —“ Speak-
ing of our loans, honorable members will have observed from extracts in the
O 7
newspapers that certain superficial persons, who were interested in manipulating
the sale of our securities to suit their own ends, have endeavoured from time to time, by
communications which they have made to the English newspapers, to show that New
South Wales has over-borrowed. To those who have yet to learn the importance and
progressive nature of the country I should like to say a few words. Honorable
members will understand that I intend the remarks which I am about to make to be
known in another part of the world. I have gone back to the year 1865, at which
time the present Agent-General —Sir Saul Samuel —held the office of Colonial
Treasurer. In making his financial statement in that year, he referred in glowing
terms to the nature of the securities the colony held. He informed the Committee
that, with a population of 392,000, we had an indebtedness of only eight millions ;
that we had one hundred and forty-two miles of railway open for traffic, with a gross
revenue from that source of £147,000 ; that we had 3000 miles of telegraph line,
costing £172,000, with an annual return of £29,850. In those days the statement
then made was considered to be a very glowing one, and one quite sufficient to
satisfy the holders of our securities at home. It was not considered then that we had
over-borrowed. Since the date of that honorable gentleman’s speech we have
liquidated over two millions of our then existing public debt. We have increased our
railway lines from one hundred and forty-two miles to nearly fourteen hundred miles,
and our gross revenue from this asset alone is not £147,000, as then, but over
£2,400,000 ; and, while in 1865 the nett profits from railways were £27,000, they
stand at nearly £900,000 for the year 1884, To-day we have nearly 16,000 miles of
telegraph wire in operation, with a gross annual income of £131,000 ; and, moreover
—what is better than all —our population, the great basis of the wealth of any


country, has increased from 392,000 to. I may safely say, nearly 865,000. If the
people of England have any doubts about the soundness of our securities let them
consider this statement, showing the development and progress of the country. Before
I pass from the question of railways, I have a note which I should like to read. It
was stated last year that we were able to show the enormous profit on our railways of
over £BOO,OOO a year, because we were in the habit of paying for certain alterations
and additions to the lines out of borrowed money. I denied the statement on the
verbal authority of the head of the Railway Department. To-day I have obtained a
return from the accountant of the Railway Department, which shows that during the
year 1882 we paid £333,492 out of the earnings of the railways towards the renewals
and alterations, which certain persons here and in the other Chamber, who wished to
traduce the colony and depreciate the value of its securities at home, said were paid
for out of borrowed money. During the years 1880, 1881, and 1882 we have paid for
renewals and repairs of lines, not from the loan account, but out of the earnings of the
railways, no less a sura than £BOO,OOO. The fact that we are able to show such a
large nett profit on the workings of our railways, while out of the earnings we have
paid such a large sum for renewals and repairs, ought to remove any doubts, if they
exist, as to the soundness of our securities. Having shown the progress of the colony
in the few years since the present Agent-General occupied the position of Treasurer, I
will give a few other figures, with which I think the committee and the people of
England should become acquainted. 1 have pointed out that we have in our railways
alone an asset sufficient to pay the whole of our indebtedness and to give us seven
millions to boot. I have set the officers of some of the other departments to work to
discover the expenditure upon other public works, which have been made from time to
time since 1865, when Sir Saul Samuel made his financial statement. I find that in
the interval we have expended upon roads, bridges, water supply, and a variety of
other works, exclusive of railways, over £14,000,000 sterling. These works do not
appear at any previous time to have been put forward as another of the assets upon
which our English creditors may look with some degree of satisfaction.” The whole
of the speech from which this extract is taken was considered of sufficient importance
to justify its entire transmission to England by telegraph. It constituted, as may be
supposed, a conclusive answer to the critics of the financial policy of the Government,
and the aspersions on the safety of colonial securities.
One of the most important steps in the financial history of the country was
that taken by Mr. Dibbs in withdrawing the Government Account from the Bank of
New South Wales to entrust it to the Associated Banks. During the early part of the
year 1883 the Government had taken measures to arrange with the Bank of England
for the inscription of our public loans, under the protection of an Act of the Imperial
Parliament, instead of the previously existing mode of issue by debentures. On
June 20, 1884, the Bank of England, after dealing with our loans, refused to inscribe
any other unless the stock was issued through that Bank. The fact was intimated to
the Bank of New South Wales in a Treasury letter of August 9, 1884, the Bank being
invited to exercise its right to revise its contract, secured by the agreement entered
into between it and the Government. The sixth clause of this agreement provided


for the Government making any arrangement with the Bank of England for the
negotiation of loans, conceding at the same time the local Bank’s right of revision
under the circumstances so altered. A long correspondence ensued between the
Government and the Bank of New South Wales on this subject, besides many personal
interviews, without any definite arrangement being arrived at. Meanwhile, during the
progress of these negotiations, the Treasury requested the Bank to transfer from the
Government funds in England to this colony, —to supplement the local general account
which the Bank of New South Wales reported as being overdrawn to the extent of
nearly one million sterling, —the sum of £350,000 at once, £350,000 at the expiration
of thirty days, and £500,000 thirty days thereafter. This application was made in
accordance with the terms of the twentieth section of the agreement, which provides
that the bank will transfer the sums specified with a premium of | per cent, on such
transfers, the debit entries to be made in London simultaneously with the credit entries
here. In connection with transfers of this nature it is provided under the agreement
that they are to be made when required, without the Government being called upon to
produce evidence, other than that by cablegram, that the amount to be transferred is at
the credit of the Government in any of their accounts in the bank in London. The
effect of this transfer would have been to place the Government in funds here to the
extent of £1,200,000, and the Bank of New South Wales would have had to pay to
the Government the exchange—£6ooo. On October 17, the Bank acknowledged this
letter, and intimated that, when the terms of revision had been satisfactorily arranged,
the matter would be considered. In other words, that the contract had ceased to
operate —that all powers under it were suspended, and that the obligations of the
Bank with regard to any banking business were no longer enforcible, because
negotiations were pending for the revision of the agreement. To this letter the
Treasury replied, that until a revision took place the agreement subsisted, and that
such revision could be undertaken without delay. At the same time it was intimated
that the Government funds to its credit in the London office of the Bank had been
supplemented by the payment of one million sterling from the proceeds of the then
recently negotiated loan. On the issue raised, as to whether the agreement remained
in force or was annulled by the Government making arrangements with the Bank of
England for the negotiation of its loans, being referred to the Attorney-General, Mr.
Dailey gave it as his opinion that the agreement remained in full force until altered by
mutual consent. The reasons for this opinion were given in the following terms :
“To hold anything else would be to leave the whole banking business of the
Government without regulation of any kind the instant that the Government exercised
a power with regard to a portion of its business, the exercise of which had been
carefully and specifically provided for, and the knowledge of the possible exercise of
which at any time was in the mind of the bank when the agreement was made. It
would be to give to the bank the entire and uncontrolled mastery of the financial
situation. Indeed, nothing more clearly and conclusively shows this than the fact
that, although the agreement provides an interest charge of 5 per cent, per annum on
any overdraft which the Government may require in Sydney, the bank unquestionably
violated the agreement by increasing that charge to 8 per cent., and at the same time


refused to put the Government in funds here from its moneys held by the bank in
London, and actually instructed the bank there to refuse to receive a deposit by
transfer from the Bank of England of £900,000. It seems to me that the object of
the bank is to preserve in full force all those clauses of the agreement the present
operation of which is advantageous to the interests of the bank, and to regard as of
no force or effect those portions of it which are not beneficial to the bank. Thus the
bank will swell our local liabilities for which they are charging the Government
(illegally I think) 8 per cent, interest, and at the same time refuse to put the
Government in funds here from the millions to its credit in England. So preposterous
an interpretation of the agreement is undeserving of serious consideration.”
The opinion was dated December 6, 1884. It recommended that further efforts
should be made to arrange the matter satisfactorily, before proceeding to extreme
measures. These being unavailing, the Government account was withdrawn from the
Bank of New South Wales, and committed to the care of the Associated Banks by
Treasury letter, dated January 5, 1885. The boldness and unusual firmness of this
measure excited considerable comment and admiration throughout the country. It was
universally felt that it was neither a desirable nor a healthy state of things for the
colony that its financial affairs should be unreservedly entrusted to the care of one
large monetary institution, which assumed a power that virtually aspired to prove a
financial dictatorship to the Ministry and Parliament. By dividing the account the
Government secured more freedom in its operations, besides nullifying the controlling
influence of a banking company which was directly interested in the land legislation
of the Colony, and that largely in the wrong direction. The whole of the negotiations
in this delicate affair were committed to Mr. Dibbs, who showed on this occasion that
he possessed the nerve and decision to cope with a difficulty which might have
intimidated a less resolute or capable Colonial Treasurer, His action in the matter
was favourably regarded throughout the country as ensuring the extinction of a
dangerous political and commercial monopoly.
Mr. Dibbs has been prominently identified with the action taken by the Govern-
ment in despatching troops to the Soudan. He worked side by side with Mr. Dailey
in bringing that patriotic undertaking to a successful issue, and on several occasions,
both in the electorates and in the House, he has ably combatted the objections with
which, in some instances, it has been met. We take the following brief extract from
a speech delivered by him at the opening of the railway to Bungendore, just after the
despatch of the contingent: —“ We live in very important times. A few years ago we
were an insignificant and comparatively unknown people ; in fact he knew from visits
he made to the old country some fifteen years ago that the belief even among the
generally well-informed persons there was that Australia was peopled entirely by black-
fellows. From this time forth, however, Australia would be known wherever the sun
shone, from the North to the South Pole. The people of England in future would not
require to look upon their chart to discover where Australia was, or to study a book to
see what Australians really were. Thanks to the brilliant genius of one of his col-
leagues—he alluded to the Hon. W. B. Dailey —the present time was an opportune
one for Australia to come to the front, and to show, not only to England, but to the


nations of the world, that we in Australia were British to the backbone. No soonei
did Mr. Dailey lay the proposition before his colleagues, than it was taken up with
that enthusiasm which had been general from one end of the colony to the other, and it
had ended in Australia sending her contingent of men to rank with the soldieis of
England in fierhtinfor the honour of the Empire. these words show how com-
O £5 O ...
pletely in harmony Mr, Dailey’s colleagues were with him in this matter.
Mr. Dibbs was man* led in 1857 to the eldest daughter of the late Hon. R. M. Robey.
He has a family of nine surviving daughters and two sons. One of the most noticeable
episodes in the personal career of our present subject occurred through his connection
with the well-known Shepherd-Dibbs libel case. His share in that affair was the
consequence of his chivalrous defence of his brother and former partner, Mi. John
Dibbs. The verdict was recorded against the defendant, Avho was cast in heavy
damages. These he declined to pay, considering the verdict unjust, and, in consequence
of his refusal, spent twelve months in the Debtor’s Prison at Darlinghurst. At the
end of that term, which he spent in much-needed rest, albeit frequently broken by the
daily stream of visitors and enquirers, he was compelled to pay the damages and costs,
the Insolvent Court being unavailable in the matter, though he received the fullest
sympathy of the public. George Richard Dibbs is a man of commanding appearance
amongst his contemporaries in the Assembly. He has a kindly and manly
disposition, though firm and steadfast in judgment and opinion. His great force of
character has been unmistakably evidenced on several occasions, and there can be
no doubt that his personal qualities, no less than his familiarity with questions of
finance, would make him an element of strength in any Ministry. Mr. Dibbs stands
in the front rank of our Colonial Treasurers of New South Wales.




W. MACLEOD. DEL. F*om PHOTO BY NEWMAN


SIR PATRICK ALFRED JENNINGS
K.C.M.G., M.L.A., EXHIBITION EXECUTIVE COMMISSIONER.
IpafHE great landed interest of the country has given to our public life some of its
jypj best known names and most prominent figures. The princely squattages of
the colony, with their immense wealth and acreage, have produced a race of
monied men who answer in some respects to the country gentlemen of
England. Their wealth gives them leisure to take an appreciable interest in
the affairs of the colony with which their personal welfare is so intimately
bound up, and in which they have so large a stake. They are found in the foreground
of those movements which have for their object the development of the country’s
resources and the fulfilment of its destiny. Sir Patrick Alfred Jennings is a type of
this desirable class. In the old days it was a charge against the early squatter that he
affected wealth at the expense of culture, and showed a keener interest in the staple of
wool than in the nobler efforts of life and mind. We are rapidly effacing every trace
of justification for the ungenerous charge, which was levelled at existing facts rather
than at the conditions which produced them. The pioneers of every new State must
be practical more than intellectual men, and the material required to turn the crude
promise of Australia to practical account was rather that of the sturdy backwoodsman
or patient sheepfarmer than the pale-faced student or dream-fed man of letters. But
that is a state of things which is rapidly changing itself. A class of country gentlemen
is growing up on those broad pasturages of which the country numbers so many, and
these at least are quite capable of taking their place beside their fellows in older lands.
The men of the younger generation profit by the labours of the elder, and, untrammelled
by the disabilities and disadvantages of their forerunners, they are able to open the
treasure-houses of culture and mind with that golden key which their fortunes afford.
But there was another element which aided in this work of development, and to this
latter Sir Patrick Jennings belongs. The prospects opened up in Australia to men of
fortune and means at home did not fail to attract many to our shores who were willing
to throw in their lot with the young colony, and risk their advantages of home education
and, in some instances, professional training for the chances the colony afforded.
These were attracted by the squatting and sheep-growing industry, and in these
memoirs we have seen how more than one became identified with the highest interests
of the country. In the present memoir we have to deal with another representative of
this powerful class, and it would be difficult to find a more worthy type of the squatting
element in its highest stage of development than that provided by the liberal and
public-spirited gentleman whose career we now proceed to trace. It will be found to
be that of a strictly honourable and at the same time successful man, has
generously used his large means in such an unselfish and liberal manner as to have
conferred no small benefit on his fellow-colonists and on the country.


Patrick Alfred Jennings was born at Newry, Ireland, in 1831. He belongs to an
old merchant family of Flanders, which with others entered England under royal
protection in the fifteenth century. Some of these passed over to Ireland, amongst
them being the Sir Patrick’s immediate forerunners, who settled in the Barony ol
Ards, Down. An entry in the “ Inquisition of Ulster,” as far back as 1633, records
how “ John Jennings was dispossessed of his estates in Grey Abbey for refusing to
conform to the religion of the Church of England.” Sir Patrick was intended for the
legal profession, and his studies were directed to train him for his eventual call to the
Bar. For this purpose he went through the earlier portion of his educational course at
Newry School, which held no inconsiderable reputation for the classical proficiency
of its pupils. While yet under sixteen he went to Exeter, and there he
abandoned his intention of going to the Bar, and entered upon a commercial career.
Shortly afterwards, at the age of twenty-one, he left for Australia, landing in Melbourne
in 1852. He remained in Victoria, and when the gold-fever was at its height he was
seized with the popular enthusiasm and at once went to the field to try his fortune.
He was not unsuccessful, and in 1855 he settled at St. Arnaud where he was one of
those who introduced quartz-crushing machinery on a large scale. His enterprise and
public spirit, and his interest in public affairs indicated him to the electors of the
Wimmera as a fit and proper person to receive their suffrages in 1856, when the new
Constitution came into force. They accordingly requested him to offer himself for
election, but the invitation was declined. Next year he was made a magistrate of the
territory, besides being Chairman of the first Road Board, and first Municipal Council
of St. Arnaud. Up to this his colonial life had been spent in Victoria, and it was not
till 1863 that he became a resident in the colony with the public life and progress of
which his name is now so prominently identified. However, in 1863, having taken up
extensive pasturages in what is now called the Riverina country, he went to live at
Warbreccan, near Deniliquin. There he took a leading part in every movement
undertaken in the public interest, and became a powerful advocate of the hitherto
neglected interests of that important portion of the colony.
The Riverina question was about this time one of considerable prominence in the
public mind. Although the proposal for the partition of New South Wales into two
distinct and separate colonies is no longer a question of practical politics, it was then a
subject of every day discussion. 'lbis territory has always been a debateable ground
in Australian politics. Nearly twenty years before the time of which we now write
the people of Port Phillip urged persistently that the Murrumbidgee should have been
the boundary between their province and the northern colony. Later on when the new
colony of Victoria was proclaimed the same claim was put forward. Dr. Lang,
however, pointed out that the true destiny of that part of the country was to be formed
into an independent colony. “As soon as a quarter of a million of people are
congregated in the valley of the Murray and along the Lower Darling,” he says in his
History of New South Wales, “ it is not to be supposed that they will allow themselves
to be governed either from Sydney or Melbourne ; they will insist upon being erected
into a separate province and governing themselves —and they will carry their point.
For with a navigable river along the whole extent of its southern frontier, with millions


ot acres ol the richest land, and an unlimited command ot water for irrigation, for the
growth of all European produce, as well as for that of cotton and tobacco, it is evident
that this inland province ol the future is destined to be one of the wealthiest and most
densely peopled in Australia. ’ Lhe people of Riverina themselves have always evinced
the liveliest interest in the future of their district, and at the time that Mr. Jennings
took up his residence there the Riverina Association, for the protection and advocacy
of Riverina interests, was in active working. Mr. Jennings became a member, and took
part in its deliberations. It must be admitted that some ground existed for the
prevailing dissatisfaction with the existing state of things. Their immense distance
from Sydney before the days of colonial railways placed them at a serious disadvantage.
Then again, the western half of New South Wales, which it was proposed to form into
the separate colony of Riverina, possesses physical characteristics of a Avholly different
nature from the eastern half, and legislation which might have been suitable for the
latter, was felt to be totally inapplicable to the vast arid plains of the far interior which
were to form part of the new colony. The designation was first given by Dr. Lang, who
called the country between the Murrumbidgee and the Murray the Riverina Territory,
reminiscent of the entre rios in the Argentine Republic. The strong demand put
forward by the colony of Victoria, one indeed which has been frequently repeated, that
they should have had a portion of this territory when they were separated from the
parent colony, drew some support from the suggestion of Lord John Russell in the first
instance, that the Murrumbidgee should have formed the northern boundary of Victoria
instead of the Murray. There were also many residents of Riverina who preferred
annexation to Victoria rather than remaining a part of New South Wales, where they
were sofar from the capital, and had but little, if any, commercial communication with
Port Jackson or any of the ports on the eastern seaboard. It was further pointed out
that it might be the first step towards Australian federation if Riverina were made a
separate and distinct colony ; since it would then be necessary to have a sort of
Zollverein with all or any of the neighbouring colonies, and thus pave the way probably
for a common tariff and for a Customs Union which would embrace all the provinces
and colonies of Australia. The Riverina Association which was formed for the
separation of that district from the parent colony comprised within its ranks a great
many men of position and ability, and its monthly meetings were looked upon as events
of considerable importance. With a view to educate the public mind up to a proper
understanding of the merits of this important question, the subject of our memoir was
chosen to visit the principal settlements and centres of population and to promulgate
the views for the furtherance of which the Association had been formed. Petitions
were forwarded to the Home Government and the Sydney Legislature, and Mr.
Jennings was requested in 1865 to proceed to England to advocate the views of the
petitioners ; but found it impossible to undertake the task at that time. In the
meantime a strong feeling had been growing up in Sydney and in the older settled
parts of New South Wales against any further dismemberment or diminution of the
territory of the old colony, and it came to be seen that the neglect and misgovernment
which had led to the movement for separation were rather owing to the ignorance of
the central government in Sydney of the wants and requirements of parts of the colony


lying so distant from them, than from any desire to act with unfairness. The question
was keenly debated in the Assembly, the great majority of the members of which were
altogether adverse to the proposal of Separation ; but it was agreed on all hands that
the Government in Sydney ought to have taken immediate steps to redress the
grievances and injustices which were complained of, and which had been indubitably
proved. One excellent result of this ventilation of the subject was the establishment of
Courts of Justice within reasonable reach of the community. Ihe great distance at
which these had been held had hitherto formed a practical denial of justice to many ot
the inhabitants. The Martin Ministry then in power took a considerable interest in
the Riverina question. Its railway policy was dictated by the Premier’s desire to
strengthen the bonds between that district and the capital. For some time
the western and northern lines were left in abeyance so that communication might be
facilitated with Riverina, and Sydney made more easily available as a port of export
for its large annual yield of wool The Premier visited Deniliquin in 1866 and per-
sonally gave the whole subject his attention. On the occasion of his visit the meagre
parliamentary representation of the outlying electorates comprising the territory of
Riverina was pointed out to him. In order to compensate for this slender
representative power several gentlemen were asked to accept seats in the
Legislative Council, pending the question of electoral reform. The only one who
accepted the invitation was Mr. Jennings ; and during his term in the Upper
Chamber he supplemented energetically the efforts of the members of the
Assembly from his part of the country to ameliorate the condition of affairs which had
given rise to the demand for separation from New South Wales. In the following
year, 1867, the Municipalities Act came before the Legislature, and in its passage
through the Upper House amendments of a valuable nature were inserted by Mr.
Jennings, whose training in municipal affairs in Victoria gave him a practical insight
into the working of such a measure. On the general election which took place at the
end of 1869 he resigned his seat in the Legislative Council, and received a requisition
from the electors of the Murray to stand for the Legislative Assembly as their member.
He did so, and was elected, remaining in the House as the representative of that
important constituency during two Parliaments till his resignation in 1872. At the
general election referred to a strong feeling had been aroused throughout the country
by some public utterances of Mr. Parkes, on the subject of immigration. Mr.
Jennings took a prominent part in the discussion which followed, when a select
committee of the House considered the matter. In the same Parliament the Divorce
Bill came under debate, and the subject of this memoir made a noticeable speech
against the proposed measure. On the Border Duties question Mr. Jennings spoke as
a received authority, and his part in the proceedings in connection with that matter
was a leading one throughout. One of his best efforts was the speech on this subject
in the Legislative Assembly, November 22, 1871, in opposition to the Martin Ministry.
The Premier, Sir James Martin, having made a lengthy sj)eech, advocating the
new Duties, Mr. Jennings was requested by the Opposition, led by Mr. Win. Forster,
to reply. His speech on the subject is thus reported : —“ Mr. Jennings said he must
confess that he could not help feeling under some disadvantage in replying to the hon.


gentleman avlio had just sat down. It was the duty of the lion, and learned gentleman
to support the motion, and he had done his best in the most emphatic manner to put
the case for the colony as against Victoria. He was not there as an apologist for
A ictoria, for, although he lived on the borders of Victoria, he belonged to New South
Wales. He was sure that he might trust to the good feeling of the House if, in
criticising the statement, and endeavouring to confute the position taken up by the
lion, and learned Premier, he might appear antagonistic to New South Wales. It was
the proposition of New South Wales in the first instance to have free-trade across the
Border. In Sir William Denison’s time a proposition came from New South Wales at
a period when the balance of trade was in favour of the colony ; but as time went on
it was totally changed, and became in favour of Victoria, and this colony set about to
recover what was undoubtedly its just due. But it appeared to him that their
delegates ivent to Melbourne armed with what they themselves called partial and
imperfect returns. They went down, knowing those returns to be uncertain, but
guessing, from what they conceived ought to be the extent of the trade, that they
ought to receive £IOO,OOO. They were met with a statement that they would not get
any more than £60,000. Then, very unwisely as he thought, they raised the question
if the Victorian Government were going to put a tax upon stock. He had not the
slightest doubt that they would impose such a tax. A ictoria had now entered upon a
protective policy, and the squatters could very fairly argue that if other industries
were protected theirs also ought to have a share of protection. But there was
another question more worthy of consideration than the mere money question.
The position of the inhabitants of Riverina was very peculiar : they were driven
to deal either with South Australia or Victoria, and if these duties were collected a
spirit of disaffection would inevitably be created amongst them. He admitted that
£IOO,OOO was the amount which ought to be paid to this colony ; but if it could not
be obtained without inducing a feeling of discord and a cry for separation, the House
should pause before insisting upon it. He had not come there to utter threats of
separation, or to enter upon recrimination with Sydney on her treatment of the out-
lying provinces ; but he did think that, in the absence of reliable data , it would not be
an unfair thing to have a perfect system of registration, which would show accurately
what ought to be done. He thought it was an accusation against our delegates that
they placed too much stress upon this £IOO,OOO. Our delegates put the case in this
way, that they must have that sum or they would levy the duties ; and to this Victoria
replied by threatening to levy a duty on stock, whereupon our representatives retorted
that they would make only one port of entry. This would shut up five hundred miles
of the river, and over the whole of that distance smuggling would be largely resorted
to. If such a commercial blockade of the Murray were attempted the law would be
broken, and those who broke it would have the usual support of the whole population
of Riverina. Was it worth while for the difference between £60,000 and £IOO,OOO
to resort to such measures. The people of the southern districts had no wish to claim
unfair exemption from the payment of dues. They wished to be loyal to the btate ;
but they did not wish, when political gentlemen disagreed and fought, to bear the
blows without any provocation on their part. Among other proceedings of this con-


Terence our delegates laid upon the table a memorandum in reference to a despatch to
Lord Kimberley. If it should ever reach the hands of that nobleman, he would
probably smile at the evanescence of public feeling in the colonies, when he read the
following statement : — 4 By the agreement made between Victoria and New South
Wales in 1867, free trade across or by way of the river Murray was established.’ It
would be singular if the same mail that conveyed that statement home also conveyed
the intelligence that free trade established in 1867 had ceased to exist. It would cause
some degree of doubt with regard to the stability of colonial opinion. He hoped,
however, that no such intelligence would go home. He hoped the House would pause
before it proceeded to endorse the acts of the Conference. And he hoped, above all
things, that our population would not be subjected to decided loss, great hardship, and
an inevitable amount of suffering which the re-imposition of the Border Duties would
occasion.”
On the resignation of Sir John Robertson in 1870, Sir Charles Cowper assumed
the Premiership and offered Mr. Jennings the portfolio for Lands, which was not
accepted. Mr. Robertson afterwards occupied the vacant office. On the defeat of
the Martin Ministry on the Border Duties question Mr. William Forster was sent for
to form a Government and he also offered a portfolio to Mr. Jennings ; but owing to
the dilatory manner in which the formation of a government was proceeded with, Mr.
Forster threw up the commission and Mr. Parkes was sent for, who formed a government
which remained in office till the general election of 1874. Two years after his
resignation Mr. Jennings was invited to contest the Mudgee electorate ; but did not
succeed in obtaining a majority.
Though Mr, Jennings remained out of Parliament for some five or six years he
did not relax his efforts in the public interests. His energies took a new direction.
He recognised the immense advantage to the colony of periodical exhibitions of
the industries and products of the country. These events are serviceable in bringing
the various branches of colonial development together for the encouragement and
emulation of workers. But they have also their use in directing outside attention to the
progress and resources of the colony, and the field it offers for enterprise. As early as
1854 the fact was recognised by Sir Charles Fitzroy, by whose direction an exhibit
was sent from New South Wales to the Paris Exhibition. In August, 1870, the first
Intercolonial Exhibition in Sydney was opened. On April 3, 1873, His Excellency
Sir Hercules Robinson opened the second Intercolonial Exhibition in Sydney ; followed
by a third, April 6, 1875 ; and the great International Exhibition, September, 1879.
Besides these there have been the yearly Agricultural Society’s Exhibitions, commenc-
ing in 1869. In these Mr. Jennings always took a zealous interest. He went to
Melbourne in 1875 as Commissioner from the colony to the Victorian Exhibition, and
in 1876 he represented New South Wales, Queensland, and Tasmania at the great
Philadelphia Exhibition of that year, after which he visited Europe. In January, 1879,
having returned to the colony some time before, he was unanimously chosen Executive
Commissioner to undertake the first Great International Exhibition of Australia. That
vast enterprise was carried out under his direction with a splendid measure of
success. The building was erected on a most commanding site overlooking Sydney


Harbour, and till the surrounding’s were in keeping with the great occasion. No
circumstance which could lend dignity or honour to the opening ceremonies was
overlooked. A cantata, written by Kendall and composed by Giorza, was performed
with full orchestral and choral effects, in the presence of most of the Australian
Governors and many thousands of people. The Exhibition gathered together
representatives of the world’s enterprise and skill from every quarter of the globe, and
an impetus was thereby given to the colony, the good effects of which it continues to
enjoy. Mr. Jennings gained the applause of the whole community by the able and
signally successful manner in which lie carried through his heavy responsibility. A
banquet was tendered him after the dissolution of the commission, to testify the
acknowledgments of his fellow-members of committee. It took place at the Exchange,
April 18, 1880, and was largely attended by leading colonists and others. In
recognition of his eminent services in this connection Her Majesty was pleased to confer
in 1880 a knighthood with the distinction of K.C.M.G. on the subject of our memoir,
he having been nominated C.M.G. in the preceding year.
At the general election in 1880 Sir Patrick Jennings offered himself for election
as member for the Bogan, and was elected. He sat in opposition to the Parkes Gov-
ernment of the day, and took a fair share in public business, speaking on the Financial
Debate, the Fisheries Bill, the Local Government Bill, and on the discussion that
ensued on the proposal to remit the interest on Conditional Purchase Balances. This
subject attracted a considerable share of public attention both in this and in the preced-
ing Parliaments, but the subordinate phases of the general question were lost in the
greater interest afterwards excited by the Land Bill as proposed by Sir John Robertson
under the Parkes Government. On the rejection of that measure a dissolution ensued,
and at the general election which followed Sir Patrick was re-elected for the Bogan.
On the formation of the Stuart Ministry he was offered and accepted the post of Vice-
President of the Executive Council, January, 1883. This office he continued to hold
until August lin the same year. Although declining to remain a member of the
•)J o o
Cabinet, he still continued to give a general support to the Stuart Government, particu-
larly in its land legislation. When that measure was tabled, as described elsewhere,
Sir Patrick Jennings took a prominent part in the discussion of its clauses and
general provisions, speaking to the question in one or other of its phases on upwards
of thirty-five different occasions. His large experience of the working ol the land laws
and the thorough liberality and broadness of his views on this as on other public ques-
tions gave Ids utterances peculiar value quite apart from the interest they possessed
as the words of a leading representative of a large class in the community. In
the course of a debate on the second reading of the Land Bill in June, 1881, Sir
Patrick Jennings made the following speech, having special reference to that clause of
the Bill which recommended the establishment of elective Land Boards : —“ In his
speech on the second reading of the Bill he distinctly stated that he was opposed to the
principle of elective boards, to land boards sitting in private, and to the Victorian
system of making the chairmen of mining boards and the presidents of shire councils
ex officio members of the land boards. He said that he was in favour of the law being
administered locally by persons who were directly responsible to the Government, and


he understood the Government to indicate on that occasion that this was what they
meant by local land boards,—and that the boards should be composed of local residents.
The term ‘ local land board’ was somewhat misleading in this respect. No doubt the
chairmen of local land boards would be high officials, and lie supposed that it was
intended that they should travel from district to district. He had always held the
opinion that an essential feature in connection with land boards should be that the
proceedings should be conducted in open court. He had no doubt that nearly all the
difficulties which had arisen under the existing law were attributable to the principle of
free-selection before survey. His remedy was one which had not met with the approval
of the author of the land law ; this was that survey should precede selection. He had
always advocated as one means of overcoming the difficulty that the Survey Department
should be so managed that a large amount of surveying should be done in advance of
selection. He hoped that the elective principle in the land boards would not be agreed
to. No squatter or selector, or anyone having a personal interest in law matters, ought
to be allowed to act on a local land board.” It may be mentioned that Sir Patrick’s
resignation of his position as Vice-President of the Executive Council was not the result
of any disagreement with his colleagues on the Land Bill.
Sir Patrick Jennings is distinguished not only as a representative man in political
life, but also because of the leading part he has taken in most of the public
institutions of mark in the colony. Thus it is to be noted that he is a member of the
University Senate, in which capacity he has exercised a princely liberality towards that
noble institution, the fine organ in the Great Hall being his gift. He is also a fellow of
the Council of St. John’s College, within the University of Sydney. He is President
of the Sydney Liedertafel, a representative musical association ; while in commercial
life he is a foremost figure as a Bank Director and member of the directorate of some
of the leading Life Assurance Societies. Sir Patrick Jennings has been Vice-President
of the .New South Wales Commission for the Melbourne Exhibition of 1880 ; Vice-
President of the Commission for the Amsterdam Exhibition in 1883 ; and President
of the Commission for the Calcutta International Exhibition, 1883-4. At the final
meeting of the last named, a resolution couched in the following terms, and
representative of the sentiments of his co-workers in other undertakings of the kind as
well as that immediately referred to, was carried by acclamation : —“ That the active
personal interest taken by the President of the Commission in the success of the
colony at the Calcutta Exhibition, and in the important question of the development
of an enlarged trade between India and Australia, and of direct steam communi-
cation between these two great sections of the Empire, is deserving of the warmest
acknowledgments of the Commission, —which are hereby recorded.” These facts
speak eloquently for the activity of Sir Patrick as a public man ; and it may
fairly be recorded that New South Wales could have no more thoroughly capable
and responsible gentleman, nor one more worthy to represent the best side of
Australian public and social life at the coming Colonial and Indian Exhibition, to
be held in London in 1886, than Sir Patrick Jennings, who is now our Vice-
President and Executive Commissioner. In a similar capacity at our own first
International Exhibition he won golden opinions, and the same measure of success


may be predicted for any future undertaking of the kind which may be fortunate
enough to secure his co-operation. Sir Patrick is a magistrate of the territory for four
colonies, —Queensland, V ictoria, South Australia and New South Wales. He received
the Order of St. Gregory the Great from the Roman Pontiff in 1874, and two or
three years later the rare distinction of Knight Commander of Pius IX., and that
of Commander of the ecclesiastical order to which he already belonged, were also
conferred on him on being presented to the reigning Pope during his visit to Europe.
He Avas also offered the A r ice-Presidency of the Executive Council by Sir John
Robertson in 1878.
Sir Patrick Jennings took an active and prominent part in the splendid demon-
stration of Australian loyalty and devotion to England which resulted in the despatch
of a colonial contingent to the assistance of Her Majesty’s forces in the Egyptian
Soudan. He Avas one of the principal speakers at the great popular meeting held in
the Exhibition Building to inaugurate a Patriotic Fund, to which he was one of the
largest contributors. When the question came on for discussion in the House, Sir
Patrick was a prominent defender of the action of the Government in the matter, and
in the course of his speech on that occasion, before voting with the Ministry, he spoke
to the folloAving effect against the amendment censuring the Government policy :
“ His heart Avas Avith the movement from the first, and he took the first opportunity of
speaking before one of the largest meetings ever held in Sydney, in order to explain
his views on the question. Since that time he had been before his constituents, who,
perhaps, occupied the most central position in the heart of the country, Avere engaged
in all kinds of pursuits, and avlio Avere a mixed community, and he could say that
nothing but unqualified approval of the action of the Government had been expressed
by them. The motion Avhich had been put before the House by the hon. gentleman
who had moved the adoption of the address simply contained two proposals. It
expressed approval of the conduct of the Government, and affirmed that the action
taken manifested the loyalty of the colonists. The amendment set forth that the
Government had not been Avarranted in taking such an action without the authority
and sanction of Parliament. The Avhole thing after all turned on Avhat appeared to
have been a matter of opinion and feeling. It was absurd to say that the matter had
been one of emergency of such an absolute nature. But he Avould ask, were they to
wait until England came to them and asked for assistance ? Would England humiliate
herself so much as to come out to one of her thinly-populated dependencies and ask
for 500 men? If they waited for that they Avell kneAV that the time Avould never come.
Noav, England and the world kneAV that there existed in the hearts of the British people
all over the globe the desire to help the mother country, Avhether she Avas in urgent
need of help or not. The step taken by the Government had been one Avhich had
displayed feelings of loyalty, and he took a great pleasure in upholding it. The
emergency of the case was simply a matter of opinion ; but the acknoAvledgments
received from the mother country shoAved that there Avere people in the United
Kingdom who did think the situation grave. From whom had the colony received
thanks for what had been done? In the first place they had been thanked by the
Queen. A telegram had been received from her Majesty, expressing pleasure at the


offer being made. In the second place the English Parliament —both Houses had
shown their appreciation by referring to the matter in complimentary terms. All had
been unanimous in acknowledging the offer. The chief magistrate of London had
almost gone out of his way to send a telegram upon the subject. If the Government
had gone beyond strict constitutional limits, he hoped, now that the expedition had
gone, that the House would not show the idea that the Government had acted in an
unpatriotic way. He believed that they had played a noble, straightforward, manly
part in going to the assistance of the old country, and saying, ‘ Since you may be
somewhat hampered by difficulties on all sides we offer you our little meed of help,
which morally will show your enemies all over the world that Australasia as a part of
the British Empire would never cease to take every opportunity for expressing its
intense loyalty towards the mother country.’ ”
In a speech made before his constituents on this subject, on the occasion of a
ministerial visit to Dubbo shortly after the despatch of the contingent, Sir Patrick
Jennings spoke at some length on the business of the important session of Parliament
that preceded that step. As this address gives a fair idea of his parliamentary action
during that period we make the following extracts : —“ He might at once say with
regard to the great and burning question of the day—the Soudan expedition —that the
first moment he heard of it he at once conceived the Government had done the right
thing. He did not wait to think. His instincts told him the Government had per-
formed a noble and a patriotic action. There were occasions in public life when
instinctively men do things without the labour of thought—when they were moved
by strong overpowering feelings —and, invariably in the cooler consideration which
follows, the instinctive rush is confirmed. It had been said that in sending our men to
Egypt, our Government had engaged in an unjust war, and in a struggle which did
not affect the colonies. He denied this. The quarrel was ours as much as England’s,
and we had as great an interest in it, and the war was not an unjust one. It was, if
ever a war in the world was, a battle in the interests of civilization. According to Sir
Samuel Baker, who had some knowledge of the country, the Egyptians, though hard
taskmasters, were better rulers of the Soudan than the Arab tribes that scoured the
country previous to its annexation. The Egyptians founded a stable form of Govern-
ment —order was established amongst the tribes, who had been continually warring
amongst themselves —and generally peace was brought about, until one could travel in
the country with as little danger as walking across Hyde Park. But there was
another consideration impelling England. These Arab hosts which now revolted
threatened Upper Egypt and the Suez Canal. The protection of this great waterway
—the load to India and Australia —was of paramount importance. In assisting to
protect it, our contingent was as truly protecting Australian commerce and Australian
interests as if they were fighting for them on Australian soil. This war was perfectly
justifiable —it was in English interests and to prevent the Canal being dominated and
a settled form of government being upset by a horde of Moslem fanatics. He was
very glad to have this opportunity of speaking on this subject, for it was most desirable
to exhibit matters in a truthful and proper light. However, to return to subjects less
attractive, perhaps, than this—to their past legislation —he dwelt upon the necessity


for a Local Government Bill, which would decentralise the administration and get rid,
to a considerable extent, of the bureaucracy that now existed. He believed with the
extension of Municipal Government they would have work done better and more
economically. It was only right that the people who supplied the finances should
have a larger part than they now possess in expending them. It stood to reason that
a system of Local Government would give better control and a larger management of
their own affairs, and would also relieve the central Government of matters that would
be much better looked after by elected councils than government officials. These
Municipal Councils would be the best training grounds for their public men. The
history of municipalities had been the history of freedom. In the middle ages, they
had supplied the best examples. He thought, however, that these new municipalities
which would spring up under a larger measure of local Government should be more
liberally subsidised than the existing municipalities, which were treated in a very
niggard spirit. He had, they were probably aware, given a general support to this
Government and their measures. He gave this support independent of the fact that
he had, in its first days, been a member of the administration. He gave it on public
grounds —on conscientious grounds, because the legislation they proposed agreed with
his views. They would remember that when the railway was opened to Nevertire, he
had made a speech at the banquet given at Warren. He was speaking on the land
laws. He laid down certain propositions, as representing his ideas of the amendments
required in the land policy. These views were adopted by the Government in framing
their Bill, and they were the views which seemed to have been expressed by the country
at the general election. The Bill had occupied the attention of Parliament for a long-
time Members spared no labour to make it as perfect as possible. With much self-
sacrifice and lofty patriotism, they devoted night after night, and month after month,
to make the measure as perfect as possible, and render it of the greatest advantage to
the country at large, and this great constituency which was most immediately inter-
ested. The measure was now law, and he and all of them were justified in believing
that it would assist in allaying the strife between classes, and increasing in a marked
degree the prosperity of the country. It was conceived liberally, and if administered
fairly would give satisfaction. He had every hope that its administration would be
just, honest, and wise. He had every confidence in the Minister who was charged with
the administration of the law. He was a man of experience, and who was moved by
the one consideration —to do justice to all.” This extract contains references to the
leading points in the policy of Sir Patrick Jennings as a popular representative. His
intimate knowledge of the country and its wants fits him to deal with public questions
in a methodic and practical way, and his municipal training in Victoria qualifies him
to speak with authority on subjects relevant to the management and progress of the
inland towns of the colony. As a leading squatter, with large interests in three
colonies, he is a representative of that wealthy and influential class in the community.
At the same time it is to be noted that his name does not connect itself with any of
those acts of aggression with which the opponents of the squatting class are in the
habit of charging some of its members. His character has been uniformly a broad one,
and the reputation for a generous liberality which is associated with his public career


accompanies him into private life. In these respects he is a lair type of the represen-
tative outgrowth of our Australian social and political life.
It is impossible to glance back at such a career as that just traced, crowded as it
is with service and distinction, without a feeling of patriotic pride in the colony of which
the social and public life is represented by such honourable and high-minded
gentlemen. Young as we are in our national record, we have already declared our-
selves sufficiently to allow our outside critics to judge the colonist of the future. It
is such men as Sir Patrick Alfred Jennings who, by the singleness of their patriotic
spirit, the purity of their public record, and the stainless honour of their lives, provide
noble models for the admiration of the many, and for the formation ol a worthy national
character. As active elements in current colonial history their careers claim the
careful study of all who observe colonial institutions, and would grasp a clear concep-
tion of the educative forces of colonial social and political life. At the great gathering
of representatives of the Greater Britain, which is to take place in London at the
Indian and Colonial Exhibition next year, it is of the first importance that the oldest
of the Australian Colonies should be capably and fittingly represented. It would be
difficult to find any public man in Australia who so thoroughly and completely unites
in himself all the qualities desirable in the person chosen to fill such an honourable
position. Quite apart from the question of individual capacity and experience, Sir
Patrick Jennings is peculiarly fitted to represent us, as personifying those striking and
distinctive Australian characteristics of culture, wealth, and public spirit, which, with
his well-known and no less desirable social gifts, the subject of this memoir so happily
possesses and evidences.




/
w '0&mmx:pk
' w V
W. MACLEOD. DEL.
I*0 - H'N Ji ''- AEART’ M HR,


THE HON. JOHN MACARTHUR, M.L.C.
||p * s ar ß’ e b T due to the enterprise and foresight of some few among tlie first
|l|P|; Australian colonists that the great resources of the continent were, at an
Jo* early period of our history, laid under contribution. Opportunities and
capabilities that might have long been overlooked were observed by intelli-
P gent and public-spirited men, who were not slow to foresee the result of their
prompt and immediate development on the future of the young settlement.
No industry within the colony has done so much for its commercial and consequently
general progress than that of wool-growing. The wide pastures of Australia invited
such an industry, and the markets of the old world offered an outlet for its product.
I o Mr. John Macarthur is due the first credit of having practically recognised this fact
and founded the pastoral industry of the colony. His part in other stirring historical
episodes, however interesting and indeed distinctive in a career less useful than his, are
comparatively insignificant beside the part he took in conferring on the colonies this
great service. In introducing the wool-trade Mr. Macarthur laid the foundation of
Australian prosperity, and ensured stability and wealth to what had hitherto been but
a struggling and uncertain settlement. Political services, and the more brilliant happy
chances in the lives of public men that give them place in a history which they but
feebly help to make, are but the filagree and decorative tracery that surround the
genuine fibre of honest practical work performed by men with such a tangible record
as this. The discovery of gold was but an accident of fortune in our history. Great
as was its influence on the colony, coming as it did at a critical time, and bringing
with it an accession of population that at once raised the country to a higher level —
this happy accident was but an ephemeral and passing episode in our record when
considered in connection with the foundation of what has proved to be the staple
industry and chief commercial support of Australian settlement. When we add to this
the fact that the name of Captain John Macarthur connects itself most prominently
with the first manifestation of public feeling in the colony it will be seen that his claim
to a place amongst the representative men of Australian public life is by no means
trifling or unimportant.
John Macarthur was born in Plymouth, Devonshire, in 1767. His parents had
been compelled to leave his native Argyleshire after the battle of Culloden, in which
his father had fought with his brothers on the side of the Stuart in 1745. During the
subsequent proceedings against the followers of the Pretender he escaped to the West
Indies, whence he returned in a few years to Plymouth, where the subject of the present
memoir was born. Young Macarthur attended a private school in his native town as
a boy, and entered the army at the age of fifteen years. After spending twelve months
with his regiment he retired on half-pay to Devonshire, where he applied himself to


the study and practice of agriculture. Here he remained for some five or six years,
till he accepted a lieutenancy in the 102 nd regiment, formed for service in New South
Wales. Before leaving home he married a Miss Neale, the daughter of one of the
gentlemen of his county, and arrived with his wife in Sydney, in June, 1790. He
became Captain and Paymaster of the New South Wales Corps soon after his
arrival, and in 1793 he received a grant of two hundred acres of land near Parramatta,
which he named after his wife, “ Elizabeth Farm.” His home tastes, acquired and
cultivated during his retirement in Devonshire, here led him to devote his time to the
development of the resources of his little estate, and he entered at once on the breeding
of the hair-bearing Cape and Bengal sheep, of which there were at that time a fair
number in the colony. About the year named a few English sheep, however, which
had been accidentally brought out from Ireland, were landed in the colony, and Captain
Macarthur’s attention was arrested by the effect produced by their crossing with the
original sheep in the settlement. It was observable that the crossing led to a decided
improvement in the staple of the wool, the hairy coat of the Cape sheep being
converted into fleece, while the climate was found in every way favourable for its
propagation. These valuable facts having thus been satisfactorily ascertained, Captain
Macarthur at once took steps to act on his discovery. In 1796, a friend, Captain
Waterhouse, was commissioned to proceed to the Cape of Good Hope, whence supplies
were ordinarily obtained for the settlement. Captain Macarthur at once suggested
to him to bring back on his return a few sheep of improved breed, proposing to
share the cost and proceeds of the speculation, which he foresaw would result
in the establishment of fine wool growing as a remunerative colonial industry.
The scheme was taken up, and an accident afforded Captain Waterhouse an opportunity
of fulfilling his commission. Some pure merino sheep of the famed Escurial flock,
which had been presented by the Spanish Court to the Dutch Government, had been
sent out to the Dutch settlement at Cape Colony under the care of Colonel Gordon, an
officer in the Dutch service. That officer’s decease having involved his widow in a
dispute with the Dutch Government, the sheep in question were sold with the rest of
his effects. Captain Waterhouse was fortunate enough to secure a certain number,
and on the return of the expedition to this colony, Captain Kent, who had succeeded
Captain Waterhouse, brought back with him about twenty-four sheep, which were
divided amongst Captains Macarthur, Kent, Cox, and the Kev. Mr. Marsden. Captain
Macarthur received five ewes and one ram as his share, and he appears to have been the
only one who thought fit to give the requisite attention to these valuable animals,
which were neglected by his friends. But although his perseverance in the matter not
unfrequently exposed him to no small degree of ridicule on the part of his
contemporaries, he at length succeeded in forming a considerable flock, which he
greatly increased some years later by the purchase of the whole of the sheep comprising
the flocks of Colonel Eoveaux. In ten years from the date of his commencing sheep-
farming with seventy animals of the inferior Bengal breed, his flock had increased to
four thousand.
About this time an event occurred which, while it illustrates the social customs
of the colony at the time, was productive of momentous consequences. For some reason


of an Inch we have no record, Lieutenan-Colonel Paterson, of the New South Wales
Corps, challenged Captain Macarthur to fight a duel. A meeting took place
September, 1801, in which Colonel Paterson was severely wounded by his antagonist.
On information of the affair reaching Governor King he at once issued a General Order
placing Captain Macarthur and the two seconds under arrest until the wounded officer’s
life was pronounced out of danger. Eight days afterwards a further order was issued,
requiring all four gentlemen concerned to find security and enter into recognisances to
keep the peace, ihis Captain Macarthur declined to do, considering himself unfairly
tieated, and demanded a court-martial. The Governor thereupon issued a further order
that Captain John Macarthur do prepare to embark for England in the arrest he has
thought proper to place himself under.” He was conveyed home accordingly, but the
step proved afterwards to have a very material influence on his further fortunes. He
had taken with him samples of his wool, which, some time after his arrival in
were submitted to a committee of home manufacturers, in 1803. Just about this time
the operatives in some of the great woollen manufactories of England had discovered
an obsolete statute of Queen Elizabeth prohibiting woollen manufacturers from engaging
the services of persons in any capacity in connection with that industry without having
served a regular apprenticeship. The matter attracted considerable attention, and
threatened to aim a heavy blow at the woollen industry. Captain Macarthur’s
samples being submitted at this time proved that the raw material could be produced of
good quality and in large quantities within the limits of the Empire, and strong recom-
mendations were addressed on behalf of Captain Macarthur and his subject to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, Lord Camden. He was jjersonally examined
before the Privy Council on the subject, as was also ex-Governor Hunter, who strongly
supported his theories, ihe ultimate result was that the matter w T as taken up with
interest by the Secretary of State for the Colonies. The Privy Council cordially
adopted Mr. Macarthur’s plans for rendering England independent of Spain for the
supply of the best wools, and with its sanction he purchased two merino ewes and two
rams, with which he returned to the colony in 1805 in the ship Argo, and took
possession of a grant of 5,000, afterwards increased to 10,000 acres on the Cowpastures,
which he named after Lord Camden, his patron. Here he prosecuted his plans with
assiduity, under the sanction and with the assistance of the governor for some years,
until the arrival of Governor Bligh, when he came into collision with that unpopular
official in connection with events which are in themselves historical.
Governor King was succeeded in the Government of the colony by Captain Bligh
of the Royal Navy, August 13, 180 G. This official had already earned an unfavour-
able notoriety in connection with the mutinies of the Nore and of the ship Bounty ,
and his peremptory and domineering disposition was fated to bring him into collision
with the people of the colony he was commissioned to rule. One of the first matters
over which the ill accord was felt was the regulation of the liquor traffic. There can
be no doubt that Governor Bligh in this particular did good service. Liquor, the
monopoly of the sale of which had been almost entirely usurped by the officers of the
New South Wales Corps, had become a recognised medium of currency and exchange
in the colonj. In his evidence on the subject given before the court-martial on


Colonel Johnson five years later, Mr. Macarthur asserted that “ officers, clergy, and
every description of inhabitant were under the necessity of paying for the necessaries
of life in that sort of commodity which the people who had to sell, were inclined to
take,” —and ardent spirits was the most generally recognised medium for this purpose.
In the instructions issued to Governor Bligh under the sign manual, the following
extract occurs : —“ And whereas it hath been represented to us that great evils have
arisen from the unrestrained importation of spirits into our said settlement. . .
We do therefore strictly enjoin you, on pain of our utmost displeasure, to order and
direct that no spirits shall be landed from any vessel coming to our said settlement
without your consent and you are at the same time to take the most
effectual measures that the said order and direction shall be effectually obeyed and
complied with.” One of Bligh’s first acts, pursuant to these instructions, was to
issue an order establishing pains and penalties for the punishment of any attempt at
barter of spirits for grain of all kinds, or the necessaries of life in general, or to
labourers for their hire. For these steps the Governor received the approbation of the
Home authorities. It was scarcely to he expected, however, that such measures
could be enforced without giving offence to those persons whose rank or office had
enabled them to draw large profits from this traffic, and from the importation of such
a popular commodity which they exchanged at an enormous percentage over its value,
to the settlers who desired to realise on their produce. The new arrangement at once
gave rise to a strong feeling of dissatisfaction, which was by no means decreased by
the stringent measures taken by the Governor to ensure its passing into effect. By
this time Mr. Macarthur had relinquished the pursuits which had hitherto occupied his
time, and had embarked in business in Sydney as a merchant. Of course as such his
interest was quite opposed to the new regulations, and his personal opposition to the
Governor was heightened by a decision given against him by his Excellency in an
appeal case. In February, 1807, an order had been issued by Governor Bligh,
prohibiting the distillation of spirits in the colony. In March following the ship Dart,
of which Mr. Macarthur was part owner, arrived from London with two stills on
board, one of which was consigned to him. On the manifest being exhibited to the
Governor, he directed the proper officer to place both stills in the King’s store, to be
sent back to England. As the boilers had been packed with other stores, however,
Mr. Macarthur was allowed to receive possession of them, while the other essential
parts of the still were conveyed to the King’s store. It being subsequently discovered
that the boilers remained in his possession, the Governor issued directions for the enforce-
ment of his order respecting the re-shipment of the stills to England. This matter
brought Mr. Macarthur into still stronger antagonism to Governor Bligh,—a state of
things which culminated a few weeks afterwards. In November, 1807, the schooner
Parramatta , of which Mr, Macarthur was part owner, returned to Sydney from a
voyage to Tahiti. It appeared that a convict named Hoare had escaped from the
colony by the Parramatta on her outward voyage, and, as under the colonial regula-
tion such an occurrence subjected the owners to the forfeiture of a bond of £9OO,
into which they were required to enter, proceedings were taken to recover that penalty.
The bond was forfeited in due course, and Mr. Macarthur appealed to the Governor,


who refused to interfere. The owners then declined to pay the penalty, and the vessel
was seized. Mr. Macarthur notified to the captain that his ownership ceased, and that
officer went ashore with his crew, and, conformably to the colonial regulations, made
affidavit of the circumstances before the Judge-Advocate, who addressed a letter to
Mr. Macarthur requiring him to appear in Sydney on the day following, to answer in
the case. To this summons Mr. Macarthur sent a written refusal, when a warrant was
issued by the Judge-Advocate for his arrest, and sent to Chief-Constable Oakes, at
I arramatta, for service. On receiving the document Mr. Macarthur gave the officer a
written reply in the following words “ You will inform the persons who sent you here
with the warrant you have shown me, and given me a copy of, that I never will submit
to the horrid tyranny that is attempted, until lam forced; that I consider it with scorn
and contempt, as Ido the persons who directed it to be executed.” This note Con-
stable Oakes delivered next morning to Judge-Advocate Atkins in Sydney, relating to
him and the Governor the particulars of his interview with Macarthur. A second
warrant was issued, and Mr. Macarthur was arrested by five constables on the same
day, and having been brought before the bench of magistrates in Sydney, he was
committed for trial for high misdemeanours, before a Criminal Court assembled for the
purpose. This tribunal, consisting of the Judge-Advocate and six officers of the New
South M ales Corps, to which the prisoner formerly belonged, was convened at Sydney
on January 25, 1808, the court being crowded with colonists and soldiers. The
indictment charged Mr. Macarthur with detaining the stills, and inducing the
crow of the Parramatta to come on shore against the regulations, and also with an
intention to stir up the people of the colony to hatred and contempt of the Govern-
ment in the inflammatory and seditious words he had used in the court on a previous
occasion, and with a seditious contempt of the authority of the Judge-Advocate, and
with littering false, scandalous, malicious, and seditions words of His Excellency in the
paper he had given Constable Oakes. The defendant objected to the Judge-Advocate
as President of the Court, on the ground of his being an interested party, and in a
long and vehement protest he submitted his reasons and authorities for challenging
th at official. On its conclusion the Judge-Advocate threatened to commit the prisoner
for contempt. He was interrupted by Captain Kemp, one of the officers present on
the Bench, and, seeing that confusion was likely to ensue, he adjourned the proceedings
and left the Court. The prisoner, who claimed that he had private information that
his life was in danger, requested the protection of a military guard. This the officers
undertook to grant ; but the Provost-Marshall, Mr. Gore, considering the Court
adjourned on the Judge-Advocate’s proclamation, and regarding this action of the
officers as an attempt at a rescue, at once procured a warrant for the imprisonment of
the prisoner in gaol. In the meantime the six officers composing the Court informed
the Governoi that they upheld Air. Macarthur’s objection, and requested him to nom-
inate a Judge-Advocate in place of Richard Atkins, Esq.; this request His Excellency
refused. Considerable correspondence between the officers and his Excellency resulted
in which the latter quoted from the appointment of the Judge-Advocate and pointed
out that without him the rest of the Bench did not constitute a Court, and demanding
all the papers in the case to be delivered to the Provost-Marshall. The Governor


also wrote to Major Johnston, commanding the Forces, requiring his attendance,
but that officer sent back a verbal reply excusing himself on the plea of illness.
Next morning the Provost-Marshall’s warrant against Mr. Macarthur was again
executed, and, the Judge-Advocate having formally accused the officers ol “ crimes
amounting to a usurpation of His Majesty’s government, and tending to incite or create
rebellion or other outrageous treason in the people of the territory,” the Governor
summoned the officers to appear before him at Government House on the following day,
in the meantime again sending for Major Johnston. On receiving this second
summons that officer came into Sydney to the Barracks, where the officers and
friends of Mr. Macarthur represented to him the state of affairs and persuaded
him to assume ttie government, and place the Governor under arrest. Major
Johnston placed himself at the head of his regiment, and proceeded to Govern-
ment House (then a small verandah cottage in O’Connell Street). The building was
surrounded by the troops, those on guard having joined their comrades. Mrs. Putland,
the Governor’s daughter, attempted to oppose the entry, but without success. An
entrance was effected by the soldiers and a thorough search made for his Excellency,
who was not found for some time, until he was at length discovered beneath a bed, it
is alleged, in a back apartment. A general order was then issued thanking the soldiers
for the assistance they had rendered, and appointing Captain Abbott Judge-Advocate
in the room of Richard Atkins, superseded, while several of the most prominent actors
in the recent proceedings, including Mr. Macarthur, who was made Colonial Secretary,
were nominated magistrates of the territory. Bligh was confined in a subaltern’s
apartment in the barracks till March, 1809, when he was permitted to assume command
of H.M.S. Porpoise, on condition of proceeding to England forthwith. He embarked, and
at once gave orders to open fire on the city, which were disobeyed. He proceeded to
Tasmania, and thence returned to Sydney after Governor Macquarie’s arrival. He
remained here from January to May 12. 1810, when he went to England, to be present
at the court-martial on Major Johnston. Mr. Macarthur also went home for the
enquiry, which resulted, in 1811, in the cashiering of Major Johnston, while Mr.
Macarthur was prohibited from returning to the colony for eight years, which time he
occupied with his sons in continental travel, studying the culture of the vine and olive.
The result of these observations was apparent on his return, when he started at
Camden Park the first vineyard in Australia. At length, in 1817, the prohibition was
removed, and he returned to the colony in a vessel, a large portion of which had been
placed at his disposal by the Secretary of State for the conveyance of plants and other
stores to be devoted by him to various public purposes. Eight years later he was
nominated to the Legislative Council, but he retired from public life some six years
later, on the death of his son, a promising young equity barrister in London. He died
at Camden Park, April 10, 1834, at the age of sixty-seven years. Lieutenant-General
Sir Edward Macarthur, K.C.8., the Hon. Sir William Macarthur, and James
Macarthur, Esq., of Camden, were his sons. The Rev, George Macarthur, of King’s
School, Parramatta, is also a relative.




-O':;'"
--- jp ■■■■
I X • •
t
W. MACLEODi DEL.
fr#** cJd&yx
mi —


HON, WILLIAM JOSEPH TRICKETT
M.L.A., MINISTER FOR PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
f Sir HE subject of this memoir is another of the young Australians who have been
<J| y=b honoured with a place in the Stuart-Dalley administration. Trained and
educated, if not actually born in the colon} T , his whole career, both private
(|) and professional, has been spent under Australian institutions. He was one
I of those who were selected by the popular sense of fitness to represent the
people in the successive grades through which a popular representative has to
pass—as alderman, member of Parliament, and Minister of the Crown. In each of the
former of these capacities Mr. Trickett has proved himself a useful and capable man,
and in his successive positions as Postmaster-General and Minister for Public
Instruction he has shown himself to be an able, intelligent, and painstaking holder of
the high ministerial office. To the Stuart Ministry belongs the special honour of having
brought to the front, and taught the public to acknowledge, an amount of young and
native talent of which it was at one time the discreditable fashion to deny the existence
altogether. \V hile the rank and file of the Assembly produces from its ranks from time
to time such men as some of the members of the present Cabinet, who have been
hitherto unknown as holders of ministerial offices, it can scarcely be alleged ao-ain as
it has been in the past, that the governing power of the House lias been exhausted.
Mr. Trickett lias made his way honourably to the front, not by blatant self-assertion or
selfish and coldly-calculating intrigue, but by honest warmth of zeal in the performance
of his earlier public duties, much of well-earned public good faith, and the conscientious,
unobtrusive, but effective and manly discharge of the high responsible offices of that
dignified post which, as a representative young Australian, he has the honour to
fill.
William Joseph Trickett was born at Gibraltar, September 2, 1843, his father, Mr.
Joseph Trickett, being a civil engineer engaged on certain works there in the service
of the Government. In 1847 Mr. Trickett returned to England and remained in the
Government service at Woolwich for several years, until he received the appointment
of manager of the coining department of the Sydney branch of the Royal Mint. In
that capacity he came to Sydney in July, 1854, his son, the subject of this memoir,
accompanying him. Here his high qualifications as a civil engineer and his valuable
practical experience were usefully employed in the erection of the Mint and machinery.
Mr. Trickett brought out with him a party of Royal Engineers for this work, who
successfully carried out the plan entrusted to them under his direction. He remained
in the Mint until 1872, when he retired on a liberal Imperial pension. He was a
magistrate of the territory, and took considerable interest in the proceedings of the
many boards and commissions on which his services were sought and given, A visit


to England proved injurious to his health, and he died there, January, 1873. Meanwhile
our present subject, on his arrival in the colony at the age of about ten years, was sent to
St. Philip’ s Grammar School for a year or two, and thence to the Lyceum, finishing his
scholastic training at the Sydney Grammar School, Here he left a good classical and
mathematical record, leaving the school after passing through its highest grades at the
age of seventeen. He chose the law for Ins future profession, and was articled to Mr.
Richard Holdsworth, of the firm of Messrs. Rowley, Holdsworth, and Garrick. He
attended the law lectures of Mr. Justice Hargrave during the duration of his articles,
and otherwise applied himself with careful assiduity to the study of his profession, till,
oil the completion of that term, he was admitted at the age of twenty-two years as a
solicitor on the motion of his eaidy friend and adviser, the late Edward Butler, Q.C.
The zeal and persistence manifested by Mr. Trickett during his period of pupillage in
the law accompanied him in its professional practice, with the result that his connection
rapidly grew, and he became known as a careful and reliable legal adviser. Three
years after his admission he entered into partnership with Mr. W. H. Pigott, lately
member for Canterbury, and very soon the name of the firm became well-known in
legal circles in the city. As one indication of the professional standing of its
members it may be mentioned that both partners have been at different times appointed
by the judges of the Supreme Court as law examiners for the admission of solicitors.
Mr. Trickett continued a member of the firm till about two years ago, when he retired
for the purpose of giving his attention unreservedly to public affairs.
Our subject made his first appearance before the public in connection with municipal
affairs, the training ground of many of our most useful representative men. His father
had been an alderman of the borough of Woollahra from its incorporation in 1860 till
his departure from the colony, when his son was invited by the ratepayers to fill his
place in 1873. The care and attention which he had bestowed on his own affairs was
divided with the wants of his municipality thenceforth, with such good results that he
rapidly advanced in public confidence and w T as three times elected Mayor. Besides the
usual routine of municipal duties, he was particularly active in the matters of water
supply, sewage, and tramway extension, and in all these his influence and energetic
advocacy have been beneficially felt. After having been solicited to engage in a former
contest for the parliamentary representation ofhis electorate without success, he received a
very numerously signed requisition on the occasion of the general election in 1880, when
he consented to offer himself for the electors’ acceptance. In delivering his first
speech on the hustings at Paddington, he sketched in general terms a programme of
his intended action in the Legislature which his subsequent career has well filled out.
In that address he pledged himself to give his attention to the questions of municipal
government, of civil service and law reform, and public education, besides the other
matters of passing interest at the time. He was successful at the poll, where he received
the highest number of votes, being upwards of three hundred over the second successful
candidate. One of his first acts of good service as a parliamentary representative was
his obtaining the extension of the tramway to Woollahra, on the completion of which
he Avas entertained at a public banquet by his constituents, May, 1881. At the large
gathering of some of the best known of our public men on this occasion, Mr. Trickett’s


exertions, as well as the promise of his future public career, received full recognition.
nother matter in which his influence was largely felt was the substitution of stipen-
diary magistrates for the old unpaid magistracy of the city, a beneficial and necessary
reform which he unceasingly advocated until it was embodied in the Metropolitan
Magistrates Bill, passed December, 1881. During the year 1882 he made a trip home,
\ isitmg the United States, England, Scotland, France, and Italy. On his return to the colony
le contributed to the Press a series of observations gathered in the principal cities of those
countries, which showed that he had not forgotten the interests of the colony while
abroad. His notes on the tram system in use in San Francisco were especially inter-
esting and valuable, while his suggestions for the improvement of our postal and
telegraph system showed his aptitude to profit by what he had seen. On his return he
resumed his duties in the Legislature, where he was always distinguished as a repre-
sentative of liberal and intelligent views. His action in respect of the Sunday Laws
ga\e one instance of this, and whenever a question came up for discussion his contribu-
tion was always marked by that manliness of tone and broadness of spirit which are
nov looked on as the distinctive notes of the political representatives of young Australia-
The talent for hard work evidenced by Mr. Trickett was not overlooked by his party
in the Assembly, for we find that on the resignation of Mr, Copeland from the post of
Minister for Works in the Stuart Ministry, and Mr. Wright’s translation to that office,
our subject was called upon to fill the office of Postmaster-General thus rendered
vacant, May, 1883. The appointment was the theme of universal eulogy in the
1 ress of the city, and on Mr, 1 rickett offering himself again, under an unnecessary and
vexatious clause in the Constitution Act, to the electors of his constituency for re-
election, he was returned without opposition. One of the first matters of importance
that engaged his attention in his department Avas the adjustment of a postal contract
with the Orient Steam Navigation Company for the conveyance of mails to and from
Europe. I his business Avas satisfactorily arranged in every respect. By the arrange-
ment entered into this colony secured a mail service xvith a contract time shorter than
any yet entered into Avith any of the colonies. This Avas ensured, not by the payment
of a heavy subsidy, but by our agreeing to pay the company a reasonable sum, accord-
ing to the amount of the mail matter carried ; the postage on which, it was calculated,
Avill balance the amount paid to the company. The plan combined many advantages :
the rates of postage as well as the time Avere lessened, and the transmission of letters
Avas expedited generally. Another reform introduced by the Postmaster-General Avas
that of decreased cable charges, and later on, the much-needed and popular one of the
extension of the penny postage system to Parramatta. The in our com-
munication with the mother country was effected with the co-operation of the Post-
masters-General of neighbouring colonies, Avhom Mr. Trickett succeeded in favourably
interesting in the matter. In all his diplomatic relations with the intercolonial Postal
Departments he Avas very successful, even against much older politicians than himself-
Avhile in the negotiations Avhich he conducted Avith the Victorian Premier, Mr. Graham
Berry, in reference to the postage rate on the Peninsular and Oriental Line, he
shoAved himself well up to his Avork. The Avholc of his term of office in the Postal
Department was characterised by the most active interest on his part in even’ detail


of his administrative duties, and many suggestions made by him for the further
improvement of the postal regulations of the colony will doubtless be adopted at some
future time. He evinced from the first an intelligent conception of what this great
public department should be. Mr. Trickett’s speech, in moving the adoption of the
Orient contract in the House, embodied a careful explanation of its working, as the
following extract will show : —“ He thought it a matter for congratulation that the
o no
Government had been able to initiate this contract with the Orient Company. The
first few clauses referred to the establishment of a fortnightly mail to alternate with
that of the P. and 0. Company. This had now been settled, and the time-table that
had been prepared was so arranged that a mail would be despatched to England on
every alternate Tuesday and Thursday, while from England the mails were to be
despatched every Friday. In the arrangement that had been made it was also settled
that the English Government, who had dealt very liberally with the colony in the
matter, were to convey the mails on from Suez. That was a necessary step to take,
and took some time to bring it about. Clause twelve would be looked upon as a
satisfactory part of the arrangement, inasmuch as it provided that the contract time
in which this service is carried out is reduced to thirty nine days. By the concluding
paragraph the whole of the contract was subject to the approval of Parliament.” The
resolution was carried on the voices in the Assembly. By its adoption the first step
was taken towards doing away with subsidies, it being a cardinal principle of the
contract that the Company was to be remunerated by payment of postages on all mail
matter actually carried.
On May 2, ISS4, Mr. Trickett, after a successful career as Post-master General
was sworn in as Minister of Public Instruction, in the room of Mr. G. 11. Reid, his
successor in the Post Office being the Honorable James Norton. One of the chief
difficulties of his new position confronted him a few weeks after his acceptance of his
second portfolio. An important deputation, comprising the heads of the various
Protestant denominations represented in New South Wales, with the Primate at their
head, waited on him to make certain representations in connection with religious
instruction in the State schools. It was strongly urged by that deputation that
religious instruction should be provided for in the training schools for teachers,
as well as in their examinations, and that the time for such instruction, expressly
provided by the Act in primary schools, should be allowed also in the High schools. A
protest was also entered against the alleged discontinuance of the National School
series of class books, which contain Scripture lessons of a general moral and religious
kind. Mr. Trickett, in his reply, confined himself entirely to the letter of the Act,
and pointed out to the deputation the impossibility of complying with their suggestions
without infringing its existing provisions or framing new ones ; while, as to the class
books, he informed those who waited upon him that the approved scries was used
continuously throughout the State Schools. During his term of office Mr. Trickett
has found it part of his duty on many occasions to open State Schools and Mechanics’
Institutes in various parts of the colony, and on all of these occasions his speeches and
addresses on the important question of Public Instruction have been valuable and full
of information. There seems to be no detail of the business of his department which


he has not made it a point to master. Before his appointment to the Education Office
it fell to his lot on one occasion to open the new Public School at West Maitland, in
the absence of the Minister. Me there delivered one of the most useful addresses that
he has yet made on the subject suggested by the event. An extract therefrom will
show something of what has been done in the way of providing instruction for our
people in New South Wales. “ The report of the Minister for Public Instruction
shows that in 1872 there were 902 primary schools in the colony, with an
average enrolment of 88,487 children, while in 1882 there are no less than
1358 such schools, with an average enrolment of 189,141 children. Another
very satisfactory feature in the report is the statement that no less than
20(1,879 pupils of various ages are now being educated in the colony, either in
public or private schools ; in other words, one in every four of the population of
817,468 is now deriving some kind of instruction. This shows that the community
is only too eager to avail itself of the advantages of education, and the above
figures present a proportion of people being educated greater than in any other country
in the world.” Since Mr. Trickett has been more closely identified with the educa-
tional interests of the colony, as Minister for Public Instruction, he has spoken in
public on very many occasions at the opening of schools and institutions con-
nected with that department. His first appearance in public in that capacity was
at the opening of the Rand wick School of Arts, in May, 1884. On that occasion
he advocated the study of public speaking in the schools, and the elevation of the tone
of the Mechanics’ Institutes throughout the colony. In this direction, as he pointed out,
there is much room for improvement. The practice of allowing the buildings which
should serve as educational centres in their respective districts, to be given up to
popular entertainments and amusements merely, is quite foreign to the real scope and
intent of these institutions. The Granville School of Arts was opened by the Minister
in the following month, and in his address on that occasion, Mr. Trickett gave an
interesting sketch of the origin and progress of the present institution in Sydney, from
which we take this extract: —“On March 22, 1833, now over fifty years ago, the
institution known as the Sydney School of Arts was first established. On board the
ship Stirling Castle , which brought to this colony fifty Scottish mechanics, was a
Scottish clergyman, the Rev. Henry Carmichael, who came out here in the interests of
high-class education, and who, during the voyage, started classes amongst the crew
and passengers, which classes were regularly and advantageously attended by all on
board. The idea there originated of forming themselves into a society which should
combine the advantages of a mechanics’ institute and a benefit society. The movement
would have fallen to the ground after the separation of the immigrants on their arrival,
but for the zeal and energy on the part of Mr. Carmichael, who was nobly aided in his
good cause by Governor Sir Richard Bourke. At a meeting held in the Court House,
Sydney, on March 22, 1833, the Sydney School of Arts was first launched into being,
and amongst those who assisted in the good work were Sir Thomas Mitchell, Mr.
Edward Deas-Thomson, Dr. Lang, Rev. Mr, Carmichael, Mr. Thomas Walker, and
others,” Another of the brief and excellent addresses which Mr. Trickett has made in
his official capacity was one delivered at the Hurlstone Training College for teachers.


About six months later, at the beginning of 1885, he opened the Public School at
Waterloo, and in the course of his speech he gave some interesting particulars of the
Kindergarten system, which he approved of under certain modifications, but condemned
on the score of expense. An experimental school on Kindergarten lines had been
recently closed by the Department. On several occasions, while travelling about the
country in his Ministerial capacity, he has made happy and effective speeches on the
current questions of the day which showed that he keeps himself well abreast of public
opinion, and well informed on all matters connected with the working of his depart-
ment. He appears to have given a special study to the education question in all its
abstract and administrative phases, and has made himself a competent authority on
every branch of its operations.
Apart from his ministerial capacity Mr. Trickett has always taken a great interest
in Art and its progress in Sydney. It is only within the past few years that this
subject has been taken up as it ought, though we have never been without appreciation
in New South Wales. The popular love of Art received its first encouragement by the
International Exhibition in 1879, when European Art was represented by the works of
some of the best known modern painters. The Art Gallery of New South Wales was
the result of the awakened public interest. During Mr. Trickett’s term of office the
question of erecting a safe and suitable building for this purpose came before him, and
he had the honour of deciding the site and taking the first steps towards the erection
of a temple of Art which will be a credit to our national taste and culture, hrom an
address by Mr, Trickett to the Art Society of New South Wales in August, 1884, we
take the following extract as embodying his views on the scope of art-culture in the
colony : —We are as yet a young country, and Art is at present in its infancy here ;
but I think it is on a sure footing, and what is now wanted is to extend and enlarge
its sphere, so that the whole community may become intelligent admirers and patrons
of Art: first, for the sake of the public culture and refinement ; next, for the public
advantage in obtaining good and worthy works of art ; and lastly, for the encourage-
ment of artists, so that they may receive praise and substantial encouragement.
Surely to extend the sphere of Art should be the aim of all ; for what
more desirable object can any people have than to try and make their social refinement
and intellectual advancement run hand in hand with their material prosperity. It is
gratifying to find that arts and sciences are making advances in our midst, and the
progress of this society is a sure sign that at any rate we are not going backward.
Still we must go onward, and the question is, how are we to heighten the aim of the
fine arts, and get that general appreciation and encouragement I have before referred
to ? The remedy is greatly with the public themselves ; let everyone heighten his
own aim and taste. To have and to cidtivatc this taste is alike within the reach of
rich and poor, for poverty alone does not destroy high feeling and good taste. It has
been well said by Guizot that the study of art possesses this great and peculiar
charm, that it is absolutely unconnected with the struggles and contests of ordinary
life. One very effective means of stamping on the mind of this country a taste for the
arts, is to enable the rising generation to see and appreciate objects of beauty both in
nature and art; for children at an early age begin to admire and enjoy beautiful things,


and there is more chance of developing love of beauty in children than in older people.
Here we have ample opportunity for fostering this taste, for in this free and prosperous
country both old and young have advantages of seeing the beauties of nature. Then
again our liberal Public School system and our Technical schools put within the reach
of old and young, not only the advantages of a primary education, but the means of
availing themselves of lectures on the arts and sciences.” Throughout his term of
CD
office Mr. Trickett has always done everything in his power to enlarge the scope of the
State system of instruction in these branches. The beginning which the department has
made under his direction will doubtless be amplified sufficiently in the future to form
the matrix of a definite artistic taste among the younger generation.
O J CD CD
Mr. Trickett took a leading part in defending the action of himself and his
colleagues in connection with the Soudan Expedition. On his ministerial visits about
the country he spoke with much force and point on this subject, and his speeches are
not ttie least valuable contributions to the literature of the movement. One of the
most noticeable of these deliverances was made on the occasion of a ministerial visit to
Young in March, 1885, at the opening of the Murrumburrah-Young railway. We
make this extract from Mr. Trickett’s speech on that occasion:—■“ Some people had
said a great deal about England not wanting this aid. Well, looking at the case in the
O CD CD ' CD
abstract, I do not suppose for one moment that anyone will contend that this small
body of soldiers will save England ; but as a matter of policy, as a matter of sympathy,
1 contend that the offer was well timed, and its acceptance and the manner of its
acceptance prove that England appreciates the offer ; and I certainly think her rulers
the best judges. The colonies expect the Imperial navy to rally round them at need,
and the}- must be expected to rally round the Imperial standard themselves when
needed. But the one is no more to be expected than the other. Communities cannot
be one-sided. The colonies cannot take the privileges and leave to England the duties
of freedom. United, England and her colonies can defy the world, and nothing has
yet happened which proves so conclusively the genuineness and the reality of this union
as this action of the Government, backed up and applauded as it has been by the whole
of the colonies, and, I may say, by the whole of the British dominions. I say, without
hesitation, that I believe the bulk of the people of this country are with this movement,
and I wish I had possessed fifty votes to record in its favour instead of one, for I feel
sure that in the history of this colony this epoch in our career will be recorded as
marking one of its brightest, noblest, and most chivalrous acts, and will always be
remembered as the time when New South Wales proved that she was not only a colony
but also an ally of Great Britain, and that she took the first and most practical step
towards that great and Imperial federation which I and so many others look anxiously
for.” The whole of this speech, which we give at length elsewhere, was a manly and
outs]Doken vindication of the action of the Government in raising and despatching the
contingent ; and as such was received by the speaker’s auditory on the occasion with
applause, and every demonstration of approval.
It is an encouraging and healthy sign in colonial politics to find an important
post such as that of the Minister for Public Instruction filled so ably by a young poli-
tician who is entirely the product of Australian training and Australian institutions. It


would be difficult to End, In the wliole range of our political life, one so well qualified
to assume the charge of that important State interest. The character ol our educa-
tional system draws much of its colour from that of its ministerial head, and our subject
€/
in this instance has succeeded in impressing his department with much ol its own broad-
ness and liberality of spirit. There are some reforms which still seem desirable to
the public mind ; not the least of which is suggested by the fact that the training of
teachers at the present time is directed rather to the formation of accurately balanced
teaching automata rather than to the turning out of men qualified to inculcate the
spirit as well as the letter of what they are expected to teach. Again, it is almost
incredible that the Department should have tolerated so long the series of reading books
in use in the schools of the State. However valuable the Scripture lessons they
contain may be, it must be admitted as a strange anomaly that Australian children
should be taught to read from text-books which teach them the geography of Great
Britain as that of their own country, —that they live in the northern hemisphere, —
that the sun never appears in the north, —with other interesting but misleading items
of information which the youngest pupil can contradict from his own experience. It
should be possible to prepare a series of graduated class-books containing authentic
information about the country in which the pupils live, with its flora and fauna , its
history, and its literature. As it is, the class-books of the Irish National School series
are ridiculously unsuitable for Australian School use. This reform in our State School
system would come with special propriety from the present Ministry, which has so
completely identified itself with the progress of young Australia,




$ . '
?w-'
W. MACLEOD’ DEL. From PHOTO BY FREEMAN


THE HON. EDMUND BARTON
SPEAKER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
JHf i is a tact in our history worthy of something more than a passing notice that
110 sma -ii proportion ot the names of those who have distinguished themselves
therein have been names ot native-born Australians. It was in the essential
nature of things that many of our prominent public men should have been
born and received their educational training in older lands. The pioneers of
the colonial settlement were necessarily British by birth as well as by
parentage, and it took time to rear a race of native-born Australians trained to take an
active part in the public life of their own country. The list of our native-born public
men is therefore the more remarkable. r i he roll of such names is not in itself a long
one ; but when lengthened by the addition of those who, though not actually born in
the colony, yet came to these shores in infancy, and owe their training to Australian
influences, the list becomes a gratifying and imposing one. Of such are Wentworth,
Dailey, Martin, Robertson, Deniehy, Cowper, Forster, and many others, whose names
are landmarks in our early history and in the records of later achievement. Such names
are the best testimonials that could be given of the colony’s growth, just as they are the
best evidences of our social, intellectual, and political progress. To these, however,
are fast being added those of a younger generation of Australian representative men, —
the product of our later development ; and of these we single out that of the Honour-
able Edmund Barton as a notable instance. That gentlemen is a representative type
of the highly-trained, educated, native-born Australian. He has introduced into our
public life a character which is distinctively the outcome of our own educational insti-
tutions and the professional life of the colony. All those manly qualities of mind and
conduct which should naturally spring from our free institutions and our open arenas
lor public competition And a fit exponent in Edmund Barton. His honourable though
short public career is a standing witness to that type of young Australian manhood
that our well-wishers may look forward to see distinguishing the leading figures and
representative men of the Australian public life of the future.
Edmund Barton was born at the Glebe, Sydney, January 18, 1849. He went
through his educational training entirely in Sydney, commencing at the Fort Street
Model School, whence he went to the Sydney Grammar School. At both these
institutions he was successful in his studies, gaining the captaincy of the latter as well
as two scholarships. At the age ol sixteen he matriculated at the University,
receiving a special prize from the Senate as facile pnnceps in Classics. During the
second and third years of his University course he held successively the Lithgow and
Cooper Scholarships, and graduated in 1868 with first class classical honours and the
University Prize of JC 2S. Two years afterwards he took his degree of Master of


Arts, thus completing at the age of twenty-one years a very honourable and successfu
academic career. In the meantime, from May, 1868, to June, 1870, Mr. Barton had
been devoting his attention to the study of the law in the solicitor’s office of Mi.
Burton Bradley; rather with a view, however, to familiarising himself -with the
practice than of entering the legal profession as an attorney. He already decided
on joining the other branch of the profession, so that we find him duiing the eighteen
months following the date last given—from June, 1870, to December, 18 il in the
Chambers of Mr. G. C. Davis, barrister-at-law, since deceased. To the generous
kindness of this gentleman, whose name is so honourably known in the profession
which he graced by his personal qualities no less than by his talents, Mr. Barton
confesses the deepest obligation. In December, 1871, our subject was called to the
Bar of New South Wales.
Mr. Barton’s political history dates from the enfranchisement ot the Sydney
University in 1877. According to the provisions of the Electoral Act, the University
was entitled to Parliamentary representation on the number of its superior graduates
reaching one hundred . This was the case in the year named, when Mr. Barton
contested the representation of the culture of the country with Mr. William Charles
Windeyer, now a Judge of the Supreme Court. The latter was successful by a
majority of six votes. Shortly after this Mr. Barton was appointed to a Crown Prose-
cutorship, which he held until the resignation of Mr. Windeyer left the representation
of the University again vacant. The late member, having been Attorney-General in
the Parkes Ministry of 1879, had been appointed to a temporary Judgeship, necessi-
tating his retirement from Parliament. Dr. Arthur Renwick, a member of the Senate
and Mr. Edmund Barton, were the candidates on this occasion, the latter being elected
by a large majority over his opponent. During the course of the following year he
was elected a member of the University Senate, a position which he still holds. The
new Electoral Act, which was passed in the year after Mr. Barton went into Parlia-
ment, repealed the Electoral Act of 1858, under which University representation was
conceded, and on the principle being again proposed in the new Bill the clause was struck
out in committee. During the debate on the proposal Mr. Barton spoke as follows :
“The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge had a place in the representation of England
in the time of James I. I find that within recent years the University of London has also
been included in the representation of the country. In the debates which took place in
the British Parliament in 1867 on the subject, I find that not a word was said against
the principle of the representation of the Universities at that time. It has been intended
that the representation of the University should be part of the representation of the
education policy of the country, and that it should be a recognition of the desire to
promote the cultivation of the liberal arts. W r e are told that it is class representation,
but I am quite unable to see that it is so. They are not the sons of rich people
generally who go to the University, but the sons of the poorer and the middle classes.
The sons of the rich at the University are outnumbered by the young men who are
being trained for nearly every one of the callings of a non-manual description, and
they belong to almost every class in the community. There exists, therefore, a power
of discrimination between the claims of candidates in the University constituency


which ought to be exercised, and is exercised in a very large degree, —in as large a
degree as in any other constituency in New South Wales. The principle of having
representatives returned by local election is adopted in the Bill, because it is the most
convenient principle on which to base the representative system. The University
constituency is no infringement of this principle. It is a benevolent, proper, and wise
exception to the general rule. The members of that constituency are scattered all over
the colony, and we know how they value their vote, because gentlemen travel hundreds
of miles in order to exercise their franchise. University representation is not open to
the objection that it tends to make members delegates. There is no such tendency.
1 he representative has to act as far as possible for the good of the community generally.
He has no local interest to serve. It is impossible to say that the representation of
the University is class representation, unless you consider that the attainment of a
certain standard of education by a body of men forms them into a class. I have
heard the objection that this constituency ought not to have the suffrage, because the
number of its members is.so small. We have been told that, after all, we have only
one hundred voters, but the gentlemen who repeat this do not look abroad and
ascertain what is going on. Since we obtained the suffrage three years ago the number
of voters has increased by seventy per cent., and if the proposed amendment giving
Bachelors as well as Masters the suffrage be passed, we shall have an increase of fully
one hundred in the number of constituents ; and, if we adopt the principle of
admitting men from other Universities ad eundem gradum , in a very short time we
shall have an addition of two hundred more voters. I agree with the main provisions
of the Bill, and I would not have raised my voice now, had it not been for the attack
made upon the provision for the representation of the University,” The whole of the
speech from which this extract is taken is a well-argued plea for Universitv
representation, in which all the objections are vigorously combatted. To the general
surprise the clause was lost, though the Premier, Sir Henry Parkes, who shortly
before had been a defeated candidate for the Senate, voted for the principle, which
the good sense and culture of the country will doubtless at no distant date re-affirm,
Mr. Barton’s constituency having been disfranchised from the date of the expiration
of the then current Parliament, its representative was forced to look elsewhere for
a Parliamentary seat. His legislative record had not been a dull one, however,
and the country, ever quick to recognise the promise of senatorial ability, was
not slow to provide a new constituency for the promising young member whose
public career was thus untimely threatened. At the general election, November,
1880, he offered himself for Wellington on the invitation of the electors, when he was
at once returned without opposition. For two years he continued to represent this
constituency in the Legislative Assembly, sitting on the Opposition benches during
the term of office of the Parkes Ministry, to whose Lands Act Amendment Act of
1881-2 he gave a decided opposition. On the defeat of the Government on that
measure in 1882, Mr. Barton appealed to a metropolitan constituency for re-election,
and was returned with Messrs. Reid, Griffiths, and McElhone for East Sydney on
that occasion, December, 1882. Mr. G. H. Reid obtained the highest number of votes,
3,048, Mr. Barton coining next with 2,948 ; the defeated candidates were the 4’remier,


Sir Henry Parkes, the Minister for Mines, Dr. Renwick, and another. At this
election our subject cast in his fortunes with the party which led the reaction of the
country against the political stagnation and decay of public spirit which had overlain
Parliamentary life for the preceding four years, the fortunately exceptional nature of
which period we have glanced at in another memoir. By the defeat of the ministerial
candidates all over the country, room was made in Parliament and in the high offices
of the State for new men with progressive instincts and of high political honour. A
healthy tone took the place of the deadened spirit of the past, and the result was
soon apparent in the renewed vigour that coursed through every channel of public life.
During the agitation which led to this desirable state of things, Mr. Barton had
distinguished himself by his vigorous denunciation of the general policy of the
preceding Government, especially as exemplified in its Land proposals. The amend-
ments submitted he denounced as the merest patchwork legislation, calculated only to
ensure a continuance of the corruption engendered by the maladministration of the
Act on which they were founded ; and he drew forcible attention to the rapid growth
of large freehold estates, and to the necessary result of such on the future of the
colony. The outspokenness and soundness of his views compelled attention, and at
once captivated popular favour. The electors of East Sydney showed in a most
decisive manner their sense of his prospective value as a legislator in their interests by
according him the honourable place on the poll we have recorded. On the opening of
Parliament on January 3, 1883, the House itself confirmed the verdict of his
constituency in a way that was beyond misconception. One of the first steps of the
new Parliament was to proceed to the election of a Speaker. Sir George Wigram
Allen, who hod held that high and honourable office for nearly eight years previously,
was proposed, and Mr. Barton was nominated for the Speakership against him. The
latter was elected by a majority of four votes over his opponent, the numbers being 51
and 47 respectively. It was well known at the time that Mr. Barton did not desire
the honour thus conferred upon him, however much he may have since proved himself
fitted for the discharge of its onerous functions. When Ids name was proposed he was
reported to have done all in his power to dissuade his friends from nominating him.
However, he loyally accepted the issue. The event deprived him of the offer of
ministerial office, which would otherwise certainly have been made him, but which he
had clearly expressed his disinclination to accept.
As Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, of course, Mr. Barton has not been
identified with the measures submitted to Parliament, or with party politics generally.
By the nature of his position he is held aloof from the actual arena of practical politics.
But, in the meantime, he has kept himself well before the attention of the public
by the ability and singular fitness he has evinced for the office of Speaker,—the
most honourable under the Constitution. In that high office he was preceded by some
of oui ablest men, and the test of comparison with these is a severe one for a y oung
politician. The Speakership has been occupied in the following order, and a glance at
the names will show the representative character of the holders of that position : the
Chair was first occupied immediately after the establishment of a Legislative Assembly
under Responsible Government by Sir Daniel Cooper, elected May 22, 1858 ; he was


succeeded by Sir Terence Aubrey Murray, January 31, 1860 ; Sir John Hay held the
post from October 14, 1862, till lie was succeeded by William Munnings Arnold,
November 1, 1865 ; on his death Sir George Wigram Allen was elected Speaker,
March 23, 1875. Since his entry into public life as a member of the Legislative
Assembly, Mr. Barton has made some valuable contributions in his speeches to the
discussion of current public questions. The clearness and force of his deliverances
wore felt from the first, long before the recognition of his capacity by the Parliament of
the country in elevating him to the Speakership. Ihe first speech made by him in the
House was delivered during the debate on the second reading of the Lands Act Further
Amendment Bill, November 6, 1870, in the course of which the following passages
occur : A great deal has been said about the formation of extensive landed estates by
the graziers of this country, and it is almost universally admitted that the operation of
the present system has compelled the graziers to purchase largely, both directly and
indirectly. It is also generally stated, and very seldom denied, that unless there be
soon a great rise in the price of wool, and a considerable increase in the profits of the
graziers, there will be a serious predicament as the result of their being compelled to
lock up their capital unprofitably in the purchase of land. That capital goes first to
the Treasury in payment for land, then to the banks, and is afterwards returned to the
squatter, so that really a very large portion of the money representing our surplus has
only a fictitious existence. I submit that this state of things was not contemplated by
the promoters of the Act of 1861, Ihe object ot that Act was obviously to facilitate
the formation of small freeholds, and by no means to promote that of large landed
estates, the existence of which in older countries has been proved to be so great an evil.
A\ e are told that there is in the popular mind a passion for land, an earnest
desire to acquire a freehold. But if we allow our present system to continue, the very
evil we wish to avoid, namely, the growth of large estates, will ensue here. I have no
doubt that, so far as the colony is concerned, the alienation of the public lands should
be put a stop to ; and that a well-devised system of leasing should be carried on, under
which we might derive a revenue that would for all time to come relieve the country
of the bulk of the taxes it now has to pay. There is another remedy proposed,—to
restrict the right of conditional purchase within certain lines. It is only reasonable
that we should confine the operation of free selection to an area within which it can be
profitably carried on, and within which, for that reason, we may expect that selection
will be of a bona fide character. One or other of these principles,—that is, of national
leases, or a restriction of free selection —will be embodied in some measure of land
reform at no distant date, if not by our present government, then by some other ; and
in the absence of a system of national leases the restriction of free-selection within
defined areas is a plan which will gain converts day by day.” The views here enunci-
ated have since been endorsed by the country in a very large measure by its acceptance
of the Land Bill recently passed into law. They were the ideas of the party of progress,
and the prediction contained in the last sentence of the extract just quoted has already
been very fairly borne out. Another characteristic speech was that made in the course
of the debate on the Public instruction Bill, December 3, 1879. in the course of this
speech Mr. Barton spoke as follows : —“I may state at once that I shall give a very


warm and hearty support to the second reading of this Bill. I cannot say that I agree
with every clause of it, but it is a Bill which tends to bring about that system of
education which ought to be and will inevitably become the policy of the future, —a
system of education which is general, consistent, and uniform in its character. I
suppose it will scarcely be denied that a system of education undertaken by the State
should be in its grasp as large and as comprehensive as possible, because it is not to be
forgotten that those who are to be educated under it will become the fathers and
mothers, the voters and jurymen of the future —that to their hands the greatest powers,
fraught with the most momentous consequences, are to be entrusted ; and that the
future of this country depends very much on the manner in which they exercise them-
Igoon to say that in my belief the system of education should be free. The system
will be practically free, and for that reason I support it ; but I think that the very
small proportion of fees which we shall receive when compared with the total amount
to be expended upon education, is not such as to justify the retention of any payment
whatever. I say further that our system of education should be unsectarian. I cannot
support for a moment any system of education which, in the name of denominationalism,
or under any other name, draws funds from the coffers of the State manifestly for the
propagation of creeds and dogmas widely divergent. What we want is a system which,
while tolerating all religious beliefs, places them on a footing of perfect equality. The
difference between the denominational system and the public school system is all the
difference between bolstering up on the one hand and letting alone on the other.
Denominational education supported by the State bolsters up a number of discordant
beliefs, while the policy of the country as affirmed in the abolition of State aid to
religion is to let all religions alone —neither to discourage nor support any of them.
Still I am not one of those who think that the denominational schools should be hastily
swept away. I am not in favour of doing away with them as rapidly as is proposed in
this Bill, Large vested interests have sprung up under the law ; and to hold out to
the denominations the expectation that the Government will purchase the lands and
buildings which they have acquired, is a delusive prospect. I believe that a longer
time ought to be given, and that the result aimed at should be accomplished in a more
gradual, a more statesmanlike manner. While we should proceed to extinguish these
rival systems —for they are nothing else —yet our object should be to bring about the
change gradually —especially since some people make it a matter of conscience—and in
as tender a manner as possible. No new denominational school ought to be certified ;
but 1 would support a clause for the gradual increase in the minimum number of
scholars in attendance, with a view to get rid of the objection on the score of vested
interests, which would get rid of the denominational schools in the most rational way,
and deprive persons of any temptation to suppose that their interests were being
confiscated. While Ido not support this provision of the Bill in its integrity, still
I say that it is from a desire to extinguish all support to denominational schools
that I support this Bill. I hope no honourable member will charge me with
inconsistency. Holding the opinions I do as to the functions of the State and the
Church —believing that the concern of the State is merely temporal, and that the
concern of the Church is something widely different from that, —I say let each go on in


the exercise of its proper functions—let the Church continue to endeavour to fit us and
our children for a better world, and let the State seek to promote the elements of social
harmony and material prosperity—-let them do their work separately, although, if you
will, side by side. There is no feature of the Bill which entitles it to the respect and
support of every citizen more than the compulsory clause. I cannot for a moment
understand the intense opposition which this principle has met with in every country ?
and is being met with here. We have been told that it is not practicable. It obtains
in Victoria, New Zealand, and Germany, and in Switzerland it has worked for many
years without the slightest complaint being made against it. Not only is it eminently
practicable, but what little compulsion it is necessary to exercise becomes, after a short
time, no compulsion whatever, because the subjects of the State very soon get used to
the exercise ot a gentle system of compulsion, and the consequence is that when they
grow up, after being educated under such a system, they insist on their own children
going to school. Then there is no compulsion, except on the part of the parent. I
have now, I think, dealt with the main provisions of the Bill so far as they relate to
primary education. It is gratifying to me to find that the Bill goes a great deal
further than that. This is the first time that an effort has been made in this country
to carry out a general system of public instruction—a system which will provide the
connecting links between the primary schools and that institution where every youth
of ability and intellect should be found—our University. It is a wise and generous
provision of the State that facilities should be afforded to those who display intelligence
and industry at the public schools to fit themselves for positions they may be ambitious
to attain in after life. I find no provision in the Bill for public scholarships, but I
apprehend that there will be no difficulty in the way of the Government carrying at
any time a vote for exhibitions for scholars who distinguish themselves in the public
schools, in the superior schools, and at the University, The Bill appears to me to be
general in its application and consistent throughout. It is a Bill which is likely to lead
to a vast amelioration of the material prospects of this country. It makes noble and
generous provision for public education, and all I can say is that it is high time we had
it. I think the Bill ought to be supported by every man who is desirous of getting rid
of ignorance and sectarianism, and substituting education, knowledge, and general
charity.” As one who at the outset of his political career was the elected representa-
of the highest educational interests in the country, this speech on such a subject had, of
course, a special value. It contained within itself all the best points of the protracted
debate which led up to the passing of the present Public Instruction Act.
But the particular period during which the subject of this memoir has reaped
distinction and made his name part of the public history of the country has been
covered by the rather trying term of his occupancy of the Speaker’s chair. From the
first day that Mr. Barton assumed that distinguished office, it was recognised by the
House and by the public outside that he united in himself in a more than remarkable
degree all the gifts and qualities which go to constitute an effective and capable
Speaker. He showed himself at once abreast of his position and its duties. To great
quickness of perception he added a prompt and watchful readiness of resource, which
astonished those who had had no previous opportunity of estimating his powers. He


is always ready, and his tact never seems to fail him. These terms might appear
were it not that the facts we here set down were the theme of universal
comment and eulogy as soon as they were publicly recognised. The past few sessions
have been a particularly trying time for the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly,
owing to a variety of reasons. It will scarcely be necessary to make any lengthened
extracts from the enormous number of rulings, still so fresh in the public mind, which
Mr. Barton has been called upon to deliver during the troublous times which
1 arliament has passed through, during the period of two years and a half which have
now elapsed since his accession to the Chair, But during the course of a ruling on
one ot the later stages ol the Land Bill of 1884 it became necessary for him to express
his opinion ol the relations between the two Houses which have been created by. and
have by practice grown up, under the first section of the Constitution Act. The
ruling in question was delivered on October 2, 1884, and in the course of it
Mr. Speaker said :—“ I wish to say a few words as to certain doctrines that
have been put forward with reference to the powers and privileges of this
House. 1 here seems to be in some- quarters—l say it with all respect —a
gieat anxiety to get rid altogether of the name of privilege. My answer to
that is that you may take away the name ol privilege, and give it the name
of power ; call it what you like, —1 cure nothing, for the thing remains. There is to
my mind considerable contusion of thought—and [ speak again with all respect —with
reference to the construction Avhich should be put upon the Constitution Act. I think
this confusion arises from the want of a proper distinction between the powers given to
the Houses in relation to the community outside, and the powers they ought to exercise
inter se and in relation to each other. I am not going to raise any contention, nor, I
think, has any contention ever been raised in this House, against the other Chamber
using any power confided to it by the Constitution Act. But this must be remembered,
that an infraction of the first section by the origination of a money bill in that House,
or the infraction of the 54th section by the omission of a message to cover an appropri-
ation bill, renders the legislation not a mere irregularity, but an illegality. That is
not the construction which regulates the dealings of the Houses with each other.
Whether there is an implied—and it is, perhaps, more to be considered by one acting
in the capacity of a lawyer than by myself, acting as Speaker of this House—whether
there is an implied power given to amend money bills under the 51st section of the
Constitution Act, seems to me to matter very little to this House. It may be conceded
for the purpose of argument, if it were necessary to concede it, that there is nothing
actually illegal in the action of the other Chamber when it amends money bills. That
cannot affect the action of this House. The spirit of that Act is that this House should
have the control of every one of those financial measures which it originates ; and, if
that were not enough, it was the very spirit of the Act which gave representative power
to this House and not to the other. If I am correct in taking that view—and I think
there can be no doubt that it is the proper view—it matters little whether there is a
legal power to amend a money bill, or a bill which in its clauses deals with money
where those clauses are amended. Those who wish to any extent, great or small, to
pare or trim down the privileges of this House will certainly concede this, that it has


at all times the power to deal as it likes with any such measure when it comes back to it ;
and if an amendment is made in any such bill which is contrary to the principle that
this House should have the control of the revenue and expenditure of the country, then
this House acts not Illegally, not tyrannically, but wisely and loyally in taking its own
course with regard to such bill. And 1 consider that it is part of the loyalty I owe to
the authority which gave the Constitution Act to this country—l mean to the people
of the country to lay down what I have laid down to-night. If it were necessary to
hold that standing order No. 1 gives sufficient power to the House to deal, as it is in
the habit of dealing, with amendments which are in its view contrary to the spirit of
the Constitution—it it were necessary for me to say that, lam prepared to say it. We
are asked to construe that standing order by the light of some headings or some
side-notes. I could no more do that witli a standing order than a lawyer could do it
with a section of a statute ; it is the words themselves which are to be construed. If
the Constitution Act made no provision in respect of these matters, if it were silent on
the point, and the standing orders were silent on the point, still it was never intended
that this House should drift about like a rudderless ship. That could never have been
the intention of those who gave us legislative functions. If we had no standing orders
to look to, I should advise the House to look for leading to the best representative
legislative authority in the world, and by it we are in the habit of being guided.”
Ihe action taken by the Upper House in this matter threatened the existence of the
Land Bill that had just been passed through both Houses with such extreme care and
deliberation. But it became a question between the safety of that important measure
and regular constitutional procedure, and the Speaker did not hesitate to give his ruling
in the terms just quoted. The difficulty was afterwards overcome by the Ministry
giving way to the amendments proposed by the other Chamber, on their acceptance by
the Lower House. The action of Mr. Barton in this matter was marked by much
firmness, and a clear insight into the spirit, as well as the letter, of that portion of the
Constitution Act which regulates the transaction of public business between the Houses.
The position taken up by him was the more creditable as it compelled him to give a
decision against a Bill which it was understood carried all his personal sympathies
with it. Another matter which came rather prominently before the public during the
past sessions of the present Parliament was that of the adoption of the new
rules for the regulation of parliamentary procedure. Under these rules the suspension
of one of the members for Mudgee took place. He took his case into the Supreme
Court, whence some of the issues raised are now under reference to the Privy Council
at home.
We have been singularly fortunate, as a rule, in our choice of Speakers to
preside over our Legislative Assembly. Almost all who have occupied the Chair have
evinced some special tact or fitness for the discharge of its dignified duties. The
present occupant, as we have seen, is no exception to this rule. He has shown a
peculiar aptitude for the official duties which have devolved upon him, and a
masterful knowledge of all those points of constitutional law and parliamentary
procedure which have been referred to him. No Speaker has had his qualifications so
severely tested as the Llonourable Edmund Barton, and it is but just to add that none


have passed through the critical ordeal so well. His record as a representative has
been well filled out and amplified by his conduct during the term of his Speakership.
He has proved himself to be a young politician of much promise and ability. He possesses
sound practical qualities of mind and head which, disciplined by careful training and
directed by a laudable ambition, should place the richest prizes of public life in his
hands. We have had abler and more brilliant young men in our Legislative Assembly,
and short as has been our history it has seen the commencement and untimely close of
more than one career of which the final scenes were enacted in mournful contrast with its
early promise. Men who have occupied the highest positions in our public life have
fallen to the lowest depths, and singular abilities and talents have been buried in
hopeless oblivion before their expected fruition was arrived at. The result of this has
been that the public life of the colony has been to a great extent monopolised by a
pitiful mediocrity which has overlain and crushed out of existence that real vitality
of which the first years of constitutional government in this country saw the brilliant
beginnings. But the subject of this memoir has shown that he has those practical,
workable qualities of tact, readiness, and firmness which command success and ensure
it. A manly independence of character is the best safeguard against the perils of public
life, and this Mr. Barton possesses in a striking degree. He is another of the members
of that young Australian party to whose trained and capable hands the task of
government must in process of time necessarily fall.




v v‘ - ■ / .
v, * V'.
W.Macleod, Del. From Photo by Newman


HIS HONOR JUSTICE FAUOETT
JUDGE OF THE SUPREME COURT.
a ormer mem °i r some reference was made to the exceptional good fortune
liPP'l; as attended the appointments to the Supreme Court Bench of New
South Wales. Whatever may have been said of political weight having
in some instances been brought to bear in this direction, few will be found to
r question the fact that the dignity and purity ot the administration of justice
in the highest court in this colony have always been worthily and honorably
maintained by our judges. This is a fact of which any young state, still labouring to
some extent among the initial difficulties attendant on the formation of national and
social character, may well cherish with a proud sense of distinction. In the memoir
just refei red to we glanced back at the growth of the legal and judicial system of the
colony, and traced its progress from its first beginnings through successive stages of
development to the present time. The first rude pre-indications of national life in
Australia gave but little promise of the brilliant future and more than magical achieve-
ment that one brief century was to witness. It would be hard to deduce from the first
rude courts-martial of the colony, with their prompt procedure and rapid sentence —
followed by its execution with quick precision—the elaborate and complete machinery
of the law to-day, in the hands of counsel and judges who are an honour to the profes-
sion they lead. In this the legal profession has only kept pace with the advancement
of the colony generally. Every other branch of professional or other industry shows
the same record. Every interest represented within its borders has developed in a
corresponding degree. But it is by contrasting the development in its present stage
with the state of things which served as a beginning that an adequate estimate of the
wonderful progress of the colony in every direction is arrived at. It is true that for
the most part, or until very recently, we have been compelled to rely on imported
talent to fill our highest positions, and impress our young institutions with
the true traditional character. The stage which will be reached when native
talent may command the higher posts which are not the reward of political
prominence is still in the future. But meanwhile, while we are preparing
the way by educating ourselves to fill from our ranks the positions which have only
been reached by Australian-born representative men in exceptional instances, we have
been taking our national lesson from gentlemen well qualified to give it. His Honor
Mr. Justice Peter Faucett is one of those whose names most easily suggest themselves
in this regard. He has been for twenty years an honourable and worthy occupant of a seat
on the Supreme Court Bench of the colony of New South Wales, where he has resided
for the past thirty-three years.


The personal career of Mr. Justice Faucett is one of those that takes us
back to the early legislative records of the colony under Responsible Government.
Fie was one of those who watched with more than a passing interest the
passing away of the old order of things, which had existed up to 1856, and the coming
of the new system of popular government by representation. Fie had left Dublin,
where he was born, just four years before, in 1852. Educated at Trinity College in
that city, he graduated in 1842, and, having devoted his talents to the study of law, he
was called to the Bar in 1845. He practised in the Four Courts and on circuit for
about seven years, until he was attracted, like much of the younger talent of the time,
to the large and untried field which awaited energy and ability at the antipodes. He
does not appear to have taken long to decide on his future course, and his arrival in
Sydney was followed by his admission to the colonial Bar, where lie at once entered upon
practice. The rapidly succeeding stages through which public opinion was passing at
the time made politics the centre of popular interest at the time, and every man with
any pretension to a public character felt himself carried along with the current
As has already been described the period between 1852 and 1856 embraced the whole
of the active agitation of Wentworth, which culminated in the granting, in the latter
year, of the Constitution which we owe to that great man’s patriotic statesmanship,
Mr. Faucett was one of those who gave themselves up to the influence of the time, and
in the general election which followed the Royal Assent to the new Constitution Act,
he offered himself for the acceptance of the electors of King and Georgiana, by which
constituency his well-known talent and ability had been sufficiently recognised during
his four years’ residence in the colony to secure his return. He continued to represent
that electorate until 1860, when he was elected for East Sydney —then, as now, the
premier constituency in the colon}". During the time of the first experiments in con-
stitutional government Mr. Faucett was an attentive and prominent partaker in the
procedure of the young Legislature, and a noticeable figure in its deliberations,
though he continued to give the bulk of his time to the duties of his profession. Flere
his abilities became more and more recognised by his contemporaries until October 16,
1863, when Mr. (now Sir James) Martin paid him the compliment of inviting him to accept
a ministerial portfolio as Solicitor-General. He took office with the Martin adminis-
tration accordingly, his colleagues being Messrs. William Forster as Colonial Secretary,
Geoffrey Eagar as Colonial Treasurer, John Bowie Wilson as Secretary for Lands,
Arthur T. Holroyd as Secretary for Public Works, with Mr. Martin as Attorney-
General and Premier, and John Hubert Plunkett (formerly Attorney-General) as
representative of the Government in the Legislative Council. The Ministry came into
office in succession to Mr. Charles Cowper, by whose party they were again defeated
on their financial proposals in February 2, 1865. Eight months afterwards —October
6, 1865 —Mr. Faucett was appointed Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court of New South
Whales by the Cowper Ministry.
During the twenty years that His Honor Mr. Justice Faucett has been a Judge
of the Supreme Court, his attention to the duties of his high position has been exemplary
and unremitting. He brought to the exercise of the judical function a clear mind and
an excellent legal training ; and his long experience on the Bench has endowed him


with most of the other qualities that the public wishes to recognise in high places.
Ihose first great, and, with us, almost commonplace virtues of the Supreme Court
Bench—unswerving justice and incorruptible purity —are personified in our present
subject ; but the remark seems almost invidious until we recollect that no breath of
suspicion has yet sullied the record or dimmed the bright repute of any other of our
Judges in this particular. For the rest, His Honor has earned the esteem of the legal
profession, and the respect and confidence of the public by his evident special fitness
for the exercise of the duties he has so long discharged. His decisions are always such
as to recommend them to even popular acceptance, and of no other Judge of our
Supreme Court can it be said as of him, that in not one single instance has his decision
been reversed on appeal to the Privy Council, though during the twenty years of his
judicial career some of the most momentous cases that have occupied the attention of
our Courts have been heard before him. He has the faculty of clearly and logically
marshalling his facts and stating his cases to juries, while his unfailing courtesy has
always rendered him deservedly popular amongst those with whom he has come in
contact.
Although by the nature of their position their Honors the judges are raised some-
what above the level of political and public affairs, it is impossible in a work of this
kind to overlook some of the more signal instances of the beneficial influence exerted
by them in the past on the side of popular right and privilege. Some of their number
have taken up unassailable positions as signal public benefactors in this respect.
Perhaps the only example of sheer worthlessness our judicial record has presented is
that of the first Judge-Advocate, Richard Atkins. This worthy made an exceedingly
unsavoury reputation for himself in the early days of the colony. He was appointed
in 1800, as the first regular administrator of justice. It was about as graceless a
beginning as can well be conceived. We have seen how an objection raised by Mr.
Macarthur to his presiding on his trial led indirectly to the deposition of Governor
Bligh. But amongst the Governor’s own papers was found a letter to the Secretary
of State, recommending the Judge-Advocate’s dismissal from his office. He appears
to have been guilty of the most outrageous conduct in his official capacit} T . In
the letter of Governor Bligh a passage occurs which shows the utterly worthless
character of the man:—“ He has been accustomed to inebriety ; he has been the ridicule
of the community ; sentence of death has been pronounced in moments of intoxication ;
his determination is weak ; his opinion floating and infirm ; his knowledge of the law
is insignificant, and subject to private inclination ; and confidential causes of the Crown,
where due secrecy is required, he is not to be trusted with.” The explanation of his
being found in the position of Judge-Advocate probably rests in the fact, as it is said,
of his having been the relative and dependent of some person in power, through whose
influence he obtained his exalted position, though he had never received anything
in the shape of a legal education. Though he occupied his position for about
nine years, until he went home to give his evidence on the court-martial of Colonel
Johnston, his name can scarcely be said to belong to the list of Judges of New
South Wales. Quite a different character was that of Sir Francis Forbes, our first
Chief Justice, who was appointed in June, 1823, and arrived in Sydney, March 5,


1824. His advent is one of the brightest epochs in our history. To him we owe the
recognition of the right of trial by jury and the liberty of the Press. He promulgated
a new charter of justice on the day he took his seat on the Bench, and he introduced
the regular Courts of Quarter Sessions, and opened the new Supreme Court of
Criminal Jurisdiction with the year in which he landed. When the liberty of the
Press was threatened in 1826 by Governor Darling’s “ Gagging Acts,” as they were
termed, Judge Forbes took such a determined stand in the matter that the rights of
the Press were preserved. Sir James Dowling, who followed him, arrived in Sydney
in 1828, and being appointed Acting Chief Justice on Sir Francis Forbes leaving for
England, succeeded to the Chief Justiceship on his retirement in 1836. He also did
the colony good service. His name is perpetuated by the street so-called, which with
V ictoria, Brougham, Judge, Duke, and Forbes Streets, he opened on his own land,
covering a large portion of Woolloomooloo, in 1834. He died September 27, 1844,
and was succeeded by the late Chief Justice, Sir Alfred Stephen, with whose career we
have dealt at length.
While the subject of this memoir has been always remarkable for his close appli-
cation to his official duties, he has not displayed a corresponding activity outside his
own profession. From the date of his accession to the Bench he has withdrawn him-
self almost entirely from public concerns, and with the exception of occasionally lending
his patronage and presence to a charitable or other similar gathering, he has seldom or
never appeared before the people except in his judicial capacity. He has the reputation
of being quite above and beyond political parties and political differences, and his
impartiality is as unquestioned as it is unquestionable. Quite recently a criminal libel
action, instituted by Sir Henry Parkes against a country journalist, was heard before
him, and the case presented some points of peculiar difficulty. His Honor’s conduct of
the trial, however, was unexceptionable, and his capacity for the administration of even-
handed justice was never more completely demonstrated. Mr. Justice Faucett
combines in his personal and official character many of those features that distinguish
and dignify the occupants of the Bench at home. His twenty years’ judicial record is
one of the noblest possessions of the country which has been privileged to be the field
of his labours. Colonial public life has yielded no more valuable outcome than this
almost unbroken career of honourable and unremitting judicial work.




T \ % 1
•x.
W. MACLEOD. DEL* From PHOTO BY NEWMAN


THE HON. JAMES SQUIRE EARNELL,
M.L.A., MINISTER FOR LANDS.
SPECIALISTS in Australian politics form a distinct class in themselves. The
larger questions that have agitated political parties from time to time have
j attracted the special attention of certain of our public men, with the result
that their public life has been more or less devoted to that single branch of
the political science of the colony. No question has excited this marked
attention in a greater degree than that relating to the public lands of the
colony—unless, indeed, it is that of finance. Both of these subjects have been prolific
of earnest professors, and it would be difficult to determine which of the two has been
pursued with the greater interest and avidity by its votaries. It is certain, however,
that the Land Question, especially of late years, has played a most important part in
our political history. Ministries have been made and destroyed over it, and political
reputations have been formed and shattered, and though the present Ministry has suc-
ceeded in passing a measure into law after mature thought and prolonged debate, we
have yet no guarantee that the matter is finally settled. Of those who have been notice-
able by their connection with this great question, Mr. James Squire Farnell is certainly
one of the most prominent. He has for years past fixed his attention on the study
of the working of the Land Laws to such an extent that he is now looked upon as one
of the best informed men in the country on matters relating thereto. The peculiarly
vexed and involved intricacies of the law have been so long under his scrutiny both in
their text and operation that he is now a received authority. His familiarity with
these details no doubt gives him a peculiar facility in administering and applying the
new law which has recently come into practical effect. Dangerous as would be the
experiment ot entrusting even its temporary administration to a new minister not
responsible for its provisions and special features, this peril is considerably minimised
by the fact that Mr. Farnell is not only the official author of the Land Bill of the
present, but the persistent and leading critic of the evils of the old Act of the past.
He was in the House as far back as 1860-1, when the Land Act of Sir John Robertson,
with its then novel free-selection clauses, was passed. He has given his contribution to the
discussion of the many amendments that have been proposed or carried since that time.
And as Premier and Minister for Lands in the Farnell-Fitzpatrick administration of
1878 he was the author of a Bill for the regulation of this important State interest,
by the rejection of which, however, his Ministry on that occasion was defeated. Prior
to that he had for three years, from 1872 to 1875, administered the Land Act under
the Parkes Ministry. With this training the new measure of the present Stuart-Dailey
Ministry should be safe in his hands, and it may fairly be taken for granted that,
should it be found a failure, that result will be traceable rather to its inherent detects
than to any flaw in its practical administration


Our present subject has been identified with the colony of New South Wales all
his life. Born at Parramatta in 1827, lie received his education and grew from youth
to manhood in that neighbourhood. Me has since travelled over the greater part of
the colony, besides visiting San Francisco, the Soutli Sea Islands, and New Zealand.
Three years after the framing 1 of the new constitution he was elected —I 8 5( J —for the
- O
borough of St. Leonards, but on the dissolution of Parliament next year was rejected
by that constituency. He was at once elected, however, for Parramatta, which he
continued to represent for some years. After gleaning a large share of parliamentary
experience as a private member, he was elected Chairman of Committees, which office
he occupied with growing success and acceptance till he became ambitious of higher
distinction. In 1872 he joined the Parkes Ministry as its Secretary for Lands.
During the three years his Government held office Mr. Farnell distinguished himself
by the pertinacious industry with which he applied himself to the duties of his post.
It was during this term of office that he was presented with a public testimonial in
recognition of his administrative ability. On the defeat of his Government he sat in
opposition to the Ministry of Mr. John Robertson in the Assembly, until the failure of
that Cabinet in March, 1877. He was again in opposition from August to December
in that year, the Robertson party having returned to power, but in the confusion of
parties which ensued on the further defeat of that Ministry in December, Mr. Farnell
followed Sir Henry Parkes in the endeavour to form a working Cabinet. He succeeded,
and on December 18, 1877, formed his Ministry, which included Messrs. Michael Fitz-
patrick, Colonial Secretary ; H. E. Cohen, Colonial Treasurer ; Joseph Leary,
Minister for Justice and Public Instruction ; John Sutherland, Minister for Works ;
W. J. Foster, Attorney-General ; W. H. Suttor, Secretary for Mines ; and J. F.
Burns, Postmaster-General. That administration held office for just twelve months,
when it was defeated in attempting to carry its proposed Land Bill. Since that time
Mr. Farnell has represented St. Leonards and New England in the Legislative Assembly,
for the latter of which constituencies he now sits. On the defeat of the Parkes
Government in 1882, on its Land Bill, he accepted office in the Stuart-Dalley
administration as Minister for Lands, in which capacity he passed his Land Bill of 1884.
The long record of completed legislative labour due to the Stuart Ministry contains
nothing more important than its Land Bill. This question had wrecked administration
after administration, and some of the strongest combinations in our political history
have lost their hold on the feeling of the House and of the countiy over their action in
its regard. Dealing as the successive Land Bills have with the largest interest in the
colony, and one that concerns in the most vital degree the two largest classes outside
the metropolis, and through them the rest of the population and the colon)’- generally,
it will readily be conceived that a Ministry could be called upon to deal with no more
important matter, or one more difficult to equitably adjust. Time alone will show how
far the measures passed into law by Mr. Farnell as Minister for Lands in the Stuart
Ministry is destined to prove a success. That success will depend largely on its
administration. But the utmost that can be said of it at the present time is that the
measure has passed into law through both Houses of Parliament after a most critical
and minute discussion of its provisions by members trained by the fullest experience


of the working of the old measure. It is the only proposal which has so passed the
Legislature out of the many complete and amended measures proposed, and which has
succeeded in reconciling, at least until the Bill shall have had a fair trial, the conflicting
opinions and interests of the squatting and selecting classes. From the speech made
by Mr. Farnell in moving the second reading of the Bill in the Assembly, Nov. 7, 1888,
we compile here a sketch of the leading features of the measures as proposed. It may
be remarked that the essentials only of the Bill were insisted upon, members being
invited in committee to offer suggestions and amendments with the utmost freedom
DO
with a view to making the whole as perfect as possible. The chief points of the
measure —such as that of local land boards, the division of runs, the division of the
colony, and others of a distinctive character—were fully adopted in the Act as passed,
the amendments being merely matters of important detail. Mr. Farnell’s speech was
long and exhaustive, and evinced in a masterly manner the thorough command which
his long and careful study of land matters had given him over his subject. The
following extracts from the speech in question convey the scope and purpose of the
measure in its author’s own words : —“ In dealing with this important question I may
be very properly asked by honourable members the reason why the Government have
introduced a measure to provide for the alienation and occupation of the Crown Lands
of the colony, seeing that we have already in existence a law for such a purpose. My
answer is this : that this House—not in this Parliament —unmistakably decided that
the present law was not applicable to the wants of the colony, and that some other
legislation ought to be passed in its stead, and that, on appeal to the country on the
bill introduced by the late Government, the people so far as one can judge, spoke out
plainly, and said they would not have the law of 1861, or any act based on it, any
longer. Prior to the Land Bill of 1861, every other Ministry from 1856 attempted to
deal with this question. As Lands Ministers, Mr. Donaldson, Mr. Parkes, Mr. Hay,
Mr. Cowper, and Mr. Terence Aubrey Murray attempted to deal with this question.
Then came the bill of 1860, which was defeated in this House. After the general
election a similar bill was introduced. It was defeated in the Upper House by the
tactics taken to thwart what was then known as the swamping process, —the appoint-
ment of a large number of members to the Upper House. It was again introduced
and passed into law, and stood as the law of the land until 1875, when it was found
necessary to amend it in some respects, and subsequently it was amended by the Act
of 1880. 1 voted against the thirteenth clause of the bill of 1861, and voted for the
amendment proposed by Mr. Hay. Ido not disguise it. lam now as firm a believer
as I was then in the principle of free-selection after survey ; but I know that I am in
a minority on that point, and until we can educate the people to understand the
question we shall not be able to provide for election after instead of before survey.
Honourable members will perceive that we propose to repeal ten acts of Parliament.
All existing rights are preserved,—that is to say, all contracts and all things
promised and done under the acts proposed to be repealed will be continued under
the new act except in certain special cases. The first part of the Bill consists of
preliminary and general provisions. Part IL provides for the division of the colony
into three districts. Instead of the settled, intermediate, and unsettled districts we


have divided it geographically into eastern, central, and western divisions. The area
of the first is, approximately, 60,452,000 acres, of which, up to the end of September,
1886, about 40,467,500 acres were alienated. The second area is, approximately,
55,460,000 acres, of which 40,095,600 were alienated. The third division comprises,
approximately, an area of 79,970,000 acres, of which 78,764,000 were alienated. We
propose to make a complete departure in the administration of the law by the establish-
ment of land boards. The great advantage of local land boards will be that the people
will be able to get their business done in the district where the land is situated. We
want decentralisation. I think that the establishment of land courts will conduce to
the more honest administration of the law. 'Hie board will have power to deal with
the conditional purchaser, to put him on the land, to give certificates as to conformity,
and to do other things. If any one doubts the decision given he will have a right of
appeal to the Minister, Avho will decide the case in open court in Sydney. Part 111
of the Bill refers to conditional purchases, conditions and obligations of conditional
purchasers, conditional and improvement purchases in gold-fields, conditional purchases
without residence, conditional leasehold, and so on. By the ninth sub-clause to clause
24 we do not make improvements a bar to conditional purchase only under the circum-
stances mentioned in that provision. We have learned from experience that conditional
purchase is often barred by a number of sham improvements which are valueless. We
say that those improvements shall not bar selection. Then the clause provides what
lands are open to conditional purchase. The whole process in connection with
conditional purchase is this : the present law is that a person makes application to a
land agent ; he has to go on the land within three months ; and he has to mark
temporary boundaries. In the Bill we propose that at the earliest possible period the
purchaser shall be able to get a certificate of conformity. It is quite at his option
whether he goes into occupation of the land at once or not. As to the price of land,
we propose that two shillings per acre shall be paid as deposit ; after the expiry of
three years eighteenpence per acre is to be paid ; and thereafter for fifteen years there
will be due from the conditional purchaser eighteen pence j3er acre in annual instalments.
This would leave a balance of three shillings from the first payment in the hands of the
selector, who at present has to pay five shillings per acre. We propose also that if a
purchaser desires to liquidate any of the instalments before they fall due, he
shall be able to do so by paying five or more of such instalments, and have a
rebate of fourpence per acre. It is proposed that in the eastern division a
purchaser may take up 640 acres, with the right to make a conditional lease of an area
equal to that which he has conditionally purchased. In all he can take up 1280 acres.
In the central division the maximum area of conditional purchase is 2560 acres.
Clause 47 provides that a man who does not reside on his conditional purchase will
not be allowed to make an additional conditional purchase, unless he resides on it for
five years and fulfils other conditions. We propose to abolish pre-emptive leases,
which have always been a delusion and a snare. This pre-lease system means a great
saving to the pastoral tenant. His rent may be assessed at twopence ; but in order to
avoid paying this, all he has to do is to purchase a quarter of his run, and he gets the
remaining three-quarters at a rental of three farthings an acre. The pastoral tenants


have taken advantage of this, and no one can blame them for doing so. Clause 65
provides for auction sales. We propose to retain the principle of auction as applicable
to town and country lands, limiting the area to be sold in any one year to 200,000
acres. We also stop after-auction selections, which have been fruitful of the greatest
possible evils. The next part of the Bill contains a new feature —I refer to the division
of the runs into pastoral leases, occupation licenses, homestead leases, annual leases for
pastoral purposes, and so on. The western division will be confined to leaseholds.
These will be divided into a leasehold area of fifteen years’ duration, with the right of
renewal for another fifteen years, and a resumed area, to be held under occupation
licenses until it is applied for under homestead leases, also for fifteen years. Under
this provision a man of moderate means will have an opportunity under this bill to
secure upon easy terms and by fair means a block of land exactly suited to his require-
ments. Referring now to the subject of revenue, we expect to receive from the leased
lands of the colony—not pastoral leases alone but also auction and pre-emptive leases
—upwards of a million and a half sterling, —that is, according to the rents we have
suggested ; but if in the opinion of the House the rents are too high they and the
revenue will be proportionately reduced. The 194 th clause of the bill will enable any
person whose run is assessed at a minimum rate to make application to the local land
board and subsequently to the land court for a reduction of the rent. The homestead
leases will be confined to the resumed area of the western district. Part Y. of the
Bill deals with dedications, reserves, and roads. Part VI. relates to State forests
and timber reserves. Part YII. deals with transfers, legal and miscellaneous provisions.
The 145 th section is a new provision rendered necessary by the fencing clause, to the
effect that every man may ask or compel his neighbour to contribute one moiety of the
value of a dividing fence. ... If there is one thing more than another for which
I commend the bill to the consideration of the honorable members, it is the fact that it
is not a bill which deals with the interests of conditional purchasers and pastoral
tenants only, but one which deals with the interests of the whole community. I shall
be proud of my connection with the Government if we succeed in passing a measure
which will be of service to the country of which —and I say it with pride—l am a
native. I believe that the bill 1 now submit will be a great boon and a lasting benefit
to the country. I now beg to move that the bill be read a second time.”
The portions here extracted from the speech of Mr. Parnell in moving the second
reading of his Land Bill, sets forth more particularly, it will be remarked, the novel
features of his measure, and the points of difference between it and that which it
superseded. That measure is so familiarised to us by its working for the past quarter
of a century that it has been unnecessary to do more here than indicate the departures
from the text of the late Bill. Speaking at Tamworth on the same subject a few
months ago, Mr. Parnell gave the following further information on the scope and
purpose of the new Act: —“ The great principle of the Act was that it preserved to
the public a fair share of the income from the Crown Lands of the colony, and prevented
the wholesale alienation of the land to individuals. It had done away with improvement
purchases altogether, and preserved to the country the whole of the minerals hereafter
alienated, or that had been alienated, where there was a provision in the deed of grant


by which these minerals were reserved. The Government had done away with the
system of improvement purchases, which was a counter-agent to the system of free
selection before survey. While we did that on the one hand, we allowed people to take up
their pre-emptive leases. The law gave security ot tenure for half the lands of the
colony, and the other half was to be thrown open to whoever chose to take it up. Thirteen
millions of acres of land had already been alienated by auction sale, and these thirteen
millions did not represent a single individual. Population should represent alienation.
Everybody knew that it was the population ot a country that made a country wealthy;
it was not the broad acres, but the individuals who occupied the broad acres. We
could not take a better example than America, where there was a population of fifty-
four millions of people. There would not have been that number of people in that
country if they had had a land law there such as our Land Act of 1861. That was a
good honest law, intended to settle the people who desired to make a home on the land;
but under that law people accumulated large estates by perjury and other false
practices. We had never received a fair rental from the land, and a fair rental could
not be obtained without a certainty of tenure. Our late land law was one of jobbing,
and the law was never intended for that. Now a law was in force by which people
could get honestly all the land they required. The great advantage under the present
law to a conditional purchaser was that instead of having a myth of a pre-lease, which
anyone else might convert into a conditional purchase on any Thursday, he himself
within ninety days could convert it into a conditional lease. The bill would stand
upon its own merits. It was not wise to have large estates, and yet we had got about
two millions of acres in the hands of some fourteen persons.”
Mr. Farnell’s long terra as a legislative representative has not been entirely
devoted to the Land Act and its amendments. He has taken a practical interest in
most of the larger questions that have come up for legislation in Parliament from time
to time, and his faculty for hard work, with the power he has of concentrating his
attention on detail, makes him a useful and a serviceable public servant. Outside of
political life Mr. Farnell is distinguished as the Grand Master of the Freemasons
under the New South Wales Constitution. His familiarity with the country and its
wants is a remarkable feature about our present subject winch makes him, in many
respects, a thoroughly efficient if not a brilliant legislator.




V
W MACLEOD. Ohl. Fftoy PHOTO BY FREEMAN


THE HON. WILLIAM FORSTER, M.L.A
S'~mL ERE and there among the group ot figures that have made up the public life
M of New South Wales we can single out an occasional one whose influence for
good was none the less effective because it was abstract and non-assertive.
yf Such men, although filling a large space in the public eye, have not been
| the open-air toilers at the work of national progress. Their part in the
politics of the country, while ever active and intelligent, has not been always
a leading one ; nor do the greater legislative acts of our political history connect them-
selves with their names as authors. The practical skill of party politicians has not
been theirs in any very signal or pre-eminent degree, and they have been content to
orig-inate theories and furnish ideas for the working legislator while thev themselves,
O O O */ 7
from temperament as much as from the force of circumstances, were content to remain
aloof. These are, nevertheless, the essential men in the political system. Without
them politics would descend to a dead level of petty party strife, unmarked by any
progressive feature, and unbroken by any original device in the dull monotony of what
unthinking persons are prone to describe as the practical business of legislation. This
dead level has always been the fertile source of a fruitful crop of abuses. Stagnation
ensues, and with it all the evils of democratic self-government. The safeguard against
this is to be found in the vigilance and public spirit of the men who are content to
stand aloof from the detail, while keenly alert to detect and criticise the first deviation
from essential political principle. Such men preserve public honour, and ensure that
healthy tone which is necessary to public life. Our history has not been without
examples of this high type of political character, and amongst them the name of Mr.
William Forster deservedly stands among the first. He bears out to the letter that
feature in public life which we have here endeavoured to suggest to the reader. As a
politician his place in our record may be thus indicated. But his share in colonial
politics has also been an active and at one time a leading one, while no small part of
the Statute Book has been suggested if not written by his authority. He has also
distinguished himself in literature, while, as a contributor to the colonial journals of
the last generation he made some reputation for himself as a sound leader of public
opinion, and a caustic and effective satirist.
Like most of those who have identified their names with prominent chapters in
our colonial history, William Forster, though quite young when he came to Sydney,
was not a native of the colony. Pie was born at Madras in 1818, and landed in
Sydney when he was eleven years of age. His name adds another to the long list of
well-known colonial names whose bearers received their early education at the hands
of Mr, W. T. Cape, —a gentleman whose name most worthily and honourably
connects itself with the first efforts at higher education in Australia. At an early age


he left Sydney and went into the interior to engage in squatting pursuits, but the early
devotion he appears to have formed for literature seems to have accompanied him.
His literary tastes were not allowed to remain dormant during these first years out
among the eucalyptus forests of the pastoral districts, for we find him addressing a
series of well-considered and thoughtful contributions to the Sydney press on the
political subjects then occupying attention. He took an active interest in the affairs
of his own class, and when the action against the squatters, referred to elsewhere, was
taken by the Government, his pen was an effective defender of the squatting claims.
Sir George Gipps, in particular, found in him an uncompromising opponent of his
measures to regulate the pastoral interest, and particularly of his Squatting Act of
1846. It was about the time that the discussion of these matters was in progress that
he contributed to the Atlas, at that date edited by Mr. (now Sir James) Martin, his
well-known satire under the heading “ The Devil and the Governor,” in the course of
which his Excellency is treated to the following piece of plain speaking by his
interlocutor :
“ I grant you the praise you’ve fairly won
By the deeds you do and the deeds you’ve done;
I know that as causes corrupt the mind
Like the chains by which tyrants have crushed mankind,
That the blighting touch of a despot’s rod
Kills in man’s spirit the breath of God.
That the purpose he bade your race fulfil
Is not for the meek slave’s fettered will,
That the cherishing light of the holy skies
Falls barren and vain upon servile eyes,
That the weeds of evil will thrive their best
Where the fair shoots of nature are clipped and drest;
Yes, under those climes where the poisonous brood
Of error is nursed by solitude—
Where souls are bowed by the weight they bear,
Where their moral sky looks dark, and their air
Is thick with the filth that bondage breeds,
I scatter my foul and fertile seeds—
Where most I am bent on man’s undoing
The tyrant assists my work of ruin.”
The scathing satire from which these lines are taken conveys some idea of the
strength of the feeling against Sir George Gipps when it was written. It made a
considerable impression in the colony at the time, and, with the writer’s other contri-
butions to the discussion, gave him a prominent place in public notice. His writings
were principally of a political character, though to other subjects of a more distinctively
literary caste, on several other occasions at this period, he showed himself no stranger.
One such occasion was afforded by some lectures by Mr. Frank Fowler, who undertook
to give his hearers imitations of the most celebrated writers. This ambitious and quite
characteristic flight was favourably noticed by the press of the day, until Mr. Forster,
in an incisive and well-considered article, showed the pitiful absurdity of the lecturer’s
effort, while it evinced on the writer’s part the possession of much critical power and
correct literary taste. Somewhat later in life he devoted more time to the gratification


of his inclination towards literature, especially in prosodical forms ; and before that,
about the time of the Crimean War, he wrote the following on Russia, as one of a
series of four sonnets, which may be read with an interest of its own just now :
“ ’Twixt East and West a giant shape she grew,
To both akin, and making both afraid.
Casting a lurid shadow on the new
And ancient world, her greedy eyes betrayed
The tiger’s heart, and ominously surveyed
The peoples destined for her future prey ;
From Polar steppes and ice-encumbered seas
To where the warm and blue Symplegades
Darken the splendour of a Grecian day,
She stretched her long grasp, conquering by degrees;
And, when at length the banded nations rose
In armed resistance, their combined array
With equal arms she shrunk not to oppose,
But bravely stood, as still she stands, at bay.”
From the beginning of Responsible Government Mr. Forster took part in the
political business of the country, having taken his seat in the Legislative Assembly for
the Murray Electorate when the House met, May 22, 1856. He continued to hold a
seat in the Legislature during succeeding Parliaments, representing at different times
the constituencies of East Sydney, St. Leonards, the Hastings, Queanbeyan, Illawarra,
the Murrumbidgee, and Gundagai. He was originally a supporter of the Cowper
Ministry, but that fact did not prevent him from closely scrutinising its action in
public matters. As we have already seen, he objected to the Education policy of the
Cowper administration in 1859, and advocated the adoption of a purely secular s} T stem.
He attacked the Cabinet on the question, with the result that a ministerial defeat
ensued, whereupon Mr. Forster was invited to assume the responsibility of forming an
administration and enunciating a policy. He formed a Ministry in which Mr. Saul
Samuel, who afterwards succeeded him as Agent-General for the colony, first took
ministerial office as Colonial Treasurer, Mr. John Black as Minister for Lands, Mr.
Geoffrey Eagar (now Under-Secretary for Finance and Trade) as Minister for Works,
Mr. E. Wise (afterwards Judge of the Supreme Court) as Attorney-General, and Mr.
J. F. Hargrave (afterwards Mr. Justice Hargrave) as Solicitor-General. With the
appointment of Mr. Geoffrey Eagar as Minister for Works that office was first
constituted. The Cabinet of Mr. Forster retained office till March, 1860, when it was
defeated on its Upper House Electoral Bill, and succeeded by the Robertson-Cowper
Ministry. Mr. Forster again accepted office in the Ministry of Mr. James Martin as
Colonial Secretary in October, 1863, continuing to hold it until February, 1865, when
the Cabinet was defeated on its Protectionist policy. In this administration Mr. Forster
was associated with Messrs. Geoffrey Eagar, Colonial Treasurer ; Peter Faucett, now
Mr, Justice Faucett, as Solicitor-General ; J. B. Wilson, Secretary for Lands ;
A. T. Holroyd, afterwards Master in Equity, as Secretary for Public Works ; the
Premier, Mr. Martin, taking the office of Attorney-General. He next took office as
Minister for Lands in the Cabinet of Mr. Robertson in October, 1868, till April, 1870,
when he resigned, his colleagues having been Messrs. Samuel, Sutherland, Josephson,


Salomons, Egan, and Owen. This ministry became the Cabinet of Sir Charles
Cowper in January, 1870. Mr. Forster was again a Minister of the Crown in the
administration of Sir John Robertson that took office in February, 1875, on the defeat
of the Parkes Ministry. In that Ministry his colleagues were Messrs. Robertson,
Docker, Garrett, Lackey, Dailey, Lucas, and Burns. Mr. Forster left the colony in
October, 1875, with the object of arranging the affairs of the Agent-Generalship at
Home. Sir Charles Cowper, the then holder of that office, became too ill to continue
the duties, A large and representative gathering of his fellow-colonists gave him a
banquet at the Town Hall, about two hundred persons being present. Gentlemen
representing every shade of political opinion, and identified with every leading interest
in the colony, attended this demonstration, and the farewell to Mr. Forster and the
good wishes for his welfare were of the most cordial description. Sir Charles Cowper
died in February, 1876, and Mr. Forster’s appointment to the Agent-Generalship was
formally made. He held office till the end of 1880, when he was recalled by the
Parkes Government, his successor being the present holder of the post, Sir Saul
Samuel. Mr. Alexander Stuart was nominated, but never accepted office. During
his term of office in England he gave himself up with more freedom to the pursuit
of literature ; he published at this period, amongst other works in verse, his tragedy
“ The Wehrwolf,” which was very favourably noticed by the leading literary reviews.
On Mr. Forster’s return to Sydney in the early part of 1881, he found that the
electors of Gundagai had already elected him in his absence as their member, an
extraordinary vacancy having ocurred. His arrival in the colony was hailed by a large
gathering of his old political friends and associates, and he took his seat on the
Opposition side of the House, the Parkes Ministry being then in power. Some few
weeks before he returned a discussion took place in the House on the question of his
recall from London, and the appointment of his successor, Sir Saul Samuel. It Avas
considered that a great wrong had been done to Mr. Forster by the Avay in which he
had been removed from his office. This extreme step was taken by the Goverment of
Sir Henry Parkes nominally because of an ill-judged and imprudent letter addressed by
the late Agent-General to the Premier. It was very generally held, even by most of
his old political opponents, that though he had had no commercial training he had
conducted the business of his colony at home in a highly satisfactory and efficient
manner. Some unpleasantness arose about the question of his official salary, which at
that time was £ISOO a year ; his successor now receives £2OOO yearly. A full
discussion of this matter was discouraged in the House, but there can be no doubt that
the circumstances surrounding his vacation of the office of Agent-General someAAffiat
o o
embittered his later years. Throughout the rest of his Parliamentary career he con-
tinued to take part in the current business of legislation, but though for some time he
was the recognised head of the Opposition he never actively asserted his leadership.
One of the subjects which came up for debate shortly after his return Avas the question
of opening the Museum and Library on Sundays, —a matter which for a while con-
siderably exercised the public mind. As one of the first advocates of the secularisation
of the state system of school teaching, Mr. Forster took part in this debate with some
degree of prominence. His remarks on the occasion shoAV much of his feeling on the


secular question, and what he regarded as the strong advisability of the State’s
operations being kept free from religious influences. We extract the following from
his speech, in which he opposed a motion affirming the undesirability of opening the
institutions named on Sundays : —“ Ido not rely for the vote which lam about to give
on any religious sanction. I do not say but that I respect them, or that lam
without religious sanctions for the votes which I am about to give ; but it seems to
me that in this particular case a view more consistent with public opinion and the
tendency of the colony may be taken. It appears to me that the main object of this
resolution is that it proposes to make use of the Government and of our public
institutions to enforce dogma, —to enforce a particular view of a religious question. 1
am not one of those who, as it has been assumed, repudiate the institution of the
Sabbath as a day of rest for the working man ; but I do protest against a particular
view of this day of rest being enforced by the authority of the Government or of
Parliament ; and it is upon this ground that I protest against this resolution. I
object to the House or the Government being called upon to enforce, through the
authority of public bodies, any doctrine so inconsistent with our previous
tendency —with the course which we have taken in public affairs from the
time responsible Government was instituted. We have abolished State Aid —we have
announced to the world that we have no national religion —that religion is a thing to
be left to the consciences of the people, and not to be controlled by the authority of the
State. We have, lam told, adopted secularism in our own national schools, though I
do not think they are thoroughly secular. It seems to me that the teaching in the
public schools embodies a good deal of dogmatic theology ; and I hope the time will
come when we shall go on in the path in which we have hitherto trodden, and that we
will make our public schools thoroughly secular. A country which has adopted this
policy, which boasts that it has gone ahead of the mother country in Liberal views,
would be thoroughly disgraced by adopting a resolution of this kind. . . . To
carry this resolution would simply be a triumph of narrow sectarianism, of a spirit
altogether opposed to that of our institutions, to the course which the colony has taken
hitherto, I hope the House will not take this retrograde step ; but if honorable
members should assent to the motion, I have no doubt that their action will be reversed
before long. Any Government which relies for support upon narrow sectarian feeling
will rely on a broken reed ; and however strong the present Government may be, they
will put their strength to a very dangerous test if they venture to base it on any sup-
port like this.” At the same time it may be remarked that he held strong views in
favor of denominational independence, which he considered, as he said at an early
period of his career, “ the only bulwark we had against that very worst despotism—the
despotism of democracy.”
When the tidings of Mr. Forster’s decease were communicated to the House they
evoked a most gratifying demonstration of respect and esteem for the leading figure
that had just passed away. From both sides of the House came expressions of regret
and admiration. Sir Henry Parkes, the then Premier, who had been opposed to Mr.
Forster in a most marked manner, spoke as follows : —“ It is now my painful duty to
move what had become the practice of this House —that the House adjourn in


respect to his memory. The name of Mr, William Forster has been before the public
of this colony for over thirty years. I think it is thirty years since, sitting in that
gallery, I saw Mr. Wentworth, in one of his great speeches, make a long quotation from
one of Mr. Forster’s satires. I became acquainted with the late Mr. Forster on the very
hrst day of the meeting of the first Parliament, and though it might surprise younger
and newer members of that House, for several years I lived on the most cordial terms of
relationship with him as a member of the House, together with my honourable friend
behind me—Sir John Robertson. We worked together in the early years of responsible
government, and our votes were recorded on the same side in almost very struggle. I,
therefore, had opportunities of judging of the value of the late member equal to those
of any other member of the House. I heard his first speech, I saw all his early struggles,
I witnessed all his actions on both sides of the House from first to last. Mr Forster
had now passed away across that mysterious dividing line which effaced all personal
dissensions, and in watching his figure retiring into the land of shadows we can only
remember the services he has rendered here. Not only was he a contributor to our
public political literature of very considerable eminence, but when he first became a
member of that House in 1856 he devoted himself to the movement for the extension
of political privileges. It is not generally known in our day, but it is a fact known to
many, that he was the originator of the Electoral Act. It w r as he who suggested nearly
all the most essential provisions of the measure, which afterwards, under the auspices of
Mr, Cowper and my honourable friend behind me —Sir John Robertson—passed into law.
We all of us know with what intimate acquaintance with the circumstances of the
country, with what a fearless examination of the public business of Parliament, with
what fearless opposition to all abuses, with what steadiness of purpose, he supported
every cause which he once espoused, with what sleepless vigour he opposed anything
which he believed to be wrong. We all know those striking distinguishing qualities
in the late member. We all of us see, lam quite sure, and acknowledge, that
there cannot be higher qualities in a representative of the people in this or any other
land. Mr. Forster has now passed forever from our ranks, and neither this House nor
any other Legislature can well afford to lose a member so distinguished in education,
so distinguished in practical knowledge of this country, and so distinguished by ability
to give effect to what he believed. We, therefore, not only deplore his sudden death,
and offer our best consolation to his bereaved friends, but we mourn what is indeed
a great public loss, and a loss to the representative quality of this House.”
This graceful tribute to the memory of a late political opponent was received
with frequent cheers and expressions of marked approval by an appreciative
House. The leader of the Opposition, Mr.—now Sir Alexander—Stuart, followed in
the words : —“ I rise with no ordinary feelings of sorrow to second the motion of the
Colonial Secretary. In the death of Mr. Forster we are called on to mourn one who
can be ill spared at this juncture. Even those who have most keenly felt his invective
or his caustic sarcasm will acknowledge that in the loss of Mr. Forster we lose a man
of great ability, a man of cultured intellect, and a man who could, and did, make
himself heard on every question affecting the public welfare of the colony since ever he
took part in public life. If such are the feelings of his public foes, I can hardly express


the feelings with which we, on this side of the House, learned on the departure of our
friend. We feel that we have lost our brightest ornament. Our greatest champion is
laid low ; his voice is no longer heard ; and we feel that our greatest debater has gone
from us—one whom, not only we, but the whole country, can ill afford to lose.”
1 hough the late William Forster stood prominently forward in the first rank of
Australian politicians,—being indeed one of the few that we can single out as possessing
sufficiently strong and valuable characteristics to be known as Australian statesmen, —
it is yet an extremely difficult task to weigh his public character in words. While
there is no name better known in the annals of New South Wales, and no personal
character held by his contemporaries in more justly high repute— though he possessed
in a manner shared by few the elements of public usefulness as a legislator, he was still,
in effect, raised above the active current of the political life of the country. He was an
observer and a critic of legislative work, rather than a labourer himself. He was a
political theorist rather than a practical administrator. By his very idiosyncrasies he
was unfitted to engage in the practical work of parties, with the necessary compromises
and allowances of one member for another, and their mutual sacrifices for the sake of
party concord. He was intolerant of those tricks by which the practical politician and
the successful leader of the political clique assumes power and retains it ; and consis-
tency with him was too much a cardinal and essential virtue of his character to permit
him to prune down a principle for the sake of expediency, and gave way in opinion
from a consideration of mere prudence. Most of the successful party leaders of this as
well as older countries have been remarkable for quite other features than these ; and the
effective politician is too often he who is most fertile in expedients to violate consistency
rather than conspicuous in his efforts to preserve it. Much as these characteristics may
have stood in the way of his success as a practical politician, however, they were not with-
out their effect on the best and worthiest of those who sat by his side in the Assembly.
A graceful tribute was paid to his memory in the Press by one of these just after his
death, from which we extract the following passages: —“Softening the harsher features
of that remarkable and perhaps sometimes too impressive gravity of demeanour, which
inspired strangers and even ordinary acquaintances with a sentiment of reserve, there
existed in him a purity of intention, a simplicity in demeanour as well as in action,
and a singleness of purpose which lent to his manner a charm which it was easy to
perceive and impossible to trace The time which the meaner and neces-
sarily the more successful creatures of our political system occupy in endeavouring to
lessen the restraints of conscience and to supply the deficiencies of culture he employed
in increasing the one and enlarging the other ; thus more and more removing himself
from the walks and aims of practical politicians.” The remarks we have quoted above
as falling from the leaders of the House, when his influence was removed, seem to prove,
however, that the force of his personal and political character made itself felt even in
its isolation. It was the privilege only of the few who were his contemporaries in the
House to estimate and know him rightly. His lot was cast amongst practical men ;
untrained to distinguish fact from principle, and unable to trace the subtler distinctions
between abstract causes and their visible effects. Much of the finer lines and hues of
character are thus lost to them. And it not infrequently happens that the


very qualities that should have excited admiration have only bred misunderstandings
and misconceptions.
Doubtless the tine literary character which Mr Forster possessed had much to do
with that sensitive trait which was so conspicuous in his general temperament. He
was a man of much culture and of much reading, bearing about with him most of the
distinctive marks of the student of letters. This was suitably recognised by his
election to the Senate of Sydney University during his absence from the colony,
although his candidature was opposed by the then Premier, Sir Henry Parkes. His
tastes were pronouncedly literary, and there was a deep vein of poetry in his nature
which, as we have seen, began to find expression at a very early period of his career,
The last thing that proceeded from his pen was the poem “ Midas,” which was only
completed in rough copy on the last day of his life. In the same volume in which
this poem was afterwards published appeared two others —“ Kassandra,” and “ Olden
Days.” In the latter he glances sadly back at the phantoms of the past, and its asso-
ciations, —its dreams and hopes, and its life-work in the active political arena, —with its
bright interspaces of literary labour and literary leisure. There is a peculiar pathos
in the last lines of this poem “ Olden Days,” which appears at the end of this little
posthumous volume, telling of “ soft sweet regrets, like sunsets lighting old ruins with
gleams day had not,” and recalling the impressions of an active lifetime, crowded by
the representative figures and historical incidents which will always be identified with
the history of this country :
“ O pleasant days ! Your figures stand
Like forms on some receding strand,
Which, to the parting traveller's eye,
Wax gradually more dim and die.
Who, wafted by th' indifferent breeze,
Looks back in vain from distant seas,
With painful straining to explore
What may not meet his vision more.
The flowers which made our morning fair
Have withered in noon's sultry air ;
The colours once so fresh and bright
Grow pale in day's consuming light;
And gold and purple, light and shade,
Upon the far horizon fade."


THE CONSTITUTION ACT.
AN ACT TO
CONFER A CONSTITUTION ON NEW SOUTH WALES
Whereas by the thirty-second Clause of the Imperial Act passed in the Session holden
in the thirteenth and fourteenth years of the reign of Her present Majesty intituled
An Act for the better Government of Her Majesty’s Australian Colonies it was among
other things enacted that notwithstanding anything thereinbefore contained it should
be lawful for the Governor and Legislative Council of this Colony from time to time by
any Act or Acts to alter the provisions or laws for the time being in force under the
said Imperial Act or otherwise concerning the Election of the Elective Members of
such Legislative Council and the Qualification of Electors and Elective Members or to
establish in the said Colony instead of the Legislative Council a Council and a House
of Representatives or other separate Legislative Houses to consist of such Members to
be appointed or elected by such person and in such manner as by such Act or Acts
should be determined and to vest in such Council and House of Representatives or
other separate Legislative Houses the powers and functions of the Legislative Council
for which the same may be substituted And whereas it is expedient that the powers
vested by the said Act in the said Governor and Legislative Council should be
exercised and that a Legislative Council and a Legislative Assembly as constituted by
this Act should be substituted for the present Legislative Council with the increased
powers and functions hereinafter contained Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency
the Governor of New South Wales with the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council thereof as follows :
1. There shall be in place of the Legislative Council now subsisting one
Legislative Council and one Legislative Assembly to be severally constituted and
composed in the manner hereinafter prescribed and within the said Colony of New
South Wales Her Majesty shall have power by and with the advice and consent of the
said Council and Assembly to make laws for the peace welfare and good government
of the said Colony in all cases whatsoever Provided that all Bills for appropriating
any part of the Public Revenue for imposing any new rate tax or impost subject
always to the limitation contained in [clause sixty-two] of this Act shall originate in
the Legislative Assembly of the said Colony.
2. For the purpose of composing the Legislative Council of New South Wales it
shall be lawful for Her Majesty before the time to be appointed for the first meeting of
the said Legislative Council and Assembly by an Instrument under the Sign Manual
to authorize the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council in Her Majesty’s


name by an Instrument or Instruments under the Great Seal of the said Colony to
summon to the said Legislative Council of the said Colony such persons being not
fewer than twenty-one as the said Governor and Executive Council shall think fit and
it shall also be lawful for Her Majesty from time to time to authorize the Governor in
like manner to summon to the said Legislative Council such other person or persons
as the said Governor and Executive Council shall think fit and every person who
shall be so summoned shall thereby become a Member of the Legislative Council
of the said Colony Provided always that no person shall be summoned to the
said Legislative Council who shall not be of the full age of twenty one years and a
natural born subject of Her Majesty or naturalized by an Act of the Imperial
Parliament or by an Act of the Legislature of the said Colony Provided also that
not less than four-fifths of the Members so summoned to the Legislative Council
shall consist of persons not holding any office or emolument under the Crown except
Officers in Her Majesty s sea and land forces on full or half pay or retired officers on
pensions.
3. Ihe Members of the first Legislative Council of the said Colony who shall be
so summoned by the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council shall hold
their respective seats therein for five years from the date of the first summonses to the
said Legislative Council but all future members of the said Legislative Council who
shall be summoned thereto after the expiration of the said five years by the Governor
with the advice of the Executive Council as aforesaid shall hold their seats therein
for the term of their natural lives subject nevertheless to the provisions hereinafter
contained for vacating the same and for altering and amending the future Constitution
of the said Colony as established by this Act,
4. It shall be lawful for any Member of the Legislative Council to resign his seat
therein by a letter to the Governor, and upon the receipt of any such letter by the
Governor the seat of such Legislative Councillor shall become vacant.
5. If any Legislative Councillor shall for two successive Sessions of the Legislature
of the said Colony tail to give his attendance in the said Legislative Council without
the permission of Her Majesty or of the Governor of the Colony signified by the said
Governor to the Legislative Council or shall take any oath or make any declaration or
acknowledgment of allegiance obedience or adherence to any Foreign Prince or Power
or shall do concur in or adopt any act whereby he may become a subject or citizen of
any Foreign State or 1 ower or whereby he may become entitled to the rights privileges
or immunities of a subject or citizen of any Foreign State or Power or shall become
bankiupt or take the benefit of any law relating to insolvent debtors or become a
public contractor or defaulter or be attainted of treason or be convicted of felony or of
any infamous ciime his seat in such Council shall thereby become vacant.
6; An J question which shall arise respecting any vacancy in the Legislative
Council on occasion of any of the matters aforesaid shall be referred by the Governor
to the said Legislative Council to be by the said Legislative Council heard and
determined 1 rovided always that it shall be lawful either for the person respecting
whose seat such question shall have arisen for Her Majesty’s Attorney General for the
said Colony on her Majesty’s behalf to appeal from the determination of the said


Council in such case to Her Majesty and that the judgment of Her Majesty given with
the advice of Her Privy Council thereon shall be final and conclusive to all intents
and purposes.
7. The Governor of the Colony shall have power and authority from time to time
by an Instrument under the Great Seal of the said Colony to appoint one Member of
the said Legislative Council to be President thereof and to remove him and appoint
another in his stead and it shall be at all times lawful for the said President to take
part in any debate or discussion which may arise in the said Legislative Council.
8. The presence of at least one-third of the Members of the said Legislative
Council exclusive of the President shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the
dispatch of business and all questions which shall arise in the said Legislative Council
shall be decided by a majority of votes of the Members present other than the
President and when the votes shall be equal the President shall have the casting vote
Provided always that if the whole number of Members constituting the Legislative
Council shall not be exactly divisible by three the quorum of the said Legislative
Council shall consist of such whole number as is next greater than one-third of the
Members of the said Legislative Council.
9. For the purpose of Constituting the Legislative Assembly of the said Colony
it shall be lawful for the Governor thereof within the time hereinafter mentioned and
thereafter from time to time as occasion shall require in Her Majesty’s name by an
Instrument or Instruments under the Great Seal of the said Colony to summon and
call together a Legislative Assembly in and for the said Colony.
10. (Number of Members of Assembly.) [. Repealed by 22 Vic. No, 20, 5. 2.]
11. (Qualification of Electors.) [ Repealed by 22 Vic. No. 20, s. 2, see
Electoral Law.]
12. (When joint owners and occupiers shall be entitled to be registered as voters
and to vote.) [ Repealed by 22 Vic. No. 20, s. 2, see Electoral Law.]
13. (Division of the Colony into Electoral Districts and the number of Members
to be returned by each. Electoral Districts.) [ Repealed by 22 Vic. No. 20, s. 2, see
Electoral Law.]
14. (Electoral Lists.) [Repealedby 22 Vic. No. 20, s. 2, see Electoral Law.]
15. It shall be lawful for the Legislature of the Colony by any Act or Acts to be
hereafter passed to alter (a) the divisions and extent of the several Counties Districts
Cities Towns Boroughs and Hamlets which shall be represented in the Legislative
Assembly and to establish new and other divisions of the same and to alter the
apportionment of Representatives to be chosen by the said Counties Districts Cities
Towns Boroughs and Hamlets respectively and to alter the number of representatives
to be chosen in and for the Colony and in and for the several Electoral Districts in
the same and to alter and regulate the appointment of Returning Officers and make
such new and other provision as they may deem expedient for the issuing and
return of Writs for the election of Members to serve in the said Legislative Assembly
and the time and place of holding such Elections Provided always that it shall
(a) See 22 Vic, No. 20, Electoral Law.


not be lawful to present to the Governor of the Colony for Her Majesty’s assent
any bill by which the number or apportionment of Representatives in the Legis-
lative Assembly may be altered unless the second and third readings of such Bill
in the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly respectively shall have
been passed with the concurrence of a majority of the Members for the time
being of the said Legislative Council and of two-thirds (6) of the Members for
the time being of the said Legislative Assembly and the assent of Her Majesty shall
not be given to any such Bill unless an Address shall have been presented by the
Legislative Assembly to the Governor stating that such Bill has been so passed.
16. (Qualification of Members of Assembly.) [ Repealed by 22 Yic.No.2o, s. 2
see Electoral Law.]
17. No person being a Member of the Legislative Council shall be capable of
being elected or of sitting or voting as a Member of the Legislative Assembly.
18. Any person holding any office of profit under the Crown or having a pension
from the Crown during pleasure or for term of years shall be incapable of being elected
or of sitting or voting as a Member of the Legislative Assembly unless he be one of
the following Official Members of the Government that is to say the Colonial Secretary
Colonial Treasurer Auditor General Attorney General and Solicitor General or one of
such additional Officers not being more than five as the Governor with the advice of
the Executive Council may from time to time by a notice in the Government Gazette
declare capable of being elected a Member of the said Assembly.
19. If any Member of the said Assembly shall accept of any office of profit or
pension from the Crown during pleasure or for term of years his election shall be
thereupon and is hereby declared to be void and a Writ shall forthwith issue for a new
Election Provided that nothing in this Act contained shall extend to any person in
receipt only of pay half-pay or a pension as an Officer in Her Majesty’s Navy or Army
or who shall receive any new or other commission in the Navy or Army respectively
or any increase of pay on such commission or to any of the Official Members of the
Government or other Officers referred to in the last preceding clause of this Act who
may accept any other office.
20. (Disqualifying ministers of religion.) [ Repealed by 22 Vic. No. 20 s. 2 see
Electoral Law.]
21. (Duration of Assembly.) [. Repealed by 37 Vic. No. 7.]
22. The Members of the Legislative Assembly shall upon the first assembling
after every General Election proceed forthwith to elect one of their number to be
Speaker and in case of his death resignation or removal by a vote of the said Legislative
Assembly the said Members shall forthwith proceed to elect another of such
Members to be such Speaker and the Speaker so elected shall preside at all meetings of
the said Legislative Assembly except as may be provided by the Standing Rules and
Orders hereinafter authorised to be made.
23. The presence of at least twenty Members of the Legislative Assembly
exclusive of the Speaker shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the said
(h) Repealed as two-thirds majority by 20 Vic., No. 10, s. I.


Legislative Assembly for the dispatch of business and all questions (except as herein
is excepted) which shall arise in the said Assembly shall be decided by the majority of
votes of such Members as shall be present other than the Speaker and when the votes
shall be equal the Speaker shall have the casting vote.
24. Upon any General Election the Legislative Assembly shall be competent to
proceed to the dispatch of business at the time appointed by the Governor for that
purpose notwithstanding that any of the Writs of Election (not exceeding five) shall
not have been returned or that in any of the Electoral Districts the Electors shall have
failed to elect a Member to serve in the said Assembly.
25. It shall be lawful for any Member of the Assembly by writing under his hand
addressed to the Speaker of the said House to resign his seat therein and upon the
receipt of such resignation by the Speaker the seat of such Member shall become vacant.
26. If any Member of the Assembly shall for one whole Session of the Legislature
without the permission of the Assembly entered upon its Journals fail to give his
attendance in the said House or shall take any oath or make declaration or
acknowledgment of allegiance obedience or adherence to any Foreign Prince or Power
or do or concur in or adopt any act whereby he may become a subject or citizen of any
foreign State or Power or become entitled to the rights privileges or immunities of a
subject ot any foreign State or Power or shall become bankrupt or an insolvent debtor
within the meaning of the laws in force within the said Colony relating to bankrupts
or insolvent debtors or shall become a public defaulter or be attainted of treason or be
convicted of felony or any infamous crime his seat in such Assembly shall thereby
become vacant.
27. (Election to take place on vacancies) [Repealed by 22 Vic. JVo. 20 s. 2 see
Electoral Law.]
28. Any person who shall directly or indirectly himself or by any person whatso-
ever in trust for him or for his use or benefit or on his account undertake execute hold
or enjoy in the whole or in part any contract or agreement for or on account of the
Public Service shall be incapable of being summoned or elected or of sitting or voting
as a Member of the Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly during the time he
shall execute hold or enjoy any such contract or any part or share thereof or any benefit
or emolument arising from the same and if any person being a Member of such Council
or Assembly shall enter into any such contract or agreement or having entered into it
shall continue to hold it his seat shall be declared by the said Legislative Council or
Legislative Assembly as the case may require to be void and thereupon the same shall
become and be void accordingly Provided always that nothing herein contained shall
extend to any contract or agreement made entered into or accepted by any incorporated
company or any trading company consisting of more than twenty persons where such
contract or agreement shall be made entered into or accepted for the general benefit of
such incorporated or trading company.
29. If any person by this Act disabled or declared to be incapable to sit or vote
in the Legislative Council or Legislative Assembly shall nevertheless be summoned to
the said Council or elected and returned as a Member to serve in the said Assemblv for
any Electoral District such summons or election and return shall and may be declared


by the said Council and Assembly as the case may require to be void and thereupon
the same shall become and be void to all intents and purposes whatsoever and if any
person under any of the disqualifications mentioned in the last preceding section shall
whilst so disqualified presume to sit or vote as a Member of the said Council or
Assembly such person shall forfeit the sum of five hundred pounds to be recovered by
any person who shall sue for the same in the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
30. It shall be lawful for the Governor of the colony for the time being to fix
such place or places within any part of the colony and such times for holding the first
and every other Session of the Legislative Council and Assembly of the said colony as
he may think tit such times and places to be afterwards changed or varied as the
Governor may judge advisable and most consistent with general convenience and the
public welfare giving sufficient notice thereof and also to prorogue the said Legislative
Council and Assembly from time to time and to dissolve the said Assembly by procla-
mation or otherwise whenever he shall deem it expedient.
31. There shall be a Session of the Legislative Council and Assembly once at
least in every year so that a period of twelve calendar months shall not intervene
between the last sitting of the Legislative Council and Assembly in one Session and
the first sitting of the Legislative Council and Assembly in the next Session.
32. The Legislative Council and Assembly shall be called together for the first
time at some period not later than six calendar months next after the proclamation of
this Act by the Governor of the said colony.
33. No Member either of the Legislative Council or of the Legislative Assembly
shall be permitted to sit or vote therein until he shall have taken and subscribed the
following oath before the Governor of the colony or before some person or persons
authorised by such Governor to administer such oath — (a) And whensoever the
demise of her present Majesty (whom may God long preserve) or of any of her successors
to the Crown of the said United Kingdom shall be notified by the Governor of the
colony to the said Council and Assembly respectively the Members of the said Council
and Assembly shall before they shall be permitted to sit and vote therein take and
subscribe the like oath of allegiance to the successor for the time being to the said Crown.
34. Provided that every person authorized by law to make an affirmation instead
of taking an oath may make such affirmation in every case in which an oath is herein-
before required to be taken.
35. The said Legislative Council and Assembly in the first Session of each res-
pectively and from time to time afterwards as there may be occasion shall prepare and
adopt such Standing Rules and Orders as shall appear to the said Council and Assembly
respectively best adapted for the orderly conduct of such Council and Assembly res-
pectively and for the manner in which such Council and Assembly shall be presided
over in case of the absence of the President or the Speaker and for the mode in which
such Council and Assembly shall confer correspond and communicate with each other
relative to Votes or Bills passed by or pending in such Council and Assemby respect-
ively and for the manner in which Notices of Bills Resolutions and other business
intended to be submitted to such Council and Assembly respectively at any Session
(a) For the oath now substituted, see 33 Vic. No* 14.


thereof may be published for general information and for the proper passing entitling
and numbering of the Bills to he introduced into and passed by the said Council and
Assembly and for the proper presentation of the same to the Governor for the time
being for Her Majesty’s assent all of which Rules and Orders shall by such Council
and Assembly respectively be laid before the Governor and being by him approved
shall become binding and of force.
36. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained the Legislature of the said
colony as constituted by this Act shall have full power and authority from time to time
by any Act or Acts to alter the provisions or laws for the time being in force under
this Act or otherwise concerning the Legislative Council and to provide for the nomina-
tion or election of another Legislative Council to consist respectfully of such Members
to be appointed or elected respectively by such person or persons and in such manner
as by such Act or Acts shall be determined Provided always that it shall not be law-
ful to present to the Governor of the said Colony for Her Majesty’s assent any Bill by
which any such alteration in the Constitution of the said colony may he made unless
the second and third readings of such Bill shall have been passed with the concurrence
of two-thirds (b) of the Members for the time being of the said Legislative Council and
of the said Legislative Assembly respectively Provided also that every Bill which shall
be so passed for any of such purposes shall be reserved for the signification of Her Maj-
esty’s pleasure thereon and a copy of such Bill shall be laid before both Houses of the
Imperial Parliament for the period of thirty days at the least before Her Majesty’s
pleasure shall be thereon signified.
37. The appointment of all public offices under the Government of the Colony
hereafter to become vacant or to be created whether such offices be salaried or not shall
be vested in the Governor with the advice of the Executive Council with the exception
of the appointments of the Officers liable to retire from office on political grounds as
hereinafter mentioned which appointments shall be vested in the Governor alone
Provided always that this enactment shall not extend to minor appointments which by
Act of the Legislature or by order of the Governor and Executive Council may be
vested in heads of departments or other officers or persons within the Colony.
38. The Commissions of the present Judges of the Supreme Court of the said
Colony and of all future Judges thereof shall be continue and remain in full force
during their good behaviour notwithstanding the demise of Her Majesty (whom may
God long preserve) or of Her Heirs and Successors any law usage or practice to the
contrary thereof in anywise notwithstanding.
39. It shall be lawful nevertheless for Her Majesty Her Heirs or Successors to
remove any such Judge or Judges upon the Address of both Houses of the Legislature
of this Colony.
40. Such salaries as are settled upon the Judges for the time being by Act of
Parliament or otherwise and also such salaries as shall or may be in future granted by
Her Majesty Her Heirs and Successors or otherwise to any future Judge or Judges of
the said Supreme Court shall in all time coming be paid and payable to every such
Judge and Judges for the time being so long as the Patents or Commissions of them
or any of them respectively shall continue and remain in force.
(£) See 20 Vic. No. 10, s. 2.


11. All laws statutes and ordinances which at the time of the passing of this Act
shall be in force within the said Colony shall remain and continue to be of the same
force authority and effect as if this Act had not been made except in so far as the same
are repealed or varied by this Act or in so far as the same shall or may hereafter by
virtue and under the authority of this Act be repealed or varied by any Act or Acts of
the Legislature of the said Colony.
42. All the Courts of Civil and Criminal Jurisdiction within the said Colony and
all Charters legal Commissions Powers and Authorities and all Officers judicial
administrative or ministerial within the said Colony respectively except in so far as the
same may be abolished altered or varied by or may be inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act or shall be abolished altered or varied by any Act or Acts of the Legisla.
ture of the Colony or other competent authority shall continue to subsist in the same
form and with the same effect as if this Act had not been made.
43. Subject to the provisions herein contained it shall be lawful for the Legis-
lature of this Colony to make laws for regulating the sale letting disposal and occupation
of the waste lands of the Crown within the said Colony.
44. It shall not be lawful for the Legislature of the Colony to levy any duty upon
articles imported hand fide for the supply of Her Majesty’s land or sea forces nor to
levy any duty impose any prohibition or restriction or grant any exemption from any
drawback or other privilege upon the importation or exportation of any articles nor to
enforce any dues or charges upon shipping contrary to or at variance with any treaty
or treaties concluded by Her Majesty with any Foreign Power.
45. Subject to the provisions of this Act and notwithstanding any Act or Acts
of the Imperial Parliament now in force to the contrary it shall be lawful for the
Legislature of the Colony to impose and levy such duties of Customs as to them may
seem fit on the importation into the Colony of any goods wares and merchandise
whatsoever whether the produce of or exported from the United Kingdom or any of
the Colonies or Dependencies of the United Kingdom or any Foreign Country Pro-
vided always that no new duty shall be so imposed upon the importation into the said
Colony of any article the produce or manufacture of or imported from any particular
country or place which shall not be equally imposed on the importation into the said
Colony of the like article the produce or manufacture of or exported from all other
countries and places whatsoever.
46. For the purpose of this Act the boundaries of the Colony of New South
Wales shall except as hereinafter accepted comprise all that portion of Her Majesty’s
Territory of Australia or New Holland lying between the one hundred and twenty-
ninth and one hundred and fifty-fourth degrees of east longitude reckoning from the
meridian of Greenwich and northward of the fortieth degree of south latitude including
all the islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean within the latitude aforesaid and also
including Lord Howe Island being in or about the latitude of thirty-one degrees thirtv
minutes south and the one hundredth and fifty-ninth degree of east longitude reckoning
from the said meridian of Greenwich save and except the territories comprised within
the boundaries of the Province of South Australia and the Colony of Victoria as at
present established Provided always that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to


prevent Her Majesty from altering the boundary of the Colony of New South Wales on
the north in such manner as to Her Majesty may seem fit nor from detaching from the
said Colony that portion of the same which lies between the western boundary of
South Australia and the one hundred and twenty-ninth degree of east longitude reckon-
ing from the said meridian of Greenwich.
And whereas the Legislative Council of New South Wales constituted under the
Imperial Act passed in the Session holden in the thirteenth and fourteenth years of
the reign of Her present Majesty intituled An Act for the better Government of Her
Majesty s Australian Colonies are desirous that Her Majesty should owe to the
spontaneous liberality of Her people in this Colony such grant by way of Civil List in
lieu of the provision contained in the Schedule to that Act as shall be sufficient to give
stability and security to the Civil Institutions of the Colony and to provide for the
adequate remuneration of able and efficient Officers in the Executive Judicial and other
departments of Her Majesty’s Colonial Service the granting of which Civil List belongs
constitutionally only to Her Majesty’s faithful people through their Representatives in
the said Legislative Council and Her Majesty’s most dutiful and loyal subjects the
Members of the said Legislative Council in Council assembled being desirous that a
certain competent revenue for the purpose may be settled upon Her Majesty (to whom
may God grant a long and happy reign) as a testimony of their unfeigned affection to
Her Majesty’s Person and Government have accordingly freely resolved in lieu of the
aforesaid statutable provision for the like purpose to grant to Her Majesty Her Heirs
and Successors a certain revenue payable out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of
this Colony Be it therefore enacted as follows :
47. All taxes imports rates and duties and all territorial casual and other revenues
of the Crown (including royalties) from whatever source arising within this Colony and
over which the present or future Legislature has or may have power of appropriation shall
form one consolidated Revenue Fund to be appropriated for the Public Service of this
Colony in the manner and subject to the charges hereinafter mentioned.
48. The Consolidated Revenue Fund of this Colony shall be permanently charged
with all the costs charges and expenses incident to the collection management and
receipt thereof such costs charges and expenses being subject nevertheless to be
reviewed and audited in such manner as shall be directed by any Act of the Legis-
lature.
49. There shall be payable in every year to Her Majesty Her Heirs and Suc-
cessors out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of this Colony the several suras not
exceeding in the whole the sum of sixty-four thousand and three hundred pounds for
defraying the expense of the several services and purposes named in the Schedules A
B and C to this Act annexed the said several sums to be issued by the Colonial
Treasurer in discharge of such Warrant or Warrants as shall be from time to time
directed under the hand of the Governor and the said Treasurer shall account to Her
Majesty for the same through the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury, in
such manner and form as her Majesty shall be graciously pleased to direct, (a)
50. The said several sums mentioned Schedules A B and C shall be accepted and
(u) Repealed as to Schedule C by 2G Vic. No. 19 so far as inconsistent therewith.


taken by Her Majesty Her Heirs and Successors by way of Civil List instead of all
territorial casual and other revenues of the Crown (including all royalties) from what-
ever source arising within the said Colony and to the disposal of which the CroAvn may
be entitled either absolutely or conditionally or otherwise howsoever. ( a)
51. Not more than four thousand five hundred and fifty pounds in each year shall
be payable for pensions to the Judges of the Supreme Court’ out of the sum set apart
for pensions in the said Schedule B and not more than five thousand nine hundred
pounds in each year shall be payable by way of pension or retiring allowance for the
present incumbents of any office or departments mentioned in the said Schedule B who
on political grounds may retire or be released from any such office or department
Provided always that pensions shall be demandable by such Judges ( b) to the amount
of seven-tenths of their actual salaries on permanent disability or infirmity or after
fifteen years service as such Judge in this Colony and that so far as the present Judges
are concerned every three years service in any judicial office in this Colony other than
the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be equivalent to one year’s service as
such Judge of the Supreme Court Provided also that the Officers so liable to retire or
be released shall be the Attorney General and Solicitor General the Colonial Secretary
Colonial Treasurer and Auditor General and upon the retirement or release from office
of any of the present Officers they shall be entitled by way of pension or retiring
allowance to the full amount of the salaries respectively received by them at the time
of the passing of this Act Provided also that if after the assignment of any such
pension or retiring allowance any of such Judges or Officers shall accept any new
appointment under the Crown then and in every such case the pension or retiring
allowance of any such Judge or Officer shall merge or be reduced pro tanto during the
tenure of such appointment according as the salary or emoluments of any such new
appointment are of a greater or less amount than the pension or retiring allowance of
such Judge or Officer.
52. Not more than three thousand five hundred pounds in each year shall be pay-
able for pensions to superannuated Officers Provided always that the amount of all
such pensions for such superannuated Officers shall be according to the several scales
and rates fixed by the Superannuation Act of the Parliament of Great Britain and
Ireland passed in the Sessions of the fourth and fifth years of the reign of His late
Majesty King William the Fourth and that a list of all pensions granted under this
Act and of the persons to whom the same shall have been granted shall be laid in every
year before both Houses of the Legislature of the Colony.
53. After and subject to the payments to be made under the provisions herein-
before contained all the Consolidated Kevenue Fund hereinbefore mentioned shall be
subject to be appropriated to such specific purposes as by any Act of the Legislature
of the Colony shall be prescribed in that behalf Provided that the consolidation of the
Revenues of this Colony shall not affect the payment of the annual interest or the
principal sums mentioned in any outstanding debentures or other charge upon the
Territorial Revenue as such interest principal or other charge severally becomes due
(u) Repealed as to Schedule C by 2(> Vic. No. 19 so far as inconsistent therewith.
(b) See 23 Vic. No. 2, Judges.


Uor shall such consolidation affect the payment of any sum or sums heretofore charged
upon the taxes duties rates and imposts now raised levied and collected or to be raised
levied and collected to and for the use of this Colony for such time as shall have been
appointed by any Acts of the said Legislature by which any such charge was
authorized.
54. It shall not be lawful for the Legislative Assembly to originate or pass any
\ ote Resolution or Bill for the appropriation of any part of the said Consolidated
Revenue Fund or of any other tax or impost to any purpose which shall not have
been first recommended by a message of the Governor to the said Legislative Assembly
during the Session in which such Vote Resolution or Bill shall be passed.
50. No part of Her Majesty’s Revenue in the said Colony arising from any of the
sources aforesaid shall be issued or shall be made issuable except in pursuance of war-
rants under the hand of the Governor of the Colony directed to the Public Treasurer
thereof.
56. This Act shall be proclaimed in New South Wales by the Governor thereof
within one calendar month after official information of the Royal Assent thereto shall
have been received by such Governor and shall take effect within the said Colony from
the day of the proclamation thereof.
57. In the construction of this Act the term “Governor” shall mean the person
for the time being lawfully administering the Government of the Colony of New South
Wales.
28. The foregoing provisions of this Act shall have no force or effect until so much
and such parts of the Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland passed in the thirteenth and fourteenth years of Her Majesty’s reign intituled
An Act for the better Government of the Australian Colonies and the first second and
third parts of the Schedule A therein referred to and of another Act passed in the fifth
and sixth years of Her Majesty’s reign intituled An Act for the Government of New
South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land and of another Act passed in the fifth and sixth
years of Her Majesty’s reign intituled An Act for regulating the sale of Waste Land
belonging to the Crown in the Australian Colonies and of another Act passed in the
eighth year of Her Majesty’s reign intituled An Act to clear up doubts as to the Regu-
lation and Audit of the Customs of New South Wales and of another Act passed in the
same year intituled An Act to explain and amend the Act for the Government of New
South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land and of another Act passed in the ninth year of
the reign of His late Majesty King George the Fourth intituled An Act to provide for
the Administration of Justice in New South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land and for
the more effectual Government thereof and for other purposes relating thereto and of
another Act passed in the ninth and tenth years of Her Majesty’s reign intituled An
Act to amend an Act for regulating the Sale of Waste Land belonging to the Crown in
the Australian Colonies and to make further provision for the management thereof as
severally relate to the Colony of New South Wales and as are repugnant to this Act
shall have been repealed and the entire management and control of the Waste Lands
belonging to the Crown in the said Colony of New South Wales and also the appropri-
ation of the gross proceeds of the sales of such lands and of all other proceeds and


revenues of the same from whatever source arising within the said Colony including
all royalties mines and minerals shall be vested in the Legislature of the said Colony
Provided that nothing herein contained shall affect or be construed to affect any con-
tract or to prevent the fulfilment of any promise or engagement made by or on behalf
of Her Majesty with respect to any lands situate within the said Colony in cases where
such contracts promises or engagements shall have been lawfully made before the time
at which this Act shall take effect within this Colony nor to disturb or in any way
interfere with or prejudice any vested or other rights which have accrued or belong to
the licensed occupants or lessees of any Crown Lands within or without the Settled
Districts under and by virtue of the aforesaid Act of the Parliament passed in the
ninth and tenth years of Her Majesty’s reign or of any Order or Orders of Her Majesty
in Council issued in pursuance thereof.


THE
HISTOET
OF THE
SOUDAN EXPEDITION:
AN
HISTORICAL RECORD
OF THE
Events relating to the Levy, Despatch, and Return of the
NEW SOUTH WALES CONTINGENT
-A_ ISED FOR SIEIR "V ICE I IST lE] Gr "X" I? T_
MARCH JUNE, 18 88,




THE SOUDAN EXPEDITION.
A voice that peals across vast leagues of sea
And dim deep voids of distance, stirs the furled
White wings of Peace that fold the under-world, —
And deep to deep re-echoes thrillingly.
And shining armour on his strong young limbs
The hardy son of foam-born mother girds:
The sea-king’s scion unfamiliar herds,
Awaking, leaves : and pastoral sweet hymns
War’s clarion-note out-voices. With a swift
And prompt good-will the mother’s last-born son—
His bright new term of youth scarce yet begun—
Thrusts forth his priceless patriotic gift,
Generous, if premature ; and the brave
Strong life yields back the boon the sireland gave.
W HE noise and tumult of old-world conflicts reach us here in Australia but as far-oflj indistinct
\ IJill murmurs. From our comparative isolation we are but spectators, moved by curiosity rather
than active sympathy with the wars and rumours of wars that agitate European politics from
time to time. Hitherto, undisturbed Peace has been our national heritage, and her furled
* white wings have been unstirred by the faintest angry breath of international discord. But
one touch of nature, appealing to that first of instincts —the love of the motherland—has in a
few brief months changed the attitude of these Australian colonies before the world. The reverses
sustained by the British arms in the Egyptian Soudan, which reached their grand climacteric in the death of
the chivalrous and gallant Gordon, struck a chord of feeling here that vibrated an instant response to the
unspoken appeal. After the first burst of enthusiasm which resulted in our despatching a contingent of
Australian troops to the Soudan, it may have been doubted that our generous and impulsive act of filial
grace was somewhat premature. But, to use the spirited words of one whose name will always be a part of


the political and literary history of these lands, it was felt that “ when the signal fires are reddening the
hills at midnight, when the sharp tuck of (he drum and (he fierce taunting invitation of the trumpet
are abroad, it is not for the recruit to plead that his drill is incomplete.” Our offer was accepted as
graciously as it was made. And the first military expedition in our history became a splendid
demonstration of the patriotism and loyalty of these Australian colonies, and of the strength
of the ties that bind them and the mother-country sympathetically together. The movement
was brilliantly conceived and gallantly carried out into practical effect. From the first moment
that the project of raising an Australian contingent was mooted it was taken up with unanimous
fervour, and pressed on with unexampled enthusiasm. The heart of the country was touched. From one
side of the continent to the other our action was approved and cheered on with such a general and cordial
good-will as proved that the articulate classes of these Australian communities were in the fullest sympathy
with the movement. It was felt that the mother colony of the group should lead off in such a demonstra-
tion as would prove beyond cavil and beyond doubt that the national feeling of the people was in harmony
and accord with that of the great mother-land at the other side of the globe. It may be that, in due
process of years and development, we may be called upon to federate for the formation of a distinct
national existence, and thus separate from Great Britain. But our recent action has conclusively shown
that that event has been indefinitely postponed, and will be the result of the action of the Home authorities
rather than the effect of any initial step of our own. The bonds which unite us to our native centre are
strengthened, and the union of England with that Greater Britain which she has founded on the shores of
strange seas has been ratified. The moral effect which the step we have taken will exert on the rest of the
world will be incalculable, as showing forth how intimately interwoven and how closely knit the interests
and sympathies of the colonies are with those of the great heart of the empire. It would, of course, be
idle to ignore the objections with which the movement was met. Such a distinctive and important act must
necessarily have excited some criticism, and this it encountered in a large and noticeable degree. But
the objections were almost unheard amid the applause with which the step taken by the Government was
greeted, and the objectors themselves remained all but unnoticed and unheeded. The country seemed to
instinctively feel that it was doing a great and worthy deed, and nothing was allowed to interfere with its
representative character and import.
The history of the year 1885 will always bo a bright page in the annals of Australian progress. Our
historical record is still forming itself. Year by year and month by month the group of colonies founded
not yet a century ago under the Southern Gross is putting the materials for the historian together with a
rapidity that outstrips the pen of the chronicler and excites the wonder of the observer of the growth of
nationality. In the preceding pages wo have endeavoured to convey some idea of the magical progress
Australia, and more particularly the mother colony, New South Wales, has been making in the past.° To
this end we have traced the careers of a few of her prominent men whose lives have made our history, and
whose actions are its landmarks and the chief factors in its development. To these men, and some of their
equally distinguished contemporaries, we owe the advances we have already made, our free institutions
and that broad and liberal national spirit which already begins to distinguish young Australia. But we
haic so far but turned the first pages of our record. The work of development is still proceeding,
unhasting, unrestingand even while we are putting the records of the past together the present is
fixing its place and the names of the men who are its leading figures indelibly on the tablets of history
While these sheets have been passing through the press, the Soudan movement, with all its accessories of*
brilliant historical effect, has been conceived and carried out by the Government of the colony ; and another
and perhaps the most attractive page in our history has been turned down.
The events which led to the despatch of the Contingent may be briefly recapitulated here. The
Soudan has always been the pillage-ground of the Egyptian rulers. The sub-officials openly encouraged the
slave trader. Throughout the reign of Ismail Pasha this state of things continued. Under Tewfik, his son
who succeeded after his abdication, matters grew worse. The oppressed Soudanese rose up repeatedly


against their domestic tyrants. Sir Samuel Baker was appointed Governor of the equatorial provinces,
and commissioned to relieve the misery of the people, and repress the slave-trade and similar abuses.
He failed, and was followed by General Gordon, who shortly afterwards became Governor-General of the
Soudan. The pashas, who had profited by the disorganisation, opposed his efforts to introduce order, and
under their influence sheikh after sheikh turned against him. He gave up his task in despair in January,
l&bO. The work of spoliation commenced with renewed vigour. The last check was removed, and the native
population were ground down by their rulers to the uttermost depths of wretchedness and misery.
Mahomet Achmet was one of these Soudanese. He belonged to a religious sect, and he used his influence
over his fellows to incite them to rise against their rulers. He proclaimed himself the “ Mahdi,” —the
prophet. When Gordon left, and the Khedive’s officers resumed their work of spoliation, the Mahdi
declared himself the appointed saviour of his people. In July, 1881, he began his crusade, which he put
forth at first as the mission of Mahomet, with whom he claimed to be related. He described himself as
the prophet foretold by Mahomet, who was to re-establish Islam. The Soudanese followed him en masse.
Ihe hardy Arabs of the desert fought under him. His advance was irresistible. Successes accompanied his
march, and a swift revenge was enacted whenever the traces of Egyptian officialdom made themselves
apparent. Charles George Gordon was requested by the King of the Belgians to take charge of an expedi-
tion to Congo to suppress the slave-trade, at the end of 1883. He accepted, and went on to England.
While in London he was asked to undertake a mission “to report on the military situation in the Soudan,
and to provide in the best manner for the safety of the European population of Khartoum and of the
Egyptian garrisons throughout the country, as well as for the evacuation of the Soudan, with the exception
of the seaboard.” In January, 1884, he left England with this object. He reached Khartoum on
February 18, and at once re-commenced his arduous work of re-organisation. He opened the prisons,
stopped the grinding taxation and cruelty that existed, and worked many salutary reforms. The Mahdi
marched upon Khartoum and surrounded the town. The rest of the sad story is well known. Is it
necessary to tell of the weary hours of sickening hope and languid expectancy with which the General
looked forth from his palace walls, across the dazzle of the desert sands, for the glint of the steel and the
music of the cheers of the British force which should have advanced to relieve him?—of the chivalrous
and gallant heroism of the forsaken champion who forgot his peril to remember his honour when others
seemed to forget theirs ?—or of the final tragedy that formed the last scene in a life that reminds one
more of that of Sir Galahad of old than of the modern mechanical soldier ? The lines of his story are as
familiar on our lips as household words now. Brave tales have been told of man’s heroism and woman’s
love, but this dead hero’s history binds much of the most precious of these together in one dazzling parnre
of priceless brilliancy. His profoundly religious faith, and the deep strain of religious feeling which ran
through and exalted his manly character—his private and public charities, and his tenderness for those outcast
London boys for whom he did so much, —his philanthropic labours for the poor of the Egyptian towns where
he laboured with such singleness of heart, —these and the thousand and one other traits of character, which
pen does not chronicle nor voice acclaim, but which memory loves to treasure and linger fondly over,
are still fresh in the minds of all. But it was fated that the hero should die in harness at the post of duty,
like a brave soldier and gallant gentleman. Sold by traitors, he was assassinated at the gates of his own
palace, almost on the anniversary of the day he entered Khartoum, while the Mahdi thundered at the
gates, and the tardy relief which a just indignation at home had at last sent forth, made its tedious and
hopeless way along the JNile.
It was the tidings of this tragic event, with the reverses that the British forces had previously sus-
tained in the course of the Egyptian campaign, that evoked that outburst of national sentiment which
found so clear an echo amongst ourselves, and prompted our action in despatching the Contingent. It was
felt that the circumstances called for some signal expression of feeling on our part. The tacit appeal was
so strong as to be irresistible, and it was too pressing and too urgent to admit of hesitancy or delay. The
most creditable features about the whole movement were its spontaneity and its promptness. It was not


for us to express an opinion on the expediency or otherwise of continuing this disastrous and uncertain
warfare. It was unanimously felt that the occasion called for acts, not words, on our part, and the
immediate result of that feeling was such a promptness and decision of action, and a general and genuine
outburst of enthusiasm, as will stand forth from the pages of the history of this Australian nation for all
time, —a protest and a testimony of devoted patriotism to the motherland. We owed Britain this return.
We have received our independent existence at her hands. We have copied her free institutions and her
popular privileges; we learn from her wisdom and culture \ and we claim a share and a part in the glory
of her who now, in point of historical glory, is “ the heir of all the ages.” A\ e are under the protection
of England, and we receive yearly immense assistance in the shape of ships and men in guarding our coasts
and trade. When this matter came up for discussion in the Legislative Council, where the action of the
Government during the Parliamentary recess was cordially and unanimously approved by a body of
gentlemen, most of whom have seen the beginnings of progress in these colonies, one member
—William A. Brodribb—pointed out, in a few telling sentences, the nature of the claims the old land had
on our service. The squadron at this moment in these seas costs the English government £lOO,OOO per
annum. A dance at Australian statistics will show the nature of our debt to the home country. The
population of these colonies numbers over 3,420,000, drawn in a great measure from the British Islands.
The territory comprises an area of 3,075,030 square miles, which may be thus divided —New South AVales,
309,175 square miles, with a population of 1,000,000; Victoria, 87,884 square miles, population,
1,000,000 ; Queensland, 668,224 square miles, population, 300,000; South Australia, 903,425 square
miles, population, 350,000 ; Western Australia, 975,920 square miles, population, 50,000; Tasmania,
26,375 square miles, population, 120,000; New Zealand, 104,627 square miles, population, 600,000.
This magnificent estate has been the free gift of England to the people of Australia, and they felt that
they owed some return. Such objections, therefore, as were founded on the mere pecuniary side of the
question were at once swept away by the breath of public opinion. The outlay was one almost of petty
insignificance beside the large sum that England annually spends for our maritime protection in our own
seas alone. We have, besides, as colonies and dependencies of England, and the markets for her trade, the
protection of English prestige and standing amongst the other Powers. If that were removed, the rich
cities that dot the Australian coast would fall an easy prey to the first privateering expedition or belli-
gerent Power that desired to descend upon us. The actual outlay incurred by our Contingent, therefore,
was not a matter for close calculation in view of these solid facts. A much more serious objection, at
first "lance, was that raised by some of the critics of the movement who maintained that by taking part
in a foreign war we sacrificed that neutrality which had hitherto been our chief strength. By engaging
by our own act in a struggle where our internal interests were not directly concerned, it was said that we
assumed a part and share in the international quarrels of England, with all their responsibilities and
consequences. Were this criticism founded on any known or existing law, it would cover a serious charge.
As a matter of simple fact, however, so long as these colonies are connected with England as dependencies
under her rulers and under her Hag, her foreign policy is ours. If England is at peace, her colonies are at
peace also. If England is at war, then her colonies and dependencies are at war likewise, subject to all its
risks and penalties, and participators in all its glories and advantages, whether they actively assert them-
selves as belligerent States and take part in the conflict or not. We cannot separate ourselves from our
rulers in this matter, even if we so desired. It is idle to speak of our colonial neutrality while Britain is
at war. We are no more subject to the descent of a foreign power because we aspire to aid our guardian
and protector than if we had remained passive while her armies sustained reverses in the field. By
asserting ourselves at such a juncture we establish a claim for assistance in our own day of need, and we
show to other nations the nature of the tie that binds the mother-country and her colonies together. We
make public our right to the protection we have always claimed, and we strengthen and multiply the
reasons why that protection, with all its advantages, should be continued to us. We have everything to
gain from a continuance of such guardianship, and everything to lose by its withdrawal. Again, we had


an interest in the British campaign in Egypt of a directly practical kind. By tlie action of the Mahdi and
his followers British interests in Egypt were threatened. This meant that the safety of the Suez Canal,
and thereby the line of traffic between Europe and Australia, was endangered. The evil implied by this
contingency, both as to communication and transit, is incalculable. On this ground alone, then, Australia
was justified in interfering, with her offer of assistance and sympathy, in the Egyptian campaign. No
neutrality was sacrificed, because no neutrality existed ; and so far from Australia, by its action, inviting
the Powers to make her spoils their prey, we showed the nature of our alliance with England, and our
right and title to her best protection in the event of any action on their part which may cause us to
invoke it in the future. Another objection, and one which contained the only real force, was founded on
the unconstitutionality of the action taken by the Government of New South Wales in levying and des-
patching the Contingent without having first sought and obtained the sanction and consent of Parliament.
This was the burden of the attack made upon the Ministry when the Australian Military Contingent
Indemnity Bill came on for discussion in the Assembly. As will be seen from the following account,
Parliament was in recess when the news of the British reverses in the Soudan and Gordon’s death at
Khartoum reached Sydney. The labours of a long and arduous, but exceptionally fruitful session had
been brought to a close by the passing of the Land Bill, as described elsewhere in this volume. Members
were enjoying a respite from their labours, and the country representatives for the most part had retired to
their homes. But the thrill of enthusiasm produced by the awakening of the national spirit after the
event in the Egyptian Soudan, put new vigour into the public life of the country. The popular sentiment
was rightly interpreted by the Acting Colonial Secretary and Attorney-Gereral, the Honorable William
Bede Dailey, who at once gave it definite shape and expression in the form of that offer of troops which has
now become historical. The offer was accepted by Her Majesty’s Ministers at home, and preparations
were at once set on foot to ensure the due performance of the service we had undertaken to render. The
colony was committed to an important action, involving the expenditure of public money, on the sole
authority of the Cabinet, and without the consent of Parliament: in this lies the gravamen of the charge
of unconstitutionality against the Government. There is this much to be said in favor of the indictment,
that it is at least founded upon fact. That the Government did not rigidly adhere to the letter of the
Constitution Act has never been questioned even by the most ardent apologist of the movement. But
there is a time when the letter of the law is subservient to its spirit ; and the public feeling of the country
at large is the best judge as to when that time is reached. Judged by this test, the crisis which called
forth the Australian offer of troops was just such a time as that. The very nature of the appeal which we
felt addressed to us precluded hesitation or delay. We were called on, as it were, either to act promptly
and immediately, or let the opportunity for ever go by. There comes such a crisis from time to time, for
nations as for individuals, when decisive action is called on to co-operate with momentary occasion, to
produce a result of life-long effect. “ Genius,” Carlyle says, “is the union of the man with the oppor-
tunity and there is a genius in statecraft which has ever been the first factor in national greatness. To
have delayed the offer of troops for the Soudan until Parliament might have been called together would
have been to court a refusal of our offer, and thus deprive ourselves of all the credit and honour that we
have gained. On general grounds, then, the Government was justified in submitting their offer at once
and without delay, to the highest constitutional authority in these realms,—that is, to the English Cabinet,
and through it to the British Parliament and public. We know how unanimously our action has been
approved and applauded by the one, and accepted by the other. The House of Lords has officially
thanked us, and Her Majesty the Queen has been pleased to signify her pleasure at the patriotic feeling of
her loyal Australian colonies. After such high testimonies as these, all charges against the unconstitu-
tionality of the movement must necessarily fall to the ground. What was wanting has been added by the
English Cabinet and by Royalty, and these, by their consent and approval, have taken upon themselves
all constitutional responsibility. For all practical and theoretical purposes, the letter of the Constitution
has been sufficiently recognised by the action of the Ministry in submitting the whole matter, with their


own responsibility for their action, to the Parliament of the country at the very earliest opportunity they
had of doing so. To the credit of both Houses be it said, the action of the Ministry was approved, and
after the matter had been fully discussed, as its importance required it should be, and the formal ratifi-
cation of the action of the Government recorded, the representatives of the people in Parliament assembled
expressed the popular enthusiasm and feeling on the subject which had called them together by rising in
their places and giving way to such an outburst of spontaneous cheering as had never before been heard
within the precincts of the Chamber.
The advantages which will accrue to the colony from this circumstance in our history will far outweigh
any imagined objections to the movement. The objectors have, in most instances, been actuated either by
a very easily traced desire to make political capital or cheap notoriety out of the Ministerial action.
The pitiful details of opposition which were so familiar to us while the movement was in progress will be
forgotten when that movement itself is remembered as an act of public policy most prolific in benefits to the
colony. In the first place, it has given us a position in the eyes of other nations. Australia, a mere
Ci geographical expression,” in many senses of the term, to the outer world hitherto, is now looked upon as
a growing nationality, with the elements of vital strength rapidly developing, and able to put with her
united forces an army of aid into the field. We also, for the time being, concentrated the attention of the
English-speaking world in a marked manner on ourselves by the completeness and promptitude of our
action. This marked interest will have results of its own. To the great bulk of the home population little
or nothing is known of the vast territory which we possess, and which only requires population—with its
attendant capital and labour —to develop resources which are declaring themselves every day. We publish
forth to the world the opportunities and advantages we offer, in making ourselves and our resources known.
In this way a stream of immigration, of the most desirable kind, is directed to our shores to strengthen our
hands in working out our ultimate destiny. Our action is valuable, again, as tending to form a national
spirit amongst ourselves. The unanimity of opinion on the subject which characterised the action of all the
colonies in complimenting us on our despatch of troops, and in offering their own, will tend more than any-
thing else to weld the group together. The federation of the Australian colonies has been accelerated by the
despatch of our Contingent, and the bonds of unity have been drawn more closely together. Again, we
have strengthened our own defences. As before shown, we have stated a claim in the most forcible terms
for the continued protection of England. Our small body of troops may not, indeed, have had much
practical influence on the Egyptian campaign, but we have done our best, and done it gratefully and
promptly; and we feel that the pleasing sacrifice we have made will not be overlooked should we, at any
time, stand in need of a similar manifestation. We have strengthened the bonds of Empire. Instead of
being overgrown and burdensome excrescences on the mother-country, we have learned to walk alone and
carve out our own history. But we have turned back at a critical time to re-assert our dependence and our
patriotism. The act was performed exactly at the right time. The present decade will see us enter upon
our national manhood. With our first centennial celebration, we will have left behind us our national
adolescence, as it were, to come into possession of our heritage. It was a graceful and a fitting act, then,
on completing this first century of existence, to commemorate our entry into national manhood by the
brilliant movement which has marked out an epoch in our history. It shows that we have not outgrowm our
sympathies by time, and that our new nationhood is not growing up without heart. Our first act of
national self-assertion has been devoted to the land from which that nationhood sprung.
In the following pages we lay before the reader a detailed account of matters relating to the expedi-
tion, compiled from official documents and information carefully collated, and reports from the various
journals of the day—in particular the Sydney Morning Herald . A passing notice is also taken of the
objections to the movement, and some of the leading speeches delivered in both Houses of Parliament on
the question are also republished from Hansard . Care has been taken to present in the following pages
such a picture of the whole movement as will show, with every accessory of colour and effect, but to the
exclusion of unimportant details, its true character and its influence on the feeling of the country.


To whom the idea of sending help from Australia to the British Arms in the Soudan first occurred
may be a matter of speculation, but there can be no question that to Sir Edward Strickland is due
the merit of first having made it public. The interest taken by the people in the course of events in
the Soudan, especially since the gallant Gordon went there, was intense. Every item of news that came
to hand was eageily scanned and keenly discussed. Every move of the hero and of the expedition sent
to his relief was closely watched ; and while acknowledging the difficulty of moving an army with its
necessary equipment through such a country as that along which the Nile takes its course, all felt
impatient that more haste had not been made, or that the expedition had not been despatched sooner.
And when the news arrived that Khartoum had fallen, and that Gordon was supposed to have perished, at
first the report was scarcely believed. At last, however, the sad news was but too surely confirmed, and
nothing was felt but grief for the loss of Gordon and indignation at the treachery which caused his untimely
fall. It was just at this moment, when the whole of Australia was smarting with sorrow, that Sir
Edward Strickland—himself an old soldier—addressed a letter to the Sydney Morning Herald, which was
published on the 12th February, 1885. Sir Edward wrote as follows
“ It is in the first moments of grief and indignation on hearing the news that ‘ Gordon was dead,’
that the idea flashed across me that Australia should at once give expression to her deep sorrow at the loss
of this great commander and preux chevalier by following the example of a sister colony, Canada, and
tendering to our mother-country substantial aid in the time of need. If we are correctly informed by the
wires, Canada has placed 600 of her local forces at the service of the Home authorities; and it is not very
many years ago since the 100 th Regiment, now styled the Royal Canadian Regiment, was raised in
Canada and incorporated with the Royal Army. A grand opportunity is now offered to Australia of
proving, by performing a graceful, a loyal, a generous act, that she yields not to Canada or to any portion
of the British Empire in loyalty and affection towards our mother-country. I would suggest that a
regiment 1000 strong be raised in Australia as speedily as possible, and be placed at the service of her
Majesty the Queen, to aid her troops already engaged in bitter war both in North and South Africa, or to
supply the place at home of those drilled battalions sent out to reinforce their comrades in the field.
There is no soit of use in attempting to shut our eyes to the fact that England has now upon her hands
two of the most bloody wars of the century, apart from possible contingencies with some European States.
I irst, we have the warlike, brave Saracens, led by the Mahdi, and fighting under all the savage influences
of fanaticism ; we have attacked them on their own soil, and we can never retire from the field except as
conquerors, unless we are content to have peace with dishonour. Secondly, we have the hardy Boer, a
deadly shot and an excellent soldier. We are on his soil too, and there must either assert the supremacy
of English rule or yield the country to the Dutch, By continued successes over Hicks, Baker, and now,
alas ! poor Gordon, the Saracens are learning the art of modern military strategy, and they are acquiring
arms and artillery, and a knowledge of how to use them. If not crushed now, by force of arms, they
may easily become as formidable as their renowned ancestors of old. It therefore well becomes every
Christian people to aid in the great task now undertaken by England single-handed, and to no Christian
people is this a more sacred duty than to the children of old England. Every Christian-born subject
feels to-day that he has lost a friend in Gordon ; therefore all Christendom will ring with praises of the
gallantry of Australia in losing not a moment in tendering aid in the hour of need for the maintenance of
the integrity of our nation and the ascendancy of Christianity.”
The publication of this letter created a strong interest at once, and the idea contained in it was
everywhere discussed. Sir Edward, it will be seen, contemplated an Australian regiment, composed of
recruits from all the colonies, which, as experience has shown, could have been easily raised, though, of
course, it would have required some considerable time before the details as between the several colonies
could be arranged, and no doubt an immense mass of correspondence must have passed. In the mean-
while, the idea occurred to the members of our Ministry to act, and let New South Wales offer to send
her contingent of men to the aid of the British arms at once.


On Thursday, the 12th February, the day on which Sir Edward Strickland’s letter had appeared, an
extraordinary Cabinet Council was held at the Colonial Secretary’s office to consider a minute written by
Mr. Dailey on the subject. It should be stated that before the meeting of the Cabinet Mr. Dailey had
had interviews with Colonel Richardson, the Colonel-Commandant of the forces in New.South M ales, and
with Colonel Roberts, the officer commanding the N.S. W. Artillery, commonly known as the Permanent
Force. From Colonel Richardson he ascertained that there would be no difficulty in raising a large body
of trained and efficient infantry for the proposed service from among the volunteers of the country ; and
from Colonel Roberts he learned that two or three batteries of our Permanent Artillery were available for
active sexwice. Mr. Dailey also saw Mr. Yuill, the local manager of the Orient Steamship Company, and
ascertained from him that the means of transport could be obtained. These facts having been embodied
in the minute referred to, it was unanimously approved of by the Cabinet, and in consequence the
following cablegram was, at noon, despatched to Sir Saul Samuel, the Agent-General of the colony in
London :
“ The Government offer to her Majesty’s Government two batteries of its Permanent Field Artillery,
with 10 1 Gib. guns, properly horsed : also an effective and disciplined battalion of infantry 500 strong ;
the Artillery will be under the command of Colonel Roberts, 11. A. ; the whole force under the command
of Colonel Richardson, the Commandant; and undertaking to land the force at Suakim within 30 days
from embarkation. Reply at once.—AV. B. D alley. 12th February, 1885.”
The object of the Government in making this offer, was explained by Mr. Dailey, as to testify the
readiness of the Australian colonies to give instant and practical help to the Empire in its emergency,
conceiving that such a course cannot be without a beneficial effect upon those who may in dealing
adversely with the Imperial interests, fail to recognise the esteem, the sympathy, and the adherence of the
colonies. Pending the receipt of an answer from the Imperial Government, all the necessary arrangements
were put in train, so that in the event of the offer being accepted active preparations might commence at once.
It should be mentioned that on the same day—February 12—Mr. J. Hindson addressed a letter to
the Press, in which, referring to the suggestion of Sir Edward Strickland, he offered to give £2OO as the
first public contribution towards a patriotic fund.
At half-past 8 o’clock on the morning of Friday, February 13, Mr. Dailey received from Sir Saul
Samuel a reply to his telegram sent at noon on the preceding day, in the following terms :
“ Have shown your message to Lords Derby and Hartington. Your offer greatly appreciated, and
will be at once considered. Operations in the Soudan expected will have to be deferred, as getting late in
season. Sent your offer to press.— Saul Samuel.”
During the course of the same day the Herald correspondent in London telegraphed as follows :
“ The offer of military assistance to England by the Government of New South AVales has favourably
impressed the British public. The Home Government have expressed their gratification at the offer, but
it is unlikely that it will be accepted.”
But, although it was so far uncertain whether the offer made by New South AYaleS would be accepted
or not, there was no uncertainty whatever about the spirit in which the offer was met by the people of
New South AYales. In all parts of the colony, especially where local corps of volunteers existed, the
greatest excitement on the subject arose, and the action of the Goverment was approved by overwhelming
majorities. Here and there, it is true, there were those who condemned the course the Government
proposed to take, and among others, Sir Henry Parkes wrote a letter to the press, in strong disapprobation of
the whole matter. At the same time there were others who not only approved of the proposed expedition,
but who expressed their practical approbation by offers of pecuniary assistance. Among the most
prominent of these was Mr. AV. H. Halliday, of Brookong, who proffered a contribution of £lOOO per
annum so long as our forces were engaged in the assistance of the I mperial arms in Egypt. Other liberal
offers came in during the course of the day.
It should be stated that immediately Mr, Dailey cabled his offer on the 12th he wired to the Premiers


of all the Australian colonies informing them of what he had done. On the following day he received
from Mr. Service, the Chief Secretary of Victoria, the following very gratifying reply : —I await with
interest the answer of the Imperial Government to the patriotic offer of New South Wales, which, I
believe, gives practical expression to the general Australasian feeling. If your offer accepted, Victoria will
gladly follow suit.— James Service, Premier.”
It transpired during this day that more than a sufficient number of Volunteer officers to command
the proposed battalion of infantry had offered their services; and from the offers that were even then
pouring in it was evident that there would be no difficulty whatever in raising the proposed number of
men. There was great enthusiasm among the men of the Permanent force when they heard that their
services were likely to be required ; and among the comparatively new force known as the Naval Artillery
Volunteers a large number came forward to offer themselves for the Soudan.
The public enthusiasm and excitement up to this point had been something remarkable, but it was as
nothing compared with what ensued on Sunday night and Monday morning when it became known that
England had accepted the generous offer of assistance from New South Wales. On the Friday night Mr.
Dailey, in company with his colleagues, the Colonial Treasurer and the Minister for Mines, (Mr. J. P.
Abbott), left Sydney to be present at a banquet at Burrowa given by the constituents of that electorate to
Mr. T. M. Slattery, their representative. Mr. Wright, the Secretary for Public Works, remained in
Sydney, looking after the preparations and arrangements generally. The banquet took place on Saturday
night, and on Sunday, while on his return journey from Burro wa to reach the train at G along, Mr. Dailey
received the following telegram from the Agent-General, which had been forwarded to meet him en route
by his colleague, Mr. Wright :— u Her Majesty’s Government accept with much satisfaction offer of your
Government, upon the understanding that the force must be placed absolutely under orders of General
commanding as to duties upon which it will be employed. Force of Artillery is greater than is required ;
only one battery accepted. Transport should call at Aden for orders. If your Government prefer the
immediate despatch of your contingent, the War Office does not desire to delay it. Press comment very
favourably upon your splendid offer.”
It was at Tarengo, on the road between Burro wa and G along, that this intelligence reached Mr.
Dailey, and there, as at other places along the route, the news was received with the utmost enthusiasm.
Telegrams were received in Sydney stating that the offer had been accepted out of compliment to the
colony, and that her Majesty the Queen had personally expressed her high appreciation of the generous and
spontaneous offer of assistance from New South Wales to England. He also stated that several of the
leading English journals had commented in high terms upon the spirited line of conduct which this colony
had adopted.
The Government and the military authorities, as soon as they found the English Government willing
to accept our proffered aid, lost no time in setting about to fulfil creditably the promise so liberally made.
It had already been ascertained that the numbers required to till up the contingent would be obtained
over and over again, and it only became necessary to take such measures as to ensure that the men with
the best physique and those best fitted for the service should be selected. With regard to the infantry
the chief difficulty was with the clothing. Our volunteers all had their own uniforms, but the proposed
battalion was to be selected from the colony generally, and the uniforms of the different regiments \ary
considerably with regard to the facings, &c. Our uniforms were all of scarlet, but it was thought by
Colonel Richardson and others that this is a colour which may be very good on the parade ground, but is
not altogether the best for active service. It then became a question which had to be very anxiously
considered, whether suitable uniforms should be made in the colony, or whether they should be telegraphed
for to England, to be despatched thence so as to meet our men on their arrival at Suakim. Another
matter of anxious importance was the supply of horses, but it was well-known that the piopei stamp of
animal could be procured here in almost any quantity; the only difficulties related to the questions ot
whether they could be got at a reasonable rate, and in the limited space of time. Arrangements were at


once put in hand for the formation of an Ambulance Corps, and the all-important question of the com-
missariat received due attention.
Our Volunteer Force is in reality what may be termed a volunteer militia. The men are not accepted
unless they come up to certain physical requirements, and, when enrolled, a certain amount of attendance
at drill is compulsory, and to these attendances a small payment is attached. Among other regulations it
is required of them that they should undergo at least one week’s continuous training in camp in the course
of every year. This has now been carried on for several years, and in this way our men have attained a
knowledge of the interior economy of camp life that will be of the utmost value to them, and, indeed,
without which they would be almost unfit for service in the field. Their Commandant, Colonel Richardson,
asserted that had they not had this training he would not have recommended them for the present
service.
A few words with regard to the officer who assumed command of our contingent to the Soudan
will be here not out of place. Colonel Richardson, who has had charge of the New South Wales forces
since 18G5, has the following honourable record attached to his name: —He joined the Imperial army
in 1851, having entered it by passing a direct examination at Sandhurst. He served with the 72nd High-
landers at the siege of Sebastopol. In New Zealand, with the 12th Regiment, he went through the Maori
wars of 1860-61 and 1863-64, during which period he was Adjutant of the regiment. He has Crimean,
New Zealand, and Turkish medals. In February, 1865, he was appointed to the command of the New
South Wales forces. In August, 1871, a regular force was formed, consisting of a battery of artillery, and
two companies of infantry, but since that time the infantry has been disbanded, and two more batteries
substituted. A most important change took place in the Volunteer service in 1878, by assimilating the
volunteers to what may be called a volunteer militia. By means of this change of system increased dis-
cipline has been obtained, and the adoption of continuous training has brought the men to the state of
efficiency which their Commandant believed justified him in recommending them as reliable troops, and in
setting himself confidently at their head.
The arrangements for the despatch of the New South Wales expedition to the Soudan were
commenced in earnest on the morning of Monday, February 16. The Brigade Office was unusually busy.
Colonel Richardson was at the office during the greater part of the day, and had his time fully occupied
with the numerous duties of his position, in addition to necessary altercations with members of the
Cabinet. The staff officers, Lieutenant-Colonel Christie and Captain Mackenzie, were in attendance, and
received many applications from persons desirous of serving with the expedition. The office was thronged
by volunteers, officers of all grades, ex-volunteers, retired members of the Imperial forces, and civilians
anxious to tender their services ; and the whole atmosphere of the place was war-like from morning to
night. As a rule, the men offering to serve were of good physique and in excellent health. The enrol-
ment of volunteers took place at the offices of the Ist and 2nd Regiments, in O’Connell Street, and in
the course of the morning 13 officers, 10 non-commissioned officers, 6 buglers, and 100 privates had been
enrolled. A great many men, who had formerly served in the Imperial army, proffered their services, and
no less than 16 of these registered their names with the Ist Regiment. The spirit evinced by these
volunteers is shown by the following incidents : —A man who had served 22 years in the Imperial service,
had been with his regiment in India, and held the honourable rank of colour-sergeant, registered his
name and expressed his great desire to serve in the New South Wales force. Another soldier, who had
served 17 years in the Cameronians, offered his services.
The question of remuneration was considered at a Cabinet meeting held in the forenoon, and the
following rates of pay were fixed :—Married men, 2s. 3d. daily pay, and 2s. 9d. per day deferred pay, or
made payable to the wife, making ss. per day pay, with allowance to the wife of 2s. per day, and 6d. per
day for each girl in the family under 10, and Gd. per day for each boy under 14. Unmarried men were to
receive 2s. 3d. daily pay, and 2s. 9d. deferred pay, which might be made payable to an order to parents or
friends. These were the payments to gunners in the Artillery and privates in the Infantry ; other ranks


were to be paid in proportion, at rates to be subsequently notified. This scale, it will be seen, is far above
the rate of pay given to the ordinary British soldier; but then it must be remembered that the men of
New South Wales who volunteer for this service are of a class vastly superior to the “Tommy Atkins’”
class of the British line. It was arranged during the day that the following should be the strength of the
contingent ;—Artillery : 1 field officer, 1 captain, 3 subalterns, 1 staff surgeon, 1 extra officer, 26 non-
commissioned officers, 8 artificers, 3 trumpeters, 168 gunners and drivers—total, 212 men, with 172 horses,
21 carriages, 6 16-lb. guns, 4 ammunition waggons, 1 spare gun carriage, 1 forage waggon, 1 store waggon,
1 general service waggon, 1 store cart, 6 small-arm waggons for carrying infantry ammunition, and 800
rounds of shot per gun. Infantry : Colonel Richardson, in command of the whole contingent; Lieutenant
Colonel Christie, Captain Mackenzie, and a pay-master, 2 lieutenant-colonels, 2 majors, 3 captains,
including an adjutant, 2 surgeons, 9 lieutenants,, 4 staff-surgeons, 1 bugle major, 4 colour-sergeants,
20 sergeants, 30 corporals, 8 buglers, 433 rank and tile, making a total of 522 men in all, with 24 horses
for the officers. This made a total force, both arms combined, of 734 men.
Telegrams were received during the day from Goulburn, Mudgee, Moss Yale, Kiama, Bathurst, and
other places where Volunteer corps existed, with offers of men. The enrolment at the office of the Ist
Regiment was under the supervision of Captain Bartlett; that at the office of the 2nd Regiment was
under the charge of Captain Norris, adjutant to the regiment. Captain Norris is an ex-officer of the
Imperial Army, having seen service in the 80th Regiment of foot, in India. Among other work
performed this day, further steps were taken towards the formation of an ambulance corps, and it was
arranged that four medical officers should accompany the expedition. Horses were advertised for, and the
selection of suitable animals was entrusted to Colonel Roberts, assisted by Mr. Lowe, and Mr. Stanley,
the Government veterinary surgeon. The horses required were to be strong, well-trained animals,
seasoned to work, not loss than four and not more than eight years old, sufficiently heavy for draught pur-
poses, and yet not too heavy for the climate in which the operations of the expedition are to take place.
Mr. Dailey telegraphed on the 16th to the Imperial Government, through the Agent-General, stating
that this Government hoped that the forces of the colony would embark on Tuesday, March 3, and
intimating that the Government proposed to send ammunition and stores of all kinds, and forage for six
months; but, as the establishment of a commissariat corps would very much increase the difficulty of
transport, or diminish the effectiveness of the force by withdrawing from it a certain number of its
members to attend to the commissariat arrangements, the Acting Colonial Secretary desired the Agent-
General to ascertain at once whether the Imperial military authorities would take charge of the distribution
of stores and forage, and also whether they would undertake the payment of the forces, to be recouped
by the colony; and also whether they could find means of transport during the operations. He also directed
the Agent-General to send at once toSuakim 1000 suits of suitable clothing for field service for the artillery
and for the infantry. As an order for greatcoats had been some time since forwarded to London, it was
directed that 1000 of them be sent to Suakim.
The question of providing the means of transport for the troops was not overlooked during all this
time. It was a matter upon which there would naturally not be much difficulty, considering the great
number of steamers of the largest size that are constantly trading to the port of Sydney. The only possi-
bility of a hitch was that, perhaps, the requisite tonnage might not be available at' the precise moment
when it was required. The Government, however, ascertained that the Orient Company’s fine steamer
Iberia could be procured, and at once entered into negotiations for her charter. Other vessels considered
to be suitable for the purpose were offered, and arrangements were made for their inspection.
The history of the 16th is not complete without some reference to the feeling of the general public
upon the matter. That this was unquestionably in favour of the course the Government had taken was
amply proved by the letters of sympathy and offers of assistance that poured in upon Mr. Dailey from all
parts of the colony. Among other communications received by him during that morning was one from
Mr. Daniel Cooper, the eldest son of Sir Daniel Cooper, Bart., enclosing a cheque for <£looo. Another


letter from Mr. James Reading Fairfax contained an offer of £IOOO a year for three years if necessary.
The same gentleman since sent in a contribution of £IOOO on behalf of his brother, Mr. Edward Ross
Fairfax, absent in England. The proprietors of the Evening News likewise offered £IOOO per annum to
the Patriotic Fund, besides which numerous contributions of £IOO and smaller sums were received ; and
several business firms promised valuable contributions in kind. The press of the neighbouring colonies
was unanimous in its commendation of the course taken by New South Wales in the matter.
Events seemed to thicken on the following day, Tuesday, February 17. The steamship Australasian
of the White Star Line, at present in Sydney Harbour, was offered to the Government as a transport
ship. A London cablegram also informed us that the duties of our troops would be principally to
protect the navvies who are to be engaged in the construction of a railway from Suakim to Berber. But
the news that perhaps gave the most general satisfaction was to the effect that Lord Wolseley had
telegraphed from the Soudan to Lord Augustus Loftus, Governor of New South Wales, expressing his
pride and pleasure at commanding the colonial troops about to leave for the Soudan. We also learnt with
pleasure that the British soldiers at Korti, the head-quarters of the Commander-in-Chief, were delighted
at the news of the approaching arrival of troops from New South Wales.
Contributions of money and in kind were literally showered in upon the Government, and the
generous offer of Messrs. Maiden, Hill, and Clarke, of the use of their large wool stores, on the Circular
Quay, for the storage of goods intended for the expedition, was gratefully accepted by the Government.
Two more of those munificent contributions, which show how sincerely the heart of the country was in the
matter, were made in the course of the day. One was an offer from Mr. Thomas Walker, of Concord, of
£IOOO ; and the other from Mr. B. W. Levy, of West Maitland, who wrote from a sick bed to offer
£IOOO a year, to be used as Mr. Dailey might direct. Among other contributions was one from Mr.
Donald Manson, who sent £IOO, as a contribution to the fund, from the American Waltham Watch
Company, of which he is the manager in Sydney.
Mr. Dailey was again busy, together with his colleagues, all the day in making arrangements and
expediting matters of detail. A telegram arrived from the Agent-General, desiring to be informed, for
the information of the War Office, as to whether any reserve stores would be required ; and also spare
parts, accoutrements, and equipments, and if any reserve ammunition would be required; and also desiring
that numbers and detailed particulars of the force going might be furnished. To this Mr. Dailey sent the
following reply :
“ Inform War Office that we shall require no reserve stores; that we are providing spare parts of
materials for repairs ; that we are sending 300 rounds per gun, and 500 rounds per rifle. Battery of 6
guns, 212 men, 522 infantry, and 200 horses. Contingent leaves 3rd March.”
The enrolment of volunteers continued with unabated vigour all day, and a large number of appli-
cations was received from persons who appeared willing to give their services in any capacity so long as
they might be allowed to accompany the expedition. Among these were many offers from ladies who
desired to go out as ambulance nurses. It was, however, deemed advisable to decline these applications.
It was decided that the clothing for the men should include the ordinary service uniform, and sea kits,
which consisted of a jumper of blue cotton, a pair of serge trousers, cotton shirt, and pair of canvas
slippers. Extra blucher boots were supplied, and the gaiters, which, with the water bottles, were
ordered from home. As to the clothing for the artillery, Colonel Roberts decided that the kits were to
be carried in what are known as bushmen’s valises. By this means each pair of horses carried what was
immediately required for three men. The driver’s kit will be placed in front of him, and the off horse will
carry two extra kits. Colonel Roberts also suggested to the Government that blue spectacles and
bushmen’s fly veils should be issued to every man. The dress of the artillery will be a blue serge Norfolk
jacket as at present worn, blue serge trousers, strapped for riding, and bushmen’s leather gaiters. The
present service helmet was found to be heavy and very uncomfortable, and a light cork helmet appeared to
be the best adapted for the climate.


Ihe Brigade Office was even busier on Wednesday, February 18, but additional medical strength was
put on to assist in the examination of the men, and the work was in consequence much expedited. During
this day the Minister for Works signed the charter party for the Iberia to convey to Suakim 600 men, 26
officers, and 24 horses for infantry officers’ mounts. The horse selection committee spent the day in visiting
the various horse bazaars, and succeeded in purchasing altogether about 50 good useful animals, making
about 150 in all selected up to that time. The question of supplies had anxiously engaged the attention
of the Minister for Works for some time, and he now forwarded to Mr. Dailey the following minute on the
subject : “ I beg to submit to my hon. colleague, the Acting Colonial Secretary, the following list of sup-
plies required for the expeditionary forces to the Soudan, for both men and horses. The supplies for the
troops are for six months, and for the horses 90 days, exclusive of the forage required for the transport.
1 have given the matter of providing for the men very careful consideration, being guided largely by the
experience of our local officers, and by information gathered from the regulations and books issued by the
Imperial service and by Lord Wolseley, and T have made, I think, ample provision for both men and horses.
The climate is a hot one, and the troops may possibly be called upon to do hard work, and I have therefore
dealt with them most liberally, as will bo seen from the list enclosed. The daily supplies are in excess of
the rations issued to the Imperial troops, but I do not think the scale I have submitted is an excessive
one. There will be sufficient to supply the utmost wants of the men, while at the same time it will pre-
vent undue extravagance —Supplies required for the troops for the Soudan—7so men of all ranks, and 220
horses : Rations estimated for troops, 180 days’ supply; and forage for horses, 90 days’ supply, and 40 days
on transport. Daily rations : lb. bread or 1 lb. biscuit, and 1 lb. hour, lb. fresh meat or 1 lb. of
preserved meat, tea or coffee per day ; 3 oz. sugar, oz. salt, l-36th oz. pepper, and | oz. mustard,
2 oz. rice, 1 oz. limejnice, and lb. preserved vegetables, rum at discretion of officer, not more than one
gill per day each. In addition, 1 lb. flour and 2 oz. currants or raisins per week. There will be thus required
53 tons of flour, 25 tons biscuit, 30 tons preserved meats, 2 tons tea and coffee, 11 tons sugar, 2 tons salt,
2 cwt. pepper, 1 ton mustard, 8 tons rice, 4 tons limejnice, 30 tons preserved vegetables, 10 hogsheads rum,
and 1 ton currants or raisins. For the 220 horses, 90 days’ daily rations: 12 lb. hay, 10 lb. oats, and 33
lb. bran. While on transport, 40 days, 10 tons hay, 5 tons oats, and 5 tons bran. Total quantities : 146
tons hay, 242,000 bushels oats, equal to 110 tons, and 103,400 bushels bran, equal to 46 tons.” Minute
signed by F. A. Wright, Minister for Works.
Enrolment was carried on in the following manner :—The centre of attraction was transferred on the
18th from the regimental offices in O’Connell Street to the Victoria Barracks at Paddington, where the
work of enrolment was commenced at 10 a.m. The barrack square presented a lively scene all day, and
in the vicinity of the barracks there was every appearance of interest in what was going on. Volunteers
in uniform passed to and fro, sometimes alone, sometimes in small parties, and they talked everywhere of the
absorbing topic of the Soudan expedition, with many references to the business immediately before them,
and calculating as to their chances of selection. The examination and enrolment took place in one of the
offices at the right-hand corner across the drill ground. The door of the office was surrounded by an ani-
mated crowd, composed of an inner ring of redcoats and an outer fringe of civilian dress, through which
glimpses of scarlet jacket, white helmets, rifles, forage caps, and bright faces could be seen. A busy hum
of talk was kept up, and the faces of the volunteers waiting for their turn were lit up with eager anticipa-
tion. The picture was a novel and pleasant one, calling to mind those scenes, familiar to colonials through
the medium of prints, which are to be observed in the old country at a busy recruiting station. The
inspecting medical officer was Dr. Granville, who was located in a room curtained off from that in which
the clerical work was carried on. As the men were formed into squads of four or six, they were taken
into the office and entered the doctor’s room. Here they stripped, and the doctor examined them in the
usual way, subjecting each man to a severe test. This operation over, each man received a ticket, and came
before the recruiting staff, who recorded the names and administered the oath of engagement to such as
were up to the standard of physique. This portion of the work was performed by a staff consisting of


Captain Bartlett, Captain Norris, Captain Hill, Lieutenant Boam, Sergeant-Major Murphy, Sergeant-
Major Toovey, Quarter-Master-Sergeant Tuite, Quarter-Master-Sergeant Cremin, Staff-Sergeant Liggins,
Sergeant McMasters, and Sergeant McGregor.
The volunteers now stood midway between their old corps and the new expeditionary force.
According to the method resolved on, they severed all connection with their former regiment, and were no
longer recognisable as members of Ist or 2nd Regiment or Engineers, as the case might be. They became
simply recruits, on the same footing as other applicants for engagement in the new force, and were all
sworn in as privates. Each man signed an agreement, in which the following particulars were recorded
regarding him :—Name, birthplace, age, personal description, height, marks, trade or calling, apprentice or
not, religion, married or single, number of children under 14 years of age, if any ; as to existence of
ruptures or lameness, liability to fits, or disability or disorder impeding the free use of the limbs, or
disabling him from ordinary labour; willingness to serve in the military force of New South Wales; as to
previous service in the army, marines, ordnance, or navy ; and as to rejection for unfitness from her
Majesty’s service. The recruit also took an oath of engagement, which reads as follows :
“ T, , swear that 1 will well and truly serve our Sovereign Lady the Queen, in the New South
Wales Infantry, for the term of one year, or for two years if required for that period, or until sooner
lawfully discharged, dismissed, or removed; and that I will resist her Majesty’s enemies, and cause her
Majesty’s peace to be kept both on land and at sea, and that I will in all matters appertaining to my
service faithfully discharge my duty according to law.” This document was signed by the recruit and the
attesting officer.
The work went on steadily throughout the day, but the progress of enrolment was delayed by there
being only one medical officer on duty. It was seen that at the rate of business under these circumstances
the enrolment would involve great waste of time, and further assistance in the medical department was
asked for. Staff-surgeon Williams arrived on the spot about 4 o’clock, and passed ten of the recruits
before the work was given up for the day. The men examined by Dr. Granville numbered 143, and of
these 23 were rejected for disqualification in one shape or another. The remaining 120, with the other 10
inspected by Dr. Williams, made a total of 130 examined, passed, sworn in, and enrolled as the result of
the first day’s work. As a rule, the men selected were of a very good physical stamp, and were
chosen with a view to their being able to resist the peculiar trials of the climate in which they were to
serve. Some of those who were refused were much disappointed, especially in such a case as that of one
man who was found deficient under the eyesight test, though sound in other respects ; but Dr. Granville,
who has had experience of what the men would have to pass through, determined on having no man in
the force with the slightest defect in his constitution ; and everyone will admit the wisdom of this rigid
ruling. The men who enlisted were by a large majority infantry men, but a few came from other branches
and desired to be engaged in them again if possible. The recruits were, however, treated as all of one
class for the time being, and whatever disposal of men’s services may be decided on was to be subject to the
completion of the establishment as laid down at the outset. A few buglers were among those enrolled,
and about half of the buglers required presented themselves.
Among the many contributions which came in during this day was the magnificent offer from Mr.
James Tyson of the sum of £2,000 for two years.
All were gratified on Thursday, February 19th, by the receipt of a telegram from the London
correspondent of the Herald , stating that Her Majesty the Queen, through Lord Derby, Secretary of
State for the Colonies, had expressed her warm and grateful feelings at the proffered aid of troops from
the colonies of Australia, which was regarded as most satisfactory.
During the course of the day Mr. Dailey received a telegram to the effect that the War Office would
send ammunition for artillery guns, and undertake the conveyance of supplies. They w 7 ere to take charge of
the forage and the rations for the troops on the same scale as the Imperial forces. Money was to be supplied
to our Commandant as required. They were to supply regimental transport. In connection with this offer to


N. 0. OFFICERS,
GUNNERS,
AND
PRIVATES.
Daily
Deferred
Per
diem
S.
cl.
s. d.
s.
d.
Sergeant-Major ...
• • • • • •
5
G
4 0
9
G
Quarter-Master Sergeants
• • • • • •
5
0
3 9
8
9
Sergeants
• • • • • •
4
0
3 G
7
6
Corporals
• • • • • •
3
4
3 0
6
6
Bombardiers
• • • • • •
3
2
2 10
6
0
Trumpeters, Buglers, Gunners, and Privates...
2
3
2 9
5
0
supply ammunition, an explanation will be found in the following telegram, received on the same day from
the Agent-General to the Acting-Colonial Secretary, dated February 18th, 1885. General Graham?
through the War Office, says that “The 16-pounder guns will be too heavy for the Soudan. Send, there-
fore, horses and harness only. The War Office will send a 6-gun 9-pounder battery of 6-cwt. guns, and
ammunition and carriages complete, to meet the company at Suakim. Your telegram sent to press.
Satisfaction at action of your colony.” To this Mr. Dailey replied in the following terms : —“ We shall go
as War Office desires with regard to guns and ammunition. Will forward harness and horses as required.”
As only one battery of artillery was to be sent, it was decided that Colonel Roberts should not accom-
pany the expedition, much to that officer’s regret; but Colonel Spalding, who is to command the artillery,
attended at the office of the Colonial Secretary on Thursday afternoon, in response to a request from Mr.
Dailey, and made a most gratifying report as to the state of forwardness of the preparations for embarka-
tion. It was understood that all the arragements connected with the artillery were in such an advanced
state that the embarkation could take place in the course of two or three days, if that were necessary.
Colonel Spalding was authorised to strengthen in a small degree the contingent under his command.
The supply of revolvers having been found to be insufficient, the Colonial Secretary, acting upon the
advice of Colonel Spalding, telegraphed to London an order for 250 army service weapons of the latest
pattern, and directed that in the selection of these weapons, the Agent-General should seek the co-operation
of the War Office. The revolvers are for the use of the New South Wales Artillery, every member of
which was supplied with one; and, with a full complement of ammunition, will be forwarded to Africa
to meet the troops on their arrival.
The Government decided that the pay of the Commandant shall be .£1,250 per annum, and that
the following should be the rates of pay to other officers and members of the force about to proceed to
Egypt: —
ART ILLERY AND INFANTRY.
OFFICERS.
Lieutenant-Colonels (in command)... ... ... ... ... ... ... £650
Lieutenant-Colonels... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 600
Majors ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 500
Captains ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 400
Lieutenants over three years’ service ... ... ... ... ... ... 355
Lieutenants under three years’ service ... ... ... ... ... ... 325
Surgeons attached to Artillery and Infantry ... ... ... ... ... 400
Veterinary Surgeon... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 400
Also a subsistence allowance in case of married non-commissioned officers, gunners, and privates of 2s.
per diem to wife, and 6cl. per diem to each girl under 16 and to each boy under 14 years of age. In regard
to the families of staff officers and New South Wales Artillery and Volunteer Permanent Staff, the Govern-
ment approved of those now in occupation of quarters remaining therein, and of those for whom
quarters are not provided retaining their present rate of lodging allowance. The Government was pleased
to approve also of pensions being granted for casualties, as provided for in the Imperial military service.
The Finance Minister was able on Thursday afternoon to inform Mr. Dailey that the greater portion


of the commissariat had been prepared, and could be put aboard the transport ships in the course of 48
hours. In perfecting the plan of the commissariat the Government received assistance which has been most
generously extended by Imperial officers. The Government was very much encouraged by the
valuable contributions and valued assistance accorded by Rear-Admiral Try on and the captain of the Nelson.
The work of examining and enrolling recruits was continued most vigorously at the Victoria Barracks
all day. The medical examination was conducted by an enlarged staff, and some increase in the number of
men passed was obtained thereby. The medical officers in attendance were :—Surgeon Glanville, Surgeon
Dansey, Dr. Davies (who volunteered his services, and Dr. Proudfoot, and some assistance was given by
Surgeon McDonagh. The process of the examination weeded out about 30 of the applicants. The total
number passed and enrolled on Thursday was 178, making a total strength of 308 when the work was
finished at night. The men who presented themselves were generally good specimens, and there were
among them some remarkably well-built and powerful men. The great majority of those enrolled are
natives of New South Wales. Contributions, both in money and in kind, were coming in from all
quarters all day.
On Friday the Herald's correspondent telegraphed that the offers of the Australian colonies to
send troops to the Soudan had made a marked impression at Berlin. After further consultation with the
military officers, and in order that everything should be complete, the Government telegraphed to England
for certain additional stores, and the Agent-General was requested to furnish information as to ammunition
waggons, and the number of horses required for them. With regard to tents for the forces, it was
ascertained that these would be provided by the Imperial Government. Contributions of all descriptions
continued to arrive, as well as letters and telegrams of sympathy from all parts of the colony.
Perhaps the most memorable event of the day, however, was the monster public meeting held in the
Exhibition Building, Prince Alfred Park, for the purpose of expressing sympathy with the Government in
their action in sending New South Wales troops to the aid of the British arms in the Soudan, and also to
form a patriotic fund for the relief of the wives and children of the men whom we sent there on our
behalf. Resolutions expressive of the object of the movement were carried with much acclamation, the
principal speakers being Sir James Martin, C.J ; Sir Patrick Jennings, M.L.A., Mr. H. S. Badgery,
M.L A., Mr. H. Copeland, M.L.A., Hon. E. Barton, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, Hon. G.
Thornton, M.L.C., Mr. R. B. Smith, M.L.A., Mr. Thomas Robertson, and Mr. G. Pile. The meeting
was a somewhat noisy one, but this arose in a very large measure from the impatience naturally evinced
by many of those present who were unable in a building of such wretched acoustic powers to hear one-half
of what was said. It is computed that about 12,000 persons were present. Of course, out of so large a
number, some opposition was naturally to be expected, but the dissentients were evidently in a very
insignificant minority. Similar meetings were successfully held in some of the suburbs.
From the telegraphic correspondents we were informed on Saturday that our action had received warm
approval in the British Parliament, and on that clay our Government received a telegram from the
Imperial authorities authorising them to procure in the colony, and forward by our transports to Suakim,
large quantities of meat for the Imperial troops. Mr. Dibbs, the Colonial Treasurer, was enabled to fulfil
this order in the most satisfactory manner, and the provisions will be despatched with our troops.
The following are details respecting the ambulance corps:—Officers: Surgeon-Major Williams (in
command), Surgeon Glanville, and Surgeon Proudfoot. Non-commissioned officers: Sergeant Shaw,
Hospital-Corporal Renegar, and two dispensers, together with 24 trained bearers, many of whom are men
of long service in army hospital corps, five drivers, and one trumpeter. There will be five ambulance
waggons, fully fitted up on latest service principles, each waggon to carry seven wounded—two in front
seat, two inside on stretchers, which have been so arranged that when in position but very little motion
will be felt, and three on the back seat. There will also be two pharmacy and surgical waggons, fitted
with instruments, rugs, medical comforts, and medical panniers, in such a way that each article is placed
in boxes and drawers, which are lettered and numbered, so that the article can be at once procured. Two


waggons will be provided for carrying tents, both hospital an operating; bedding, clothes, and reserve
stores ; two field waggon s f fitted up to carry general hospital stores ; one water-cart. The following will
also be provided :—4 saddles, with saddlery complete, 26 horses, draught, with harness complete, allowing
for spare sets. The Ambulance Corps is now in camp, and the stretcher and bearer drill, as laid down by
the Imperial authorities, has commenced,
By Saturday evening the total number of men enrolled was as follows : —477 men, and 55 non
commissioned officers and staff, making a total of 533. Although the contingent was thus complete,
numbers of men have since continued to offer their services, and it is thought that double the number of
men could have been obtained without difficulty had they been required. The parade-ground on Saturday
afternoon formed a striking spectacle. Crowds of citizens of both sexes perambulated the grounds, and
the whole of the volunteers for the Soudan were drawn up and told off into companies, afterwards being
put through company drill. The appearance of the men, so far as height and physique are concerned, was
very good, and in these respects the force will reflect credit upon the colony. As regards uniform, the
appearance of the companies was odd, many of the men being in civilian costume, whilst many wore the
dress of the respective New South Wales regiments to which they previously belonged, and some were in
naval uniform. However, the evolutions through which they were put were executed in a manner which
showed that the great majority of the men were quite at home in the parade-ground. A few more such
exercises will render them proficient in that department of drill. The roll was called at 7 o’clock in the
morning, and the companies were reclassed. It was called again at 10 o’clock, and afterwards at 2in the
afternoon, when all the men not on duty were allowed to leave the barracks.
On Monday, February 23, the purchase of forage and stores was completed, and quantities were
shipped. The purchase of the horses was also almost completed.
It appeared from a telegram received on Monday that Sir Saul Samuel had opened a subscription
list to the Patriotic Fund in London. The Hon. Thomas Holt had given £5OO ; Sir Saul Samuel, £lOO ;
and Mr. James Payn, £lO.
The services of Captain Pritchard, Aide-de-camp to the Governor of Queensland, were accepted by the
Government. Captain Pritchard generously offered to attach himself to the expedition without pay.
The horse contingent which is such an important element in active service, received every attention
from such able and well-informed authorities as Major Airey, Mr. W. Garling, Mr. 0. B. Lowe (of Brown
Bros.), and the other gentlemen appointed, and those who saw the animals agree that there were amongst
them as fine a lot of horses as ever have been assembled in the colonies. The Sydney Omnibus Company
supplied 50 in a bunch, and most of the others came from the Hunter, Goulburn, Blayney, and Albury.
The prices paid ranged from £25 to £45 ; the gentlemen chosen to procure them wisely selected horses
aged from 5 to 9 years. The “ Australasian ” was chosen as the transport ship, which was to carry the
greater number of horses.
Tuesday and the following days were devoted to the multitudinous details of the preparations now
rapidly approaching completion. Every day until the last had its full share of work, and the work was
earnest and real; for once at least red tape was locked away, and all engaged in the labour of love went
to it with a heartiness that thrust aside mere form and petty obstacles. The picture of the man who was
at the head of the movement working in his office was typical of the spirit that animated the whole colony.
He has been referred to humourously as “ Mars in his shirt-sleeves calling the world to arms.” At 7or
8 o’clock in the morning he might be seen, coat off, and hard at work. A constant stream of visitors upon
one business or another connected with the expedition ebbed and flowed through the room, which was
continuously occupied by knots of pressmen, who made rapid shorthand notes as the Acting Premier rattled
off the doings of the day.
The excitement caused by the acceptance of our troops was no less great in the country than in the
metropolis. Each day brought news of the departure of country volunteers for Sydney. The enthusiasm
was manifested in all manner of ways. The volunteers were escorted by torchlight procession to the


railway stations, a patriotic address having been delivered on the way by the local Mayor from the balcony
of the chief hotel, which for the time became a fountain at which all quenched their thirst, ihe news was
wired down the lines, and each station was crowded with people, who cheered the lads as they passed
through. Along the coast of the seaport towns the same hearty feeling manifested itself. Commanding
officers of local corps delivered heroic speeches to the volunteers ; ladies decorated them with ribbons of
red, white and blue ; while Mayors made very vehement, if not strictly grammatical orations, and poured out
libations of strong liquor to the god Mars.
The question of allowing chaplains to accompany the troops proceeding to the Soudan, which had
previously been decided in the negative, was reconsidered, and it was decided to allow two ministers to be
attached to the contingent. One represented the Church of England and the members of all the other
Protestant denominations in the contingent, and the other officiated with respect to the Roman Catholic
section of the contingent. The Primate had been exceedingly interested in regard to this subject, had
addressed a number of communications to the Acting Premier, and had had several interviews with him,
including one which took place early on Saturday morning. Mr. Dailey then communicated to the Bishop
the determination which had finally been arrived at. The two chaplains were afforded passages by the
Government, and their remuneration was fixed at the rate of £2OO a year while employed, but the Colonial
Secretary provided that if on arrival at Suakim it was found that the reverend gentlemen would be unable
to accompany the troops if they were ordered to advance, the engagement of the chaplains would be at an
end, and they would be granted passages either to return to the colony or to go to Europe, whichever
might be desired, their remuneration being continued until the period of their return or their arrival in
Europe. Dr. Barry expressed his satisfaction at the arrangements made and his thankfulness to Mr.
Dailey. The same subject also induced the Roman Catholic Archbishop to call at the Colonial Secretary s
office, but as Mr. Dailey was out of town he did not see Dr. Moran. On Saturday the Acting Colonial
Secretary communicated the decision of the Government to the Archbishop, and that prelate subsequently
wrote thanking the Ministry for their action in the matter. The Rev. H. J. Rose, of Christ Church and
St. John’s, North Shore, was appointed as Church of England chaplain, and the Rev. 0. F. Collingridge,
who had been for some time chaplain at the Convent of the Sacred Heart at Rose Bay, the Roman Catholic
clergyman.
On Sunday special religious services in connection with the departure of the contingent were held at
St. Andrew’s and St. Mary’s Cathedral, reports of which we give further on. By Tuesday everything
was quite ready for the departure. The greatest enthusiasm on the matter prevailed throughout the whole
colony, as was testified by the enormous crowds who thronged the city. The day had been proclaimed a
public holiday by the Government, and it was strictly observed as such by the people. All ordinary
business was suspended, and even some of the licensed victuallers closed their establishments during the
time the troops were marching through the streets. The weather was admirable : not so hot as it had
been, and somewhat cloudy, but not sufficiently so to throw any kind of shade upon the proceedings. It
is impossible to estimate the number of people who turned out to see what they could, and to do honour
to the contingent; but it is quite safe to say that there has never before been an occasion of such general
interest, or that has invited the attendance of so many people. The expressions of admiration at the
physical appearance of the contingent were universal, and so was the wish that success might attend them
in their expedition, and that they might soon safely and honourably return.
THE VICTORIA BARRACKS.
Never have the Victoria Barracks presented such a scene as they did on the 3rd, for from early
morning till the march to the point of embarkation commenced they were thronged with people, and for
the most part with people who had a special right to be present, in view of their relationship or friendship
with soldiers and volunteers. The men going to the Soudan were nearly all in the highest spirits, and
those who remained behind were fired with martial ardour to such an extent that had a single man chosen


to go to Egypt suffered some accident which would compel him to stay here, there would have been
hundreds of volunteers for the vacant place. During the morning the discipline was, as might have been
expected, not very strict, and the parade-ground, the tents, and the space around them and the officers’
quarters were crowded. It was intended that only those persons who had some claim to admission should
be let into the Barracks, but as one officer after another drove up, a section of the crowd in the road
squeezed in behind the vehicle, and before the troops marched there were several thousands of people
within the barrack walls. Many apathetic scene occurred, as wives, mothers, or sisters took what might
be the last farewell of the brave fellows going out to tight for the land of their fathers, and here and there
an affecting parting between lovers obtruded itself upon the gaze of the passer-by. The few hours before
noon must have been very trying to the members of the contingent, distracted as they were from quietly
making their final preparations by the crying of women and the fervent valedictions of friends; but there
was no disorder, and when the signal was given to fall in it was promptly obeyed. At half-past 11 the
men dined, and afterwards there was a short interval before they were paraded, and at this time the square
presented a phenomenal sight, the verandahs of the different buildings being packed with people, the walls
half covered, and the ground thronged with soldiers and civilians, the bright uniforms of the former
contrasting with the tasteful costumes of the ladies, who came to do them honour. A calm spirit dwelt
over the scene, and all excitement was subdued until noon. Previous to that hour the men were formed
into squads, and examined by Adjutant Bartlett and his subalterns, with a view to ascertain that each had
his accouti ements and was piepared to proceed to the point of embarkation. Thev were afterwards
dismissed. It would be difficult to realise a more orderly set of men being got together than were these
men the colony was sending forth to the field. They fraternised with the visitors and chatted sociably
with their comrades, and seemed as light-hearted as though they were entering upon an Easter
encampment. Suddenly the rattle of drums was heard, and the regular tramp of men accustomed to
shoulder the rifle fell on the ear, and the sounds set the first great wave of excitement in motion, for it
announced the period of the real business of the day. They came from the detachments from her
Majesty’s ships-of-war in the harbour, and as the gates were thrown wide open a body of pioneers marched
in, heading 550 blue jackets, marine artillery, and marine infantry. The band played one of the liveliest
marches, and the men trooped in, and by their bearing, their physique, and the smartness of their dress,
at once challenged and won general admiration. The detachments had in their charge two Gardner guns,
two field guns, and two Gatlings, and they made a stirring rattle as they quickly rolled these into their
assigned positions. It fell to the lot of the squads in charge of the guns to clear a square in which the
New South Wales troops might form into line, and much amusement was created by the impetuous sweep
they gave the terrible instruments they were attached to. It was an absolute “ scatter,” and could not
have been more complete had it been accomplished with rounds of ball cartridge. Another exciting
sensation occurred when the newly-formed cavalry corps entered the square. Of this there were 50
members present, and they were under the command of Captain Macdonald. They rode splendid animals,
and imparted an agreeable variety in the scene. Lastly, a considerable number of mounted troopers,
under Captain Battye, filed in, and their animals also were sources of much admiration on account of the
bone and muscle they displayed, and their splendid symmetry. His Excellency the Governor drove to
the ground in his carriage, and was accompanied by the Hon. W. B, Dailey, Acting Colonial Secretary,
Captain A. D. Loftus, A.D.0., and Mr. H. A. Unwin, private secretary. Amongst the other distinguished
persons present were the Hon. J. S. Farnell, Minister for Lands ; the Hon. F. A. Wright, Minister for
Works ; the Hon. G. R. Dibbs, Colonial Treasurer; Hon. W. J. Trickett, Minister for Instruction ; the
Hon. H. E. Cohen, Minister for Justice; the Hon. J. Norton, Postmaster-General; the Hon. J. P.
Abbott, Minister for Mines; Mr. E. Fosbery, Inspector-General of Police; Rear-Admiral Tyron ; General
Scratchley, High Commissioner for New Guinea; and Sir Edward Strickland. The crowd which was
exceedingly well behaved, was easily kept in order by Inspectors Anderson. Waters, Larkins, Lenthall,
Lawless, Cotter, and McKay, and about GO police under their charge. The route was divided into six


sections, each of which was supervised by a sergeant, and all vehicular traffic was suspended by means of
constables being placed in the side streets. Every arrangement was made to ensure a clear road for the
troops, and happily they were most successful. Up to a quarter past 12 the local troops and the general
public in the barracks were mingled with each other, and then the whole assemblage thrilled as the bugle
for the last time in Sydney called upon the troops to fall in. There were hurried squeezes of the hand, a
last kiss to sweethearts, wives, or sisters, and the men seizing their rifles rushed oft amidst numerous
“ good-byes ”to their positions. There occurred a brief interval, during which the roll of each company
was called ; the men were formed in sections of five, and in an instant, amidst loud cheering, waving of
handkerchiefs, and the inspiriting tap of the drum, the movement from New South Wales to Egypt had
commenced. The procession was composed as follows :
Mounted Troopers.
Foot Police.
Sydney Light Horse.
His Excellency the Governor and Suite.
Sydney Light Horse.
Rear-Admiral Tryon.
Mounted Troopers.
Members of the Ministry.
Blue-jackets from Ships of War.
Marine Artillery.
Marine Light Infantry.
Permanent Artillery Band.
Acting-Commandant Roberts.
Sir Edward Strickland.
Commandant Richardson.
The Contingent.
Foot Police.
GENERAL VIEW OF THE PROCESSION.
The seene outside the Victoria Barracks during the forenoon very forcibly brought to one’s recol-
lection the part of Byron’s memorable description of the night before the battle of Waterloo, in which he
tells us that —
“ And there was mounting in hot haste ; the steed,
The mustering squadron and the clattering car
Went pouring forward with impetuous speed,
And swiftly joining in the ranks of war.'’
The whole of the troops to be seen were not going to the Soudan ; but a good many gallant fellows
were to take their last walk through the streets of Sydney for perhaps many a long day to come, and
therefore old and young, and grave and gay, turned out to do honour to the occasion. A loud hurrah
greeted his Excellency the Governor and his suite as they passed out of the barrack yard into the roadway,
preceded by the police and the Light Cavalry. From crowded balconies and thronged thoroughfares then
went up a great shout as the procession moved onwards. Loud cheers were given for Mr. Dailey and Mr.
Dibbs at this point, while a murmur of applause, which gradually swelled into a perfect ovation, greeted
the sturdy seamen as they marched onward in magnificent style. They presented a splendid appearance,
and the Gardner, Nordenfeldt, and field guns attracted much attention. On nearing Darlinghurst, one
old salt, who had been giving a description of his adventures in various parts of the globe to an excited
and motley group, was heard to remark that “ them Gatlings were regular terrors.” This was shortly
before the tars approached the spot upon which he was standing, and when the Gatlings did come along
the orator’s voice was drowned by the roll of the drum and the shrill notes of the life, and he


was pushed aside very goodnaturedly by the seamen whose praises he had been sounding. The
mounted police did their best to keep a clear passage for the troops, but they did not accomplish their
object one half so successfully as the tars did. Nothing short of a torrent of grape and canister could
have stopped their onward march, and they literally carried everything before them. On they marched
and the crowd fell back on either side almost instantaneously. Those who did not get out of the way
voie quietly hustled along until they were glad to creep to the rear of the crowds that lined the streets,
and lepent of their folly in endeavouring to stem the living torrent which swept on in such magnificent
anay. Looking down Oxford Street, the spectacle was simply bewildering. Long lines of streamers and
gay-coloured flags stretched across the thoroughfare, and every coign of vantage was closely packed with
human beings. Balconies, verandahs, and housetops were covered with spectators, many of whom threw
choice bouquets on the moving column beneath them. The Soudan contingent was especially favoured in
the matter of floral decorations, and many of the fair occupants of the balconies showered rice and ribbons
upon the heroes of the day. Some of the volunteers appeared to be much affected by these demonstrations
of goodwill, and many a brave fellow’s eye moistened as he glanced for the last time on the loved form of
mother, sister, or sweetheart. The members of the Contingent quickly transferred the flowers to their
button-holes and belts, while some fixed them on the points of their bayonets. In this manner they
marched on with a swinging step to the well-worn tune of “The Girl I left Behind Me.” Many of the
ladies who had stationed themselves along the line of march were deeply affected by the stirring scene,
and not a few of them kissed the young soldiers as they passed by. Others wished them “ God speed ”
with a trembling voice, and some there were who smiled approvingly on the men of the Contingent, and
bade them be of good cheer. Cries of “ Bravo, boys,” “ Give it to the Mahdi,” and “ Advance Australia,”
were of frequent occurrence. One balcony at the lower end of Oxford Street was crowded with ladies,
and these also showered down a profusion of flowers upon the bluejackets, marines, and the Contingent.
On passing the Cambridge Club Hotel several bags of rice, evidently meant as an expression of good
will towards the men who were going to the Soudan, were thrown from the lofty balconies of the building
on to the crowds below, and hearty cheering followed this token of good feeling. Just at this spot the
crowd was very great, and right along College Street the spectators were formed up in dense masses on
either side of the procession. The sloping banks of Hyde Park were covered by an immense concourse of
people, who cheered enthusiastically as the Contingent passed by ; and Mr. Dailey and Mr. Dibbs were
frequently applauded. Appropriate mottoes were displayed at intervals along Oxford and College Streets,
amongst them being two bearing the inscriptions “ Strike for Victory ! ” and “ God Speed.” The latter
also bore a representation of the Southern Cross, Turning into Park-street the scene was an exceedingly
pretty and animated one. Dense crowds lined the thoroughfare, and vast multitudes were assembled
inside the railings of the park. The foliage of the trees, together with the banting and the gay-coloured
costumes of the ladies, produced a charming effect. The procession was seen to the greatest advantage in
Park Street, and the matchless sight presented by the glittering bayonets and cutlasses as they were borne
onwards in the pageant will never be forgotten by those who witnessed it. The standards carried in the
midst of the Naval Contingent also added to the effect and beauty of the spectacle. A quantity of bunting
was displayed in the street, and flowers were showered upon the troops. One motto bore the inscription
“ For England, Home, and Gordon,” and another wished the Contingent “ God Speed.” Turning into
George Street, the first thing which attracted the eye was the tower of the Town Hall, which was decked
with the flags of England, America, France, and Germany. A number of people were perched on the
summit of the tower, and others swarmed on the staging on the outside of it. The crowd was not quite
so dense in George Street, but the Royal Hotel, the Post Oflice, and other large buildings were literally
crammed with the youth and beauty of Australia. Hunter Street was also thickly lined with spectators,
and the numerous windows of the Sydney Morning Herald Oflice were filled with ladies and gentlemen.
The gay pageant then swept onward through Pitt Street into Spring Street, and thence by way of
Macquarie Place to the Circular Quay. The enthusiasm was very groat on passing the Lands Oflice and


Mort’s Statue, both of which places were thickly crowded with people. Hats and handkerchiefs were
waving everywhere, and shouts of acclamation filled the air. Men and women caught hold of the troops
and shook them by the hand for the last time, whilst others decorated them with flowers and ribbons. The
men of the Contingent bore the parting ceremonies very well, although more than one brave fellow’s voice
grew husky as he took a farewell embrace of some loved friend. In this manner the procession passed on
to the Quay, but here the weight of the crowd was too much for the police, and a scene of confusion
prevailed for some little time. Order was, however, soon restored, and the the troops speedily marched
through the long lane of human beings to the place of embarkation.
DARLINGHURST TO COLLEGE STREET.
For some hours before the time for the marching forth of the troops, Oxford Street, from College
street to Darlinghurst was thronged with enthusiastic thousands. Every balcony was crowded, and every
awning was black with people. Not only so, but there was not a door or window along the line of route
that was not thronged with spectators. The parapets and roofs of houses were also crowded, and even
chimney stacks were requisitioned literally as points from which to view the pageant. There was a great
display of bunting, strings of flags being stretched across the street at intervals, and colours flying from a
hundred points. Here and there were mottoes, and in some cases the buildings were decked with ever-
greens. When the tars and marines from the war vessels in port hove in sight, all in full marching order,
the former drawing their Nordenfeldt and Gardner guns, they were loudly cheered. The cheering for these
line fellows had hardly died away ere the head of the New South Wales Contingent came in view, and
then there arose an enthusiastic cheer which passed along the line of the assembled thousands, until the
sound diminished in the distance. Banners and handkerchiefs were waved, and floral favours were thrown
at the troops as they passed along. “ Three cheers for the ladies !” said a voice from the ranks as they
were passing a block crowded with ladies, and the Contingent responded with a deafening cheer. To say
that the people cheered is bub feebly to convey an idea of the enthusiasm as the troops passed along.
There w 7 as one continuous roar of cheering, like the sound of the breaking sea, and there was literally a sea
of waving handkerchiefs and hats. The sounds of music were deadened by the applause, and it was impos-
sible for the troops to keep their dressing, as the crowd pressed on them from either side, eager friends to
say farewell, enthusiastic admirers of the movement, and men with strong military instincts, to get a
nearer view of the force, as if it were necessary to their very existence that they should grasp the hands of
the gallant fellows who are going to Egypt.
COLLEGE STREET TO GEORGE STREET.
The crowd of people which had assembled long before midday to witness the march past of the troops
engaged to keep the ground, and form guards of honor at the Quay, waited patiently for the arrival of the
Contingent. The transit officers closed the junction of Liverpool, Oxford, and College Streets, against
horse and vehicle traffic, while the trams also ceased from running. Looking from the corner of College
Street down Oxford Street not a particle of the road or footway could be seen, while along College and
Liverpool Streets and in the Park the people could be estimated only by thousands. The transit officers
rapidly cleared the centre of the road, and as the troops turned into College Street they were received with
a fresh volley of cheers, while from every window bunches of flowers were showered down on them. Many
of the spectators rushed forward and shook the hands of the volunteers warmly, while here and there a
maiden all forlorn might be seen weeping bitterly without any attempt to disguise the fact. There was
something in the scene to remind one of Gordon’s cynical (perhaps true) lines, —
“ But absent friends are soon forgot,
And in a year or less
Perchance ’twill be another’s lot
Those very lips to press.”


However, the affairs of war brook no delay, and so, in spite of weeping sweethearts and sorrowing
friends, the troops kept steadily on their way through the crowd which surged around them, along College
Street and into Park Street, the crowd thickening at every step. Through the Park and along the street
swarmed the mighty throng, continually rushing forward to gain fresh vantage. Here and there gay
banners w a’\ ed from the windows, while the balconies along the line of march were crowded with spectators.
As the procession neared George Street the throng grew so dense that it was almost impossible to get
through it, and the troops had to march slowly.
GEORGE STREET TO CIRCULAR QUAY.
George Street, from Park Street to Hunter Street, was crowded from an early hour in the morning
with an exceedingly jovial and enthusiastic throng of spectators, who continued strolling to and fro until
the time for the departure of the departure of the troops from the barracks drew near. Numbers then
assembled at the intersection of King and George Streets, where they remained until the procession came
in sight, when they were forced to move on. The business premises along the thoroughfare were crowded
with spectators. Every available window was opened, and hundreds of persons betook themselves to the
roofs of the buildings. The scaffolding at the intersection of King and George Streets were taken
possession of by men and boys, many of them climbed almost to the top of the poles, where they remained
until the procession ha 1 passed. The line of route from Hunter Street to Circular Quay was thronged by
an eager crowd. A large number of people, anxious to secure favourable positions, assembled at the inter-
section of George and Hunter Streets shortly after 11 o’clock, and notwithstanding the fact that they had
to stand for over two hours, they kept their positions until the troops had passed. The buildings opposite
were taken advantage of by as many as could gain permission to enter, and from Hunter Street to Pitt
Street the owners and lessees of premises on each side of the thoroughfare, with numbers of their friends,
posted themselves at the windows and on the roofs of their buildings. The footways below were crowded
to an uncomfortable extent. A similar state of things existed in Pitt Street. The large banks and other
buildings along the thoroughfare afforded splendid facilities to some hundreds of persons. Immense crowds
gathered in Spring and Gresham Streets, and the constables along the route were kept busily engaged in
keeping the line of march clear, and also in preventing the cabs crossing the streets. A number of private
vehicles and cabs were driven to within a safe distance of Spring Street, and by this means the occu-
pants had a tolerably fair chance of viewing the procession. Aaron’s Exchange Hotel, and also the
Exchange building, were taken advantage of by numbers of people, and the lofty balconies of the Lands
Office were also crowded with spectators. A large crowd assembled on and around the pedestal of the
Mort statue, opposite to the Exchange. Every building along Macquarie Place was thronged, and the
footpaths were crowded right on to the Quay. A large number of men and boys also took up very
dangerous positions upon the immense scaffolding erected in connection with the new Custom House.
THE EMBARKATION.
Opposite the Blackwall Wool Stores (Messrs. Flood and Company’s) was moored the “ Namoi ”, which
had been chartered to convey the Judges of the Supreme Court and members of both branches of the
Legislature as far as the Heads; in advance of and a little to the north of the “ Xamoi” was the troopship
“Iberia”; and a little further ahead was the companion troopship the “Australasian.” The police
authorities had made every provision for preventing communication between the general public and the
troopships from the water side, by detailing for duty a section of the Water Police, who, under Inspector
Donohue, with their boats, formed a cordon westward of the vessels. The wharf and other space to the
eastward of the “Namoi,” the “Iberia,” and the “Australasian,” had been set apart for military bodies
taking part in the proceedings, the reservation of the ground being effected by the erection of the barrier
already referred to. This enclosure extended from the Government boatshed to a line in continuation of
Moore’s steps. The reserve was about GOO yards in length by about 50 yards in width. In the early part
of the day the shipping of the stores, etc, were completed, and this doubtless attracted large numbers of


persons who were anxious to see the execution of the final arrangements in connection with the provision
made for the first military expedition from this part of the world. there were others, however, whose
curiosity was not so great, but who, finding no hindrance to their occupation of the reserve, did not
hesitate to invade it, the consequence being that the concourse soon grew in dimensions, until it must
have numbered some thousands. About half-past 11 the first body of foot police, numbering 20, under
Sub-Inspector Bremner, arrived, and they, in conjunction with some of the water police, at once proceeded
to clear the enclosure. The people were so exceedingly well-behaved, that instead of offering any resist-
ance, they at once retired. By this time the Tarpeian Way, which was a pre-eminently suitable elevation
from which to view the proceedings connected with the embarkation, was occupied by a dense mass of
humanity, and the blocks of rugged rock outside the boundary railing had also been claimed. The road
below these places was also covered by a seething mass of humanity, part of which was concealed by the
colossal building of Messrs. Hill, Clark, and Co., and the other part of which extended apparently nearly
as far as Fort Macquarie. The fort itself was also manned in a two-fold sense, the tower being mounted
by an eager throng of spectators, whose elevation and extensive visual range must have afforded them no
small amount of gratification. Then the battery was u manned ” by a body of Artillery Cadets, whose
youthful ardour was to be allowed to expend itself by firing a salute as the contingent proceeded past.
Between the stores of Messrs. Hill, Clark, and Co., and those of Messrs. Flood and Co., there was an
unoccupied and elevated piece of land, which overlooked the troopships and their surroundings, and it is
needless to say this ground was occupied by some thousands of people. So far as the wool stores themselves
were concerned, it is not venturing an opinion to say that on no previous occasion did they ever present
so much animation. Tier after tier of windows and openings were thronged by eager spectators, and as
there were not enough windows or other openings for all the sight-seers, no small proportion of them were
content to get a footing on the parapets, and even on the pediments of the structures. In the case of the
Blackwall stores a temporary balcony had been erected, and it was freighted by a large majority
of ladies and gentlemen. The “ Namoi,” the “ Centurion/' and other vessels were made pictur-
esque by the multitude of people whom they bore. The decks did not harmonise with the aspirations of
some of these people, who consequently climbed the rigging, whilst others were not satisfied with anything
less than footholds on the yards. To complete the picture it must be realised that the southern boundary
of the enclosure was breasted by a sea of humanity which extended far up Phillip-street. Rising in all its
architectural beauty beyond this sea of life was the office of the Colonial Secretary. The crowd having
as already stated retired from the enclosure, a guard of constables was placed at the southern entrance to
it. They were kept actively employed in resisting the threatened advance of a surging mass of people
whose numbers were being constantly added to, and whose strength grew in like proportion. The con-
stables, however, by the exercise of tact and firmness, were enabled to keep out of the enclosure nearly all,
if not all, who were not entitled to come into it. The first military —or semi-military—body to arrive
was the Cadet Corps of the Sydney Grammar School, a fine body of manly youths, who were under the
command of Captain Weigall. The corps drew up under the balcony of the Blackwall stores. About 10
minutes later the enclosure was invaded by three firemen (of a steamer) who, in honour of the occasion,
had visited some hostelry, which had supplied them with drinks of an exceedingly stimulating kind,
there was a great exuberance of spirits on their part, and the antics which they indulged in caused no
small amount of amusement. They gave evidence of their exultation in various harmless ways, including
the flourishing of a stick upon which was borne what was intended to represent a banner; and by the
singing of a song, the beginning and the end of which seemed to be comprised in the words “ Sons of
Victory!” These “ sons of victory ” were allowed to advance without molestation, and it is probable that
non-interference with them saved no little trouble. At ten minutes to 1 o’clock the second detachment of
police—consisting of 150 men under Inspector Anderson, who was assisted by Sub-Inspector Potter—
arrived. This body was drafted off to various sections of the enclosure in sections of 10. About the same
time Captain Taunton and Captain Hill rode on to the ground to make arrangements for the expected


arrival of the guard of honour of the combined forces which were expected from Moore Park. The sounds
of a band in the distance were accepted as an indication of the approach of the Moore Park contingent,
and soon afterwards these sounds were overwhelmed by general cheering. A few minutes later f and
simultaneously with the firing of the 1 o’clock gun, the Volunteer Artillery Band, heading its own regi-
ment, marched upon the ground, and was followed by the other detachments forming the battalion. In
this military pageant the following branches of the service took part:—Volunteer Artillery, 207;
Engineers Corps, 41; r Jorpedo Corps, 42 ; Ist Begiment Volunteer Infantry, 262; 2nd Regiment V.1.,
220; 3rd (Western) Regiment, V.L, 240; 4th (Northern) Regiment V.L, 252; Public School Cadets,
276; Vernon Boys (four companies), 210; Naval Volunteer Artillery, 118; Naval Brigade, 250. The
Na\ al \ olunteer Artillery had the honourable distinction of carrying the colours, a blue ensign, having in
the upper left-hand corner the Union Jack, and in the lower right-hand corner a white disc, traversed by a
cross bearing a lion and the Southern Cross. The battalion was under the command of Lieutenant-
Colonel Raymond, the \ olunteer Artillery was directed by Major Owen, the Engineer Corps by Lieutenant
Cansdell, the Torpedo Corps by Captain Walker, the Ist Regiment V.L by Major Richards, the 2nd Regi-
ment V.L by Lieutenant-Colonel Goodlet, the 3rd Regiment by Captain Byrnes, the 4th Regiment by
Lieutenant Colonel Wilkinson, the Public School Cadets by Captain Strong, the Vernon Boys by Captain
Neitenstein, R.N., the Naval Volunteer Artillery by Lieutenant Lee, and the Naval Brigade by Captain
Hixson.
The following bands were included in the column : —Headquarters, Volunteer Artillery, Ist regimental
(drum and fife), 2nd regimental (drum and fife), 3rd regimental (Goulburn), 4th regimental (Northern
districts), Public School Cadets, Vernon, Naval Volunteer Artillery, Naval Brigade. The Moore Park
contingent, together with the Grammar School Cadets, drew up in the enclosure, forming three sides of a
square, and acting as a guard of honour to await the arrival of the Suakim Contingent and their escort.
Altogether there were about 2300 rank and file in this guard of honour. At five minutes past 2 o’clock
preparations were made for receiving the approaching troops, and three minutes later the order “ Fix
bayonets ” was given. A few minutes more having elapsed, the suspense which people had begun to feel
was relieved by Sergeant-Instructor Thompson, of the Light Horse Troop, dashing into the enclosure as
the avant-courier of the Contingent. His arrival was followed by the guard of honour shouldering arms.
A second or two later and his Excellency the Governor’s special escort—the Sydney Light Horse —entered
at the trot, and their smart soldierlike bearing called forth general cheering, which was renewed on the
entry of the carriage of the Governor. His Excellency was received with a military salute. The
procession continued to stream in, and as each body comprising it made their appearance they were lustily
cheered. The excitement gradually increased as the various divisions of the brigade advanced, and the
artillerymen and riflemen proceeding to the Soudan were awarded round after round of cheering, which was
accompanied by the waving of handkerchiefs and hats from every window, balcony, and parapet.
Occasionally one of the spectators, espying in the Contingent a friend, would rush up to him and warmly
grasp him by the hand. The waving of handkerchiefs, amid huzzas and numerous congratulations of
members of the Contingent, last for some time. The bands stationed upon the quay played “ Auld Lang
Syne,” “ Her bright smile haunts me still,” and other compositions. The Light Horse Troop drew up
opposite Messrs. Hill, Clarke, and Co.’s stores, the whiteness of whose walls acted as an excellent
background, showing ofl* the troop to much advantage. A call for “Cheers for Mr. Dailey” met with a
most enthusiastic response. His Excellency the Governor and party, some of the Judges, Ministers, the
Primate of Australia, and a large number of members of both Houses of the Legislature, and other
prominent citizens, took up a position under the goods’ shed opposite the “Iberia.” Two benches were
brought for the Governor to stand upon and address the troops, which, like the guard of honour, had been
formed into three sides of a square.
His Excellency the Governor, having stepped upon the benches, said:—“ Soldiers of New South
Wales ! Before addressing you in the terms which I contemplate using, let me inform you that I received


on Monday from Sir H. B. Loch, Governor of Victoria, a telegram congratulating me on the successful
manner in which the arrangement for the dispatch of troops from the colony to the Soudan had >een
carried out. . The telegram runs as follows : ‘ Monday, March 2, 5.30 p.m. On the eve of embarkation of
your troops for foreign service, I offer my sincere congratulations to your Excellency and to your Govern-
ment upon the admirable promptness which characterised the arrangements for their departure, and tha t
has thus enabled such early effect to be given to the proffered aid which your Excellency’s Government
placed at Her Majesty’s command. I wish the officers and men and all concerned with the force every
success and God-speed. (Signed) Henry B. Loch, Governor of Victoria’ (Applause.) Now, have
deemed it my duty, as the representative of her Majesty the Queen, to say a few words to you at this
solemn moment before your embarkation. For the first time in the great history of the British Empire a
distant colony is sending at her own cost a completely equipped contingent of troops, who have volunteere
with an enthusiasm of which only we who have witnessed it can judge, to assist the Imperial forces in a
bitter struggle for the suppression of unspeakable cruelty, and for the establishment of order and justice
in a misgoverned country. (Hear, hear.) Countless as have been the occasions when the blood and
treasure of England have been poured out freely to protect the feeble, to shield the defenceless, and to
maintain the right, there has never been one in which humanity is more deeply interested in the triumph
of the arms of England than the cause which you are heroically resolved to uphold by your valour,
will be greeted in Egypt by the hearty welcome of thousands of chivalrous soldiers who have never yet
looked upon such an action as yours—(cheers)—the eyes of your gracious Queen will be bent upon your
exertions—and in every part of the world where our flag floats men and women and children will eagerly
read of your exploits and pray for your success. Soldiers, you carry in your keeping the honour of this
great colony, which has made such splendid sacrifices to send you to the front with an equipment of which
nations most practised in Wkr might have been proud ; and you will have the glorious privilege of helping
to maintain the honour of the Empire. (Applause.) In your ranks are numbers who are voluntarily
leaving the paths of fortune, worldly advantages, the comforts of home, and the sweetness of domestic life,
for heroic service in a bloody war, in which already many brave men have been stricken down. You are
doing this to show to the world the unity of the mighty and invincible Empire of which you are members.
Your country charges itself with the care of those dear ones whom you leave behind. All that generosity,
tenderness, and gratitude can do to care for them, to succour and console them, will be looked upon as a
labour of love by the nation. (Cheers.) Soldiers, you leave us amidst the acclamations of your fellow-
citizens, whose hearts will be with you in your camps and your conflicts—amidst an enthusiasm of
admiration and sacrifice unexampled—with the sympathies of every true citizen of the Empire—with our
earnest hope that it may be your glorious privilege to share in the triumph as in the service, and to come
back to us crowned with England’s gratitude, as you are now encompassed with her sympathies. Soldiers,
on the part of your fellow-citizens, I now say to you—Farewell ! and may God ever have you m his holy
keeping.” (Loud and prolonged cheering.)
The Commandant (Colonel Richardson) saluted his Excellency, and delivered the following reply ;
My Lord, On behalf of the officers, non-commissioned officers, and soldiers of the Contingent, I beg to
return ray sincere thanks for the inspiriting and kind address which you have given to us this day. If
anything were wanting to complete our loyalty to her Majesty the Queen, it has been done by your lord-
ship’s speech this afternoon, for every man who has volunteered in this service is determined to do his
duty, not only to Her Majesty the Queen, but for the honour of the colony. I again thank you on behalf
of the officers, non-commissioned officers and men. (Cheers).
The speech of Colonel Richardson was followed by loud and repeated cries of “ Mr. Dailey, but the
Acting Colonial Secretary did not respond, that gentleman’s reason for failing to address the assemblage
being° that on the occasion of the departure of the Contingent for the scene of war they
should not be addressed by other than the representative of the Queen and their Commandant.


The embarkation Was then proceeded with, the men being marched off in messes of 10, and going up
the gangways with alacrity, their features betokening that they realised the greatness of the trust reposed
in them, and that they were resolved not to retui’n without having attempted to do something for the
honour of the country. As the sections of 10 went forward the men were warmly greeted by their old
friends, and hasty adieus were paid. The scene was by no means of an ordinarily impressive character,
and was not without incidents having an exceedingly pathetic aspect. His Excellency the Governor, Mr.
Dailey, their Honors Sir William Manning and Mr. Justice Faucett, Mr. Dibbs, and other Ministers
occupied a position near one of the gangways, and took an active interest in the proceedings. At 3 o clock
the bell of the Iberia notified that friends of the soldiers were to withdraw from the vessel, and ten minutes
later the gangways were drawn. The “Iberia” moved off at about 20 minutes past 3 o’clock, and as she did
so there was a renewal of the cheering and waving of handkerchiefs and hats that had previously taken
place. The Iberia’s soldiers consisted almost exclusively of riflemen, many of whom climbed the shrouds
and got upon the yards. The “Iberia” went out stern first, being assisted by a tug, and when off Milson’s
Point she was hauled round, so that her head pointed to the east. At 2o minutes to 4 o clock the Austia
lasian also cast off, and the fluttering of handkerchiefs and the flourishing of hats was again visible. The
bands played “ Auld Lang Syne,” the steamers moved ahead, and there were frequent discharges of the
signal guns of vessels on the western side of the quay. As the troopships passed Fort Macquarie they weie
saluted by the guns of that fortification.
THE SCENE AT THE CIRCULAR QUAY.
Out of the main streets the crowd of people came hurrying into Phillip Street, Young Street, and
Castlereagh Street, whence they proceeded in thousands into one surging mass which gathered in Albert
Street at the Quay. Along the whole length of the Tarpeian Way there was another dense throng
distributed along the railings. An open batten fence had been erected from a line with the ship “ Centurion,”
cutting off their farther approach to the troopships, and the people struggled furiously to gam a place of
vantage near the fence. The police worked hard to keep the way open for the troops, but a small portion
at the end of the line appeared to be cut off, and had to push their way through as best they were able.
The (mder issued by Inspector-General Fosbery, warning women and children to keep away from the crowd
was of course strictly disobeyed. Several women had their garments torn, and were with difficulty rescued
from the crowd again. A number of unruly characters made their presence felt, and by roughly
pushing people intentionally made matters worse than they would otherwise have been.
Casting a glance round on whatever side, it was the same—people. People m thousands,
crushing and pushing in their excited desire to gain some vantage ground. People in every
window and door, and on every roof where there was standing room, until the buildings themselves
seemed almost shut out from view. People on every vessel around the harbour, perched away
high up on the trucks, standing out on the yards, crowding the decks, or peering out of port-
holes. The large wool warehouses around the wharves were literally human hives, and to sum the situation
up in half a dozen words, it was a great human spectacle. From Messrs. Hill, Clark and Co.’s Stores were
displayed the British ensign, the White Standard of the Southern Cross, and the house flag of the firm,
while other establishments displayed similar decorations. There was not a vessel to be seen in or about
the harbour which did not manage to fly a piece of bunting, while some vessels made a remarkably fine
display. The ship “Centurion,” for instance, had her three masts covered with flags, while from her maintop
a long line of them were carried to the top of Messrs. Mason Brothers’ warehouse on the opposite side of
the street, one of them bearing the sentiment, which the crowd seemed to echo heartily, “ Well done New
South Wales—God-speed ! ” Alongside her lay the Sveaborg barque “Emars,” while the “ Scottish Bard
was moored ahead, both flying splendid flags. On the opposite side of the quay lay the P. &O. steamer
“Shannon” and the ships “Gretna,” “Iceberg,” “Benares,” with other craft, all floating streams of gay bunting,
while the harbour itself was alive with craft of every description, from rowing boats to steamers The


“Shannon” was beautifully dressed and in magnificent order, and when the ships commenced to move from
the wharf the order was given to man the yards, and her Lascar crew went aloft very smartly, looking
very picturesque in their red fezes. One noticeable feature in connection with the “Shannon” was the fact
that the white ensign with the blue cross and five stars, which now does duty for the New South Wales
flag, was flying from her mainmast. The scene in the harbour was one of extreme beauty, and the effect
of it was heightened as the troopships stood away from the wharfs, when every portion of their structure,
every rope and waving flag and pennant, stood out sharply against the background of shore and sky, while
the men, posted in the rigging to obtain one long last glance of home, formed striking figures in the
picture.
SPECIAL CHURCH SERVICES.
On March Ist, being the last Sunday the men of the Contingent spent in Sydney before their
departure, special services on their behalf were held in most of the churches and other places of worship
in Sydney and the suburbs. At St. Andrew’s Cathedral the sermon was preached by the Primate,
Dr. Barry. Archbishop Moran held a special service at St. Mary’s Cathedral. At nearly all the Episcopal
churches the sermons had special reference to the expedition, and at many of the Wesleyan, Congregational,
and other churches, there were special prayers for the welfare of the men forming the Contingent, and for
their safe return.
It was decided that the parades should not be compulsory, and therefore many of the men who were
anxious to spend their last Sunday with their families, relatives, or friends, did not put in an appearance.
At half-past 10 o’clock about a dozen men fell in to attend service at the Wesleyan Methodist Church,
Bourke Street, and were marched there under Lieutenant-Colonel Paul. At 2 o’clock about 150 more fell
in at bugle call to attend services at the Anglican and Roman Catholic Churches. Maj or Norris and
Adjutant Bartlett were the commanding officers for this party, and Lieutenant Keating had charge of the
Roman Catholic contingent. The company was formed into line and then into fours, and headed by the
Artillery band and that of the Contingent, marched out from the barrack yard in silence, owing to the
recent death of a comrade. When they reached the street, however, the bands commenced playing, and by
degrees an immense crowd assembled. After proceeding along Oxford Street for some distance, it was
feared that the tramway and other traffic would be completely stopped by the crowd, and the troops
therefore turned down College Street, the throng growing denser at every yard. Lieutenant Keating’s
party, 44 in number, broke off at St. Mary’s Cathedral, in proximity to which there must have been
several thousands of people assembled. The detachment filed into the building, and the main body pro-
ceeded along College Street, and thence by King Street to St. Andrew’s Cathedral, the route as before
being through crowds of spectators.
ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
The service of intercession for the troops proceeding to Egypt held in St. Andrew’s Cathedral attracted
a congregation so numerous as to completely fill the spacious edifice. Noticeable amongst the congregation
were three or four judges of the Supreme Court, several members of the Ministry, and other representatives
of both Houses of Parliament, the Commandant, in company with officers of both branches of the service;
a goodly proportion of the Contingent about to proceed to Egypt, and a large assemblage of ladies and
gentlemen. Arrangements had been made to prevent the overcrowding of the Cathedral or confusion
arising, and they seemed to be carried out in a satisfactory manner. The service was announced to com-
mence at a quarter-past three o’clock, but fully an hour before that time there were gatherings at all the
principal entrances to the Cathedral enclosures of ladies and gentlemen who were the holders of tickets
entitling them to admission to various parts of the building. The gates were opened soon after half-past
2 o’clock, and for nearly an hour there were streams of people passing through the various entrances. The
Cathedral Choir was strengthened by those from St. Mark’s, All Saints, and Christ Church, bringing the
number of voices up to 80. Mr. Montague Younger presided at the organ, and his performances were of


a very effective character. The half hour preceding the commencement of the service was devoted hy the
organist to the playing of “The Soudan March, composed expressly for the occasion hy Mr. Luscombe
Searelle ; “Arm, arm, ye brave !’ “Oh, Father, whose Almighty Power;” “ Disdainful of Danger,” from
Handel’s “ Judas Maccahseus ;” and Cruschraann’s “Ti Prego.” The hymns, “ God, the all-terrible,” “ All
people that on earth do dwell,” and “Abide with me,” were included in the service, at the conclusion of
which the organist played as voluntaries “ Rule Britannia,” “ God Bless the Prince of Wales,” and the
“ National Anthem.”
The sermon was preached by the Primate of Australia, who based his discourse on I Kings, viii.,
44, 45—“ If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, whithersoever Thou shalt send them, and
shall pray unto the Lord, then hear Thou in heaven their prayer and supplication, and maintain their
cause.”
Dr. Barry said : I have chosen for my text to-day words in which the prayer of Solomon—after
surveying in succession many other vicissitudes of the national fortunes of God’s people—lays before the
footstool of His mercy the terrible event of war, recognises it as subject to the sway of His Providence,
and asks his blessing upon those who pass through it to the peace which lies beyond. I have done so,
because this is pre-eminently a service of intercession, in which common prayer speaks more deeply and
emphatically than the most eloquent passion of exhortation. We stand (who can doubt it 1) at a critical
time—a time which, like all other crises, is a time both of serious danger and glorious opportunity in the
fortunes of our country. Therefore we pray for England, that God who has raised her up for a high and
world-wide mission, will, in spite of all error and weakness, all short-coming and wrong doing, still bless
her, and inspire her to meet it. We part with our brethren, who are going out willingly to what is no
slight or bloodless service, to embody (so to speak) the spirit of loyalty in this colony towards the old
mother country, and represent in action one part of what has been happily called the Greater Britain,
which has growm out of one little island, till the waves of its influence wash every shore of humanity.
Therefore we pray for them, and with them, that God’s hand may be over them, and His Spirit may rule
their hearts. We are not content that all shall have been done which can be done to equip them for their
arduous wwk; we are not content to give them, in our shouting streets, the encouragement of that fellow-
ship of appreciation and sympathy which at once fires and softens the heart. No ! like St. Paul at Miletus
—when for those whom he loved he had done all work, and had spoken all exhortations—we come here at
last “to commend them to God and to His grace.” They are going out for us to battle against the enemy :
we lift up our souls in prayer for them, as they for themselves, above all the din and trouble of earth to
the Lord in heaven, trusting that He will “ hear our supplications and maintain our cause.” What then
is the right office of the preacher to-day ? Certainly not to discuss the policy or the justice of this Egyptian
war, which has already cost England so many noble lives, and above all, the life of one of the true heroes
of this generation, whose death, under all the circumstances of his charge, is to us not only a national loss,
but, I fear, a national disgrace. Not to enter into any of the questions which have been raised here as to
the offer of our troops to the service of England, or the method and spirit in which that offer has been
made ; —of all these things thoughtful and unsparing reckoning must be had elsewhere; —on all these
things the preacher, as an Englishman and a citizen of this colony, has the right of forming opinion and
the duty, perhaps, of expressing it, for I cannot hold that because a man is a Minister of Christ he should
lose the political rights or is dispensed from the political duties which belong to all citizens of a free and
great country. But not here, or at this time. Not here, for the very entrance into the house of God
should raise the soul to a higher and calmer atmosphere, to see things (if I may dare so to say) from the
vantage ground of heaven. Not at this time; for the hour of worship is, above all others, the hour of
unity, from which all rude sounds of division and dispute should be banished, because in it our common
humanity is face to face with our common God. No ! the office of the preacher, when he has emphasised with
all earnestness the duty and blessing of that double prayer of intercession which we offer to-day, is to call
your minds to thoughts which lie beyond all controversy —to interpret, as far as God gives him light, the


meanings which, for all, underlie the busy action and the strong emotion of this present busy time. l>ut
what, it may be asked—it is asked—has the preacher of the Gospel of peace to do with war ? What right
have we under that Gospel to bring before God, through Christ, such prayer as that of the text,
that, when we plunge into all the horror and cruelty of battle, He will hear our supplication and maintain
our cause My brethren, let us freely confess —nay, with all impassioned earnestness, let us declare that
war is itself an inhuman, an unnatural, an un-Christian thing; let us take shame to ourselves that after
eighteen centuries of Christian civilisation, all the cool reasonings of expediency, all the clear protests of
reason and conscience, all the pathetic pleadings of humanity, all the spiritual teachings of the Gospel, have
done so little to extirpate it from a suffering world. Let us strive and pray for the time when the “ truce
of God,” which in old times centred round the great Christian festival, may be extended into an abiding
and pervading reign of peace. It is a great perplexing contradiction, felt all the more as mere barbarism
recedes, and modern civilisation by certain noble incongruities tempers, as half in shame, the unrelenting
consistency of savage war. It is a contradiction, and, like all other contradictions in life, it has its root in
the power of evil in the world—folly, injustice, oppression, anarchy, the idolatry of glory, and the insatiate
greed of power. It is because these exist, and as long as they exist that war will be. Peace is the
beginning and the end of all true humanity. Peace over the cradle of battle and the broken tomb of the
first Easter was the beginning and the end of the message of Christ to the world. But of the intermediate
state of struggle and imperfection, He Himself said with all sadness, “ Not peace, but a sword,” and the
saying belongs alike to the temporal and spiritual conditions of life, to the world and to the Church. The
real question in the world as it is now —and it is a question of the deepest moral significance —is, whether
in struggle we are on the side of right or on the side of wrong; whether we wantonly and selfishly provoke
war, or whether we enter it with sad, reluctant seriousness ; whether we give way to what has been called
“ the joy of conflict,” and trifle with the wild beast fury which lies hidden and chained within the soul, or
whether, like the great Duke of Wellington, we hold that victory is only less sad than defeat, and watch
out of the darkness of conflict for the first sweet dawn of peace. On this question it depends whether to
ask for God’s blessing on our cause and on ourselves is a reasonable prayer or a a blasphemous mockery.
It was only when His people went forth to the battle, whither He sent them, that Solomon dared to ask
that He would hear their supplication and maintain their cause. And God can send His people only to a
serious and reluctant, a righteous and merciful war. Nothing can be more hateful than what men call the
u military spirit ” in a people, if it means the reckless delight in battle, the spirit of ambition, and the
passion for glory and aggrandisement; the willing appeal on all occasions to force, the “ woe to the con-
quered” of the old barbaric chief. But what if, on the other hand, this military spirit yield, as its fruits,
the temper of loyal self-sacrifice for our country, the readiness to endure, at the call of duty, hardness and
suffering, even to lay down life—as English soldiers do —not as a great heroic act, but as a matter of
course, the resolution to maintain, under God’s blessing, the place of high responsibility and power which
he has assigned to England ? To love peace for the sake of peace, and for it to make all possible sacrifice,
is divine. “ Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.” But to cling at
all hazards to peace, simply because it preserves our ease and comfort and wealth ; to shrink, in fear of
hardship and danger, from maintaining what we believe to be the cause of right, this is an ignoble
cowardice. God grant to us and to our country, in this as in all other things, to refuse the evil and to
choose the good. Surely it is this prayer beyond all others which must lie at the very heart of our suppli-
cation to-day, and give us confidence to present it, through Our Lord Jesus Christ, before the throne of God.
What, then, are the meanings which we may rightly read to-day in this House of God’s, as underlying the
excitement of this present time, and making it a memorable epoch in the history of this colony ? First, and
most obvious, is the expression of loyalty to the old country, which we habitually call home, in what is
unquestionably an hour of trial, when over the unexampled vastness of our Empire, which it taxes all her
strength to grasp and all her wisdom to guide, there are clouds of danger and embarrassment gathering on
every side. Loyalty ;it is affection tinged with reverence —it is in the life of a people what filial love is


within the sacred circle of home. “ The mother country,” “ The fatherland,” are no mere figures of speech.
A sentiment men call it, sometimes in a tone of half depreciation ; but all thoughtful minds know that
sentiment is one of the great forces that rule the world. No family, no nation ever rose to its true ideal
merely by the cold sense of expediency, or even by the higher inspiration of duty, without the inner glow
of life which comes from the fire of love. And that expression of loyalty now you may see even by the
reflex influence on European opinion, that it has a value far beyond the material help which it is able to
offer ; it foreshadows in the future far larger possibilities than we can dream of in the present ; it has its
peculiar significance at a time when the relations of the mother country have been, as we all know, strained
to uneasiness and dissatisfaction; and men had begun to ask with deep anxiety what bond of unity could
be found for the ever-growing extension of the English Empire. It is an expression of loyalty ; but it is
more it is a stimulation also of that from which it springs. It is proverbial, and characteristic of the
highest aspect of human nature, that men love best those for whom they have been able to do most; it is
certain that to have made a sacrifice for the old country will strengthen the spirit of loyalty here far more
than to have gained any amount of benefit from her. “ Blessed,” because divine, u it is to give rather than
to receive.” That loyalty, moreover, my brethren, when it passes from emotion into thought, will surely
yield us another result of priceless value. Must it not stimulate in the minds and hearts of all a certain
largeness of idea and aspiration beyond the narrow limits of colonial interests and colonial life ? We are
claiming now our place in bearing the burden—a burden which, heavy though it be, is yet a privilege—
of the great mission, the vast responsibilities laid upon the English race. It cannot be for nothing that
God has given us a world-wide commerce; has suffered us to girdle the earth with settlements, dependen-
cies, colonies, and so to extend beyond all example our English language, and thought, and institutions ;
has granted to England to be not only a queen of subject races, but a mother of free nations, with whom
must rest much of the world’s destiny in the future. All God’s blessings, given to the nations whom he
choses, bear some shadow of resemblance to the great covenant of covenants in this, that in them “all
families of the earth are to be blessed.” To be great is to be in a high degree a fellow-worker with God
for that progress of humanity which, to us Christians, is the working out of God’s dispensation in Christ, and
the preparing for the consummation of the last day. Rightly to understand this greatness is itself an educa-
tion, in all that is true and noble, so in all that is of humility and faith in God. The bold step which is now being
taken whatever else it may bring forth, must be a new start in this high education. Surely it is well for us
that so it should be. Is not isolation of necessity the tendency, almost the condition, of colonial life ? As the
pioneers of a future civilization go out into the solitude of the untrodden bush, and each man or band of
men has to concentrate on the struggle to exist and to subdue nature all thought and energy—so also it is
in some degree with each colony as a whole under the overwhelming pressure of work and enterprise
necessary for entering on the great territory which as yet is hardly more than fringed with occupation.
But it is not good that this narrow concentration of idea and interest should rule. It is well to realise
vividly what all acknowledge as a commonplace in theory, that in the great body of the English race “ if
one member suffer, all members suffer with it.” If the central wax feeble, the languor of circulation
would be felt in the most distant limbs. It is well to know that, as on the watchfulness and bravery of
each soldier the safety of an army may at any moment depend, so the action of even the smallest English
settlement may tell on the great mission of the English race. It is well to be practically convinced that,
under whatever method, that mission can only be rightly fulfilled by the united energies of all the
communities in which the English tongue is spoken. And yet one other meaning we may surely read in
the occasion which brings us here to-day. It is the need and glory of voluntary devotion and self-sacrifice
for the country in which God has given us a place. Alone among the nations of Europe, England still
relies on voluntary service for the forces which have almost to garrison a world. Here the service which
is to be rendered is doubly voluntary, not only in general but for this special work. It is, to my thinking,
in this willingness to endure hardship, to defy danger, to break ties which are dear, to face death itself,
that the truest glory of the enterprise lies. God grant that this spirit may never be quenched among us,


for the day of its extinction will be the eve of national death! But let me ask you, my brethren, who
form the mass of this congregation, should not that spirit extend far beyond military service 1 Some
evidence of it is asked from you to-day when you are called upon—each according to his fullest means
to make some real, substantial offering to the Patriotic Fund, which is to provide, as you know, for wives
and children, for widows and orphans, of those who are leaving their dear ones behind at the call of duty.
It will be a disappointment—may f not say a shame—if this great congregation does not rise to-day to the
height of their duty and their privilege in this matter. But my question extends far beyond this simple
and immediate exemplification of the spirit of self-devotion. Should there not be this willingness for work
and sacrifice at home as well as abroad—in peace as well as in war 1 If there is one truth which is now
being forced on those who hold any position of authority, it is this, that ever in the nation, and fai moie
in the Churches, the action of those specially devoted to the service of the community must be supported
and supplemented by the voluntary work of every member of the whole. The battle of life is again no
conventional phrase. It is but too obvious that, even here, where material advantages exist in abundance,
the grinding poverty and squalor which appeal by their fearful contrast with wealth and luxury and
culture, ought to be quite unknown. It is clear there are deadly enemies, moral enemies of our souls, at
least as formidable as those who bar our path in Egypt—the positive antagonism, of vice and crinm
meanness and baseness of every sort—the deadly atmosphere, perhaps even more to be dreaded, of idleness
and luxury, of selfishness and falsehood, of coldness of all belief, and carelessness of moral and spiritual
truth. Oh, for men—not a few, but many—to serve as soldiers in the true army of salvation, and to be
willing to take some real trouble, to endure some real hardness and weariness, to make some real sacrifice
of time and wealth and labour in the great cause, disdaining the lukewarm conventional service, which
costs them nothing ! I would venture to bless them in the name of God, even if they marshal themselves
under the banner of humanity ; but I can feel trust and confidence in their full triumph only if they fight
under the device of the Cross. I often listen when the stirring hymn rings through our Churches,
“ Onward, Christian soldier, marching to the war,” and I pray for more and more of our young men,
especially of those who have the responsibility of knowledge and education, to be enlisted in some active
service for God and man, and to know the joy of labour, and sacrifice for the Lord who bought them.
These lessons, plain and simple lessons enough, we may surely read for ourselves in the great occasion of
this service. And now to you, dear brethren, who are to go forth from among us, here in the sight of God
we bid farewell. In your hands will rest in some degree the honour of the English name, in a higher and
closer sense the honour of this colony, which by its present action has challenged for itself a place before
the eyes of the world. But in your hands will rest more than honour—the opportunity of aiding in the
fulfilment of a great mission for humanity and for God. Great is the glory, great the responsibility, of
those on whom this is laid. There can hardly be need to speak of bravery in action, of patience and
endurance in labour, of calmness in danger, of quiet acceptance of duty. It is no vanity to say that from
English soldiers these things are looked for as matters of course. But suffer me to remind you that more
than these, far more, will be required, if the service to which you go is to be fully done. There must be
those yet higher qualities which made up the ideal of the Christian knighthood of old. There must be the
spirit of temperance and purity, which is the on§ secret preservation of your own higher nature. There
must be, in relation, not only to your comrades, but to those enemies, free and gallant enemies, against
whom you are to fight, the spirit of generosity, righteousness, mercy, which is the truest chivalry of the
soldier. There must be, if you would have the highest and mightiest strength, the spirit of faith
consecrating your warfare, as the red cross which marked the knight of old still shines in the banner of
England —feeling a Divine strength, recognising a Divine call; knowing that, whether in life or in death
your soul is in the keeping of God, and that nothing can pluck it from His hand. It was this highest
inspiration (as you know) which was the inmost strength of that heroic life—brave and noble beyond the
ordinary standard of nobleness, loving and loved, trusting and trusted, in relation to all among whom he
rooved—over whom, it is not too much to say, that all civilised humanity mourns. It is in these that now


he lias passed to higher life through the gate of which the world calls death. God grant that
something of his spirit may spread through the hearts of those who go to finish the work for which he
died ! So, insensibly from the words of farewell we glide at last to that with which we began —to that
utterance of prayer which I ask you to remember will rise again and again for you in our Churches and
homes when you are traversing the silent sea, toiling on the march, watching at your posts, or plunging
into the battle. “ Finally, brethren, pray for us,” are the words which rise always to the lips of Christians
in the hour of parting; for they believe, with our great living poet, that “ more things are wrought by
prayer than the world wots of,” and that by it, beyond all other means, “ the great world,” in all its con-
fusion and turmoil and sorrow, is yet “ bound by golden chains around the feet of God.” Yes, we shall
pray for you ; but our prayer will be especially that the implied conditions of the text may be realised —
that the cause of England may be kept clear of ambition and selfishness and vain-glory, nerved by the
strength of duty, tempered by mercy and consecrated by faith; and that you, catching the inspiration of
such a cause, may be worthy of the name of Christian soldiers, of God’s people. For then we know that
our prayer for England and for you will rise to God in the peace of heaven; and that, not for our sakes,
but for the sake of all humanity, and for the sake of the true Son of Man, who is the Son of God, He
will “ hear our supplication and maintain our cause.”
ST. MARY’S CATHEDRAL.
The special service held by Archbishop Moran at St. Mary’s Cathedral for the Roman Catholic section
of the troops going to the Soudan was a most impressive one, and the church was literally crowded
with people. The Catholic volunteers, under Lieutenant Keating and Sergeant Butler, marched from the
barracks with the men of other religious denominations, and on reaching St. Mary’s, where an immense
crowd had assembled outside, they were halted and marched into the cathedral, some of the front seats
being reserved for them. Soon afterwards the choir sang the “ Laudato,” and as the solemn strains swelled
forth, a troop of little acolytes in scarlet and white preceded the Archbishop to the sanctuary.
Dr. Moran himself celebrated the benediction service, and many of the clergy were present, including the
Rev. C. P. F. Collingridge, who volunteered, and was permitted by the Archbishop to become Roman
Catholic chaplain to the New South Wales contingent in the Soudan.
Dr. Moran delivered the following address : —Dearly beloved Christian soldiers, —You are assembled
before the altar to pray that the strengthening hand of God may be with you in the enterprise in which
you are about to engage, and at the same time to receive a few words of instruction from me, and to arm
yourselves with the blessing of Holy Church. And yet it may perhaps seem strange that the minister of
peace should address you, setting out as you are in obedience to the call of duty to brave the perils of war.
No blessing of earth is comparable to that of peace. Our Saviour was announced in prophecy as the King
of Kings, the Prince of Peace, and, as a feature of his glorious kingdom, it was foretold that the swords
should be beaten into ploughshares, and the spears into pruning-hooks; “ nation shall not lift up the sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.” (Isaiah ii., 4.) And again the Psalmist cries out,
“ Come and behold ye the works of the Lord, what wonders he hath done upon the earth, making wars to
cease even unto the end of the earth. He shall destroy the bow and break the weapons, and the shield he
shall burn in the fire.” (Ps. xlv., 9.) The angels heralded the Redeemer’s birth, as glad tidings of glory to the
Most High, and peace to men, and the Apostle writes of our blessed Lord, “ He is our peace : and coming he
preached peace to you that were afar off, and peace to them that were nigh.” (Ephes. ii.) And in the heavenly
kingdom of our eternal rest it shall be so. In the enjoyment of our everlasting inheritance our abiding peace
shall be undisturbed, and our joy shall be undimmed. But in our present imperfect state in these days of
our earthly pilgrimage, wars and rumours of wars are permitted by God for the punishment of the wicked,
for the trial of the just, for the greater reward of those who cherish peace and brotherly love. The sacred
Scripture teaches us that God, so merciful, so good, is nevertheless the Lord of hosts, and the God of battles.
If His Providence permits wars, yet all shall redound to His praise. But even in the ways of this world
there is no surer guarantee for peace than that the citizens of a free State should be disciplined for war.


In this great colony, so rich in its treasures, so exhaustless in its resources, so smiling in its sunshine, so
fair in the peerless loveliness of its material features, we enjoy the blessings of freedom, with free laws, free
institutions, free government, free people. There can be no more solid foundation to maintain this free-
dom, no more secure defence to repel every assault upon those free institutions, than that our citizen
soldiers would be strong of arm and brave of heart, and disciplined of mind, ready at a moment’s notice at
the call of duty to enter the lists against every foe, and with a pure heart to invoke the aid of the God of
battles. It is not numbers, it is not wealth, it is not resources, it is not extent of territory that makes a
nation truly great. The true source of the greatness of a State is its Christian civilisation, resting on free
institutions and free laws, and sustained by the brave intelligent resolve of an earnest and devoted people.
Thus, beloved soldiers, though engaging in war, you are the champions of peace, the sure guarantee that
the blessings of freedom and of peace shall long be the inheritance of this smiling land. There are three
things which are truly said to form a distinctive badge of the Christian soldier. These are obedience,
discipline, and valour. Obedience will mark out for you the path of duty ; discipline will be your guide
whilst you pursue that path; and valour, blessed by God, will triumph over every obstacle, and, attaining
the end which duty has pointed out, will win the wreath of victory. The Christian soldier is obedient first
of all to God’s commandments : he guards his soul in the observance of the Divine precepts, and obeys
those who are invested with authority, not through fear, but for conscience’ sake. He joyfully embraces
discipline, the discipline that enlightens the mind and strengthens the arm and nerves the heart, to achieve
great and glorious things in the paths of self-denial and sacrifice. Valour is the birthright and inheritance
of the race of which you come, and bear in mind that true valour spurns everything contrary to honour ; it
is fearless in the post of danger, and faithful to duty, come what may. But 1 have said “ valour blessed
by God,” for valour is but the portion of fools unless it be blessed by God, and be guided by the fear
of God. He it is who casteth down and lifteth up. It is He who imparts strength and crowns our
valour with victory, and as the Book of Proverbs teacheth : “There is no wisdom, there is no prudence,
there is no counsel against the Lord; the horse is prepared for the day of battle, but the Lord
giveth safety ” (xxi. 30). Were I to choose from the heroes of old a model for your imitation, I
would tell you to emulate the heroic courage of the Spartans, the bravest chosen band of the armies of
Greece. They were renowned for their love of temperance. When they found a drunken man, they set
him upon the stage to show their children what they were to guard themselves against. In battle they
were fearless, yet moderate and prudent and united. As a result, they were always victorious, and in
some of their greatest victories as few as eight Spartans fell, whilst the slain of their enemies were count* d
by thousands. But ] would wish rather to set before you as your model the Christian knights of the
middle ages, the most chivalrous soldiers in those days of chivalry, the bravest of the brave, and as religious
as they were brave. Before engaging in battle they sanctified themselves by approaching the Sacraments,
and then, like lions, they rushed upon the enemy. It was their rule to keep the face ever towards the foe,
even though they should be only one against ten thousand. Like them, you, too, will lead a bright,
stainless, perfect life—a knightly life. You will unite gentleness with courage. You will combat in a
land sanctified by the presence of the infant Saviour and the blessed Virgin and St Joseph. You, too, will
be crusaders, and, if it is not given you to guard the sanctuaries of religion, you will guard, at least, the
sanctuary of your own heart, and preserve the sacred treasures of honour and truth and virtue It is
sometimes said that the camp imperils virtue, and becomes to the soldier a school of vice. If the Christian
soldier be not animated by the spirit of obedience and discipline and true valour, it may easily be so; but
if he be faithful in the path of duty, guided by obedience, and animated by a spirit of chivalry, instead of
being a school of vice the camp will be to him a theatre of Christian heroism, a school of every virtue.
Look to the bright array of the Theban legion and the countless other veterens of imperial Home. From
the ranks of the victorious legions they passed to the white-robed army of the martyrs of God, and now
they wear a double wreath, the crown of heroic merit fearlessly facing death in the discharge' of public
duty, and the crown of martyrdom dying for the faith. Look to St. Martin of Tours. He won his
laurels on many a hard-fought battle-field, and then, with the same devoted heroism, embraced a religious


life, and became the apostle and the father of the faith to France and other most favoured Christian
nations. Look to St. Ignatius of Loyola. Honoured for his bravery by the armies of Spain, he brought
the same dauntless spirit to the religious battle-fields, and infused it into his heroic sons, who in every
Christian land take their place among the foremost champions of the truth. May the campaign on which
you are about to enter be to every one of you in like manner a school of true heroism, and a theatre for
the exercise of Christian self-denial and every other sublimest virtue ! It is the first time in the world’s
history that the blue flag of Australia, gemmed with the Southern Cross, will take its place on the battle-
fields of nations. It must give us all no small reason to rejoice that thus unfurled for the first lime it shelters
the best interests of civilisation and peace. It is not in any internecine struggle that you engage, nor do you
champion any cause that could bring the blush of shame to those who love justice, religion, and fatherland.
Long may it be so, and ever such may be the proud eulogy of Australia’s unsullied flag ! Fgypt has been for
4000 years the battle-field of conflicting nations. Perhaps the first country that was famed for military
prowess and aimed at unhersal sway, it was for centuries the great emporium of the world’s commerce, the
centre of civilisation, of science, of literature, of the arts. Since then on its pages of history, palimpscst-
like, every empire that has risen to fame has inscribed its deeds of heroism; and if in comparison with the
wars that have been carried on in past ages the present struggle may appear at first sight trifling and
insignificant, yet anyone who looks beneath the surface of events cannot fail to recognise that, whatever
may be our judgment as to the origin of the war and as to the manner in which it has been carried on, the
campaign at the present moment yields in few respects to the most memorable of former times in that it is
linked with the vital interests of many nations, with the hopes of civilisation, and the blessings of lasting
peace. It is in such a glorious cause that you now unfurl your country’s flag. You will guard it faithfully
on Egyptian soil, and, returning in triumph, you will consign it to your children, wreathed with laurels
and emblazoned with victories. But whilst our brave fellow-citizens march to the battle-field, what, beloved
brethren, is the duty that devolves upon us ? It shall be ours to pray that the campaign may be a short
one, that it may be a happy and glorious one, and that peace may crown their toil; and may this peace be
the harbinger of a new era of Christian civilisation to the continent of Africa, so long enslaved amid the
humiliation and sorrows and darkness and vices of barbarism. For these devoted men themselves it shall
be our fervent prayer that they may hold their place around the Australian flag without stain, without
reproach, without dishonour. May they be brave ; may they be wise! Our prayers shall be with them
when they face their enemies in the battle-field, with them when the danger is their own wayward will, when
the enemy whom they face is not death but temptation. May each one return to his home with redoubled
energy and redoubled vigour, jubilant, disciplined, virtuous, and brave! May they be triumphant over
every foe that dares to oppose them in the path of duty, and may they be triumphant also over everything
that would enslave the heart—those hidden enemies that would turn them aside from the course marked
out by honour, justice, rectitude, and virtue !
Dr. Moran’s words were listened to with profound interest. Robed in purple silk and white lace, with
his figure outlined against the whiteness of the altar, and the rich golden glow of the eastern window— a
glow which made the flames of the tapers look pale —his appearance alone would have riveted every one’s
attention, and when he began to utter his exhortations every sentence was keenly marked. The organist
played with excellent effect the grand “ War March of the Priests,” from Mendelssohn’s “ Athalie.”
THE PATRIOTIC MEETING.
One of the largest public meetings ever held in Sydney was that at the Exhibition Building, on
Friday, February 20th, convened by the Mayor at the requisition of a very large number of citizens, for
the purpose of expressing sympathy with the action of the Government in ottering to send troops from
New South Wales to assist the British arms in the Soudan, and to provide funds for the patriotic purpose
of assisting the relatives of those who go to assert in Egypt the honour and loyalty of New South Wales.


The Mayor of Sydney (Mr. T. Playfair) occupied the chair, and on the platform there were large numbers
of our most prominent citizens in all walks of life. The Exhibition Building was better filled than ever it
was before. All over the vast area of the floor space the people were packed as closely as ever they could
be. Not only were the seats occupied, but the crowds were as thick as they could stand all along the
aisles and sides of the building. The galleries, too, were densely packed, and there must have been at
least 12,000 people present.
The Mayor, on rising, was received with loud applause, and he commenced by reading out a number
of letters, telegrams, etc., offering contributions and other assistance to the Patriotic Fund. They were as
follows : —From the Mayor, a cheque for £SO ; Mr. A. H. McCulloch, a cheque for £SO, and stating his
intention of paying a similar sum every quarter during the absence of the troops; from Mr. C. Huenerbein,
offering to give a grand concert in aid of the fund ; from the public meeting at Bulli, telegraphing their
sympathy with the present one; from the inhabitants of Gulgong to the same effect; from Mr. C. B.
Fairfax, expressing his desire to become a contributor, and forwarding a cheque for £IOO ; from Mr.
James R. Fairfax, on behalf of Mr. E, Ross Fairfax, to the same effect, and forwarding a cheque for
£1,000; from the officers of the Mining Department, forwarding a cheque for £55 7s. 7d., being the
amount of one day’s pay from each; from the public meeting at Wollongong, forwarding a telegram
sympathising with the present meeting ; from the Town Clerk, forwarding a cheque for £52 7s. 9d., being
the amount of one day’s pay contributed by the Corporation officers; from Mr. G. J. Cohen, a cheque for
£100; from R. A. Watson, Circular Quay, a cheque for £25; from Mr. J. Liggins, a cheque for £25 ;
from Mr. Thomas W. Warren, a cheque for £25; from Mrs. R. H. D. White, requesting permission to
purchase the colours for the troops at her ow r n expense; from the Hon. E. Flood, M.L.C., apologising for
his absence through ill-health, and expressing his intention of subscribing ; from Mr. A. L. Park, promising
£25 yearly; from Mr. Melhado, to the same effect; from Mr. Lee, £IOO ; from W. S. Friend, £IOO ; from
Mr. Joseph Thompson, £250 ; from Mr. W. R. Piddington, £2O.
The Mayor then delivered the opening address. He said they were about to take part in a meeting
called together for a purpose and with an object which had never previously been before the minds of the
people of the Australian colonies. In a few days they would witness the departure of the first soldiers
Australia had ever sent to the battle-field of the country. It was the greatest event that had ever taken
place in their history, and no greater event could take place hereafter. Fifteen thousand miles from
England, a colony—which contained hundreds of thousands of people who had never seen the old country —
was sending the flower of its people (for the brave men were the flower of them all) to fight for the Empire,
They knew the one prevailing feeling here at this time. They all felt that the occasion was a great one,
and it was not felt here alone, since from one end of England to the other the news of their action had
run like wildfire. The Queen had thanked them, the great General at the head of his troops in Egypt had
thanked them, and the brave soldiers there in the presence of a bloody and treacherous enemy were
waiting to welcome their little band. This was a day never to be forgotten. He would not detain them,
as they were about to be addressed by the first and ablest and most distinguished men in this country.
The Chief Justice of the colony, who would be as great in England as he is here, had come amongst them
to stamp this meeting with his authority, and he was sure they would hear him with respect and admira-
tion. He hoped that when the time came for taking the divisions there would be no confusion to prevent
him from coming to a proper decision. He then called upon Sir James Martin to address the meeting on
the first resolution
Sir James Martin then came forward. He said that he attended the meeting to-night in the character
of a citizen of New South Wales, which his present office did not deprive him of. His friends had
expressed the opinion that he ought not have attended on the platform this evening, because they appre-
hended that in some way or other his appearance at the meeting would partake of a political character.
They all knew how dangerous a political judge might become in any community, while a partisan judge
would be still worse. Those, however, who knew him, and those who were aware of the character of


these gatherings, must know that he would not be open to the objections which his friends thought might
be levelled against his conduct in coming here. (A. voice : “ Australia is not England.”) Independent of
the danger of his being looked upon as a political judge, exception hud been taken at his being present on
the following grounds : It had been said that, practically, the expenditure of money in connection with the
despatch of the troops was unauthorised, and it had been said that action might be taken —in what way he
did not know—because Parliament had not been called together to pass the expenditure, and his friends
thought that possibly some question might thus be raised, which he would have to decide in his official
capacity. He had no such apprehension. An expenditure of this character was one which, to be of any
value, must be dealt with expeditiously. If the Government had waited until they called Parliament
together, and procured from it a vote for the expenditure, the time would have gone by when their inter-
ference would be of any value. There were many occasions for the Government, and for those who were
its leaders, to take upon themselves a very large amount of responsibility. That had been done in this
colony many times already. It had been done repeatedly in the mother country, and only the other day
when the troops were sent off on the receipt of the news of General Gordon’s death to the Soudan, no vote
was obtained for defraying the cost, but the expenditure was incurred in the anticipation of the sanction
of Parliament. Each Government must judge for itself. They must judge when the occasion has arisen
as to what would be the responsibility incurred in spending public money without Parliamentary sanction.
On the present occasion the enthusiasm of the community had been so great and so wonderfully manifest
that there could be no doubt that if Parliament were called together the expenditure would be sanctioned
with acclamation. Telegrams had been received from all parts of the colony expressing the most entire
approval of the steps which had already been taken. Meetings had also been held in various parts of the
colony, and not only had expressions of cordial approval been exhibited, but a significant sympathy had
taken place in the shape of large monetary contributions. Up to the present time something like £30,000
had been subscribed. (Hear, hear, and long continued applause.) It would be unnecessary to read out
the full list of contributions, as they had already been published in the newspapers; but there was one to
which he must invite attention. It was communicated by letter, dated this day, and was from the Com-
missioner of Railways to the Treasurer, and ran thus ; —“Pear Mr. Dibbs : The officers and men of the
Railway Department had a meeting to-day, and decided to contribute as a body to the Patriotic Fund.
It is estimated that the united contributions from the Railway Department will amount to £3,000.”
(Vociferous applause.) The first large subscription was from one of their squatters, Mr. Halliday, who
set an example which had been followed by many other gentlemen, and the contributions were such that
they would be equalled in no other colony. In the other colonies, like expressions of approval had taken
place, and in the mother-country the Secretary for War, Lord Hartington, Lord Roseberry, the General in
command of the troops, and above all Her Majesty the Queen—(applause) —had expressed their approval
of what the colony had done. It could scarcely be said, in the face of this enthusiastic approval here and
in the mother-country, that what the Government had done in incurring this expenditure would be
condemned by their own Parliament. Bearing in mind these facts, he did not think he was going out of
his province to give what little support he could to this movement. A few individuals had indicated their
opposition to what had been done. Every man was no doubt entitled to his opinion, but he questioned
the policy or the wisdom of one or two or half-a-dozen individuals setting themselves up to condemn the
views of the entire community. (Hear, hear, and applause.) There were some persons who had a horror
of the military profession. There were some who thought that they had arrived at that stage when no
force should be maintained either to keep peace amongst themselves or to resist the invasion of others.
He was not one who shared those opinions. No doubt there were some persons of a very philosophic turn
of mind who thought that all persons were amenable to reason, and that nations were not now likely to be
unjust. The immediate cause of the action which had been taken by the Government was not because the
mother-country was at present involved in any danger, but because of the death of General Gordon.
(Hear, hear.) Only a short time since they w'ould have been inclined to think that the heroic days had


gone by, and that they were not likely to hoar of any person whose career would emulate the career of the
heroes of the past; but in General Gordon they had found one who had. From the first,
when General Gordon went to the front in China he had shown that lie was a man stamped
with an heroic spirit —(cries, No, no) —with the most unpromising material. (Confusion.)
He did not know whether those few persons who were endeavouring to create a noise had
attended the meeting as the representatives of those who had been setting themselves up against the
popular feeling of the community. (Applause). To his mind nothing could be more contemptible than the
action of the few who had attended the meeting for the purpose of causing interruption. (Cheers.) If
they could only sift out from the meeting those who were making the noise, he felt confident that they
would be found to be a very insignificant few, and that they would certainly be very much ashamed of
themselves. (Cheers.) General Gordon had been a man stamped with a true heroic spirit. (Cheers.)
With, as he had said before, most {unpromising material—that was to say, Chinese soldiers—General
Gordon put an end to the great Chinese rebellion With troops of no account General Gordon made a
first-class army ; and to show the heroism of the man, when he had saved the Chinese and destroyed the
rebellion and was offered all kinds of honors and also large sums of money, he declined to receive a single
shilling beyond his pay as commander of the troops. That in itself was quite sufficient to show that General
Gordon was a self-denying and the most unselfish man they had ever had any experience of. (Applause.)
After having accomplished such good results with the Chinese, Gordon settled down in the mother country,
and for five or six years devoted himself to the work of relieving the poor and distressed ; he, in fact, acted
as a missionary amongst the poor and needy. (Cheers.) He was after this employed by the Egyptian
Government to go to the Soudan, and subsequently, after Gordon had again returned to the mother country
fresh difficulties arose by the rebellion of Arabi Pasha, and Gordon, after England had taken Alexandria,
and a second rebellion had arisen in the Soudan, was sent out single-handed to put it down. (Cheers.)
Whether it was wise on the part of the English Government to send Gordon out single-handed was
not their business —that would be dealt with elsewhere. (Cheers.) Neither was it anything to do with
them whether the English Government had acted right in leaving Gordon without aid —that they had
nothing to do with. At last, after having been neglected so long, the public feeling of Europe called upon
the British Government to move in the matter, and they did that which they ought to have done months
before. They sent forth a relieving army. Everyone hoped that that army would reach Khartoum.
When the relieving army was within a short distance of Khartoum news of the death of Gordon
was received. It was then that the indignation of the people here and elsewhere arose, and it was in
consequence of the fate which had befell General Gordon that the Government had been set in motion
for the purpose of assisting to retrieve that which had been done. (Cheers.) The mother country was
in no danger as far as could be seen —(applause)—and the small contingent of 750 men from New
South Wales was not really required. For every man sent from here England already had 10,000 men,
and ample means. New South Wales was not giving material aid to the old country, but she was setting
example. (Cries of time, time, and uproar.) The colony had given proof of its readiness. The
example which New South Wales had set to the other colonies—(cheers) —an example which they
were ready to follow—would have its weight not only with the statesmen of England, but also with the
statesmen of the continent of Europe. (Cheers.) It was very strong proof of the fact that when the
necessity arose the Imperial Government could depend upon the assistance of her colonies. (Cheers.) He
had very little more to say to them. They might depend upon it that no amount of small babbling on the
part of an insignificant minority would at all impede the progress or the magnitude of the movement.
(Cheers.) He thought that, considering the large gathering he saw before him, the meeting was an
orderly one, notwithstanding the exclamations of the few who had attended for the purpose of creating a
disturbance, and who were in reality nobody and of no account whatever in the estimation of the
community. They could do nothing which would affect the movement, nor yet have the slightest influence
in their local Parliament. (Cheers.) Should there be found when Parliament met anyone so unpatriotic


as to move a vote of censure, or endeavor to prevent the passing of an Indemnity Act, he believed such
an attempt would be a miserable failure. A majority of the members of both Houses of Parliament were
in accord with the popular feeling of the community. (Cheers.) Independent of this the large number of
contributions which had been handed in, and the enthusiasm of their great meeting was enough in itself
to show what kind of feeling and influence prevailed. The day when the troops of this colony shall
embark for the Soudan will be forever memorable in the history of New South Wales—(cheers) —for on
that day they would raise themselves from colonial to Imperial rank. (Loud applause.) In after times
the story of this movement would be told by many a fireside throughout the wide lands of Australia,
and their children and children’s children would look back with pride upon the action of their fathers in
thus throwing in their lot with the grand old home to which they owed so much. (Applause.) Hitherto
they had been merely tacit sharers in her triumphs ; but now they had shown their readiness to uphold her
renown. (Cheers.) Long might the spirit which was now manifested preserve and strengthen that
Imperial federation—(applause)—which they were about to cement on the battle-field, where they might
well hope that their sons would prove themselves worthy to be the companions in arms of those famous
warriors who had fought and conquered in all lands and on every sea. (Loud applause). He moved :
“ That this meeting endorses the prompt and patriotic action of the Government of this colony in
placing at the disposal of the Imperial Government a contingent of troops for service in Egypt, and accords
its hearty approval of the same.” (Applause.)
Sir Patrick Jennings, in seconding the resolution, said he had come to that meeting to give his small
support—whatever feeble and humble support he was able to give—to the great movement that had
thrilled to the very core the hearts of the people of New South Wales. (Loud applause.) Their hearts
throbbed as one. (Applause.) He would say, with all respect to the few dissentients, that he took
the views of the vast mass of the people there as representing the feeling in the colony. (Applause.)
Those who differed from him had a right to their own opinions, but he was as sure as he was standing on
that platform that the opinions he came to support were the opinions of the great majority of the people
of this colony and of the people of Australia. (Applause.) He thought that meeting owed a debt of
gratitude to His Honor the Chief Justice for casting aside any imaginary barriers which might separate
him, by reason of his position, from the privileges of citizenship, and for showing that he had the courage
to give expression to his views on that occasion. (Applause.) It might be said also that he (the speaker)
as a member of Parliament was premature in giving expression to his opinion upon a question of that sort.
But in a crisis like the present the head had to wait whilst the heart acted, and the heart of New South
Wales had acted—(applause)—and he was sure that no Parliament of this colony would ever refuse to
pass the necessary vote of credit for the expedition. (Loud applause.) The name, the fame, and the death
of Gordon called upon them all to show by their actions their respect for that great man. (Applause.)
They were justified before the whole world in showing their sympathy, and in offering their physical
services, in a way which was not alone to avenge Gordon’s death, but to carry on the cause for which he
had died, (Hear, hear.) Any man with any sympathy for humanity would see that he was honouring his
name, his people, and his country, in assisting to carry out that work—(applause)—and nothing would pre-
vent him (the speaker) from vindicating that great name, to the gain of Australia and of New South Wales
in particular. (Hear, hear.) He was glad that this colony was first in the field—(loud cheers) —not from
any feeling of jealousy against any other colony, but because the obligations and responsibilities were cast
upon the colony of being always first to come forward. (Hear, hear, and applause.) So far the history
of the colony had been a peaceful one, and in following the arts of peace it was Sydney which invited the
nations of the world to come here to the first Australian Exhibition, and which took front rank in that
peaceable and noble attempt. (Applause.) Although it was a great thing to cultivate the arts of peace,
he would say that “the surest way to preserve peace was to be prepared for war.” (Applause.) The
surest way was for the men to gain experience in actual campaign, because it must be evident to any man
that experience gained in the field must be of much greater value than any gained in reviews or sham


fights, and those who have carried the Hag of New South Wales in battle elsewhere would be able to come
back and give the benefit of their valuable experience for (he defence of their own country. (Applause.)
There was one aspect of the case which he wished to put before them. It was not alone that the people
of this colony had come forward at this critical juncture, but they had come forward at a peculiar time, at
a crisis in their own history. (Hear, hear.) They had in the natural course of events, in the very growth
of this empire, been brought to entertain a foreign policy in regard to New Guinea, the Pacific Islands,
and the bill to allow criminals to be transported near our own shores. In the growth of nations like this
one, the time must come when they should have relations with foreign countries, and now that Australia
had been brought prominently before the courts at Paris and Berlin, it was a fine thing for them to be
able to say that they were not alone prepared to take part in the great question of Imperial federation,
which he hoped was to be—(applause)—but they would show, whether they had cause or not, that they
were prepared to take part with the mother country—that they had got the men, they had got the means,
the power and the capacity, to assert themselves in the face of the whole world. (Applause.) It was
quite competent for England to carry on this war without a shilling from New South Wales, but this
colony’s offer was a generous thing, and showed goodwill to the old mother country. (Applause.) He
believed that this little gift of a few men would strike a chord that would make the heart of every
patriotic citizen vibrate with hope for the future welfare of the Australian colonies. (Hear, hear, and
applause.) There were some few people who objected to this colony sending 500 men to the Soudan,
but already there were Australians in that very career of conquest on the Upper Nile. Notably one
Sydney citizen, one Australian had fallen, and was a martyr to the great cause for which General Gordon
died. (Hear, hear.) They had to lament the death of brave men like Colonel Burnaby and Colonel
Stewart, and one also out of their own city of Sydney—Robert Ooveny. (Cheers.) He, as an Australian,
had carried his flag to the front, as he (Sir Patrick Jennings) hoped and believed the New South Wales
contingent were going to do. (Continued applause.) Whatever might be their labour, whatever might be
the portion of the war which our soldiers would be given to do, it must be remembered that all parts taken
in a war of that sorb would be equally honourable. (Cheers.) It had been said that our men would be
put on duty to defend the making of a railway line. Well, he thought that was one of the most dangerous
parts to take in the war, because every person knew the nature of the country between the Arabian Gulf,
Suakim, and the Nile, and the great danger men employed in that way were exposed to was being picked
off; and, therefore, by occupying those posts, they would incur the greatest danger. We ought not to
cavil or to carp with what is done, but to feel assured that our men would sustain our reputation for
courage, and that they would show the same steady determination, whether in front of the battle or
wherever they might be. (Cheers.) He congratulated New South Wales on the action taken by the
Government. He was there to approve it, he was there to endorse it—in Parliament as a member, out of
Parliament as a private citizen. (Applause.) All up and down the colony—wherever he might go,
wherever he might have an opportunity of delivering his sentiments, he would speak of their wise, noble,
and generous act, and that their action and our action—because he knew those present at the meeting
would be almost unanimous—had thrown imperishable glory not alone on the Administration, but equally
on the people, and that it would always form an epoch—we being now nearly upon the hundredth year
of our history—the starting-point in a new history for New South Wales. (Loud cheers.)
The Chairman then took a vote with respect to the resolution, for which quite a forest of hands was
held up amid much cheering. He declared that the resolution had been carried, and the announcement
was received with loud cheering.
Mr. H. S. Badgery, M.L.A., said he felt very highly honoured in being asked to come there that
evening, not only because he was addressing the largest meeting of his countrymen ever held within any
hall in this city, but because he was in the company of many gentlemen who held high positions in this
colony and because those gentlemen filled their positions with honour to themselves and credit to this
colony. He felt a particular pride in being there that night, because his ancestors dated back to the


last century, and this was the first meeting which had ever been held in connection with war. (Great
applause.) The resolution which he had the honour to move was a very simple one. It was merely to
the effect that the Mayor, on behalf of this meeting, convey to the Government the resolution which had
been carried by that vast assemblage. (Immense cheering.) It would be gratifying to the Government,
as it would be to those present at that meeting, to know that they had carried that resolution. (Renewed
cheering.) He hoped that in the action they were taking now, and in any action they might take subse-
quently, there would be no feeling of jealousy created between this and the sister colonies. (Applause.)
At the same time we could not help feeling pride at the manner in which the offer had been made, and the
manner in which the offer was accepted, and we could not refrain from manifesting our pleasure at the
promptitude with which all matters connected with the expedition are being carried out. By our action
in that respect we would show the world that we were capable of carrying out movements of a most impor-
tant character at a moment’s notice. Nothing could be more praiseworthy than the way in which the offer
Avas made. He did not think there was a man, woman, or child in the community Avho, Avhen the offer had
been made public, was not delighted to his or her heart’s core. (Great cheering.) He did not think
there Avas a well-wisher of the colony who Avas not so affected. He did not care for those who did not
Avish Avell to the colony. We showed to the world that though Ave were distant some thousands of miles
from the mother country, that although a large proportion of the population had been born here, that avc
Avere just as loyal as those who came out here from under the old flag—(cheers)—and Ave proved that the
young people lost none of the pluck and loyalty which had ahvays been the characteristics of their pro-
genitors. (Loud cheers.) That Avas exactly what we Avanted to show. Hoav could he help feeling proud
when our countrymen Avere about to go into the field of battle ? He trusted we could all unite in a feeling
of pride at seeing our soldiers go. It would cement the people in this community of all classes and creeds
in one common feeling. It Avould show the Avorld, at anyrate, that we Avere ready to act at a moment’s
notice, that although Ave Avere living so far away,
“ Though here we may roam as we will,
The red cross of old England flies o’er us still.”
(Applause.) Well, he did not think anyone had ever seen in this colony greater enthusiasm than has
prevailed throughout the present movement. It was not as if we were asked to do Avhat Ave had under-
taken to do. We were never asked to render any service, but the offer was a thoroughly spontaneous one.
We had had the thanks of the United Kingdom from the Queen, and other nations of the Avorld must have
looked on Avith approval. A few Australians had served with the army of Great Britain, and they had
good records, because they would be in the front. (Loud applause.) He believed that natives of this
country mingled their blood with the veterans in the Crimea ; and hoav avc had reason to regret the death
of a hero who Avas a native of Sydney. (Applause.) We were told that this Avas no Avar betAveen Great
Britain and any other great Power ; but why should we ask what Avas the cause of it ? Our action on this
occasion would give the whole world an insight into the heart of Australia. It Avas Avith the utmost
delight that he would see our brave fellows leaving the colony for Africa. (Cheers.) He could not help
feeling gratified at this meeting, at being allowed to address them, and at the hearing they had given him.
Whatever little opposition against the movement might exist hoav, it Avould be swept aAvay by the great
Avave of public feeling that had arisen throughout the colony—(cheers)—and Avhenever there Avas such a
movement throughout the colonies as this, he hoped we Avould be as united as Ave Avere uoav, and that the
men avlio were going would be no disgrace to us. He had the honour to propose “ That the Mayor, on
behalf of this meeting, convey to the Government the foregoing resolution.” (Enthusiastic applause.)
Mr. Henry Copeland, M.L.A., Avho seconded the resolution, said it afforded him great pleasure to
have the distinguished honour of addressing them that evening. He thought that this was an evening
that any man present must remember to the last day of his life. He thought that he might claim to have
been one of the very first to have congratulated the Acting Colonial Secretary on his action in proffering
aid to the mother country. (Loud applause.) He did not Avait to see which Avay the cat jumped before


he gave utterance to his opinion on the matter, but he immediately sent Mr. Dailey a telegram from one
of the railway stations, at the same time cautioning him as to the constitutional difficulty which might arise
from what the Government had done, lie thought then, and still thought, that it was the duty of the
Government to call Parliament together—(applause) —so as to obtain Parliamentary sanction to what they
did, within a few days of the departure of our little army. Let us see their backs, and then it would be
time enough for the Parliament of this country, under the peculiar circumstances of the case, to give an
expression of its opinion. (Applause.) A difficulty had arisen which seldom occurred in a country of
this kind. Had Parliament been sitting, no Government would have dared to have adopted such a course
as the one they had resorted to without previously taking the opinion of Parliament, but under the circum-
stances the aid had to be proffered at once or not at all —(applause)—and he felt sure that when the
Government called Parliament together, their action would be endorsed by an overwhelming majority.
He spoke to Australians, and he would ask them if they would cover Australia with everlasting shame
and disgrace. (Cries of “No, no.”) Rightly or wrongly this offer had been made and published to the
wide world, and he asked them if they wished to play into the hands of the enemies of Great Britain ?
(Cries of “ No, no.”) Would anybody think of rejecting a vote in confirmation of the action of the
Government? (Loud applause.) What would be said if in this vast dominion 500 or 600 loyal men
could not be found to fight the battle of the mother country ? There were some people who within the
last day or two had published the doctrine that we had no right to send our few men abroad. He would
ask them, —he would ask these men—if they were still British—(cries of “Yes 7 ’) —or had their British
blood turned to water in one generation? (Loud cheers.) Had their forefathers followed the tactics these
men were advocating, would we ever have had a magnificent country like Australia to call our own ? He
said we could spare this contingent of our men, and that those left behind would be able, in case of
necessity, to defend themselves. If the necessity should arise, and those left behind should have to clear
for action, depend upon it they could give Sir Henry Parkes and all his followers ample time. If any
necessity should arise, they would undertake to send all the old women to the Blue Mountains, with
Sir Henry Parkes at the head of them. In endeavouring to throw cold water on this movement, these
people had shown that the Australian contingent would not have the opportunity of taking part in
whatever engagement might be fought in Egypt, but he ventured to say that our New South
Welshmen, if they had the opportunity, would fight as well as any soldiers under the British banners.
Give them the opportunity of fighting, and they would fight well, and no soldier could do more than that.
(Hearty applause.) He thought that it was the duty of this country to take a wider view of
questions than the mere fact of having sent 500 or 600 men to the front. He thought that
the action of this Government would convince all the Powers of Europe that in future the
population of Great Britain must be counted as 48 millions instead of as heretofore 36 millions,
and the colonies would no longer be looked upon as a drag on the Empire. (Cheers.) We wanted to show
the nations of the world that, as well as the Russian Eagle, and the German Imperial Eagle, there was
also an Australian Eagle; and he was sure that our men, when once they got to the front, would do as
good service as any. He, for one, looked upon this question from a much broader standpoint than that
enunciated by the previous speakers. In addition to avenging the death of our illustrious countryman,
Gordon, we had a much wider duty to perform —that of taking upon ourselves our fair share of the respon-
sibilities of the Empire. He had much pleasure in seconding the resolution.
The Chairman put the resolution to the meeting, and declared it carried.
The Hon. Edmund Barton then came forward and said : The resolution which I have to propose is
one which no one who has any sense of shame will object to. It is a resolution in favour of the poor and
afflicted, and I am sure that everyone who is not animated by the spirit of a coward will listen to what I
have to say, The resolution is:—That by way of manifesting the undoubted loyalty of the Australian
colonies to the Crown and the integrity of the Empire, and of strengthening the hands of the Government
of this colony, a fund be opened, to be styled the New South Wales Patriotic Fund, such fund to be for


the assistance of the wives and families of the members of the force who embark, and for the relief of the
widows and orphans of those who may fall in battle, or die daring the campaign.” Who is there among you
who will not support the widow and orphan ? I draw a great distinction between this resolution and those
which have been dealt with as to the policy of the Government, taking them as carried, seeing that the
chairman has pronounced them to be so. (Cheers and uproar.) I abide by the judgment of the chairman
that the meeting has dealt with the policy of the Government, as a Government ; I put that aside. I ask
you, whatever your opinions may be as to the policy of sending the troops to Egypt, not to deny to the
wives and children of your fellow colonists, who are leaving us, that sustenance which is owing to them.
(Cheers.) If there is that patriotic feeling among you which a citizen feels when he undertakes to defend
the lives of his fellow-citizens, I think you will consider this resolution one which should commend itself to
you. Regarding this as a meeting of citizens, I claim, as a citizen, the right to express my opinion. (A
voice : Why did you put down the other man ?) 1 had no hand in putting down the other man, and any
man who has the spirit of fair-play in him, without which he can never be a soldier, will hear me now. I
ask, is this a question between the Government of this colony and the Government of England ? Is it not
a question between the people of this colony and the English nation? It is not a question between this and
any Gen eminent. (No, no). Probably there is not a man in this assembly who has any fascination for
the foreign or colonial policy of England. This enterprise has the heart of the great English nation with
it, and I want to know whether we want to consider ourselves English or not ? Do not be carried away
by any spurious or idle cry that England does not want our help. If her quarrels are not to be ours, when
are our quarrels to be hers ? (Cheers). When the time of trouble comes and we do not stand shoulder to
shoulder with our fellow-subjects of Great Britain can we expect them to do so for us? Is the good old
country always to be succouring us and not to expect succour from us? What craven cry is this that whilst
we are fruitful we will do nothing for the Empire, but when we are unfruitful we want all its resources?
I want to ask you whether we regard ourselves as a portion of the English nation, or as mere hewers of
wood and drawers of water ? (Cheers.) If we are going to do the former we will rally round the old flag,
and we will recollect that the cause of the Empire is our own (Cheers.) We will enter into no abstruse
question as to whether this particular course of action is sound, but when we find that the heart of the
nation is in it, we will say we are part of the nation. When Gordon was alive did we approve of this
quarrel, or did we not? Did Gordon call for help himself? That man never called for help for himself.
(Cheers). He called for help for the weak and the suffering, and for the brave Soudanese who were
assisting him. He called for help for those in distress, and because he called for it when alive, are we "ohm
to deny it to the nation who asks for it ? What poltroonery is that animates those poor hissers ? Are we
a nation of men, or a nation of hissers like these ? I take it that this cause is that pronounced among us to
be the cause of the Empire. We thought it just when Gordon was alive, and we think it juster now.
(Cheers.) Are we to enter upon this matter and let it be known, not only to the people of Australia, but
to the whole world, that we belong to the greatest Empire the sun has ever risen on. (Cheers.) We
know that the campaign cannot be conducted without loss, and that some will fill untimely graves, and are
we going to let their families be charity children ? We know of “ the widow’s tears, the orphan’s cares,
the dead men’s blood, the pining maiden’s groans, for husbands, fathers, and betrothed lovers that shall
be swallowed up in this controversy,” Are not these brothers of ours, blood of our blood, who are going
to fight this battle? And what are we going to do for them? Ido not believe there is a coward
here who is going to button up his breeches pocket because he does not agree with the policy
of sending the troops. If there is such a man here, show him up, and let us have a look at him.
(Laughter.) It is good for us that these men are few. If you are high-minded men, then in the words of
Henry Y., one of our greatest kings, “If we are marked to die, we are enough to do our country loss and
if to live, the fewer men, the greater share of honours.” Now, could they for an instant resist the humanity
and patriotism of that resolution? (Cheers, and “No, no.”) Show him the man who said that the country from
which he sprang was not worth a shake of the hand, and he would wring from that man a contribution to


show that, although he was mean, he was not so mean as to disregard the orphan and the widow. (Cheers.)
He asked them to give their approval of the resolution. (Cheers.)
The Hon. George Thornton said that in seconding the resolution, which had been so fully and so ably
put to them by the Honourable the Speaker, he did not feel it necessary to make a selection of words or
a construction of nice sentences, to ensure a ready acceptance by the great majority of those persons who
had assembled there that evening, of the principles involved in the resolution. He felt certain, were it
possible for him to address the whole of the people of New South Wales—aye, even the whole of the
people of Australia—there would be a very general and hearty response in favour of the movement —
(cheers) —a movement which showed, if needful to show, that the Australians, whether native-born or
those who have made this the land of their adoption, had not, by being born here, or living here, lost their
nationality —(cheers) —nor even the smallest portion of their true loyalty. (Cheers.) It appeared to him
that the Australian colonies felt an irrepressible desire, with one whole and big heart and voice, to express
their deep and earnest sympathy with the dear old mother-country—(cheers) —in her efforts to assert and
maintain her dignity, and to avenge the foul wrong, the national calamity and loss in the brutal and
fiendish murder of one of her noblest sons—the late General Gordon. (Cheers.) And it was this sad
event, he took it, which had so fully aroused our indignation and our desire to assist in avenging it. All
honour to the groat mind and heart which has conceived and prompted this movement ! (Cheers.) All
honour to those brave fellows who were banding together to carry it into effect —all honour to those who
co-operated for those especial objects ! (Cheers.) He trusted, and did not doubt, every wise and liberal
provision would be made for the health and comfort, and, as far as practicable, the protection of the brave
men who had volunteered for this risky service, as also every possible arrangement for the care and
protection of those women and families who might be compelled to be left behind by husbands and parents.
He felt sure the men who might serve in the cause would earn a reputation in honour for themselves and
their country, and any duties they might be called upon to perform would be well and bravely done.
(Cheers.)
Mr. R. B. Smith, who was received with cheers, said, that in supporting the resolution which had
been so eloquently submitted to them, he might be permitted to preface the few observations he intended
to make by referring to the general practical patriotism which had always animated the breasts of the
native-born of the colony —(cheers) —and the vigorous growth of public opinion of late years in our attach-
ment to the Throne and Constitution of old England—(cheers)—or in our affectionate loyalty to the
gracious Sovereign who ruled over the destinies of the Empire. (Cheers.) We were in heart, soul, and
intellect devoted in our allegiance as men living in either England, Scotland, or Ireland. (Cheers.) Has
not the enthusiasm which a call to assist Great Britain in her hour of need evoked, demonstrated the purity
as well as the intensity of our loyalty. But while we rejoiced, nay, exulted, in the spirit which animated
the members of the New South Wales contingent about to embark for the Soudan—(Cheers) —we should
not forget that most, if not all, of them left behind them “hostages to fortune” in the shape of wives and
children, or of fathers, mothers, sisters, or other tender ties. They are now in some sense the wards of
the colony, and those present were amongst the numbers of their guardians. (Cheers.) It was on that
fundamental principle —that sense of moral responsibility—that the establishment of the Patriotic Fund
was based. Those who could not share in the glory or the labours and dangers of our noble and brave volun-
teers could at least prove the sincerity of their opinions by taking such steps as would mitigate anxiety in
the minds of those who went forth to the field of warfare. It was almost an insult to the patriotic
instincts and aspirations of the colony to make any pathetic appeal to its sympathies on an occasion like
the present. He was convinced they would accept it as a duty, and would do all they could to make the
Patriotic Fund a magnificent success. (Cheers.) Animated by those sentiments, he most cordially sup-
ported the resolution, perfectly convinced that its ultimate result would be one of the most praiseworthy
occurrences in the annals of Australia. (Cheers.)
The resolution was put and carried.


Ihe Chairman announced the receipt of the following subscriptions:—The warders of the Goulburn
Gaol, one clay’s pay each, equal to £2O ; Hon. Sir John Hay, £100; Sir Patrick Jennings, £100; Mr. S.
W. Gray, £100; Hon. E. Barton, 80 guineas; Sir G. Wigram Allen, £500; Farmer and Co., £250;
Mr. W. Wiley, Wollongong, £5O; Mr. Charles Bushell, £lO annually.
Mi. Thomas Robertson said they had heard a great deal about painted soldiers, but anyone could see
that that question was only one of satire when applied to our soldiers. It was intended to imply that all
that was warlike about them was the red coats they wore. Now when our volunteers were ready to rush
into all the horrors and dangers of war, they could no longer be called painted soldiers. (Cheers.) Every
olunteer in the city had seemed to be an inch taller since this matter began. Whatever doubts he might
ha\e had about them when he saw them on the parade ground, he had now the fullest confidence in them
that they would do what they were required to do. It might be extremely difficult to defen d the action of
the Government in this matter—(hear, hear) —it had arisen from motives so high that they must be
regarded as heroic, or nothing at all. There were very few men who could appreciate the heroic. If such
were not the case there would be more men wearing the Victoria Cross on their breasts to-day than there
were. There were very few men who were prepared to lay down their lives for others. Some of them, if
they were in the place of Quintus Ourtius, would think twice about throwing away their lives and sacri-
ficing a valuable horse. He was certain that some of their men could not be countrymen of Shakspeare,
or, if they were and they had read “ The Merchant of Venice,” they would never have agreed with Antonio
in becoming bondsman for Bassanio. They would have advised Antonio to consult his family solicitor,
and let Bassanio file his schedule. They could not see the beauty of it, for there was no money to be
made out of it. I hey knew that the march from Suakim to Berber would be no idle promenade, and that
the majority of these men were going forth to die. They looked upon it as a joke, but he scorned such
men. He then moved that a committee consisting of Messrs. Broomfield, F. Bennett. J. Bennett,
Badgery, J. R. Fairfax, Goodlet, Hutchinson, J. Hardy, Heselton, A. A. Jacob, G. A. Lloyd, R. B. Smith,
Macintosh, R. B. Wilkinson, McMillan, W. P. Manning, Playfair, Sir Patrick Jennings, Geo. M. Pitt,
Dr. Donovan, LL.D., G. Pile, J. Pope, T. Robertson, J. Walsh, W. Neild, and S. W. Gray, with power to
add to their number, be formed to receive contributions, and to administer such fund, and that Messrs,
J. R. Fairfax and J. Pope be the honorary treasurers to the fund,”
Mr. G. Pile seconded the motion. He said that if the Government had waited until Parliament had
been convoked before deciding on this expedition, they would have been too late.
The Chairman then put the resolution to the meeting, and it was carried by an overwhelming
majority.
The proceedings terminated with cheers for the Chairman and the Queen.
MINISTERIAL UTTERANCES.
During the time that matters relating to the dispatch of the Contingent were under discussion,
members of the Ministry spoke in various places about the country on the policy of the Government on
the question. The most noteworthy of these deliverences were, of course, the speeches of the Attorney
General and Acting Colonial Secretary, the initiator of the movement; and this, not alone because of his
attitude before the country as its responsible author, but also on account of the brilliancy and verve which
characterise the speeches themselves. The first of these was that delivered by
MR. DAL LEY AT ORANGE,
on the occasion of the Ministerial visit to that town, February 27, 1885. At the conclusion of his response
to the toast of “ The Ministry,” he made the following reference to the events which were then exciting
the liveliest interest of the country: —“You will, I am sure, scarcely expect that I should sit down without


saying something of an act which lias recently sent a thrill not only through our own country, but through-
out the English-speaking peoples of the world—throughout all ranks and conditions, from the Gracious
Lady who rules our Empire, to the humblest mother who has given God’s highest gift to her heart, her
children, as soldiers to the nation. (Loud cheers.) You know me too well to suppose that I would or
could for a moment indulge in the sinful and in the despicable vanity of supposing that I am entitled to
the least merit, to the smallest distinction, in availing myself of the accident of my position, which enabled
me to express to England the thought of this noble Australian people. (Prolonged cheering.) Any man
in my place would have done all that I did—(hear, hear) —and I have done it as promptly and as effectively
as I could. (Applause.) There was no subtle insight into, no learned interpretration of popular feeling
required. It was no work of genius or rare patriotism, or sacrifice or peril. It was a simple act of duty
done at the right time and under the right circumstances. (Renewed applause.) I have been spoken of
as one deserving great praise for its performance. (Hear, hear.) I feel only ashamed of this entirely
undeserved eulogy. I knew well what would be the instant consequence of the act, but the glory of this
rightly belongs to others. (Hear, hear.)
Jt is the people who have shown to the world within a week or two the glorious unity of the Empire
—(applause)—the force and capacity of sacrifice of its most remote dependencies ; that its armies are to be
found wherever its colonies are planted—(cheers)—and that in moments of peril or reverse millions of
armed men would rally round and uphold its standard. (Prolonged cheering.) True it is that our means
of testifying our devotion are but limited ; but multiply our contributions by the numbers and resources
and patriotism of the dependencies of England and you have an army great and chivalrous enough to
stand with calmness and dignity before the Empires of the world. (Renewed cheering.) It is not in
what may be actually accomplished by our small and noble band, whose enrolment and service unfold a
new page in the glorious volume of Imperial history ; it is not what they may do, but what their enrol-
ment and service teach to the world. (Hear, hear.) There were those who thought that the colonies of
England were her weaknesses; that in great struggles the nation would feel them as helpless children
clinging to her neck, and enfeebling the strong arms of the parent fighting for the sacredness of the
hearth; that their protection would imperil the full exercise of Imperial strength. Such alarms and
apprehensions can no longer exist. The colonies are the camps and barracks of Imperial forces ready to
die for the Empire wherever the foe may be found. This is the lesson we have, by a singular privilege
vouchsafed to us, been enabled to teach the world. (Hear, hear.) What a spectacle this colony has
presented during the last two weeks! Among living public men of influence of all kinds of opinions
there has not been a dissentient voice. (Applause.) Differences, both those odious and abominable ones,
of sect and nation, and those harmless ones, of prejudice and opinion, have been forgotten. (Hear, hear.)
Enmities have been extinguished. Rivalries, save in holy patriotism, thrown to the winds. The law of
sacrifice and service has been adopted as the only rule of public conduct. What a noble national discipline
for ourselves! In a great modern book by a great scholar and a great teacher, himself a man of peace,
of pity, and tenderness and love incomparable, he writes his hope for his nation, then, as he thought—and
thought rightly as it proved—falling back in renown. And what was the hope of this cloistered scholar ?
It was in his own words— ‘ The sentiment of military honour ever renewed by our heroic traditions.’
‘ Many a one,’ he wisely says, ‘at the moment of fainting stops short, without knowing why, because he
feels upon his face the invisible spirit of the heroes of our wars, the breath of the old flag.’ It is only, he
says, among those who hold that flag aloft, whose bayonets are gleaming without spot, that strength and
mind, valour and right, those two blessings separated throughout the earth, go hand in hand. These are
his words ( Every time,’ he says, ‘ I see these young soldiers pass my heart bounds within me, and I
pray that nothing may darken that glory, impenetrable to every eye, now hovering above them.’
Gentlemen, I have said advisedly that no living voice has dissented from our national movement. But the
trumpet of war has awakened the dead—has blown its shrill blast through the cemeteries like that awaken-
ing one in the Dies Irce. Tuba viiruvi spargens sonuin j)er sejmlchra regionum. And the voice of one


who speaks to us from a sepulchre, which he selected for himself, and which he ought, 1 think, to peacefully
occupy, and not be perpetually leaving to frighten us, has come to us from below. (Applause and
laughter.) He regards our patriotism as illegal, and our enthusiasm as unconstitutional. And he asks us
to consider what he did under similar circumstances when he was in the flesh, and ruled over us. 1 know
well what he did; and I very deliberately resolved that, although the circumstances to which he referred
were in no respect similar —nay, were utterly dissimilar—his course of action was one to be scrupulously and
most carefully avoided. (Cheers.) Gentlemen, when on Tuesday next our humble contribution to the
chivalry of the Empire leaves our shores it ought to be accompanied with the benedictions and the best
wishes of every man, woman, and child in the country. (Hear, hear.) Fortunate indeed are the heroic
men themselves, upon whom the eyes of Englishmen, Irishmen, and Scotchmen all over the world are
fixed in admiration, in hope, and sympathy. The day of their departure will be the first in our heroic
history. I shall take care that no material aid will be wanting to invest it with all the circumstances of a
national festival, and with all the grandeur of an historical epoch. (Cheers.) For the rest the soul of the
people will be with these most favoured soldiers in their glorious work. The grandest poet of our times
was he who, meditating on warlike perils, and on the mightiness of his nation, said—
. . . ‘ Winds blow and waters roll,
Strength to the brave and power and Deity,
Yet in themselves are nothing ! One decree
Spake laws to them, and said that by the soul
Only the nations shall be great and free.’ ”
(Prolonged applause.)
AT DUBBO
A banquet was tendered to Sir Patrick Alfred Jennings by his constituents, March 15, in the presence
of several members of the Ministry. In response to the toast of the Ministry, Mr. Dailey spoke as follows :
“ You are aware that I have accepted your invitation to dinner under peculiar circumstances. But a few
hours will intervene between this festival and the threatened Parliamentary impeachment of myself and
all my colleagues —(no, no) —except my most fortunate friend, the Premier, who is providentially recruiting
himself at the hot lakes of New Zealand. Quiet, respectable, hospitable, country gentlemen like your-
selves are necessarily unequal to the violent imaginative effect of realising the sensations of a gentleman
publicly dining so near to the period when banquets are no longer of any care or consequence to him, and
can interest him no more. But it may be that, owing to unconquerable levity of nature, I have not that
seriousness which befits this occasion, and I am incapable of acting apprehension and disturbing your con-
viviality. I confess that I lately have felt now and then that someone must suffer for the magnificent and
prevailing enthusiasm (flashing like an electric spark as it went through the community), but I did not
realise that I was the man. (Applause.) I knew, of course, in the words of one of the greatest of men,
that
1 When pride mounts high
The watcher’s axe is nigh.’
But then I was conscious of no pride except that which was inspired by actions of unexampled nobleness
on the part of others. I little thought that in working night and day, with only one prospect of a not very
remote reward in the unattractive form of a public funeral—(laughter) —that I might even have that
melancholy gratification anticipated by a more imposing and less tranquil scene ; that I was a traitor
instead of a patriot—(no, no)— a violator of the Constitution in place of a loyal subject, and that impeach-
ment, not public gratitude, was the wages I was earning by labours never before surpassed in the public
service of this country. (Applause.) I could not realise all this. I can hardly do it now. And that is
perhaps the reason why I am here at this moment, squandering in sinless amusement hours which should
be more profitably employed in an examination of conscience, and in the settlement of those ailairs which
lie outside the consolations of physicians and the skill of attorneys. Gentlemen, what Ims been our offence ?


We have awakened in these Australian colonies an enthusiasm of sacrifice, of heroism—(hear, hear) —of all
the nobler qualities which are to the loftier national life what the immortal soul is to the perishable body
of humanity. We have lifted up remote colonies to equal companionship of chivalrous nations. We
have fixed the admiring eyes of the whole world upon ourselves. (Applause).
These are acts not usually, as you arc aware, affected by laws passed by the Governor by and with
the advice of both Houses of Parliament. They are sometimes done by straining the powers of statutes;
sometimes even by failing to find strict constitutional authority for the actions. Well, gentlemen, what
else have we accomplished by this action? We have shown to the world that in a sense, and with a
meaning of sacred patriotism, the watchword of disloyalty is the very motto of our devotion —that
England’s difficulty is our opportunity —(hear, hear) —that we have watched and waited for the moment
when we could aid, however humbly, that Empire which, after all, is the guardian and depository of the
noblest form of constitutional freedom that the world has ever seen. We have acted from the ambition to
stand before the world as a part of the great brotherhood of freedom, and under the inspiration of that
weighty Norse proverb, which says, “Bare is back without brother behind it.” Will there ever again be
any justifiable ground for the apprehension of even the feeblest believer in the loyalty of the colonies that
we are insensible to the honour of England —(Never) —unequal to sacrifices for its protection, and prepared
to face all perils for its maintainence ? Words, however eloquent, could never have accomplished this.
The costly receptions of princes, the shoutings of after-dinner loyalty at the name of the Queen, the pro-
fessions of readiness to die for the nation when there is no peril and no need of martyrs —these things are
of small account, and prove little beyond a harmless enthusiasm. The same things may be done by men
who would shrink from a single act of self-denial, and who are without the capacity for measuring the
sublime unselfishness and love of heroic patriotism. (Hear, hear.) But when men and women give their
gold without stint—their precious sympathies and prayers—their services and their lives, and give with
gladness and with thankfulness at the privilege of giving—when they renounce the gratifications of life
with the alacrity of men who are abandoning its vexations, and march to do battle in a distant land with
eagerness and an exulting happiness, their loyalty has a meaning which all the world can understand and
admire. (Loud applause.) This is what we have shown to the world by our action. As I have said
elsewhere, the statesmen who contemplate the disturbance of the world’s peace will from this time not
limit their calculations, so far as England is concerned, to her ironclads and her armies. They will con-
sider the rapidly increasing millions of her colonial subjects, their boundless resources of all forms of
material wealth, their capacity of swift and effective organisations for purposes of offence as well as
of defence, and above all their triumphant resolve to stand by the Great Empire in her troubles, and to
spend and be spent in her service. (Cheers.) No ill-considered and uncalculated wars will be engaged in
by even the most reckless of military despots ; and our joyful sacrifices will aid the cause of peace.
Gentlemen, you will not think for a moment that I am speaking as if this would be the instant conse-
quence of our single act in this colony. But you know that that which we were by our promptitude
enabled to accomplish the other great Australian colonics were most anxious so assist. The great neigh-
bouring colony of Victoria felt as deeply, aspired as nobly, was as capable of sacrifice and devotion, as
ourselves. Nothing could possibly have been more honourable and gratifying than the conduct of its
Government and people toward ourselves. They have covered us with congratulations, even as our own
citizens covered our departing soldiers with flowers in the streets of the city as they marched to the ships.
Their Governor sent a last touching message of sympathy and admiration, which was read to our men at
the very moment of embarkation. Their Premier did the same in language of heartfelt enthusiasm, which
I caused to be sent after the men to Adelaide. Had an Australian Contingent been accepted (of which I
should have been proud if it were practicable), we could have sent a force of as many thousands as we
sent hundreds. (Loud and continued applause.) And this is but the advance guard of a glorious Imperial
Federation. They will go on, and men will know what force is behind and is upon its march to the front.
I have spoken of the sympathy of Victoria. It was manifested in another form Several of the members


of the Contingent came from that colony to join it—(hear, hear) —and hundreds applied who could not be
accepted. Only a few hours before the embarkation a young and accomplished officer, who had served
with distinction in the Imperial Army, arrived from Melbourne and begged to be permitted to
accompany the force as a private soldier. Our action has immediately drawn the colonies more
closely together. We feel the value of interchanged sympathies and the force of united effort.
We owe our acceptance of service not to a belief in our greater loyalty, but to the fact that we were ready at
a few week’s notice to embark. Our readiness has been, as you are aware, charged against us as an offence.
In sending help to England we have, as it would appear, violated the Constitution. (No, no.) In stimu-
lating heroism we have incurred the penalties of criminal offenders. It has been suggested that if I had a
right view of my official duties and relations, I ought, as Attorney-General, to file a bill against myself as
Acting Colonial Secretary. (Laughter.) In helping the Queen’s cause, we have been accused of making
war upon foreign countries without the sanction of Parliament. And a number of other charges have
been preferred against us of a similar character. Gentlemen, in sending military assistance to England in
a foreign country, we were perfectly well aware that we were straining the powers of local provision made
for our own defence; but we resolved as members of the Empire, we were defending ourselves and all most
dear to us, just as much in Egypt as if the common enemy menaced us in this colony. (Cheers.) The
Queen’s enemies were ours wherever they were, and this lesson, which we are now teaching those who are
incapable of appreciating it, they may some day understand in their own persons. Their argument pushed
to its legitimate extreme would prevent us if a hostile force menaced Melbourne to-morrow from sending a
single man or gun to save the capital until we had summoned Parliament to authorise us—altered our law
—and obtained the necessary provision from the public Treasury, and the regular constitutional authori-
sation. The noble city of a neighbouring colony might be in flames while we were drawing up proclama-
tions, amending defective laws, and pursuing a strictly Parliamentary course of procedure. Gentlemen,
we prefer, thank God ! slight constitutional improprieties to the abandonment of duty, the neglect of great
opportunities, and the glory of giving noble examples. (Applause.) We have received historical warning
from the times of the Stuarts and the fate of their upholders. One lives and learns and sees history under
new and strange and bewildering lights \ but I was not before aware that that ill-starred race, and its
romantic and desperate adherents, perished on the scaffold from their devotion to the glory of England,
their pride in her freedom, their sympathy with her people, their hatred of her enemies. These were not
the lessons taught in our earlier days. Gentlemen, who are with us, and who are against us? The first,
the ablest, the most patriotic, the most cultivated men in the colony are with us. The great body of the
working-men of the country is with us. (Hear, hear.) This I say advisedly, and with a thorough
knowledge. Nobody in the country knows them better than I do, is prouder of their support and confi-
dence, has deeper sympathies with them ; and £ shall dare to say no man in this country has more of their
genuine attachment than it is my great distinction to possess, and which, I may remark, is the highest
distinction which I prize. Who are against us ? Those, in the first place, who would have disposed of
their souls (if purchasers for such extremely damaged articles could have been obtained in an overstocked
market of such commodities), for the conception of our idea, and the means of giving it effect; those who
hate a generous action, and those who see and feel in a nobler and purer public spiiit, the death-blow
given to fashions and intrigues; these are our enemies; but they are those also of the Empire. They
deride our brave Australian troops; but they would mock also the chivalry of the Guards. They hold up
our service to scorn j and ourselves to insult. Gentlemen, their day is past (hear, hear) and a brighter
and more auspicious one is dawning for peace, and freedom, and glory. We are ambitious of the sympathies
of great names and sovereign natures; for, as Hood beautifully says in his dedication of a poem to Cole-
ridge, when
‘ We gain applause from the great in name,
We seem to be partakers of their fame.’ ”
On the conclusion of Mr. Dailey’s speech the company rose en masse and cheered him.


AT GRAFTON,
On April 13 th, some of the members of the Ministry were entertained by the electors of Grafton
and the Clarence. In replying to the toast of “ The Ministry,” Mr. Dailey spoke as follows : “ I
must, at the risk of trespassing on your indulgence, and diverting your attention for a few moments
from those who are more immediately the objects of your hospitality, say something on a question that is
stirring, and has stirred our hearts to their depths. Gentlemen, it would be impossible for me to come
here at this time and hold my peace concerning a recent transaction which has altered for ever our rela-
tions with the world. (Cheers.) For on the day when our troops —that small army which was enrolled,
organised, equipped, and despatched from our shores in less than three weeks—took their departure, those
Australian colonies occupied in the eyes of all men a new position ; their resources and value were
revealed as by a sudden flash to eyes which would never have pored over our statistics of national growth,
or speculated over blue-books on our swift national development. That sentiment of readiness to cheer-
fully suffer and gladly die for the honour and the unity of the Empire which men had supposed to have
become enfeebled by time and distance and division of authority, by want of sympathy at home and a
growing sense of independence abroad, by a selfish care for our own security and a loosening of the bonds
of sympathy : was found to be strong as love and life itself—(cheers) —and the glorious vitality of this
sentiment is to the life of an Empire worth more than battalions of armed men. I have said elsewhere
that the day of departure of our contingent was a most eventful one in our history. Let me now say it is
the most memorable in the history of Imperial colonisation. (Cheers.) From it will date advantages
unforeseen to our own nation, and to others blessings immediate and remote, unspeakable glory not to us
only, but the Empire. No British colony will ever be behind us, (Cheers.) All would have desired to
be with us. It is the beginning in these days of utilitarianism of a glorious federation of powers and
sympathies and aspirations on a basis of chivalry. I pray you not to imagine that I personally would
have the unwarrantable presumption to claim any peculiar credit, or, indeed, any at all, for this work.
Nor do my honourable colleagues, who shared and surpassed ray labours and divided my responsibility,
pretend to any but their fair citizen’s share of the glory. The heroism of the chosen few of the contingent
was seconded and encouraged by the sympathies and generosity of the people, and finally crowned by the
approval of Parliament. When our daring and, in the eyes of some, our unpardonable act was submitted
to the Legislature we received praise instead of displeasure—(cheers) —and gratitude in place of punish-
ment. (Cheers.) The voice of the country was so clear, so ringing, so unmistakable, that it gave a
significance and value to the movement from first to last. Who could presume to stand against a force of
public opinion so overwhelming ? Well, you know that one such person, either at the instigation of an
unconquerable feeling of principle or grotesquely gigantic egotism, occupied this position, but only for a
time. I do not desire to allude to him, except for purposes of explanation, and I shall not condescend
to mention his name. He attributed an offer which has captivated the English-speaking people of tie
world by its boldness and its unselfishness to recklessness and vanity. lie denounced patriotic devotion
as parade of loyalty, and had the impudence to affirm that had the Imperial Government known that we
wen only sending men to England who sprang to arms on learning her reverses, our offer would have been
declined ; the very glory of our movement consisting in the circumstance that our men of their own free
will could not, under the circumstances, be sent otherwise —that, in fact, we strained the law to let them
go. This remarkable patriot discovers in their voluntary determination a discredit of their service. Day
after day he wrote against the movement in public papers, personally abused its promoters, mingled his
charges with selected bits of his autobiography, and at the last moment, though he had vowed himself to
seclusion and led us all to cherish the hope that he had retired to one of the severest religious orders to
cultivate eternal silence, he became a candidate for election to Parliament in order to enable him to
condemn a movement which had been consummated with glory before his election could take place.
(Obeers.) And in order to be perfectly consistent in surrounding himself with the most grotesque asso


ciations, he ceased to denounce the movement before his candidature went very far, and his friends,
whether with or without his connivance, but most certainly without his protest, put his claims for con-
sideration on totally different grounds. In the course of his candidature he spoke lightly of the brave
men who, by the very fact of their going, did more for the honour and greatness and prosperity of the
colony than a thousand men such as he could accomplish in a lifetime. Gentlemen, they have been
thanked by their Queen —(cheers) —and the greatest of all honour to men of courage, they were waited for
in Egypt and received with glory into the ranks of the rarest examples of chivalry in Europe, the Imperial
Guards. (Cheers.) What a day was that for an infant nation, for you, for me, for all of us,
not only here but in every Australian home ! A few individuals among us, not the most worthy
in all cases, have received some petty and ephemeral distinction for real or imaginary services;
but on the day when the Guards waited to welcome the real representatives of our manhood
on the battle-field, we were decorated as a nation in the eyes of all the world. Gentlemen, the glorious
significance of the movement was at once appreciated by our best men, by our men of the largest public
service, of the highest intelligence, and of the most distinguished station. They saw that it was a
movement so noble, so far-reaching in its beneficial consequences to ourselves and to mankind, that they
ought to participate in it and have some share in the glory of its inauguration. Foremost amongst these
was one who, in my opinion, has been the most distinguished public servant this country has ever known,
occupying the first office which can be held in this country, next to that of the Queen’s representative.
It was his duty above that of all men, if he saw in the movement a great manifestation of loyalty to the
Sovereign and to humanity in its widest sense, to give to it the prestige of his station, and greater still
the power of his support. He did this instantly, and with a vigour which five and thirty years of service
have failed to impair. There are those, a very insignificant minority indeed, alike in numbers and
intelligence and influence, who conceive that the Chief Justice of the country has no place in a national
movement ; that he has forfeited his citizenship by his acceptance of the highest office in the land; and
that, save in the strict and exclusive discharge of his mere legal duties, his gifts and endowments and
varied attainments are thenceforth and for ever lost to His fellow-citizens. To conceive thus of the office
which he holds is utterly to degrade it, and in its degradation to confine its occupancy to men whose
inferiority, whose want of courage and dignity and independence, would inflict irremediable injuries upon
the country. It is not thus that the present most distinguished holder of that office regarded his relations
to a people among whom he had grown up from childhood, whose honour and interests were as dear to him
as to any man in the community, and whom he was bound to serve as much by his sympathies with and
assistance in their noble endeavour to serve the Empire as by sitting in his court representing his sovereign
in the administration of public justice—(cheers); and this great Chief Justice was you know most ably
supported by the venerable man who for almost half a lifetime was Sir James Martin’s predecessor.
(Hear, hear.) You have all read the speech of Sir Alfred Stephen—(cheers)—in the Legislative Council,
which was heard with pride and emotion by his colleagues in that Chamber, and will be read in England
with gratitude for its noble sentiments of patriotism and sympathy—(cheers)—and, finally, the
pre-eminently chivalrous old man of our public life—(cheers) —most loved and honoured by those who
most widely differ from some of his opinions, trampling under his feet all difference, and giving the
heartiest assistance where he might have caused the most serious embarrassment, raised his eloquent voice
and gave his powerful influence to the movement. (Cheers.) In this, as in all matters and on all
occasions where the statesmanship of the heart was to be shown—the treatment of great questions with
noble sympathies, and in a large and generous spirit—Sir John Robertson—(much cheering)—was true
to himself, to his history, and to his country. Gentlemen, if the men whose names I have mentioned
were the victims of a delusion, to share their blunders would be a nobler privilege than to live in the light
of those who denounced them. And with these and countless others the great press of this country—
(cheers) —which did infinitely more to encourage and sustain this movement with success than all of us put
together. We gave them at once every particle of information which we possessed. (Hear, hear ) Our


operations through their assistance have been given to the public hour by hour, and to their honour every
noble sentiment to which they have given utterance during the last two months has been but re-echoed by
the great press of the mother-country. (Cheers.) 1 have just looked through the files of English and
foreign newspapers, and there is scarcely an article to be found in any of them, the best portions of which,
in structure, in point, and in weight, in felicity of illustration, in speculation upon the consequences of our
movement, and in just estimate of its European value, had not been anticipated by our own public writers
—(cheers) —and thus the press also has been attacked by those who denounce the movement. It is
charged with corruption and with subservience to the Ministers. If the first charge is true, it has been
corrupted by a universal public sentiment of loyalty throughout the country. (Cheers.) Of its servility
I may say that I think there are no journals in the world more utterly independent of Ministerial influence,
who would resent any attempt at its exercise with more courageous contempt, and who so little manifest
any disposition to make things extremely agreeable to the occupants of office as our own. (Hear, hear.)
For my own part—and I suppose this feeling is common to those in power—l frequently think that they
might show more consideration for us without any loss of their own independence ; but the last thing in
the world which I should expect at their hands would be protection or countenance if we blundered ; if we
failed to gauge public feeling, obstinately adhered to any erroneous policy, or in any way manifested
incapacity or weakness. (Cheers.) Gentlemen, I thank you for your welcome and patience. These are
for us stirring and glorious times. (Hear, hear.) There were those who thought that the splendour of
our empire was darkened in the latter days, and that England had forgotten the knowledge of how, in the
great phrase of Wordsworth, “ genuine glory was put on.” Gentlemen, that time has not yet come, nor
that forgetfulness. It is not to be thought of that
£ The flood of British freedom, which
To the open sea of the world’s praise
From dark antiquity hath flowed,
With pomp of waters unwithstood,
• • • •
Should perish, and to evil and to good
Be lost for ever.’
As proudly and as justly now as ever may we repeat those imperial and inspiriting words, spoken when
our perils were great, our enemies mighty, and our fortunes wavering.”
Much cheering greeted the speaker as he resumed his seat.
At the call of the chairman three cheers for Mr. Dailey were heartily given.
On June 3, on the occasion of the Ministerial reception
AT WAGGA WAGGA,
reviewing the movement and referring to the return of the troops, Mr. Dailey said : “ Mr. Chairman and
gentlemen, this distinguished compliment to the Ministry has been paid mainly, if not exclusively, because
of our real or supposed services to the country in the despatch of our soldiers to Egypt. With your
permission, I shall confine my acknowledgment of your distinction exclusively to that great matter. I
shall not allude to the many laborious undertakings of the Government which were of local interest only.
What we endeavoured to do for the colony, and what we accomplished in legislation—both of these, our
aims and our performances —are known to you. What we have been the humble instruments in accom-
plishing for the whole Empire opens up a grander subject of pride and congratulation. (Loud applause.)
I am sure you will all give me the credit of humbly and sincerely feeling that my personal and individual
title to all the kindly words which have from time to time been uttered concerning our great national
action is a small one, and that it is the country which deserves all the congratulations that can be bestowed
upon it; and surely its appetite for praise must be an inordinate one if it is not satisfied with what it lias
received. The events of the past three months have been so crowded and so significant that one has to


meditate steadfastly and calmly for a time in order to realise our altered situation in the eyes of the world.
Great has had been our progress —vast and various as were our industries—up to a few months since the
world was in comparative ignorance of our wealth and our power, and a large portion of it in absolute
ignorance of the richest of all our resources—our patriotism and loyalty, and spirit of sacrifice. Foreigners
knew that we were explorers, settlers, merchants, men of courage and enterprise, who had founded and
maintained great and flourishing colonies. Our fellow-citizens throughout the Empire more intimately
knew of our institutions, and their practical and successful working. But within these strict limits their
knowledge was confined. Some of the more generous, deeply sympathetic and imaginative, cherished a
consoling faith in our real sympathy with the great old home and guardian of the world’s freedom. Others
thought that we were too distant to treasure so ennobling a feeling, and that with a people so far away
from the heart of the Empire loyalty was but a poetic sentiment, and kinship with Imperial glory an
historical remembrance. It would have required the faculties of the highest statesmanship, and the
keenest—almost poetic—sensibility to have enabled our most favourable observers to understand what
depths of devotion to the Empire lay beneath the calm of our prosperous and unruffled career as peaceful
communities so far removed from the dread realities and the great inspirations of the national life of
Europe. In an instant we flashed a light upon the world—(applause)—by which men were enabled to
read with perfect clearness a new page, not only in the glory of England, but in the history of Europe,
(Cheers.) When we did this we perhaps little knew all that we were doing. Now we know it thoroughly,
(Cheers.) I shall in a few moments show you this beyond all possibility of doubt or cavil. Our action —
like many noble and holy actions in human history—was wider than our thought, and indeed outstretched
the compass of our imagination. (Cheers.) Of all places in the world this was thought to be the last
from which armed men fully equipped for service could be placed within a few weeks on a foreign battle-
field beside the Imperial soldiery. I dismiss for a moment that part of the assistance to the Empire which
consisted in all this being done to the last farthing at our own expense. But do not for a moment imagine
that this was without its immediate and immense effect upon foreign countries, with the baulking of whose
military ambitions most fortunately for the peace of mankind, the money-lenders of the world have much
to do. To these the spectacle of young nations offering their swords to defend their mother and paying for
the privilege of fighting for her was something almost startling in the revelation it afforded of her resources
in a great conflict. (Cheers.) Nor was our instantaneous action without its entirely startling influence.
In the military empires of the world the preparations for a campaign and the despatch of troops on foreign
service are matters which require and receive from war departments fully instructed much deliberation,
and occupy much time. We, without military departments, had to organise, equip, and despatch a force
to operate at a distance of many thousand miles. We did it with thorough efficiency—(cheers)—and
landed our men and horses in a few weeks. Everyone now knows that if the idea had been simultaneously
taken up by all the Australian colonies we would undoubtedly, with equal facility, and without any undue
strain upon our resources, have landed an army of ten thousand men in Egypt. (Cheers.) We should
have had no difficulty in despatching three regiments from this colony alone. (Applause.) And the world
is now aware that if the integrity of the Empire is ever menaced, the British colonies will all be ready.
(Cheers.) No colony could hold up its head if it failed to take its share of the service. No Government in
any colony would be suffered to rob it of its share of the glory. With our increased prosperity will be our
increased capacity of service. It is a contingent to-day —in a few years it will be an army —(loud cheers)
and this will be going on so that whenever the flag of England floats over a colony there will be a portion
of her army ready to serve anywhere without cost to the mother-country. (Cheers.) But let me follow
the history of our movement, and consider its meaning. Our men were hardly on their way —only a few
days having elapsed from their departure—when the shadow of a great peril to the world’s peace fell upon
us all, and a deadly conflict between England and one of the mightiest of Empires became imminent. The
very moment of our bitter national reverses in Egypt had been, seemingly, selected to dispute our empire
in India. We know now, from the tone of the Russian press, that in all human probability the supposed


indifference of the British colonies to the maintenance of the Imperial alliance was one of the elements of
the calculated hostility of a Power which is the most signal example in the history of empires of an un-
broken policy of long-meditated intrigue and deeply-pondered perfidy ; —of a Power which does nothing by
impulse, even malignant, but everything by a calculation which embraces all elements of possible success.
You have the elements of this calculation before you. The papers by the last mail give you the views of
the Russian press as to the chances of their nation in a war with England. They were, among other
things, the expectation of an immediate revolt in India, the absorption of Canada by the United States,
and that Australia would sever the delicate silken bond that united her to England. I shall say nothing
of the first element beyond the fact that according to universal testimony there never was a time since our
occupation of India when we stood higher in the affections of the natives —(applause)—princes and people
—(applause) —than at this moment. I shall say nothing of the second beyond expressing my conviction
that the time is near —and the best men of both nations are preparing for it—when the greatest sovereign
alliance (as it will be the holiest in the blessings it will pour out far and wide upon humanity) will be
cemented for ever between the British Empire and the United States of America! (Cheers.) That
holy alliance (not in the nomenclature of diplomatists, but by the consecration of Heaven) between
men nursed in the same literature, trained to citizenship by the same jurisprudence, loving freedom with a
like devotion, seeing nothing but the vindication of universal public justice, and the elevation of humanity,
will dictate peace to, and will have the glorious power to enforce it upon, the world. (Cheers.) The third
of their hopes for the humiliation of England—the disaffection of the colonies—we promptly answered by
the despatch of the Contingent. (Applause.) It would have been rash if at an earlier period I had pre-
sumed to speak of the world-wide significance of the step which we have taken. I should have exposed
myself to the charge of audacious extravagance which the small village critics of great enterprises invariably
prefer when they sillily confound humble instruments with actions of incalculable grandeur. You know
we had such people here, in various places, who laughed at our patriotism, ridiculed our aims, and prophe-
sied our discomfiture. But in every court of Europe, by every statesman and diplomatist, by every
journalist and accomplished man of the world, our action was instantly regarded as one of the most
important events in the later period of the history of the British Empire. (Cheers.) At present, however,
lam referring to the baseless calculations of Russia. Our troops were on their way when the war-cloud
lowered upon the world. Instantly—as if we could or ought to have foreseen what came so suddenly, so
unexpectedly—there were some who presumed to say that had we known England’s greater danger, we
should have kept our troops for our own protection. I protest against any such dishonouring doctrine.
(Applause.) Rather, I would say, had we known of the greater peril, we should have acted with greater
promptitude in despatching all the support we could render. (Cheers.) It was in this spirit that, when
we found the honour of the Empire menaced in India, we offered the contingent for that glorious service.
Our intention was to help the Empire—to proudly assert and nobly vindicate our title to share its
perils —to act with its defenders wherever its integrity was menaced. Not for us to select times of
convenience and places of advantage, but to stand by the flag wherever it was planted or borne, and to
die—if God permitted us such immense glory—in its defence ! (Cheers.) That sublime service was not
needed. Not the less were we prepared to render it. Rather than call back the men sent by us, or hold
them in inactivity while dreadful issues were being determined elsewhere, I know that the country would
have fully justified us in despatching the other battery of artillery, which we kept only at the instance of
the Imperial Government. And now, gentlemen, since we have been impeached for imprudence in leaving
ourselves in an unprotected condition, let me survey the situation. Within a few weeks of the departure
of the contingent we were in as perfect a state of military efficiency for our own protection as if we had
kept every man of them. We shall in a short time have increased our armed defence by a body of men
who in numbers —I shall not dare to say in efficiency—will at least equal that part of the whole
British army with which our contingent was incorporated at Suakim. (Applause.) We have studded
our harbours with torpedoes, and could have fully manned our batteries. But, gentlemen, there were


others looking after our defence. The great Imperial Government, to which we had rendered our slight
filial service, sent her ships to every point where an enemy could be watched and waited for. (Cheers.)
In every quarter of the globe she extemporised supplementary navies—(applause)—procured and armed
the swiftest cruisers in the world, at an expense of millions. (Loud cheers.) In our own harbour we
saw day by day an Imperial expenditure for our own protection to which our paltry contributions were as
nothing. Every Briton in every part of the world looked upon a sight of unexampled splendour—the
springing to arms of the most peaceful, the most patient, but the most chivalrous Power in civilisation.
A greater sight than that one upon which the poet looked was before all eyes—
‘ With ships the sea was sprinkled far and nigh,
Like stars in heaven. 9
It seemed as if England had resolved that no hostile shot should be sounded in our ears—that in glorious
return for our companionship with her arms abroad she would claim the privilege of destroying the enemies
of our commerce at a distance from our shores—that she was bent like a great mother upon completing our
national education by showing us the worldly benefits even of chivalry. Day by day, and night after
night, the great and distinguished officer who commands the squadron which guards these seas might be
seen advising, organising, preparing for our defence, as if his only object in life was to think of us and our
security—(cheers)—shirking no labour, overlooking no incident, inspiring confidence and enthusiasm on all
sides; in fact embodying in his daily example the protecting power of the Empire. (Cheers.) No
colonial revenues, gentlemen, could have purchased this splendid enthusiasm, nor borne the strain of the
daily expenditure of the Imperial Government for our defence. Let us not in common decency think too
proudly of what little service Heaven and our own enviable fortune have enabled us to do for England ;
but, on the other hand, let us think with unspeakable gratitude of what England was ready and is pre-
pared to do for us. (Cheers.) For my own part, I could hardly hear from the lips of some of her
chivalrous servants their compliments upon what they were pleased to call our generosity without con-
fusion. Only a few days ago I met a distinguished soldier who had served his Sovereign in India for
forty years with chivalry and devotion, who had been rewarded for conspicuous gallantry, whose calm
eyes had looked upon all the horrors of bloody war, and yet those eyes were moistened with sympathy as
he spoke of the action of this colony in aiding the Empire. (Loud cheers.) Gentlemen, in the eyes of
such men as this, the very flower of the earth’s manhood, we are a new people. Never can we descend
from the position we now occupy. Our action, while exalting us in the world’s esteem, has lifted up the
public feeling of the country. (Applause.) We have become nobler and better ourselves—as all com-
munities, like all men, do who have tested and manifested their capacity of sacrifice. We have passed into
a grander national society, just as our men in Egypt naturally passed into the highest military society, and
took their places in it with ease, and usefulness, and dignity. (Applause.) Some have regretted that we
declined to avail ourselves of the gracious invitation to convey our men to England. If the visit could
have been justified by any service the men could have rendered there—as, for example, taking the place of
Imperial soldiers required elsewhere—no one would have felt the honour more than myself. (Applause.)
But the invitation was only intended as a distinction ; and as the very base and defence of our action was
the rendering of service, there would have been a certain want of consistency in our conduct in this trip of
honour. (Applause.) Though we declined this crowning distinction, we were deeply sensible of the cour-
tesy which dictated it, and shall treasure it in our memories with all the graceful acts which marked the
history of the movement. (Cheers.) Mr. Chairman and gentlemen, but a few days will pass when we
shall look again upon the small band upon which it is, as you know, no extravagance whatever to say that
the eyes of the world have been fixed since they left us. (Cheers.) They will come back to us in number
almost as they left us. Disease has claimed some, and a few have taken permanent service in the armies
of the Empire. But, thank Cod, with these exceptions they come back again ! (Applause.) Of all our
blessings, this is the richest. We sent them for service—not for slaughter. (Cheers.) They have done
all that they were asked to do bravely—(cheers)—cheerfully and nobly. (Cheers.) They evaded no duty,


complained of no labour, were ready to obey every call. (Cheers.) The work which men thought would
require the effusion of their blood was accomplished partly by their mere presence. Their reception and
companionship in the field would have been a privilege and an honour to the picked troops of the Empire.
(Applause.) Their conduct was worthy of the distinction. (Applause. ) We expected, when they left us,
that they would uphold our honour. They have done so. (Cheers.) Never were soldiers more heartily
praised by the first men of the British army; and their brave commander who would have oeen on any field
fair representative of the English chivalry and gentleness, was covered with compliments more precious
than orders of nobility. (Applause.) They come back in one respect, and in one only, changed. We
sent them away untried men—they come back perfectly disciplined soldiers. (Applause.) In all respects,
as far as military efficiency is concerned, though their mere numbers are the same, they are quadrupled in
power of effective military service. (Applause.) Spread through the country, they will become the
teachers and leaders of the heroic spirit. Welcomed everywhere, they will repay their welcome by the
best service to society men can perform —that is, in diffusing and strengthening a generous determination
to uphold at all costs the integrity and glory of the Empire. (Cheers.) Gentlemen, lam sure you will
pardon me in saying one word as to how they are returning. The Empire has broken its compact with us
as to our offer of their service. It would have been our glory to have adhered literally to our contract,
and brought them back as we sent and supported them. Out of the noble courtesy and gratitude of
England she has graciously prevented this. She insisted upon bringing them back to us herself —carrying
them in her own transport —and, as it were, shaking hands with them and returning them to us at last,
on our own shores. Gentlemen, I thank you,” (Loud and continued cheering.)
On March 26, on the occasion of the opening of the railway from Murrumburrah to Young, Mr.
Trickett spoke as follows :—“ I must apologise for the absence of my hon. and learned colleague, Mr.
Dailey, who is prevented by illness from being here this afternoon. I venture to say that had he come to
this celebration his soul would have been fired with enthusiasm upon seeing those words, ‘Well done/
which graced the triumphal arch through which we passed on entering this town. The action taken by
Mr. Dailey and the Government in regard to despatching troops to the Soudan has made Mr. Dailey the
hero of the day, and has rendered New South Wales the observed of all observers ; and had Mr. Dailey
been here to-day he would doubtless have expressed his views upon the subject, and as it is a matter of
Government policy, I shall not hesitate to speak fearlessly on the question. lam sure that the people of
Young have watched with interest the recent action of the Government in sending troops to the Soudan,
and which action I am glad to say has been sanctioned by the people’s representatives by an overwhelming
majority. I refrained from speaking on this subject in the Assembly, because all that I could say was so
well said by my colleagues, and further, it was such a one-sided fight, and the speeches, both as regards
number and argument, were so overwhelmingly in favour of the Government’s action, that I was loath to
take up the time of the House. This, however, is a different occasion, and I feel so strongly on the subject,
and feel so convinced that the right thing was done at the right time, that I will now give you a few of
my views on the subject. The objections raised to the scheme, both in and out of Parliament, ranged
almost from the sublime to the ridiculous, and in one instance at least, I may say, the melodramatic stage
was reached. Some took the high stand that Parliament should have been convened before despatching
the troops, or even offering then, and that the constitution of the country had been torn to shreds, and is
in danger. Well, while granting that, looked at in a strictly legal and narrow view, the strictly constitu-
tional course would have been to call Parliament together and get its consent, still, as a matter of urgency,
as a matter of expediency, and as showing that the Government were in real earnest, the great feature in
the whole business was its promptitude, and I don’t hesitate to say that it' the course of calling Parliament
together had been taken, if the inevitable delay had taken place consequent on the calling together of
Parliament, and the discussion of this great question in all its details, the offer would have been robbed of


all its lustre—the offer, if made, would have been made too late to have met with that ready response that
it did receive, and New South Wales would not, as she does to-day, occupy one of the proudest, one of the
most conspicuous, and one of the most enviable positions in her Majesty’ dependencies. I will mention
what I think is a very strong argument against the desirability of this case being argued in Parliament
before the contingent was sent. I refer to the case of Colonel Holborrow, a gentleman who was not chosen
to go to the Soudan, and in speaking of that gentleman I wish to speak of him as a gentleman and a
personal friend. Well, his action in bringing his case before Parliament is a fair index of what would
have taken place had the whole question been discussed beforehand. Not only Colonel Holborrow, but
hundreds of others, officers and men, are disappointed because they were not allowed to join in this cam-
paign, and no doubt we should haie had all their claims and grievances aired in the Assembly, and also
many other mmutne of the campaign ; and not only loss of time would have been the result, but many
unpleasant things might possibly have been said which in matters of military organisation are not only
undesirable, but absolutely fatal to both despatch and discipline. (Cheers.) Now, a great deal has been
said respecting the circulars that had been sent round in some of the Government departments asking for
subscriptions, and calling meetings in aid of a patriotic fund, and some gentlemen in and out of Parlia-
ment have had the temerity to infer that the Government have had something to do with these meetings
and circulars. Well, I take this opportunity of most emphatically stating that the Government, neither
by word nor deed, have had anything to do with any such movement. But while making this statement,
I really can see no harm in the heads of departments organising such a movement. It is a free country,
and members can give or not as they like, and I assert that it would bo much better and much fairer if
these people who are informants in such cases, instead of making vague and anonymous statements about
threats and compulsion, would make a direct charge to the head of their department, or, if necessary, to
the Minister, and I’ll guarantee that justice would be done. (Cheers.) However, these complaints 'are
very few and far between, and then they are made in a way that does not even permit of inquiry. On
the other hand, what do we have? We.have the Civil Service responding liberally, and I say voluntarily,
to this Patriotic Fund. The subscription lists tell a tale of liberality that does them honour, and this
liberal spirit seems to have pervaded not only them, but the bulk of the men, women, and children of
Australia, for to their credit, be it said, we see the very children of our schools putting their pence
together, and showing not only their generosity but their patriotism. All-round abuse had been scattered
by unscrupulous opponents of the movement, some going so far as to attack that great and intelligent man,
our Chief Justice, and call him a political partisan. But what did the Chief Justice do ? He attended
one of the largest meetings of his fellow-citizens ever held in Sydney for the purpose of supporting a move-
ment to raise a fund for assisting the widows and orphans of those who had volunteered to fight and die
for the Queen. (Cheers.) Of all men in the country, by right of power of intellect, by right of length of
service, and by right of his exalted station, the Chief Justice was the very man to have attended that
meeting and taken a prominent part in it. It would be an evil day for this country were that great office
ever to be filled by a man, no matter what his intellectual powers might be, who would be such a coward
as to shirk a responsibility of this kind. (Cheers.) lam sorry to say that some people have also spoken dis-
paragingly of the troops who were sent, both with regard to their discipline and their character; some people
referring to them as the dupes of the higher classes ; but I indignantly deny both aspersions. Let anyone
examine the list of names that have gone; let us call to mind many of them, our own dear personal friends; let
us enquire are they the dupes of the higher classes. Let us look at the list of officers that have gone, and I’ll
guarantee that everyone of them is far from being a dupe, and certainly not to be ranked amongst the
lower classes. (Hear, hear ) Why, I can give instances in my own electorate of men who have given up
home, property, and wealth to join this noble contingent. Also a member of my own profession a man
worth, I suppose, £20,000, with a practice of about £ISOO a year, gave all this up and enlisted as a
private in this brave band. And yet we are told that they are dupes, and were “ sent” away. (Cheers.)
Why, does not everyone know and proudly admit that most of the contingent, instead of being senf,


volunteered for this campaign, and that we could have got twice the number in the time if required ?
Thank God, the persons who have tried to ridicule or make small of those brave and unselfish men, are
indeed few in our community, and 1 am surprised and grieved to find any man unpatriotic enough to do
so. (Hear, hear.) Outside of Parliament there has been one instance of an old and professional politician
who has ridiculed the movement and all concerned in it, from beginning to end ; a gentleman who has
descended to personal abuse; a gentleman who said that that gallant contingent were the sweepings of the
Sydney streets ; a gentleman who, although always boasting of and trading on his loyalty, is now opposing
with heart and soul the most loyal and patriotic movement that was ever set on foot in this colony. One
can afford to treat with contempt the remarks, the insults, and the slanders of such a man, especially
when one calls to mind that this is the gentleman who, when being entertained by a number of gentlemen
in London, showed such execrable taste as to make a speech which caused Lord Kimberley to publicly
traverse his words for calling England a poor worn-out old country.”
OPPOSITION TO THE MOVEMENT.
The movement had not progressed so far without some opposition. As will be seen by references in
some of the speeches we have quoted, one or two persons of some standing in the community had spoken
and written against the good sense of the public. Sir Henry Parkes, who had been Premier some years
before, was especially conspicuous in this direction. Several letters appeared in the city Press against the
movement from his pen, but he had so completely passed out of the public life of the colony at that time
that little or no attention was excited by their publication. We refer to them here merely to point some
references in the speeches from which we have quoted. In his first letter the writer wrote as follows :
“ It is impossible to repress the thought, 6 Why so late with the offer of your superfluous gold and your
maiden swords?’ For many long months the most heroic character of our time stood alone in the Soudan,
with his pure and priceless life for ever in his hand, and his glory lighting up the world. Many long
months ago, offer after offer was made in England to organise volunteer parties for the rescue of Gordon.
If, from one cause and another, these offers resulted in little, still the suggestion for like efforts in other
lands went abroad. But while there was yet time no martial sign was made by the lately awakened
crusaders of New South Wales But now, when the hour is past, our men are to join the
general mass of English and Egyptian troops, to do duty in affording protection to the navvies building a
railway, or to garrison a wretched Egyptian town. If we must send soldiers to Egypt, why was Gordon
left to perish before we thought of it?” This letter from which we here extract was followed by another
attacking the Chief Justice for taking part in the meeting called to initiate the Patriotic Fund. That
communication contained, inter alia , the following sentences : —“ It is not unlikely Mr. Dailey’s military
expedition will develop other contentions amongst us not less grave than that which it must inevitably
bring about as its own direct fruit. The free people of this country seem likely to have forced upon them
the question of being partly ruled by political judges. ‘We all know how dangerous a political judge may
become in any community, while a partisan judge is still worse.’ This was the language of the Chief
Justice at the public meeting on Friday night; the truth of it has been bitterly experienced by our fore-
fathers in the darkest periods of English history. How deplorable is it that this very Chief Justice should
awaken our apprehensions, in spite of ourselves, of the influence of political judges. The action of the
Government in enlisting soldiers, purchasing arms, chartering and provisioning troop-ships for this expe-
dition to Egypt, is wholly illegal. The Chief Justice himself intimated to the assembled thousands on
Friday night that it must be covered by an Act of Indemnity. Not only did Mr. Dailey put the
machinery of Government in motion in this matter, and 4 commit the colony ’ to his thoughtless act
without the consent of Parliament, but he did it without stopping to consult the Prime Minister*
Mr. Dailey may have been duly empowered to perform the duties of Colonial Secretary, but ho certainly


has not been substituted for Mr. Stuart as leader of the Government The Chief Justice, as
apologist for the Government, told the public meeting that i if the Government had waited until they had
called Parliament together, and procured from it a vote for the expenditure, the time would have gone by
when their interference would have been of any value/ Assuming that our interference will be of any
value, the Chief Justice’s words are by no means correct, as is proved by the messages from the Imperial
Government to the other colonies in favour of delay. The Chief Justice was good enough to inform the
meeting that Governments at times must incur a large amount of responsibility in the expenditure of
public money. 4 That had been done in this colony many times already. It had been done repeatedly in
the mother country ; and only the other day, when the troops were sent off on the receipt of the news of
General Gordon’s death to the Soudan, no vote was obtained for defraying the cost, but the expenditure
was incurred in the anticipation of the sanction of Parliament/ Both these statements are misleading
and are unworthy of the Chief Justice. Nothing of the kind which is now being done in this colony has
ever been done before. Governments have expended money without Parliamentary sanction to meet some
exigency in the ordinary course of administration. They have expended money in like manner to purchase
land for State purposes which, if not purchased at the time and without publicity, must have put the
country to a greatly increased cost. They have expended money in like manner for less important objects
where the justification was not so obvious, but where value or beneficial service has always been received.
But the present is an expenditure entirely new to the colony, and absolutely beyond the powers conferred
upon us by the Constitution. I defy both the Chief Justice and the Attorney-General to point out the
provisions of the Constitution A.ct which empower us to send an armed force into a foreign country. It is
an expenditure where the money will be sunk for ever and can have no possible return ; and, moreover, it
is an expenditure which, if it is to have any substantial issue, must carry with it a heavy expenditure of
blood. Nothing of this sort has ever been submitted to Parliament, or hinted at, or thought of, in the
constitutional appropriation of our revenues. Then as to the Imperial Government sending away troops
without the sanction of the House of Commons, the statement in its fallacious application by the Chief
Justice admits of an instant and complete answer. The Imperial Government has charge of the affairs of
the Empire, and it only did what it was bound to do. But the Government of the colony is actually
excluded from any such charge, and has no duty cast upon it in the matter. . . . It is to be hoped that
the Legislative Assembly is made of stuff which will not dishonour our most sacred political memories.
We know what the really great men who made the life of former Houses would have done if any such attempt
had been made to influence their proceedings—to deter them from discharging one of their highest obliga-
tions/’ These letters were looked upon with considerable disfavour by the Press and public as they appeared.
They called forth a brisk and cutting criticism from the leading journals, wherein the writer was described
as a disappointed politician angling for popular favour. Sir Henry Parkes replied in a letter from which
we quote : —“ It is very well, for a purpose which cannot be served by argument, to speak of me as a person
seeking popularity. Suppose it were so, what in the name of common sense are the authors of this
military commotion seeking? But if you are correct in your repeated assertions that there is an over-
whelming support to this movement, how can I gain popularity by my single endeavours to breast the
turgid torrent ? If I have no right to express my opinion on an entirely new and startling development
in the proceedings of our Government, what man in the whole country has a right to speak ? It is true I
have never been an Acting Colonial Secretary, but I have held that high office by direct appointment for
more than ten long years, and in seasons of immense difficulty, not without some little credit both here
and in England. Her Majesty’s Ministers in this colony might have enjoyed the sunshine of official
existence for ever without any word of disturbance from me, if they could have contented themselves with
the administration of our own affairs to the best of their poor ability. Having raised my voice against
their profligate waste of public money for political railways, and against other of their performances
scarcely less questionable, I should have said nothing more, leaving the final settlement to the electors-
But, in my sober judgment, the Ministers have committed a great political crime. This was done in so


rash and hasty a manner that the very mode of procedure, apart from the crime itself, would be in the
highest degree censurable. In all my experience I have never known a Cabinet decide on any matter of
first importance without the presence of all the Ministers, if their presence was possible. But this thing
was done, not only without consulting the Prime Minister, who, though in New Zealand, could have been
consulted by a day’s delay, but it was done in the absence and without the knowledge of the Colonial
Treasurer—the Minister charged with the finances of the country. But the more the thing is considered f
the greater enormity it becomes. It involves the country in troubles, the extent and end of which no man
living can see, not the least of which troubles is the starting upon a false course beyond our political
authority and capacity. The financial trouble will not be the worst. But even here the cost cannot be
less than £250,000, and may be £500,000. The truth is that, though we are prosperous as a colony of
industrious people, we cannot prosper as a mock military power, squandering our resources in the fever of
martial excitement. However big may be our talk, we have not the resources of the British Empire. At
best, our drain of men and money must soon come to an end. It never is wise to propose to do what we
cannot sustain ourselves in doing, Nothing could be more false and arrogant than for the authors of this
wild movement to claim a pre-eminent share of loyalty. The men who are opposed to them are at least
their equals as loyal and good subjects of the Queen.”
Some further correspondence appeared having reference to the Patriotic Fund. Some months later,
after having repeatedly declared his intention not to seek to re-enter public life, Sir Henry Parkes con-
tested the Argyle electorate nominally on this question, and gained a seat in Parliament,
THANKS FROM THE MOTHER COUNTRY.
Out of the mass received, the following are some of the acknowledgments received from royalty and
home. His Excellency the Governor de patched a telegram to her Majesty the Queen, on the afternoon
of the departure of the troops, in the following words : —“The Queen, Windsor Castle, England. Sydney
Contingent of 800 men, 224 horses, sailed to day; great demonstration ; immense enthusiasm, with intense
loyalty to your Majesty. (Signed) Goverxor.” To which Lord Augustus Loftus received the following
answer from Her Majesty :—Greatly gratified by your account of the departure of the Contingent and
enthusiasm displayed by my loyal subjects.” His Excellency also received, in reply to a telegram sent to
the Duke of Cambridge, the following telegram from his Grace : —“ Thanks for your telegram, and con-
gratulate yourself and the colony on the loyal spirit evinced, which I highly appreciate.” From Lord
Derby the following was received : —“ Downing-street, February 24. Sir, — I had the honour to address
you by telegraph on the 20th instant in reply to the offer of the Government of South Australia to supply
troops for service in the Soudan, and I have now much pleasure in requesting that you will communicate
to your Ministers this fuller expression of the satisfaction and gratitude with which Her Majesty the
Queen has received the announcement of the generous and patriotic desire of the colony under your
Government to furnish a contingent of her army. It would have afforded her Majesty’s Government
much gratification if they had been in a position to avail themselves at once of the generous proposals of
Victoria, South Australia, and Queensland; but in these cases as in that of Canada, the probability that
the military operations now in progress may be suspended during the hotter months of the summer pre-
cluded the immediate employment of any forces not actually prepared and equipped, like that tendered by
the Government of New South Wales. I will, however, consider carefully without delay what arrange-
ments are best to be made towards employing an Australian force at a later period of the year. I am
glad to understand that the question of uniting the colonial contingents in one brigade is being considered.
This is by no means the first occasion on which the Australian colonies have assisted this country by very
liberal contributions ; but the desire and the power to offer effective military help in a campaign at a great
distance from their shores, and of which they have given such sasisfactory proofs, marks a distinct and


important advance in their political growth. You arc already aware that this fresh evidence of the
increasing sympathy and affection of the Australian colonies to the mother country has been received in
Great Britain with deep emotion and gratification, and it may be confidently hoped that a union which
is based on such sentiments of mutual regard must be close and enduring. (Signed) Derby.” The
following is the “ letter of thanks to our countrymen and kindred beyond the sea who have offered
men for active service”:—“We, the undersigned subjects of the Queen, resident in the old country ? desire
to express our gratitude to our countrymen and kindred beyond the sea for the generous offer they have
made to send troops for active service. We have always believed that our ties of blood and common love
of freedom would keep the Empire one and indivisible. We thank you for this proof that our faith is
founded on truth.” The following are some of the principal signatures—Lord Tennyson, Duke of Argyll,
Right Hon. the Lord Mayor, Sir Stafford Northcote, M.P.; J. Bryce, M.P. ; Right Hon. W. E. Forster,
M.P.; Right Hon. G. J. Goshen, M.P.; Earl of Wemyss, W. C. Cartwright, M.P.; Sir Richard Temple,
Francis Buxton, M.P.; Right Hon. D. R. Plunkett, M.P.; Sir H. T. Holland, M. P.; Hon. Jos. Cowen,
M.P.; Right Hon. Richard Assheton Cross, M.P. ; Right Hon. W. H. Smith, M.P.; Marquis of Lome,
Sir Nat de Rothschild, Bart., <tc.
PROCEEDINGS IN PARLIAMENT.
Parliament was called together on the 17th March, and in address in reply to His Excellency the
Governor’s opening speech, moved in the Legislative Council, contained the following clauses:—“We
desire to express our hearty approval of the conduct of the Ministers in despatching the Australian con-
tingent to aid the Imperial forces in Egypt ; and we regard their action as manifesting the loyalty of the
Australian people to the Crown, and as drawing more closely together the various portions of our great
empire.” The motion for its adoption was spoken to by most of the leading members in terms of
unqualified laudation of the Soudan movement. Mr. Dailey, as the leader of the Government in the
Upper Chamber, took the opportunity to make his official statement, which was as follows : —“lt will be
naturally expected that I should take the earliest opportunity of saying something to the House on
the matters which have, to the great inconvenience, as I am aware, of honorable gentlemen, necessitated
the summoning of Parliament at this time, and in this sudden way. I shall do this as briefly as possible,
and shall not anticipate by my observations the provisions of a measure which, I presume, will be forwarded
to this House from the other branch of the Legislature. When the news of the death of the illustrious
man upon whose fortunes and forlorn heroism all eyes had been fixed for the past twelve months, and for
whose relief England had made at last the supremest efforts, was received in this country, I felt that the
time had arrived when we in these distant colonies might do something to help the Empire. It seemed to
me that when an expedition so elaborately and thoughtfully planned for the accomplishment of an object
in which not merely the military prestige of the Empire was involved, but the interests of humanity itself
had failed to attain its end, that a struggle had necessarily commenced which would strain the powers and
resources of the Imperial Government. I was not foolish enough to suppose that our aid was essential;
but I believed it would be at least acceptable. I did not think that England required our help; but I
indulged in the ambition that she would be pleased at our tendering it. I felt that the time had arrived
when a great opportunity was afforded of showing in the first place to England herself, and in the
second to the world, what were the true relations of the colony to the Empire—that we were not a weight
upon the arms of England, and an encumbrance of her glory—that the colonies were not the impedimenta
of her triumphant march ; but that they could give substantial and immediate and valuable assistance in
moments of disaster and difficulty. It seemed to me that this would be a great thing to do in our own
interests, in those of the mother country, and in those of the world. I dismiss the first consideration at
once, though if the policy of our action had been ignominiously dictated by mere selfishness and the hope


of immediate and permanent national advantage, I think nothing could be more sagacious than its audacity,
for it has given us a place in the world’s opinion which years of wise legislation and unheard-of prosperity
could never have procured for us. But its effect upon the mother country and her relations with other
nations I thought would be instant and beneficial. It would immediately disturb the calculations of those
who subtracted from the sum of England’s strength the forces necessary to protect her colonies, and
required such calculators to add the immense resources —the swiftly-growing populations —the intelligence
and the patriotism of the colonies to the fighting forces of the Empire. These were the considerations
which came into my mind on the morning of the 12th of February last. The tragic horror of the occur-
rence which had just taken place would fix the attention of the world upon the position of England. It
seemed to me of all times the most propitious to take the step which I immediately resolved upon
requesting my colleagues to take. On that morning I wrote the Minute for His Excellency the
Governor: —‘‘The Cabinet has had under its consideration to-day the intelligence of the critical position
of the Imperial forces in Egypt, and the question whether this colony as an integral portion of the British
Empire can render any assistance to the Imperial Government in surmounting the difficulties of the
present situation. Before the Cabinet met I had sent for and had long interviews with the commandant,
Colonel Richardson, and Colonel Roberts, the officer commanding the Permanent Artillery. I communi-
cated to these officers the desire of the Government to furnish at once to the Imperial Government what
help we were capable of affording, and requested them to inform me of the exact nature of the assistance
which I would be justified in stating this Government was in a position to offer. After serious considera-
tion they came to the conclusion that it would be quite possible to send two batteries of our Permanent
Artillery either for active service or to relieve an equal number of Imperial troops from duty in garrison in
three weeks from the date of receipt of an order to prepare for their embarkation. With these men could
be sent ten 16-pound guns with 200 horses. Two additional guns could be ordered from England to
complete two batteries of six guns each. An effective and disciplined battalion of be raised
from the Volunteer Force, which Colonel Richardson has expressed his desire to accompany. The
necessary ambulance corps could also be organised, as a training for that duty has been already commenced
by the staff surgeon. I have also seen the manager of the Orient line of steamers, and discussed with him
the means of transport. He undertakes to land at Suakim with reasonable notice of the period of
departure from Sydney the force, consisting of (say) 750 men and 200 horses, in thirty days from their
embarkation, at transport rates somewhat lower than the ordinary ones, and concerning which and
numerous other details I shall give full explanations to my colleagues. I venture to submit that the
Government in making this offer to the Imperial Government will testify to the readiness of this colony to
give instant and practical help to the Empire in an emergency ; and such a course cannot be without a
beneficial effect upon those who may, in dealing adversely to Imperial interests, fail to recognise and value
the sympathy and adherence of the colonies. I now invite their approval of the following telegram, which
it is proposed to send to-day to the Agent-General, and which is in these words : —‘This Government offers
to Her Majesty’s Government two batteries of our Permanent Field Artillery with ten 16-pound guns,
properly horsed. Also an effective and disciplined battalion of infantry, 500 strong. The artillery will
be under the command of Colonel Roberts, R. A. The whole force under command of Colonel Richardson,
commandant. Can undertake to land force at Suakim in less than thirty days from embarkation. Reply
at once.’ I propose with the approval of the Cabinet to send at once a copy of this telegram to the
Premiers of all the Australian colonies, and to Mr. Stuart.— William Bedk Dalley.’ ‘Cabinet approves.
—W. B. D., 12-2-85.’ ‘ Let telegrams be sent forthwith to all the other colonies, and to Mr. Stuart. I
have communicated with His Excellency.—W.B.D.’ And at noon of that day I forwarded the following
message through the Agent-General : —‘ This Government offers to Her Majesty’s Government two
batteries of our Permanent Field Artillery with ten 16-pound guns, properly horsed. Also an effective
and disciplined battalion of infantry, 500 strong. The artillery will be under command of Colonel
Roberts, R.A. The whole force under command of Colonel Richardson, commandant. Can undertake to


and force at Suakim within thirty days from embarkation. Reply at once. -William Bede DalleV.
is proceeding I caused to be communicated to all the Premiers of the Australian colonies. I had
previously communicated with the officer who is now on his way to Egypt in command of the contingent,
and with the officer in command of our Permanent Artillery Force as to the extent of the force which I
was justified in leading the Imperial Government to believe the Government of this colony could send to
Egypt. I had also satisfied myself fully by personal interviews with those not only capable of advising me,
but who had control of the means of giving immediate effect to their advice, as to the time within which
the force could be despatched. I have been charged with a most blameworthy precipitancy in committing
the colony to an offer of assistance which I had at the time I made it no means of affording, and which, if
the Government succeeded in raising it, I could not equip and despatch in reasonable time. The Govern-
ment has vindicated itself from both charges. At least four times the number sent could have been easily
obtained, and arrangements for their transport could have been made without any difficulty. This offer
having been made I ventured at once to publicly express my confidence that it would be accepted by the
Imperial Government; and the Government immediately acted upon this conviction. We proceeded at
once to make such arrangements as, if the offer were accepted, would enable us to organise the force, fully
equip it, and despatch it within the briefest possible space of time; and if it were declined we should not
have saddled the country with a shilling of expenditure beyond the cost of a telegram. Last Sunday
three weeks the message conveying the acceptance was received. It was in these words ‘ Her
Majesty’s Government accepts with much satisfaction offer of your Government upon the understanding
that force must be placed absolutely under orders of general commanding as to duties upon which it will
be employed. Force of artillery is greater than required. Only one battery accepted. Transport should
call at Aden for orders. lam to inform you, in confidence, that plans of general not fully formed, but
may probably involve placing troops in summer quarters after short campaign from Suakim. If after this
knowledge your Government must prefer immediate despatch of contingent War Office does not desire to
delay it. Press comment very favourably upon your splendid offer.’ This was received by me and some
of my colleagues at a distance of hundreds of miles from the capital, which we did not reach till the
next day. And last Tuesday week, scarcely fifteen clear days from the receipt of that message, the
expedition had left Sydney. I shall not presume to speak of the character and composition of the force
from a military point of view. lam not competent to do so. But those having the highest title to speak
critically on such subjects have freely declared that no finer or more soldier-like body of men could be
collected in any of Her Majesty’s dominions. It was made up of numbers of soldiers who had fought and
bled for their Sovereign in various parts of the world—of some of the very flower of our own youth and
chivalry in its ranks were gentlemen who were commissioned officers of the Queen, and it was placed
under the command of as true and brave and thoughtful and gentle a leader as ever led men to honour
and victory. How was it equipped? On this point I have no difficulty in speaking. Two of my
colleagues, the Minister for Works and the Colonial Treasurer, deserve the great and exclusive credit of
the equipment. Night and day during those fifteen days from the receipt of the acceptance of our offer
till the expedition had sailed they knew no rest; they saw to everything —and with what result 1 I
venture to say that the most leisurely planned and ably directed military expedition that ever left the
shores of England was not more completely equipped in all that was necessary for its efficiency and comfort
than this little army, created, organised, and despatched by our colony within little more than a fortnight.
And here I may pause to advert to what was taking place while these preparations were going on. The
whole country was awakened to a glorious sympathy with the movement. Such a manifestation was made
of nearly universal approval as has never before been witnessed in this nor perhaps in any country. In
the other colonies notably in Victoria—our action was viewed with a generous and noble sympathy that
has done more to bind us together than any number of conferences or any kind of legislation, while in
England our action has obtained the special commendation of the Sovereign—the expression of the
gratitude of her Ministers and has inspired the enthusiasm of the people*. W hen were such messages


of thankfulness, admiration, confidence, and tenderness ever sent before to a British colony ?
And now, having thus briefly reviewed what has been done during these past three or four
weeks, I shall say a few words upon how it has been done. It has been done as you all
know upon the sole responsibility of the executive. It has been done as all such works must
be done, or be left undone. To be effective such work must be swiftly done. The opportunity
suddenly arises and must be instantly seized or it passes away for ever. Ihe indication of our rapidity of
action is to be found in the acceptance of our offer. Other colonies were as loyal, as generous, as enthusi-
astic as ourselves ; but they were not so prompt. Plad we pursued the ordinary course of pi ocedure, the
work could never have been done at all. The summoning of Parliament to consider the proposal would
have consumed before Parliament could assemble just the time within which the expedition was organised
and despatched. To say nothing of the loss of time, the overwhelming energies which were exclusively
bent upon the work of organising and equipping the forces would have been distracted from that labour,
and the object could not have been attained. The responsibility was assumed by the Government, and its
weight must be borne by them. We have undoubtedly strained the law ; and of course we knew it. We
now come to give Parliament the opportunity of approving or condemning our proceedings—of indem-
nifying all concerned against injury—and of making the necessary parliamentary provision for the
maintenance of the expedition. We have taken this course at the earliest moment after our labour has
been accomplished. I shall not attempt to conceal my opinion that the course which we have taken was
a daring one ; and that the powers which we have used might in some hands be dangerously exercised.
It is for Parliament to determine whether we are to be censured or supported. For my own part I may
be permitted to say that I think our action has been stamped in terms more unmistakable than have ever
before been employed on any question with the heartfelt approval of the country. If we have in a
moment of gloom and disaster succeeded in inspiring the confidence of the mother country in our undoubted
loyalty and in the practical value of our connection—if we have drawn the great Australian colonies more
closely together —if we have shown to the world under a new light the strength which England may
command in a great struggle —if we have repaid, at so trifling a cost, but a small portion of the vast debt
which we owe to the mother country for our guardianship, for the total cost of our help will be but
little more than a year’s imperial naval expenditure for our protection—if we have done these things I
venture to submit that we are not to be condemned because we have done them without the direct
authority of Parliament. If, on the other hand, the danger of our proceeding as an evil example is
greater than our immediate service, I shall not personally complain if we are censured and punished for an
act which I shall always proudly and fondly regard as one of the greatest in its beneficent consequences to
the empire that the colonies of England have ever yet had the glorious privilege of performing.”
On the following day Sir Alfred Stephen spoke to the question in the following terms :—“ Although 1
feel quite persuaded that the address will be carried in this House with very few—l trust not more than
two dissentient voices—and although I am quite sure that after the exhaustive explanations given by the
Attorney-General, and the very admirable address which we heard from the honorable member, Mr.
Macintosh, which I charicterise as one that does equal honor to his mind, to his heart, and to his good
sense —and though I am aware that no words of mine can add much force to the strength of the argu-
ments already used in favour of the motion, —still my heart is too full, considering the nature of this
question, the enthusiasm which it is calculated to excite and which it has excited, to permit me to be
silent. Perhaps, considering the nature of the question now before us, considering all that we have to
think of, the events of the last few weeks, and remembering the position which I occupy in this House
and in the community, having been a resident in the colonies for sixty years and of this colony for forty-
flre years, and I think I may say, being the oldest member of this House, some words may be expected
from me. In common with the vast majority of the inhabitants of this colony I look upon the events of
the last few weeks, the offer of the troops to the British Government and their acceptance, and the
departure of those men under circumstances so exciting and so enduring as they will be in history, as the


grandest event which could mark the annals of any colony or country under heaven. And further, I, in
common with the great majority of people, not only in New South Wales, but also in all the Australasian
colonies, regard that event as one that is calculated at once to raise the character of this community more
than all that could have been effected for us by any increase in wealth or by any other efforts of our own.
We have long been spoken of—we are to this day spoken of in public documents as dependencies of the
Crown and a portion of her Majesty’s possessions. But we have now claimed, and the claim has been
admitted, to be considered no longer dependencies or possessions of the Crown, but as an integral portion,
as part and parcel of the great empire of which we demand to be considered a part. It may be said that
that has been well understood throughout; but if it has been understood it has never been expressed until
now ;it has never been felt; but after this it is certainly never likely to be forgotten. Elsewhere some
attempt has been made to cast ridicule upon this great movement of ours as if we had grandiloquently
spoken of it as engrossing the attention of the entire world. I do not know that any such words have
been uttered elsewhere ; but if they were I am not prepared to admit that they were very much beyond
the truth. I perceive that in the House of Lords at least—that grand hereditary tribunal, comprising
perhaps the largest portion of the intellect of the empire, a large amount of wealth and great descended
names there I see that the acceptance of the offer has been thought well worthy of an address to the
Crown, and the Crown has been pleased to express its thankfulness at the offer which has been so
prudently and so promptly made. I believe that this movement of ours, so successfully carried out as it
has been, —accompanied by the enthusiasm it has excited throughout the Australian colonies—will have
its effect on other countries than our fatherland. Ido not think it is likely at all that it will be considered
that we have rescued the mother country from distress, or that the few men we have sent to Africa will
ha\ e any very material effect upon the fortunes of the war. Ido not know that any person ever said so.
But in other countries it will be thought a grand thing that the colonies are willing to support the parent
state in a moment of supposed peril, and that they have men and resource to enable them to extend that
support; that we are not the insignificant people that possibly we have been thought in countries where
we are not well known. Without any exageration or attempt at grandiloquence, let it only bo remem-
bered that France, Germany, and Russia have consuls in the city. Is it not the duty of those consuls to
report what is going on 1 We may assume that the event which has just taken place will not be considered
one of insignificance, and that it will not be without its effect in any contest between England and other
countries. lam sanguine enough to think that even that result will follow. I have recently returned
from the sister colony of Victoria, where I have mixed, I may say with all classes, and there I
have heard but one opinion expressed. I met with a German, who, like all his compatriots who
settle in Australia, is heart and soul an Australian, and he glories in the act which we have
done. In all the circles in which I moved there was seldom an occasion on which this great event
was not the topic of conversation, and there was but one opinion expressed, and that was one of
respect and admiration for the colony which had been able to carry out so grand an undertaking and for
the Government which had the skill, courage, and the determination to carry out the resolution of the
country so successfully as it had been done. I believe that there is as much enthusiasm on this subject in
the great colony of Victoria as there is here, and I believe there is only one prominent feeling apart from
that, and that is a feeling of regret that their offer which speedily followed ours could not, under the cir
cumstances, be accepted. Well, is it nothing to be elevated at once to the character and status of a nation 1
Is this not a just cause for pride 1 ? Is there no ground for thankfulness to the Government which effected
this 1 They have had the audacity—a wise and grand audacity—to originate a movement which to this
hour no doubt has not been sustained by any expression of parliamentary approval, but which has received
the support of almost every human being whose opinion is worth considering. The vast mass of people
out of doors—those who return the members of the other Chamber—agree that that was a grand offer to
make. It was not made in any selfish spirit; it was not made for the protection of our own hearths and
homes. If the day ever arrives—which I hope will not be in my time, though It may come, when we


shall have occasion to raise a larger body of men for the protection of those who are dearest to ns, do you
think so ill of the people of this country as to imagine that there are not thousands of men who will leap
to arms for the purpose of defending their wives and children ? Do you think that we shall feel the want
of the few we have sent away? Not we. Of course I know that there may be a force brought here which
we might find irresistible; but I have that faith in the stamina, in the courage of the race to which we
belong that let whomsever will come they will find that, although we may not be wholly prepared, they
have tough customers to deal with. Knowing as I do my learned friend the Attorney-General, and most
proud I am to call him my friend, I do not believe the offer was made by him or even by any of his
Ministry with any idea of aggrandizement or reward. I do not believe that the idea ever entered his
mind, but that he acted as a true patriot and from his feeling for the country in which he was born, and
in which he has made and will retain the respect and admiration of his fellow-mon. I might address to
him, if honors and rewards were any object, words which were on another occasion addressed to a distin-
guished man. His services in this case have been rendered to his country, and he may rely upon it that
they will not be forgotten. I might say “Semper honos nomenque tuam laudesque manebunt.” If I have
any other feeling in connection with the course taken by my learned friend, it is simply that of a not
ungenerous envy that I had not the good fortune to perform such an act, and all the qualities which would
have enabled me to carry it out successfully. The topics on which I should wish to address the Council
are so numerous, and ideas have crowded upon my mind so thickly as to defy arrangement, and almost
defeat the power of adequate utterance. There are two or three matters, however, to which I shall address
myself. The idea of sending assistance to the mother-country is no new one. Ido not believe that those
who have the direction of the military affairs of the Empire really required the services of those 600 men,
and that they would not have fought their battles without them ; but that is not the question. The
grandeur of the event consists in this : that when we saw that there was a moment—not of peril, but a
moment when we could show our sympathy with the mother-country—we did all that was immediately in
our power to help her, and to show that we were at one with her in heart and hand. I have said that it
is no new thing this idea of assisting the mother-country. Our most distinguished patriot, William Charles
Wentworth, in some lines which he recited at Cambridge when he was an undergraduate, foreshadowed
some such event when speaking of the glory of England. Of course, when we speak of the glory of
England, we mean the glory of the Empire, not excepting Scotland and old Ireland. I heard with
pleasure the honorable member, Mr. Macintosh, say that he was born in Scotland. To that country I owe
ray ancestry, such as it is. The glory of the Empire will never die; but days of distress may come upon
the Empire. Wentworth, in his poem, contemplated the possibility of such a state of things, and he said
should the day unhappily ever arrive when England’s power shall be on the wane, then the Australian
colonies will come to the rescue of the mother-country. Then, he said, would Australia send her fleets and
her armies to assist the country from which they sprang.
“ And Australasia float with flag unfurled,
A new Britannia in another world.”
The idea seems a little prophetic. Should the day come in my time, or in the future, when the mother-
country shall require greater assistance than she has yet received, depend upon it there are hearts warm
enough and arms strong enough to send men to defend her, and to do it successfully. We have made a
beginning. It has been said that we have pledged ourselves to support England in all her wars• but Ido
not see that that result follows from anything that we have done. Those who are opposed to what has
been done—and they are few, and, judging by their public utterances, perfectly rabid and not very loyal
in the expression of their views,—object to the exercise of such a power without the sanction of Parliament.
To that point I shall therefore address myself. I was pleased to hear the honorable member, Mr. Macin-
tosh, say in effect that there are occasions, and no doubt many, when perhaps the most meritorious things
a man has done as a public man have been when in the interests of his country he exceeded his legitimate
power. What do we think of Lord Nelson before Copenhagen? That is a pretty strong instance of


unconstitutionality and illegality, and if ho had failed in his disobedience he knew that he would risk his
head. But there are occasions and times when a man in a public place must not regard his own safety or
convenience, when he feels that to carry out an object it is necessary that he should do what is an uncon-
stitutional act at once to secure a great national good. Lord Nelson was engaged in a very perilous
encounter; a signal of recall was made by his superior officer, but seeing that he could achieve the object
for which he was sent, putting the telescope to his blind eye he declined to see the order he disobeyed ; but
he achieved the purpose of his enterprise; the fleets of Denmark did not fall into the hands of the then
dictator of Europe. There are other instances equally conclusive of the success of the principle. What
do we think of Lord Beaconsfield bringing Indian troops to Malta. By party opponents it was denounced
as a highly illegal and unconstitutional measure, and against the Bill of Rights, though in what way it was
against that bill I cannot discover. Lord Beaconsfield inspired Europe at that time with a knowledge of
the strength and resources of the British Empire by suddenly calling down these 10,000 Indian troops,
and it had an effect in influencing the powers with whom it appears that at that time he was meditating
war; and the great object was achieved, illegally if you will. Ido not say it was; but it was a
very considerable stretch of power. Then what about his purchase of three million pounds worth
of shares in the Suez Canal. Had he parliamentary authority for that? He had not. But a moment
arose when there was an absolute necessity for purchasing the shares, and he thought that if the
opportunity were allowed to pass it may be gone for ever, together with the interest of England as a
controlling power over the Canal. Yet I think he was as constitutional as any minister England ever had,
and I think that if he now held power General Gordon might still have been alive. The purchase was
objected to as irregular, improper, audacious, but it was ratified. Although that purchase was so violently
condemned, the shares are said now to be worth double what was given for them. The objection raised
here and elsewhere, as I understand it, as to the exercise of this power by the Government, is that it was
made without previous parliamentary sanction, that it was wrong in itself, and that the verdict of the
people at large ought to have been waited for. I hold that to be very much of a technical objection.
What I am about to read I do not find in any book; it is the result of my own judgment after a consider-
ation of the authorities on the subject. ‘ I venture to maintain that a Ministry will be justified in incurring
expenditure without previous parliamentary sanction in any case where there is a high probability though
not a certainty—which can never be predicted as to any political measure—that it will be sanctioned, and
where there are strong grounds of expediency, though not amounting to a case of emergency calling for
but not excusing the expenditure; and that which is true of expenditure will obviously be equally true of
any public measure which leads necessarily to expenditure.’ I have written this for what my reputation
as a lawyer may be worth. That is the extent of the Ministry’s responsibility and power in the matter
of incurring public expenditure without parliamentary authority. I simply offer it as the result of my
judgment, as a fair, true corollary of the authorities 1 have been able to consult. Then it is said that the
Government may have waited. Yes, till the opportunity for action was lost. I venture to submit to the
House and the country that the Attorney-General has shown conclusively that then and then only w r as the
time for action, for making the offer, and, had he waited, the very object to be achieved wmuld have passed
and gone for ever. At that time we had the disastrous news not only of the fall of Khartoum by
treachery, but also the death of the greatest man who has lived within this century—great in every sense,
as an administrator, as a man, eminently as a general, and as one having power over other men. Ido not
say that his was the only arm on which Great Britain had to rely, but it was the strongest. He was cut
down, Khartoum taken, thousands of wild Arabs led by a fanatic and impostor poured forth in all
directions ready to attack the necessarily disheartened and reduced body of men. That was the supreme
moment for action. Happily our Government saw and took advantage of it; they made that offer which
will render them famous, and raise this colony from the status of a mere dependency to rank as an integral
portion of the greatest empire in the world—greater than were those of Greece and Rome. It is a great
thing for us as British subjects to remember that this great power has not attained her glory invariably by


mastery, or by her powers in arms, but by her success in the arts of peace, and by expanding her empire
into what were unknown regions, and replacing barbarism with a state of civilisation. I have nothing
further to say than to express personally not merely my admiration for what has been going on in the
course of the last few weeks in regard to this expedition, but also to say how deeply T, with others, feel
the attachment that is due to the fatherland, and my delight, my rejoicing from the inmost wellings of my
heart, in having a claim to love that land, and to be considered one with her. I refer lastly to the motto
which we have inscribed on the walls of our University, embodying in itself the feeling that now animates
every one who hears me, and also the large body outside, that our hearts are not changed simply by immi-
grating to another soil. No ! We have engraved on the walls of our University the words ‘ Sidere mens
eadem mutato,’ The star (the latitude) has changed, but the mind remains with us for ever.”
In the Legislative Assembly the address in reply to the Governor’s speech contained the following
clause : — u We desire to express our hearty approval of the conduct of the ministers in despatching the
Australian contingent to aid the imperial forces in Egypt; and we regard their action as manifesting the
loyalty of the Australian people to the Crown, and as drawing more closely together the various portions
of our great empire.” An amendment which was moved, to the effect that Parliament should have been
consulted on the matter, called forth a debate, in the course of which the Honorable the Colonial Trea-
surer, Mr. G. R. Dibbs, spoke as follows :—“The action of the Government as far as it has gone is founded
on purely constitutional lines. We have done a certain act, and we now apply to the House to endorse
that act , we admit to a certain extent that in taking upon ourselves—not to declare war against a foreign
state, as has been alleged, but to assist the mother-country in her troubles, we had to spend a certain
amount of money for the expenditure of which there is no parliamentary sanction ; but we have taken the
earliest possible opportunity to ask Parliament to give the necessary sanction. If the House refuses to
give its sanction to the expenditure, the course of the Government is clear—probably some one else will
have to be taken into our counsel, and some other influence be felt before we can be disposed of. I say
that if the House considers that we have acted unconstitutionally, and a majority vote accordingly, we
have another step to take ; that step may possibly be retirement from office, and it may be something more
perhaps which would be unpleasant to those who are against us. Either we have acted rightly or wrongly in
what we have done, and we have the country with us or against us. The question is a very simple one. I do
not believe that it has ever fallen to the lot of a minister of the Crown in this country to submit to the
House a question of such great moment as that which it is now incumbent upon me to introduce. I need
hardly say that I am acting here to-night only as the locum tenens of the Colonial Secretary, who is absent
in New Zealand. I feel that the task which I am now performing is one which could be far better
discharged by the honorable gentleman at the head of the Government. It is also a matter of deep regret
to me—as it must be to the House—that we have not within these walls to-night a member of the Govern-
ment who sits in another Chamber, who possesses distinguished abilities, and whose eloquence would have
convinced even the honorable gentlemen to whom I have just been referring that the Government had
taken the right course. However, lam left to make—and I will do so to the best of my ability—some
explanation of the cause which induced the Government to make this very bold offer to the English
Government. I need not say one word as to the manner in which the offer was carried out. That speaks
for itself. I have said that the offer made to the Imperial Government was a very bold one. lam
prepared to admit —and perhaps I shall disarm a certain amount of criticism when I say so that when I
became acquainted with the offer made by the Cabinet during my temporary absence from Sydney I was
taken a great deal by surprise. It was calculated to take away the breath of a man of much larger
dimensions than I possess. I must admit that when I read the cablegram which was sent to England, the
first difficulty which occurred to my mind had reference to the constitutional position. The question which
occupied me was whether we had the right to spend the money without the vote of Parliament. The next
question which occupied my mind was whether it would be possible within the short time named to find
the men and the equipment for the voyage which they were about to undertake. I make this admission


simply because it has been hinted through the newspapers by a certain gentleman, who shall be unnamed
by me during this debate, that—in more emphatic language than the writer of those letters to the news-
papers is himself in the habit of using—l denounced my colleagues for entering upon this wild goose chase,
as he called it. At first the proposal did almost take my breath away, and I dare say it had a similar
effect upon many gentlemen who will vote with ns upon this question. I have not the slightest doubt
that it took away the breath of honorable gentlemen opposite to find that the Government could make so
bold and apparently reckless an offer. Two companies of artillery and 500 well-disciplined and well-
trained troops to be despatched within fourteen days of the time of the offer ! It was a bold offer, and it
required a bolder man than lam to say that it could be executed. I paused for a moment to see whether
it was possible to execute it; but I assert now that I was not long in seeing that it was quite possible to
obtain the men and to despatch them within the time named. In company with my colleagues, I have
done my best to secure the accomplishment of our object. The offer having been accepted we were bound
to do our best to carry it out for the honor of the country we are governing. I propose to deal with the
constitutional view of the question last; but it has been asserted by the last speaker that no law existed
under which the men could legally be engaged. It is said that the act of 1871 —Martin’s act as it is called —
only gives the Government power to raise a certain number of men for service in the colony. That is
quite true ; but I will explain to the House presently—and honorable gentlemen learned in the law will
correct me if I am wrong-—that there is in existence a law under which the engagement of these men is
perfectly legal—that the action of the Government has been anticipated by the Imperial Government, and
that there is in force a law supplementing other legislation under which the engagement of these men
is perfectly legal, and under which our men when they go into the field will be subject to all the rules and
to the discipline of Imperial forces. I referr to the Army Act of 1881. The mover of the amendment
spoke as if England had engaged in an unholy war; as if she were worrying the lives out of poor Arabs in
a manner which was quite unjustifiable, as if the matter were one in which she had no right to exercise
her voice and control; as if she were an interloper in Egypt and should leave the Egyptians to conduct
their own government as best they could. I think I can show the honorable member that affairs in Egypt
concern our empire to an enormous extent. I think I can prove not only that the Imperial Government
has a right to take the course it has taken in Egypt., but also that upon the success of British arms in the
Soudan the fate of India in all probability hinges. And if that success concerns India it also concerns the
Australian colonies. If the Mahdi with his hordes of Arabs is able practically to conquer Egypt, if he is
able to secure the ends which he has set out for himself, we shall probably have a rebellion in India. The
success of the Mahdi at Khartoum has isolated the troops of General Wolseley, and has left him dependent
upon the loyalty of certain tribes who, up to this moment, have assisted the English Government. The
fall of Khartoum, and, worse than all, the death of General Gordon, has been the means of giving a vast
impetus to the cause of the Mahdi. The formation of the Arab tribes into one body in support of the
Mahdi is dependent upon the ability of General Wolseley to hold his own until reinforcements can be
brought to him. The state of British authority in Egypt, and the fate of the Suez Canal—the great high-
way to India —are thus hung in one balance. This brings me to the observation that the interests of
Australia are also bound up in the success of British arms in Egypt. Let the Mahdi obtain the mastery
for a short time and what will become of that great highway of communication, the Suez Canal, through
which Australian commerce of the value of £20,000,1)00 a year passes? It is a serious matter when we
consider that after the fall of Khartoum, General Wolseley at once telegraphed the request that forces
might be promptly sent to him. We know also that at that time the Imperial Government, seeing the
difficulty in which they were placed, did what they had censured the previous Government for doing —they
called out the reserves. Moreover, they ordered large masses of troops to be got under way for Suakim.
A large number of troops was also ordered to go from India to Suakim. General Wolseley had asked
that aid might be promptly given, and one of the reasons which induced the Government to make this
offer to the Imperial authorities was that, having the men and the material here at the time comparatively


idle, we could at once utilise our force, and could have our contingent forwarded to Suakim almost as
quickly as the English and Indian troops could arrive there. We felt that our interests were bound up in
the success of the Imperial arms against the Mahdi. Had the Mahdi, after the fall of Khartoum, secured
a victory over the British forces in the Soudan, there is not a shadow of a doubt but that the loyal tribes,
who had been faithful to us, would have been crushed out of their loyalty by his success, and would have
risen in one body, threatening the destruction of the Suez Canal, and there would have been a rising
throughout India such as that which occurred in 1855, That was the position in which England found
herself at that particular moment, and yet we are told here by honorable gentlemen who do not read the
newspapers and who evidently do not study history, that England wanted no assistance—that she was in
a position to fight the whole world —to control the Mahdi, to fight Germany, to dictate a certain policy to
France, and to bid defiance to Russia in Afghanistan. To hear honorable members talk one would imagine
that England had only the Mahdi to fight. Let any person take a calm view of the position of affairs in
Europe when our offer was made to the Imperial Government, and he will find that England was in a
position in which she most needed help, although she was quite strong enough to do without it. At no
time in her history was she more beset by enemies. She stood at that particular moment without one ally
in Europe; without one ally on the face of God’s earth save her own colonies. That was the position of
England on the 12th February, 1885, when the Government of this colony took upon themselves a respon-
siblity the exercise of which they well knew would in a few days bring them face to face with Parliament.
They exercised this responsibility boldly for the good and honor of Australia and for its protection. We
are here to-night face to face with Parliament, and I do not fear the result. Ido not for one moment
doubt the loyalty of the people of this colony, although there may be some disaffected persons, even within
the Avails of this House, claiming to represent Englishmen, who talk of separation from the old country.
Out, I say, upon such men avlio would so disgrace the name of a representative of Englishmen, Avho would
ignore the very name of Englishman or Scotchman, and who would come here and talk of separation from
the mother country at a time when she never stood more in need of aid. My blood almost froze in my
veins to-night as I listened to one honorable member; but I knew perfectly well that his language would
meet Avith no response in this House, and I believe that if it be published in the newspapers to-morrow,
not one man will be found to indorse it. What, said this honorable member, had we to do with the
quarrels and Avars of England ? We should cut the painter 1 We should use England to defend us in times
of difficulty ; we should draw all that Ave can from her ; we should have the protection of her fleet to our com-
merce; but immediately we see a cloud upon the horizon we should cut the painter. Suppose such a sentiment
Avere general, suppose we Avere sunk into infamy and iniquity to such an extent that men, calling themselves
Australians or Englishmen, could be found Avilling to abandon the old country in the hour of her need, what
Avould become of us 1 We should be no longer Englishmen or Scotchmen. We could no longer claim a share
in the glories of our ancestors. We should have trailed the grand old flag in the dust. We should hav T e
abandoned that name of all others of which men have reason to be proud. We should no longer form a
portion of that empire which is the envy of every other nation. What, I ask, if this degenerate repre-
sentative of Englishmen could have his Avay, would become of us 1 We should become the sport of every
pirate that dares to come within the Avaters of our harbour; the contempt of the Avorld ; degraded,
because avc have abandoned the country of our fathers—that country which, as I said before, is the envy
of every other nation, I alluded just now, and i admit 1 have deviated from the line I had laid down for
myself, because 1 could not sit and hear such disloyalty preached Avithout entering my protest I say I
alluded to-night to the fact that General Wolseley found himself after the fall of Khartoum isolated and
almost cut off, and that he made an appeal to the British Government for reinforcements, which are beinsr
* o
sent both from India and from England. But there is an extraordinary circumstance in connection with
the matter, and one which goes a long way to slioav the state of the political horizon in Europe, and what
the War Office authorities and the statesmen of England thought of the situation. The reserves of
England were ordered to be called out. Noav this is only done at a time when imminent danger is


supposed to threaten the Empire, and following on the fall of Khartoum and the then state of Europe, the
British reserves were ordered to be called out. They had not been called out before since the year 1877,
when England was on the verge of a war with Russia, and when the action taken by the Beaconsfield
Government in calling out the reserves—action taken without the consent of Parliament—possibly averted
the calamity of a European war. I have in my hand a copy of Mr. Justice McCarthy’s 1 History of our
Times,’ in which he refers to this calling out of the reserves. Speaking of that bold and brilliant act of
Lord Beaconsfield in bringing Indian native troops to Cyprus, and sending the British fleet into the waters
of Constantinople, the writer says :— c It is out of the question to suppose that, as long as European policy
is conducted on its present principles, the great powers of the west could consent to allow Russia to force
on Turkey any terms she might think proper. Turkey meanwhile kept feebly moaning that she had
been coerced into signing the treaty. The Government determined to call out the reserves, to summon a
contingent of Indian troops to Cyprus, and to make an armed landing on the coast of Syria. All these
resolves were not, however, made known at the time. Every one felt sure that something important was
going on, and public expectancy was strained to the full.’ I mention this merely to show that at that
particular period the Government of England, without the sanction of Parliament, called out the reserves,
and did what Mr. Gladstone then described as an unconstitutional and illegal act—the Mr. Gladstone of
to-day, who is calling out the reserves again, who is bringing Indian troops to Egypt, and who is accepting
the aid of troops from Australia. I point this out for the purpose of showing that the people of England,
who after all are the best judges, quite satisfied themselves that on the 12th February England was beset
with almost greater dangers than at any other period of her existence —Germany desirous of humiliating
England—l do not mince what I say ; I say it boldly, and I take the consequences—Germany desirous
of humiliating England ; France taking the cue of her policy from Germany. The blue books that have
been published prove what I now say—England was without a single ally ; the Russian, playing his
waiting game for a serious reverse in the Soudan, for a rising of the Mahomedan troops in India and in
Egypt, for a probable collision with Germany, and a possible dispute with France, makes an advance on
the north-western provinces of India. In such a time, England feeling a need for the help of her own
countrymen, her own descendants, her own flesh and blood, accepts the offer of New South Wales. She
saw that the voice raised throughout the whole of xAustralasia —for New South Wales then represented
Australasia —and we were prepared to offer her assistance and at the same time to defend ourselves—
would prove to the world at large that the colonies which the old statesmen of Europe generally look upon
as a weak point in the empire—a point of attack and a drain for men and ships—were no longer a weak-
ness but towers of strength to the empire. That was why the offer was made, and why the Government
are prepared to stand the consequences if they have done wrong. But we know that we have not done
wrong. We have received the commendation of the whole of this colony ; and we have received the
commendation and approval of the whole of Australasia ; we have received the approval of every English-
speaking country under the sun. We have been the recipients of a message from the Lord Mayor of
London, conveying the approval of the citizens of that vast city. We have approval from Lord Wolseley,
from the Duke of Cambridge, and last, but not least, we have had approval and most graceful message
from no less a personage than Her Majesty the Queen. We are not afraid, under these circumstances, of
taking a vote of this House as to whether —I am not going to use the word loyal or disloyal—this House
is going to be English in its character, and whether it fairly represents the people. I maintain we do
represent the people, and that in the action we have taken we have done nothing more than to correctly
guage public opinion and act up to it. I was saying just now that the reserves were last called out during
the Administration of Lord Beaconsfield, and just before his death ; but the reserves have since been called
out by the peace-loving government of Mr. Gladstone, and that of itself should be proof of the clearest
character that the people of England at the present moment believe in the danger of the situation. Those
who read the English papers at the time of the sending of Indian troops to Cyprus will remember that a
cry was got up called the ‘ Jingo ’ cry. Lord Beaconsfield’s Administration were accused by the Liberal


party of being Jingoes. Yet the moment that difficulties occur, and that a cloud rises on the horizon, and
when Russia plays a similar policy to that which she played in 1877, the Jingo cry becomes the cry and
policy of the Gladstone Administration. I will now briefly reply to one or two objections which have
been raised out of doors, because until the speech of the honourable member for The Hunter (Mr. Burns)
I have listened in vain for any attack on the policy of the Government. I wanted to know if we were to
have opposition to-day to the policy of the Government; because I admit, that though my Scotch caution
came to the front and led me to think twice before committing myself to the policy of offering troops, the
same caution came to the front in another direction. I vainly hoped that it would be possible to take the
debate on this question to-night, and that there would be no division. I vainly hoped that, as the
honourable member for Monaro (Mr. Badgery) put it to-night, the whole House might, by an act of
unanimity, carry the address to the Governor on broad national lines, and that the paltry spirit of party
for once would be forgotten. I was sanguine enough to believe that; but I must be content, I presume,
with the outcome of this debate. I believe that the most prominent members of the Opposition
will not make this a party question ; and I believe that to their honour, and to the honour of the
country, they will give their vote on this occasion from a love of the country in which we live, and upon
broad national grounds. But there are some members whom we have heard to-night who would vote
against any government, and, as a public advertisement in the papers the other day told us, would vote
alone on the occasion if companions were not forthcoming. I should like to see one individual standing
by himself on this particular occasion. We have been told out of doors that the Government, by its
action, has placed New South Wales, and in fact the Australian colonies, outside the respect due to her as
a neutral, the position which she before occupied—that we, a dependency of England, under the protection
of England, a portion of England, have lost our neutrality by reason of the act of the present Government,
and that we have exposed the colony to attack. I have read letters in the newspapers from distinguished
men, in which we were accused of having made war with a foreign state, and thus lost our neutrality. To
attempt to argue against such a charge I believe the House would consider absurd. Let us believe, and
let it go forth to the world, that, as long as we are under the English flag, we are a portion of the British
empire, are prepared to rejoice with her in all her joys, and to bear our full share of her troubles ; that we
are not unmindful of what she has done for us, and that whether for weal or for woe any country that
stands by England in her wars will perish with her doom. Even if we perish with the doom of England
let us stand by the country to which we owe so much, and let us hear no longer the voice of any traitor
in Sydney, or within the walls of this Chamber, attempting to create sedition and disloyalty. The honor-
able member for Mudgee (Mr. Buchanan) told us that the results of this would be to tax the people, and I
have no doubt he is gloating over the idea that to obtain supplies necessary for this expedition I shall have
to come down to the House with some scheme of taxation. I believe his patriotism is of so low an order
that if I did bring in a scheme of taxation he would vote for it if it would bring about protection. Now I
am not going into a financial statement at this stage. I will keep myself in reserve for that until another
night. But I can assure the House that the revenue of the country is in such a buoyant state that the
expense of the Soudan expedition for twelve months, calculated as it has been by those who understand
the business, will be covered by the surplus of revenue over expenditure at the end of December last year.
That disposes of the cry that we are attempting to tax the working-men, that we are going to tax the
unfortunate miner in Newcastle for the purpose of playing at soldiers and carrying on war. To-morrow
night I shall ask for a vote of £150,000 towards the expenses of the expedition, and an estimate made by
the colonels of infantry and artillery shows that a sum of £264,000, at the very outside, will cover the
whole expense of the expedition for twelve months. After asking the House to provide £150,000 towards
the expenses of the expedition, I shall have more than sufficient to carry us forward and to meet Parlia-
ment in the ordinary way. It will probably be then found that we have a surplus of £172,000 on the
31st December of this year. To return to the charges against us, —another charge is that we are doing
an inconsistent act in burthening the country with the cost of importing people from England, and at the


same time sending men out of the country. In an abstract sense it does seem absurd to pay for the
introduction of people into the country on the one hand, and to send them away at great expense on
the other. But, sir, every man who has left these shores, and who returns from the scat of war —and
I believe the majority of them will return, crowned with glory and honor, —will become the nucleus of
such a force as the colony will be compelled to maintain. If we do not establish such a force, the country
will insist upon our successors doing so, and carrying out what we now contemplate. The men we have
sent away at some cost to the country will come back after passing an apprenticeship in the art of war, and
they will form a nucleus with which to build up a force for the defence of the country. We shall thus
discourage aggression, because other nations will know that we are prepared to defend ourselves. We
have been accused of denuding our fortifications of the troops necessary for our own defence ; but what
are the facts ? I have before me a return from the colonel commanding which shows what is our position
to-day as compared with our position on the 12th February. We had on that date 2,540 men of all arms,
including the volunteers and the permanent artillery. To-day we have of all forces 2,204 men left for the
defence of the city, exclusive of the Naval Brigade. We have had offers of enlistment in the permanent
artillery to supply the places of the whole of the men who have gone with the expedition except thirty.
That is up to to-night, and we expect to get the other thirty to-morrow. We have sent 750 volunteers to
the front, and we are about 350 men short of the number before the contingent left for the Soudan. Since
the 12th of February we have had thirteen applications for the formation of thirteen companies of volun-
teers of 100 men each to supply the places of those who have gone away, and most of these will be
accepted. The desire and enthusiasm of the people for self-defence has been aroused by this great national
act; and from this time forward, if a militia bill be not passed, we should have three times the number of
volunteers at our back that we had before the 12th of February. This is satisfactory proof that we have
not weakened our defences by sending away the contingent. We have made arrangements in view of any
complications with Russia, for our torpedo corps to be doubled, and the artillery force to be largely
increased. These things have no parliamentary sanction ; but we shall ask Parliament next session to
sanction what we have done for the defence of the country. We have convened Parliament at the earliest
possible opportunity after the excitement was over, and it is only right that this question should have full
and free discussion on the part of the members of the House. We cannot be accused of calling Parliament
together in the height of the excitement, and snatching a vote when the voice of reason was not likely to
be heard. There is no question that we have acted in an unconstitutional manner, that we have incurred
expenditure without the sanction of Parliament; but I will read what is said on this subject by a great
authority upon parliamentary law. It shows the impossibility of wholly preventing unauthorised expen-
diture. Of course I admit that according to the letter of the law no expenditure must be undertaken
without the sanction of Parliament. Todd, in his 4 Parliamentary Practice,' at page 546, says :— 4 It is,
therefore, erroneous to suppose that the Government can be absolutely prevented from any misapplication
of the parliamentary grants. Even were it possible to do so, it would not be politic to restrain the
Government from expending money, under any circumstances, without the previous authority of Parlia-
ment. In the words of Mr. Macaulay (Secretary to the Board of Audit), 44 cases must constantly arise,
in so complicated a system of government as ours, where it becomes the duty of the executive authorities,
in the exercise of their discretionary powers, boldly to set aside the requirements of the legislature, trusting
o ' 5
te the good sense of Parliament, when all the facts of the case shall have been explained, to acquit them of
all blame; and it would be, not a public advantage, but a public calamity, if the Government were to be
deprived of the means of so exercising their discretionary authority.” ’ We have exercised that dis-
cretionary authority, and we now ask that sanction which the House will no doubt give. ‘To the same
effect, we have a declaration by a committee of the House of Commons that “in special emergencies
expenditure unauthorised by Parliament becomes absolutely essential.’” The expenditure of money
without the sanction of Parliament is not constitutionally legal, but this author tells us at the same time
that emergencies may arise when the Executive Government must take the responsibility of such expen-


diture, and act upon their own discretion. They must submit the matter to Parliament, however, on the
first opportunity, and Parliament has never yet refused when satisfied of the necessity for the expenditure
to give its sanction. Todd goes on to say : —‘ In such cases the Executive must take the responsibility of
sanctioning whatever immediate urgency requires ; and it has never been found that Parliament exhibited
any reluctance to supply the means of meeting such expenditure.’ That is our position to-day. We admit
the strict parliamentary law, but we have shown the emergency, and we ask the House to approve of the
expenditure. Further on Todd says: —‘The public interests require that the Government should
possess the power of incurring expenses of indispensable necessity, although Parliament may not
have previously provided for them Unforeseen events may happen, and lead to
an expenditure beyond the provision made by Parliament for the ordinary service of the year;
and it must be for the interest of the public that no delay should occur in taking the necessary measures,
and in defraying the expenses which such events may entail.’ There is the clear parliamentary law
according to the authorities, and apart from our own limited small colonial experience. Not long ago we
had to provide funds for the purchase of works of art to the value of £30,000, acquired by the late adminis-
tration, without the sanction of Parliament. But that matter was submitted to the House and the House
voted the money. There was also the purchase of the Chisholm Estate—a better purchase than which
was never made in the public interest—and that was made without the sanction of Parliament. But the
House provided the money and approved of the action of the Government. We have had a nice piece of
constitutional hair-splitting with reference to what was done by the Government of which the honorable
member for The Hunter was a member. The Government at that instance committed Parliament to an
expenditure of £250,000. That was apparently the act of a Governor who was in advance of his govern-
ment. The House saw at once that the expenditure would be for the benefit of the country, and that the
Government had acted wisely, though illegally and unconstitutionally, by incurring the expenditure
without parliamentary sanction. The House met and the money was voted in sums of £50,000 each. I
should like to say a word or two as to the legality of the employment of the men who form the contingent.
I admit that the men could not, perhaps, be legally engaged under the Military and Naval Regulations
Act for service abroad, and I will admit also that the men who have gone to the Soudan have not been
sent under the provisions of any particular statute ; but they have'not gone under coercion. Every man
is a volunteer, and the only question is as to the cost of providing for his passage. There was no
necessity for the volunteers to be sent under the act I have cited. Suppose they had been engaged under
that act, they might not have been legally engaged, but this is an act which entirely overrides our local
statute law. I refer to an imperial act passed in 1881. That act provides for the very contingency which
has now occurred. The wise framers of that statute, considering that at no very distant date the colonies
would wish to help the mother country, provided that:—Where any force of volunteers or of militia or
any force is raised in India or in a colony any law of India or the colony may extend to the officers, non-
commissioned officers and men belonging to such force—whether within or without the limits of India or
the colony. Therefore, Martin’s act can follow the contingent to Suakim. And where any such force is
serving with part of her Majesty’s regular forces then so far as the law of India or the colony has not
provided for the government and discipline of such force this act and any other act for the time being
amending the same shall subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the general
orders of the general officer commanding her Majesty’s forces with which such force is serving apply to the
officers non-commissioned officers and men of such force in like manner as they apply to the officers non-
commissioned officers and men respectively mentioned in the two preceding sections of this act. Here is
an imperial act which clearly gives authority by necessary inference for the employment of these very men,
the legality of whose enlistment has been denied by a judge of the Supreme Court. This act supplies a
blank which the honorable member for The Hunter referred to. The troops having been sent abroad to
be brigaded with her Majesty’s forces, our law follows them, and they are bound by it. 1 have quoted this
act because I believe that writers in the press, and even that the Supreme Court judge, to whom I have


referred, in dealing with the case of a man named Kenna, overlooked this enactment—have denounced the
enrolment of the members of the contingent as illegal. The public no doubt believe that the judge was
right in so doing. Had the judge read the clause which I have read he might have hesitated before
declaring the man’s engagement illegal. There is another act in force called the Colonial Naval Defences
Act, and which makes provisions of a similar character for dealing with the naval forces. That act gives
powers under which the colonial naval forces may be used in connection with her Majesty’s army. The
Government guaged public opinion, and we claim that by our act we have done the country a service, for
which, in lieu of censure, we ought to receive the approbation of this House. We believe that by this
simple act performed on the 12th of February, the Government have done more to bring about the feder-
ation of the empire than could possibly have been done by any other means. Having given the House the
reasons why the offer was made to the British Government, why it was accepted, how it affected the
empire, and where the interests of New South Wales are bound up with those of the empire—having done
this, I am certain that the House will, by a very large majority, approve of the action of the Government.
We have not diminished the power of the colony to defend itself. We have, within two or three hundred
men, the same number of soldiers that we had in February. But we have educated the people, and
aroused in their breasts a deeper love for their country, and excited a deeper patriotism than they ever
before possessed, and by so doing we have stirred their hearts, and made them understand the necessity of
an adequate military preparation. Whatever the act has cost, the result will be that the defences of the
colony, and of the whole of Australasia, will be placed upon a footing which will render attack from with-
out if not absolutely impossible, yet, at all events, absolutely hopeless. If that be the result, then the
Government have done their duty.”
“ Sir John Robertson, who, though in Opposition, also supported the Government in this matter,
made the following characteristically generous speech :—“ However we may differ in opinion as to the
propriety of the course which the Government have taken from a constitutional point of view, I believe
that no one denies that, this expedition having been sent, the cost must be paid. It is absolutely necessary,
in order to support the honor of the country, that we should carry out that which has been undertaken.
Honourable members cry c Hear, hear ! ’ and then say they are going to vote for this amendment, destroy
the Government, and knock the whole thing into a cocked hat. What is the use of doing that ? If you
do, how are the funds for carrying on the expedition to be obtained ? If the amendment is carried, of
course this Government will not proceed any further in the direction of finding funds, and any credit the
colony may have obtained for its action, and any benefit intended for the British army, must be lost.
There will be no more congratulations upon the efforts of our people in support of the old country. If
this amendment is carried, the Government must fall; or it may be that they might do another thing, they
might order the contingent back. What a spectacle we would present to the eyes of the world if, after the
congratulations we have had from Her Majesty the Queen downwards, the contingent was brought back
to this country ! I think honorable members had better carefully consider what they are doing before
they vote for the amendment. I presume that a change of Government and the appointment of the
honorable member for Mudgee (Mr. Buchanan) or some other extreme gentleman as Premier would not
conduce very much to the success of the expedition. Now what, after all, has happened ? The Govern-
ment have, without authority, incurred a very large expenditure. They have not only sent troops away,
but they have raised troops —unquestionably questions of the gravest possible importance—unquestionably
breaches of the letter of the law ; or probably I might go further and say absolute breaches of the law.
Well, what have the Government called Parliament together for now ? To ask it to agree to what they
have done, and to pass an indemnity bill. What other course could the Government have taken I should
like to know? Well, sir, the Government sent away these men, they having volunteered to go. Every
one of them volunteered to go. If that is not legal, it is now our duty to make it legal or withdraw the
expedition. Now, with regard to this alleged breaking of the parliamentary law. With a longer expe-
rience than any other honorable member in this Chamber, I affirm that parliamentary government could


not be carried on —you would have to go back under a Buonaparte or other dictator—if ministers did not
take responsibility occasionally. No government worth its salt will hesitate under some circumstances to
break the law. But they will not break the law in defiance of Parliament, or Parliament will very soon
break their necks. If the majority of the Parliament and of the people approve of this action, who shall
say no ? The whole question resolves into that. As to the breaking of the law, that may be an absolute
duty on the part of responsible ministers. A case might arise in which, if the ministers did not take upon
themselves to break the law, the House when it met would dismiss them for not understanding their
position. Ministers should do what is necessary in the public interest—what in their opinion is desirable
in the public interest, —and if they are supported by the Parliament in what they do that is sufficient.
The question then arises, was this such a case as to warrant the Government in breaking the law ? That
is really the whole question. As for breaking the Constitution as laid down literally under the law, I
maintain that no constitutional minister who understood his duty would refrain from breaking the law if
the interests of the public demanded it. 1 use the word 1 Constitution ’in its broadest sense, and not mean
the mere written Constitution under which we live ; for I say that we have rights going back far beyond
our written Constitution, I always maintained that we possessed rights before we had a Constitution Act,
and that vve were not able to carry them out because we were unfairly dealt with. But now we have a
Constitution. We have responsible government, and we have ministers responsible to this House ; and if
they have broken the law unwisely and in a way dangerous or injurious to the community, it is for this
House to condemn them ;if otherwise, this House should support them. They were not worth their salt
if they would not break the law if it were necessary to do so. Now was this an occasion in which the
Government were called upon to move ? The fall of Khartoum and the loss of Gordon were regarded from
one end of the world to the other, wherever civilised men were to be found, as a terrible disaster. I think
there was not a man, woman, or child in the country who understood the matter who did not grieve over
the fall of Gordon. Having the means, as it was proved we had, I think we were right in rendering assist-
ance to England in the difficulty in which she found herself placed. Ministers despatched the troops with a
speed which is alike honorable to the country and creditable to themselves. They despatched all the men
they said they would, and within the time specified. Therefore we have a right to assume they knew they
could do what they promised when they made the offer. Ido not know whether if I had been in office I
should have done it : Ido not know whether it would have occurred to me. But if it had been suggested
' oo
to me I should have been in favour of it. Twenty-seven years ago, before any man now here was in
Parliament, I stood in this House and had to answer to a vote of censure for inviting the Queen’s Govern-
ment to take away the soldiers to help to suppress the Indian mutiny. We advised that the troops should
go. What did we get for that? We got a vote of censure. Whoever reads the history of the past will
agree that we who suffered that censure for recommending the sending of the troops did honor to the
country, and that those who censured us did not understand their proper position. Mr. Dailey was then
in this Assembly, and he voted with us. I held then, and I hold now, that it is the duty of every subject
to the Queen, wherever he is, whether in these colonies, or in any other of the communities subject to the
British Crown, to do his best to uphold the honor and character of the mother country. I maintain that
it is our duty to give whatever we can. Honorable menbers have said that this is a very small matter.
But, sir, England accepted it with thanks, which she tendered in a manner more marked than in the case
of any ever offered before to a colony of the British empire. Who, then, will say that England did not
require our assistance ? Who is the best judge, General Wolseley or Mr. Buchanan ? I apprehend that
General Wolseley was consulted by the Imperial authorities before they gave an answer accepting our
otter with thanks. Who shall say that England did not want the assistance? If she did not want it she
would not have accepted it. That is the view I take. But surely no one here would like to see this
colony in the position of some of our neighbours—to offer material help to her Majesty’s Goverumen in
these days of trouble, and then after the offer has been accepted, to withdraw and crawl into a gimlet hole
to get out of it. I hope we shall never be guilty of anything of that kind. There must be no shirking of


the responsibility we have undertaken. I observe by a cable message that New Zealand does not
intend to help the old country in any way in this matter. What is she going to do ? Why, the people of
New Zealand are going to lie by and watch, and keep a sharp eye on the telegraph cable. But for the
British fleet how long should we have the cable ? If it had not been for the British fleet should we have
had any cable now 1 ! They have not given nor will they give it seems any help to the British fleet towards
keeping the cable open for them to communicate with the rest of the world. I hope we shall never be so
cowardly and mean as that. I hope that we shall always be willing to give help to the old country in
return for the help we get from her. The position in which New Zealand appears to have placed herself
is a despicable one for any great colony to occupy ; but I do not believe the telegrams which have been
published. They serve, however, to suggest to my mind the question : where would the telegraph cable be
if it were not for the British fleet ? My honorable friend who has just sat down took very high cr very
low ground in dealing with the subject. Ido not know whether it ever occurred to him that if it were
not for the British fleet the Russian fleet might blow the great and important city, on the margin of the
ocean, which he represents about his ears. Should we then not do something to help the British fleet
which is guarding us, or help the old land in some way or other to show our gratitude for the help we
have received from her? I am surprised that a gentleman representing a town like Newcastle, which
would not have a ghost of a chance for its defence if it were not for the British fleet, talking as the honor-
able member has talked. Some honorable members have asked what right have we to support England ?
What right have we to support England ! Why, we belong to a colony which has received support through-
out its whole career from England, and if we have any gratitude or manhood in us we should feel ourselves
bound to support England in return. And when it is said that our soldiers are not British soldiers, I
reply that I believe the heart of a Briton is in every one of them. I believe that they are British soldiers
and as soldiers are brave and gallant, and no technicality of the law can make them anything else. Now,
sir, I have said that I was the object of a vote of censure twenty-seven years ago, for advising the removal
of troops from India during the mutiny, for doing as nearly as possible the very same thing that the
present Government has done. That, however, was before we had a reformed parliament—which came
about in 1858—when only a small portion of the population were electors —but ever since we have had a
reformed parliament; never since the whole of the people became electors has any government been
censured for spending money without the authority of Parliament, when by so doing the public interest
was best served. I know that this Government was mean enough—and it is the most despicable thing
they have ever done—to force on the late Government, of which I was a member, after their retirement a
bill of indemnity for some supposed misapplication of public funds. The late Government never asked
for a bill of indemnity ; they repudiated the idea of it; and it was only brought in for the purpose of
insulting them, because the new Government had a majority without any honorable feeling to guide it. I
tried in every way to prevent the passing of that cursed Indemnity Bill, but did not succeed. It was not
necessary, because every item was covered by an appropriation act. Now this Government have come
down with an indemnity bill for themselves, and I think they ought to have it. It is no affront to them
to pass it. They have done something which they think requires an indemnity bill; the late Government
did something for which they did not require an indemnity bill, because the Parliament had already
passed every penny of the money spent, and the bill was introduced merely to degrade those who were at
the time in a minority. I thought that the day would come when they would blush for that action, if it
was possible to make them blush. During the Indian Mutiny when the soldiers were ordered away from
here, the very same arguments which have been used in this debate about denuding our batteries, and
leaving our country unprotected, were used. They have rung in my ears from those times to this but they
did not effect me. I remember very well what was many years ago said about the threats of Russia. I
said, ‘ the Russians if they fight will not fight on the water; they will run their ships up their rivers and
sink some to prevent the British ships from going in and bringing out the others.’ And that is what they
did. They never came into the open; they will never come into the open to face the British on the water.


I say the proper thing for the colonies to do in these days is to come forward as one—not as a paltry little
confederation of four unarmed colonies —to help the fleet of the mother country, and then we should ha\e
the right to claim the protection of the British fleet from one end of the world to the other. AVhat would
it be for the whole of the Bi’itish colonies to pay a fair ratable contribution towards the support of the
British fleet? Why, in 1858 this colony alone paid £26,983 for the support of the British forces within
her shores, and at that time we had only a revenue of £1,100,000 as against £8,000,000 now. What a
lift could the united colonies, including India, give the mother country now in the way of suppoit to hex
fleet ! What is the use of that tomfoolery we heard from England the other day that Admiral Iryon is
arranging for an association of the Australian with the British fleet. It is of no use to talk of an Aus-
tralian fleet j it is not worth twopence-halfpenny. Better for all the Bi’itish possessions other than Great
Britain herself to fairly, having regard to their interests, contribute £1,000,000 annually ratably towards
the maintenance of such a fleet as would be an effective and economical protection to the British people
over the whole world. But what has this Government done ?If we were to censure them for sending the
troops to assist England, on what pretence could we ask the British Government to send their fleets here
to protect us? How should we dare so to cringe to them? We could not be so mean. If we were, we
should be properly treated with the contempt we should deserve. By giving such aid to the British na\y
as I have suggested the colonies would be protected in the most effective and the most economical
manner. The silly people in Downing Street are considering —what do they call it ?—an enabling
bill, to enable the other colonies to plunder this; that is what it is for. What will he the good
of that I should like to know? I wonder at the statesmen who are governing England not seeing
that with an association of four fine colonies, if there are two or three who want what is unfair, the
probability is that the united states will grow into a federation which is hostile to England,
hostile to free trade, and to our business being carried on with England as it has been. Ido not care
what federation we may have, if the old country be in it. Have as much federation as you like, but none
without the old country. We are told that England has no right to be in Egypt. That is not our busi-
ness. The people who govern the affairs of England think that she has some right to be there, and our
people think that England has some right to claim passage for her ships through the Suez Canal. Be it
right or be it wrong for England to be in Egypt, I hold that if we expect England to stand by us in any
trouble we ought to stand by England in her troubles, and rely on the Parliament and the people of the
mother country to see that no injustice is done to any people by her forces. Suppose that all that the
honorable member for Newcastle (Mr. Fletcher) has said is true, what has our government to do with it?
We are asked why did the Government act in such a hurry ? The thing is as plain as a pikestaff if honor-
able members will look at it fairly. Our Government offered to have our force at Suakim by the Ist of
next month. The Government of England must have known through their general that our force would
be able to join the force which was about to march from Suakim, and they accepted our offer of aid because
of the promptness with which it was to be given effect to ; without the promptness it would have been of
no use. What would have been the use of it a month later on? The offers of the other colonies were
refused because their troops were not to be sent as promptly as ours were. If we who receive help hold
that it is our duty to give help when it is needed, and we can give it, we must say that the Government
were perfectly justified in what they did. What would be the use of offering help when it would be of no
avail ? The help offered by Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, and New Zealand in the aggregate, of
course, was much greater than ours ; but England could not accept it because she wanted the men on the
spot promptly, and our colony alone could be prompt. An honorable member has said that we have lost
our neutrality by the action of the Government. I should like to know when were we neutral. When in
our history did we stand by neutrally, knowing that the blood of our fellow-subjects in another part of the
world was being spilt? We were never neutral. It is not in our nature to be neutral; it is not in the
nature of man to be neutral; even schoolboys are not neutral when there is a fight going on. There is no
neutrality in the world. I claim that this colony is the oldest, foremost, and the wealthiest of the colonies


in these seas, and are we to remain passive lest we should disturb somebody’s idea of neutrality ? Thank
God ! I never had any neutrality in me. There are two features of this debate which are to be regretted
two things for which there was no occasion whatever. I think that it was offensive in the highest
degree for the Treasurer to threaten the House with a dissolution. He ought to know—and he would
know if he had been a quarter as long in Parliament as I have—that he has no power to dissolve the
House—that is a power that belongs to the Queen’s representative, and to no one else. lam sure from
my knowledge of that distinguished man—Lord Augustus Loftus—that he never authorised the Treasurer
to come here and threaten us with a dissolution. I have known the time in this House when the whole
business would have been stopped if any minister dared to say what the Treasurer said last night; the
adjournment of the debate would have been moved, and honorable members of both sides would have
insisted on an apology being made, or they would have driven the Government from office, and the same
course would be taken now were the experience of the Treasurer not considered. It is not the right way
to govern the colony to tell honorable members that if we will not grant what the Government ask, the
Government will send us about our business. The Treasurer did not say that in so many words ; but the
words of the honorable member conveyed to every man of intelligence that this was what was meant. I think
that the honorable and learned member for Morpeth ought not to have made reference to the non-action of
the Premier (Mr. Stuart) in this matter. Who is the Premier h I say that we have no right to refer to
the fact that Mr. Dailey, who has so ably conducted this business —more ably than any other man would
have conducted it—is not the Premier. As to his not being a representative in this Chamber—good
God ! Can anyone pretend to say that he is not one of the foremost representative men in this country.
I remember that twenty-eight years ago he thrashed a good man—Mr. John Fairfax—for a seat in this
House as representative of Sydney. I believe that from that day to this Mr. Dailey has not been defeated
at an election. It happens that he sits in the other House now; but I maintain that there is no legal
necessity whatever for a member of the Executive Council to have a seat in either Chamber; it
is unnecessary, but it is important as a matter of convenience that an executive councillor should
have a seat in Parliament. Mr. Dailey having had the luck to have this business cast upon
him—to see that it should be done properly—l am sure that Ido not grudge him the honour, but I
do think that having done the business so satisfactorily he deserves great credit for it. I can remember
Sydney from the time when I was five years of age—l should not like to tell how old lam now, there
being many fair ladies present. I know that I still look young—but it is more than sixty years ago. I
was in Sydney when a bullock dray could carry away all the produce which was in one day landed at the
Queen’s —then the King’s—Wharf. I have seen Sydney rise from a mere nothing. I have at home an
old copy book in which I learned that then in the whole of Australia there were only 30,000 white people.
]Now we have a population of more than 3,000,000. So the colony has progressed in my time ; but never
in my life did my blood so thrill with emotion as when I saw the manner in which our soldiers and horses
went away to the Soudan to help our English brothers. I have always been ready to do battle for New
South Wales against all comers. Although, perhaps undeservedly, I have had a longer career in the
government of the country than any other man, and I felt great pride at the manner in which this
expedition was conducted by my old friend and past colleague, the Attorney-General. Ido not shrink
from the acknowledgment that I was proud and glad that this action was taken by one of my old associates
in the government of the country. I should be equally glad if at some future time my honourable friend
Mr. Wisdom were to do something of the kind. I despise low reasons —but in the world there will
always be men influenced by them—so I have kept until the last my lowest reason for supporting the
action of ministers in this matter. That reason is that their action has won for us immense kudos
throughout the world, If we were so unpatriotic as to carry this amendment, we should lose all the kudos
and glory which we have won for ourselves in every civilised country, and we should at the same time
spend our money and spill the blood of our best men.”


THE CONTINGENT IN EGYPT.
contingent left Sydney harbour on the evening of the 3rd of March in the midst of an un-
exampled demonstration of popular feeling. As the transports put off from the wharf their masts and
rigging were lined with men, whose ringing shouts echoed back the oration from the crowded shore, amidst
the cannonade from the ships and the forts, and the crashing of seemingly endless bands of music, the
spectacle was one to be remembered. The “Iberia” and “Australasian” were accompanied to the heads by an
immense flotilla of steamers and small craft. Arrived there, their ensigns were dipped and good wishes
were exchanged ; and with a last farewell cheer the two ships swept gallantly out to sea. On March 27th
a telegram was received from Aden announcing the arrival of our troops at that place. Three days later
they debarked at Suakim. They were received by the British forces, drawn up on the shore, with great
enthusiasm ; the bands of the East Surrey Regiment and the Shropshire Light Infantry placed themselves
at the head of the contingent, who then marched to their camping ground. General Graham and his staff
rode out to meet the Australians, and an inspection took place, after which the General delivered the
following address “ Men of New South Wales,— In the name of the forces under my command I give
you a hearty welcome as comrades and brothers in arms who have come hither to share in the perils and
toils, and we hope also the glories of this campaign. Those who are engaged in the present expedition are
proud to bear with you the name of Englishmen, for you belong as much as we do to that glorious nation
on which it has been said the sun never sets, and we hope that our freedom will shine for ever, as the sun
upon our people. The heart of every Englishman beats high at the magnanimous spirit of our colonies
that spirit which knits us together as members of one great Empire to maintain our honour. We honour
the feeling which led you to leave your pleasant homes, your wives, your children and your friends, to
share the perils of this dreary war against the desert and its savages. We know you will cheerfully
submit to those privations that all your comrades here have had to do. You must know that severe dis-
cipline is absolutely necessary to the safety of an army in the field, and you will submit to that discipline
as much in the work you will have to do as in actual fighting. The eyes of all English-speaking races, and
indeed the eyes of the whole civilised world, are upon you, and I am certain that you will uphold the
honour of the Empire. I feel proud to command such a force, and am sure it will do the greatest credit
to New South Wales and to the race of which you are an important part.” The men had been about a
week in camp when they were brigaded with the Guards j they were ordered to lamai, and thence to
Handoub, Otao, and so back to Suakim ; here they heard that their return had been ordered. They were
reviewed by Lord Wolseley accompanied by General Graham, General Graves, Lord Charles Beresford,
and the staff. The Commander-in-chief addressed the troops in the following words “ Colonel Spalding,
officers, non-commissioned officers, and men,—l am extremely sorry that your commanding officer is absent
this evening, and more especially for the cause of his absence. This, notwithstanding, your turnout is
most creditable to all of you. I would not forget the artillery, who only a few hours ago arrived in camp
after a long and fatiguing march. Their appearance is most soldierlike. Although I was conducting
operations in a distant part of the Soudan, I felt great pride in the thought that I had under my command
a contingent of colonial troops, and my pride was the greater that they represented such a vast portion of
the British Empire as Australia. General Graham has told me that all ranks speak in the highest terms
of their appreciation of your services. They like you personally and feel pleasure in your comradeship. I
regard that with much satisfaction, but feel the fact that you are here representing a distant colony as a
matter of additional significance. But I also feel that Australia, putting such a line body of troops in the
field is a warning to any quarrelsome nation that they will have to fight not only Great Britain and
Ireland, but also England’s most distant colonies. You are now about to return home, carrying with you
the esteem of your comrades in arms. I hope you will always think and speak with feelings of pride on
the many, many years since as a body of men you left a distant colony to take part with Imperial troops
in warfare. But I trust it will not be the last time that a colony will send troops to the assistance of


the mother country. Speaking for myself, I hail your presence with the greatest pleasure. I have been
delighted with your physique and manly, soldierlike bearing. I shall feel proud to see the same con-
tingent in the field again. Wishing you good-bye, I hope you will have a prosperous voyage, and return
in safety to your wives, sisters, and sweet-hearts.” Two days afterward, on May 17th, the con-
tingent re-embarked on board the troopship “ Arab,” on which, at the Imperial expense, they
were conveyed back to Sydney. A suggestion was made that the contingent should be brought
to England, also at the expense of the Home Government; but on reference to the Colonial
Government the project was discouraged as inadvisable. Lord Wolseley’s farewell despatch, which
reached the troops before their departure, contained the following passage :—“ I thank the gallant
soldiers of the New South Wales Contingent, not only for the services they have rendered, but for the
sympathy which prompted them to come so far to take part in a war undertaken by the empire to which
we all belong. They will carry home with them the thanks of our sovereign and the best wishes of those
with whom they fought side by side. They have borne themselves well in action and camp, and I trust
that should any serious war be forced on our empire in the future we may again find ourselves shoulder to
shoulder with Australian troops facing a common enemy. The deeds of the forces in the Soudan have
added one more chapter to the glorious records of national prowess, and all of you who have belonged to
it—soldiers or sailors, British, Indian, or Australian—may feel with pride the high reputation the army
and navy has gained has not suffered at your hands. Among many and varied memories of the recent
campaign I have remembered, your keen, soldierlike spirit will be the pleasantest to dwell upon, and I
shall always feel proud of having commanded you.—(Signed) Wolseley, Suakim, May 16.” A farewell
message from Her Majesty the Queen was also received, as follows :—“ The Queen commands to be con-
veyed to the officers, non-commissioned officers, and men of the New South Wales Contingent her thanks
for their services during the recent campaign, and expresses her great satisfaction that her colonial forces
have served side by side with British troops in the field. Her Majesty wishes them a prosperous vovage
home.”
The evacuation of the Soudan seven weeks after the arrival of the contingent of course precluded any
chance of its engagement in any great battle. A few skirmishes, much of the hardship and privation
attendant on active service in the field, and all the discomforts and horrors of a midsummer campaign
under a tropical sun, form the chief characteristics of the contingent's service. The threatened imbroglio
with Russia hastened the evacuation of the Soudan, doubtless; but Australian loyalty had by that time
asserted its devotion and fealty to the mother-land. On Friday, June 19 th, the troops re-entered Sydney
Heads, having lost but s|x of their number by death up to that time. Some indications of fever having
appeared on board the “ Arab,” she was quarantined on her arrival in port till the following Tuesday, when
the official landing took place.
THE RETURN OF THE CONTINGENT.
The wet weather which had set in continued throughout the stay of the contingent at the
Quarantine Station ; all Sunday night the rain fell in heavy showers, and the soft ground was intersected
by gutters, through which torrents of water flowed down to the sea. Those on duty spent a miserable
night, and many of the men in the houses were little better off, having been deprived of the heavy cloth
greatcoats they had been supplied with, and having only had waterproofs, while some had none at all.
The camp was astir before daylight on Tuesday, and after a considerable amount of bugling and
rousing about among the quarters, the men were got on the move. There was a drizzling rain, and the
prospect was most cheerless. The companies marched down to the pier, carrying their equipment, and
then on board the “ Arab.” The men came away without having breakfast, and probably had quite enough
to do before they got anything to eat. Altogether the situation was about as unfortunate as could be


imagined, but, in spite of bad weather and other depressing elements, the contingent freely displayed their
satisfaction at the immediate prospect of being done with the expedition. The ship reached Circular Quay
about a quarter past nine, and was met on her approach by a few launches, whose occupants cheered their
iriends on board the troopship. The band of the contingent played several appropriate airs as the ship
entered Sydney Cove, where the first welcome was given by the Naval Artillery Volunteers, assembled at
their drill-shed. The rain, which dimmed the view all round, made things uncomfortable on board the
troopship where the men were waiting, dressed in their khakee suits, which are intended only for weather
of the very opposite character. On the arrival of the “ Arab ”at Circular Quay, the following order from
Colonel Richardson was read to the contingent“ Contingent Morning Orders. S.S. “ Arab,” 23rd June,
1885. The Colonel Commanding cannot part with the officers, warrant, and non-commissioned officers, and
men of the Soudan expeditionary force without recording his high and earnest appreciation of their services
and general conduct in the field, which have won for them the gracious recognition of the Queen, Her
Majesty’s Imperial Government, and the distinguished Imperial officers under whom they had the privilege
and good fortune to serve. Taken with the reception and welcome awaiting the contingent this day, all
ranks may well feel proud and deeply gratified at so noble and unexampled a recognition of their services.
The thanks of the Colonel Commanding are especially due to Lieut.-Colonel Spalding, commanding
artillery, second in command ; Lieut.-Colonel Wells, commanding infantry ; Major Mackenzie, Brigade
Major; Surgeon-Major Williams, P.M.O. ; Major Blanchard, pay and commissariat officer; Captain
Parrot, engineer officer; and the Revs. Rose and Collingridge, chaplains, for the manner in which they
have discharged their respective duties. The Colonel Commanding has also to express his warm appre-
ciation of the support accorded generally by the officers, warrant and non-commissioned officers, and of the
cheerful and ready obedience exhibited by the men. Colonel Richardson relinquishes his command with
regret, and in directing the field battery to join its head quarters, and the infantry to disperse to their
homes, he bids these corps, which he has had the honour and pride to command, a hearty ‘ good-bye, and
wishes happiness and prosperity to all, and, moreover, trusts that the kindly feeling of comradeship
which has happily animated the contingent throughout may survive for many a long year.—(Signed)
John S. Richardson, Colonel Commanding N.S.W. Contingent. Volunteers from the coastal and up-
country towns arrived in the metropolis during Monday and Tuesday. Newcastle sent 500 volunteers,
who arrived in the steamers “ Coonanbara ” and “ Sydney.” They represented the following branches
of the service Artillery, Infantry, and Naval Brigade. Through the early morning there were signs of
the coming event. People went hurrying along through the pitiless rain, making for the Quay and other
points of vantage, while officers were riding about in cabs, or going at the double under the cover of long
macintoshes. Shortly after nine o’clock the various regiments began to congregate at the open square
opposite the Orient steamers’ berth at Circular Quay. The bands made the air fairly ring with their
martial strains. Orderlies galloped at top speed through the mud; everybody gave orders; and the
greatest enthusiasm permeated troops and civilians alike. Even the police were affected. As the notes of
one air were lost in the distance a second would be taken up by some succeeding band. Now it was some
plaintive old melody, then a lively quickstep, and altogether it tended to keep the people in good humour.
At ten o’clock His Excellency drove up with a guard of honour, consisting of the Sydney Light Horse.
His Excellency was accompanied by Lady Loftus, Mr. H. A. Unwin (His Excellency’s Private Secretary),
and Lady Martin. The bands played the National Anthem as he drove along the square. Shortly after-
wards several memhers of the Ministry, including Sir Alexander Stuart, Mr. Dailey, Mr. Dibbs,
Mr. Wright, Mr. Cohen, Mr. Trickett, and Mr. Norton, made their appearance. The principal officers in
attendance were presented to His Excellency by Colonel Richardson. The necessary arrangements having
been made, the troops filed down the gangways, and formed into line, and as they made their appearance
in the square one of the bands took up an air which must have kindled many a sweet thought in the
breasts of the contingent. It was “ Home, Sweet Home,” and its pathetic music was never heard to finer
effect than when the refrain was taken up by one band after another along the line. Then came the lull


before the start, and everyone was in readiness for the move. At that moment a splendid view was obtain-
able from the rear, and glancing along the Quay. On one side was the long line of the contingent, sombre-
looking in their khakee clothing. On the opposite side, in strong contrast, were the black macintoshes and
white helmets of a portion of the home regiments, while in the distance there was a gleam of mingled steel
and brass flickering in the dim light amid scarlet uniforms and prancing horses, with a most prosaic back-
ground of umbrellas. On board the now almost deserted “Arab” the sailors determined to give their old
comrades a hearty send off; so they clambered up the rigging, and as the march commenced saluted the
contingent, which had formed up four deep, with a right lusty round of cheers, such as British tars can
give so well. The order of procession was as follows :
Mounted Police
Naval Brigade
Naval Artillery Volunteers
Volunteer Infantry
Torpedo Corps
Volunteer Artillery
Permanent Artillery
Imperial Escort
THE CONTINGENT
Guard of Honour—Light Horse
His Excellency the Governor
The Chief Justice
The Admiral
The Representatives of other Colonies
President and Members of the Legislative Council
Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly
The Ministry
The Right Worshipful the Mayor and Aldermen
Escort.
THE PROCESSION.
Shortly after 10 o’clock the members of the contingent landed from the “Arab” troopship, which had
been their home for so long, and were drawn up in line at the Orient Company’s wharf, on the eastern
side of the Circular Quay. They were, with scarcely an exception, dressed in the serviceable—but not
ornamental —khakee in which they had encountered their principal hardships during the last few but
eventful months. They had evidently done their utmost to present a soldierly appearance ; but circum-
stances were certainly not in their favour, as even the most striking military suit in the world would
hardly have appeared to advantage in the midst of the steady downpour with which the contingent was
greeted on its return to the capital which had sent it forth to do battle in its name. Notwithstanding
this however, the soldierlike smartness with which the contingent dropped into line and responded to the
orders of the Commandant was apparent to the most superficial observer. And observers there were in
plenty. The colossal wool stores owned by Messrs. Hill, Clark and Co., as also those owned by Messrs.
Flood and Co., situated opposite the landing-place, had their complement of spectators—among whom were
several members of the fair sex—who every now and then waved their handkerchiefs and cheered as some
relative or friend in the contingent caught their gaze. The lofty ledge of rocks known as the Tarpeian
Way were also crowded with numerous sightseers, who stood on that picturesque spot till most of them
must have been nearly drenched, but determined, in spite of the utmost inclemency of the elements, to


obtain a sight of their brave countrymen where they first set foot on Sydney shores. A few more excep-
tionally privileged ones were gathered under the shelter of the sheds, from whence they could see the
mustering of the procession at their ease, and occasionally give vent to their patriotic feelings by a cheer
for the troops as they filed past. A large number of closed carriages, filled with members of the Ministry,
members of Parliament, members of the Municipal Council, representatives of other colonies, and other
distinguished visitors, were also drawn up more or less in Indian file in the neighbourhood of the dis-
embarkation, waiting with as much patience as they could command for the order to advance. After a
weary while, during which the rain kept on a ceaseless pour, the order was given, the band struck up the
appropriate air of u Home, Sweet Home,” and the mounted police, their long waterproof capes protecting
them from the wet and falling in folds over their splendid horses, led the van, followed by the white caps
of the Naval Brigade. After the Naval Artillery Volunteers and Volunteer Infantry had tramped past
the contingent —who were drawn up in line facing east—came the Signalling and Torpedo Corps. The
Volunteer Artillery and Permanent Artillery were respectively the next to appear, and tramped through
the mud and slush in a style which would have been fine had only the weather been so. But the sight of
so many stalwart fellows toiling through a pitiless rain, with wet clothes sticking to their sides, and still
wetter boots encasing their feet, plodding along through the muddy, sloppy streets, sometimes ankle-deep
in water, was not a very exhilarating one, and one could not but feel that a very much more sensible way
of welcoming the contingent would have been to have sent them straight home, and to have subsequently
o O
feted them under a clearer sky than that which prevailed. The approach of the contingent was heralded
by the appearance of the Imperial Escort, consisting of a brigade from the “Nelson’ and other men-of-war,
perhaps the smartest and most stalwart body of men who shared in the day’s proceedings. The officers
wore their dress uniforms which it is safe to say they will never be able to don again on any similar
occasion, as the thorough drenching they received must have completely spoiled them. The midshipmen
who trotted at intervals by the side of the men, looked as if they would much rather have been cozily
ensconced in their own comfortable quarters than plodding along in the pouring rain in honour of the
colonial force, however loyal and however brave. About 11 o’clock the contingent, preceded by the
Imperial escort, received the word to advance, and, led by Colonel Richardson, they started on their route
through the city amid ringing cheers. Most of the companies forming the procession received their
complement of applause from the large number of spectators who lined the roads, manned the battlements
or filled the windows and every available vantage ground along the line of route ; but, needless to say,
the heartiest cheers were reserved for the brave fellows whom the others had only assembled to honour,
and who had borne with unflinching courage and a fair amount of good-humour the hardships and suffer-
ings entailed by their participation in the Soudanese war. As soon as the contingent left the Circular
Quay, the non-military part of the procession set forth on its march in honour of the brave men who had
risked their lives, and in many cases sacrificed their health, to do battle on behalf of Australia for the
Imperial cause. Preceded by a guard of honour consisting of the Light Horse, his Excellency the
Governor joined the procession behind Colonel Richardson’s force, the rear being brought up by a long line
of carriages containing the Chief Justice, the Admiral, and the other distinguished members of this and
the sister colonies, named above. To those who watched the procession from some comfortable sfandpoint
the sight must have been an imposing one. It was the spectacle of a united Australia—united for the
moment by virtue of its sympathy with a great cause—assembled by means of its representatives to do
honour to the select few who had upheld the honour of the colonies in the eyes of the whole world. As
we have already said, the windows and other vantage points of the large warehouses around the wharfs
were thronged with people, who bore the rain stoically, especially those who had umbrellas. It was not
until Castlereagh-street was reached that a very large crowd was met with, but here, and in Pitt-street
also, the general enthusiasm had predominated completely over the ungentle elements. It was on turning
into George-street, however, that the true state of the attendance, if such it might be termed, could be
ascertained. The people were packed on window-frames ; they peered over parapets, stood on narrow


ledges at a giddy height, or crowded on fragile verandahs, apparently with a happy unconsciousness of any
possible danger, absorbed in and living only for the brilliant spectacle below. In addition to these, there
were other devotees, who tramped patiently along the line of march, standing quietly ankle-deep in mud
and water while numerous halts were made, and then jogging along again with no thoughts except for the
newly-returned ones. They were contented —happy even —and, to judge by their faces, they had no idea
of murmuring against the unpleasant surroundings. There were some spectators who went even beyond
the bounds of enthusiasm. This small devoted band was seen making its way along a narrow unprotected
ledge apparently a few inches wide, with a clean fall of 50 or 60 feet to a hard pavement. The only fact
occupying the minds of these climbers was that they were getting an excellent view. The danger was
completely lost sight of. The march was not made amid silence. There were cheers from warm hearts
which could not be chilled by any wintry weather, and the contingent had the satisfaction of learning that
their welcome home was as hearty as the Godspeed which accompanied their departure. Turning into
Park-street, the same enthusiasm prevailed, and throughout the march there were general expressions of
praise for the contingent. They were certainly deserved, for despite their Khakee outfits, soddened with
wet, they looked as fine a body of men as ever marched, and bore, too, the u guinea stamp which
distinguishes the soldier from the raw recruit. Through Park-street the troops marched amid crowds of
spectators, the more adventurous occupying seats on spiked railings and posts. Discomfort was not con-
sidered. College-street lent its crowds, and then the troups turned into Oxford-street on the straight line
for the barracks, out of which they had marched so proudly three and a-half months ago.
Formal deliberation having been effected, and the Contingent’s rear-guard finally clear of the Circular
Quay barriers, a sauve qui pent at once set in amongst the thousands in search of shelter. Scattering in
all directions up and along Bridge-street and adjacent thoroughfares, a stream of human beings faced the
downcoming stream of water, which splashed and dashed almost ankle deep down the culverts, over foot-
paths, and rendered matters essentially uncomfortable. Tram traffic being temporarily at a standstill, and
vehicles at a premium, nothing was left but a march towards Paddington Barracks. The shortest u cuts
were promptly crowded, and a crowd of dripping thousands lined the entrance to Moore Park. Some of
the prompter ones, foreseeing that the intended review was doomed, headed direct to the Barracks, and a
ladder having been obtained, the walls were speedily lined \ 10 or lo minutes later the advance-guard of
the procession arrived, and the inevitable crush, but without confusion, ensued. Under the personal
superintendence of the Inspector General of Police (Mr. E. Fosbery), a full contingent of mounted and foot
police took charge of the traffic, and succeeded without much difficulty in maintaining order ; so much so
that scarcely one mishap worthy of the name was reported. Omnibuses proved for the nonce rather con-
spicuous by their absence, and left the field for enterprising Jehus, who reaped a golden harvest all the
morning. A majority chartered cabs for the outing, the result being that hundreds with money in their
pockets, and anxious to spend it found themselves compelled to walk. Parallel with, and beyond the
main route, business of all sorts was for the time being defunct j a drive around suburban quarters
revealing little else than deserted streets and closed shops ; not even was there to be encountered the pro-
verbial solitary policeman. Simultaneously with the troops’ return at the Barrack gates a return exodus
set in, tramway traffic along the Crown-street route was again resumed, and a constant stream of all soi ts,
conditions, and ages poured backwards towards the city and suburbs. Steady rain continued to fall in-
cessantly all day, increasing to such an extent during the afternoon, that by 3 p.m. most save the leading
and verandah-covered thoroughfares were almost completely deserted.
AT THE VICTORIA BARRACKS.
The scene both inside and outside the barracks was one of a not uninteresting character, notwith-
standing the fact that the rain came down in torrents. As the lengthy procession approached, the
mounted police came in for much favourable criticism. They passed onward through the living, surging
lane of humanity, and cantered under the archway to the position which had been allotted to them. Then


came the Naval Brigade and Naval Artillery Volunteers, the Members of both corps trudging along
through slush and mire sturdily and resolutely. Cheery and lighthearted, the men paid little heed to the
attentions of Jupiter Pluvius. Then followed the Volunteer Infantry—men from all parts of the country
from lofty tables and peaceful vales—and the Torpedo Corps. The Infantry made a very presentable
appearance, and the compact little Torpedo Corps looked exceedingly well. Then followed the men of the
Volunteer Artillery and Permanent Artillery; after which the cry ran along the varied ranks of the
umbrella-capped and defended spectators —“ The sailors and blue jackets are coming/’ Back fell the on-
lookers as the hardy British seamen swept onward into the barrack-yard, to the inspiring strains of martial
music. The appearance of the Imperial escort —about 600 strong —was greetly admired by the bystanders.
The English seamen are favourites in every quarter of the globe and in every British dependency, and in
no place more than in Sydney, and, indeed, throughout the Australias, are they better liked or more
respected. The gallant tars and their deadly machine guns—Nordenfeldt and Gardiner’s—made a splen-
did show, while high over the heads of the blue jackets, the marines, and the men of the Marine Artillery,
was lifted the banner of England—
“ The flag that braved a thousand years
The battle and the breeze/’
Following the Imperial escort, headed by Colonel Richardson, came the New South Wales Contingent—the
bronzed and bearded and in some cases pallid and worn-looking men—who, a few short months ago, went
forth from our ocean gates to array themselves in battle against the foes of our Queen and our loved
country ; brave fellows who have only recently left the spot
“ Where the death-wind sweeps
O’er Afric’s burning plains,
• • • • •
And billowy sands and dazzling sky
Seem boundless as infinity.”
The appearance of the contingent was the signal for a tremendous outburst of cheering ; and exclamations
of “ Well done, boys !” “ Welcome home again,” and wild hurrahs greeted their arrival. Although the
men were much fatigued with the cold and privations they had endured since the misty rainfall commenced,
they marched onward with cheerful step and gallant and martial bearing. They seemed right glad to see
the old barracks once again. Doubtless many of those in the ranks remembered with pride the splendid
outburst of enthusiasm which was displayed by the people of the colony when the contingent left the
Victoria Barracks for the Soudan on the memorable and historic 3rd of March, 1885 ; others, perchance,
regretted the absence of their comrades who on that day had responded to the trumpet call of war with
alacrity, and their thoughts were doubtless carried over leagues of old ocean to the sick ward in the
hospital at Colombo, the lonely grave beneath the stately palm trees of “ Ceylon’s spicy isle,” or to the far
distant and pestilence-stricken port on the margin of the Red Sea, outside the bazaars and almost within
sight of the minarets of which some of Australia’s dead are sleeping their last, long sleep. But onward was
the word, and surrounded by friends, wives, and blushing sweethearts, all sad memories were speedily
dispelled, and, with the smart-looking members of the Sydney Light Horse in the rear, the contingent
passed through the portals of the well-remembered gate at the entrance to the barracks.
Although no inconsiderable amount of fortitude was requisite to enable a spectator, not overburdened
with enthusiasm, to stand out in the drenching showers, there was a deal to interest him in watching the
crowds who pushed forward towards the Victoria Barrack gate whilst the procession was passing in, and
who, being precluded from escorting the Contingent on to the parade ground en masse , remained jammed
together in the vicinity of the entrance, bearing the discomfort of wet clothing with wonderful good
humour. In such a rush of people it was almost impossible to keep an umbrella up, except at the risk of
an emphatic remonstrance from one’s neighbour, who was receiving a stream of cold water down his back,
and so the much needed protection had to be dispensed with, and those who found the position uncom-


Portable were at liberty to retire from the footpath—if they could—and take to the road or the gutter,
down which quite a torrent of water was pouring. A favoured few who had cards of entree were allowed
to pass through the gate, but several thousands remained outside until assured that the final scene in the
ceremonial was over, when the majority hastily dispersed. A good many, however, subsequently went
into the barracks to take a closer look at the Contingent than could be obtained in the street in the face of
blinding rain, and a dense moving throng of excited people, and every member of the Contingent as he
hurried to the armoury to deliver up his arms had to submit to an amount of scrutiny almost as trying as
the close and critical inspection as the Commandant on parade. A large number of females, many of
whom looked far too delicate to be exposed to such inclement weather, remained outside the enclosure for a
long time after the dismissal of the troops, and then withdrew—wet, but apparently satisfied in having
seen as much as they could under the trying circumstances. Many of the contingent, as a matter of
course, had friends anxiously waiting to shake them by the hand and heartily welcome them back, and,
notwithstanding that they were wet to the skin, and unsustained by the recent excitement, they chattered,
good humouredly, alike with friends and strangers, and submitted to an examination of their novel-looking
uniforms with an amount of cheerfulness and nonchalance truly commendable. It was not their privilege
to describe how “ fields were won,” but they had a great deal to tell of hard toil, patiently endured for the
honour of the land they represented, and the sickness which not a few of them suffered in the enervating
temperature of the Soudan, which was more dreaded by them than all the Mahdi’s forces put together.
Even the most insatiable curiosity, was however, satisfied at last, and as soon as the members of the con-
tingent left for their homes, or obtained accommodation in barracks, the spectators departed, and the parade
ground became deserted.
In the barrack yard the scene was dispiriting in the extreme. Only a favoured few were admitted
through the gates, such as the wives, sisters, or daughters of members of the Contingent. The rain fell
incessantly and with increased force, and all present were drenched to the skin. A square was formed by
the marines, the artillery, and blue-jackets from her Majesty’s vessels in the harbour, and the volunteers
(naval and military), and in the centre of this square the Contingent was drawn up in line. Colonel
Richardson placed himself in advance of the line in anticipation of the troops being addressed by the
Governor. They seemed as cool as they would be, perhaps, before the advance of one of the Mahdi’s
intrepid hosts. Their uniforms, however, were most unsuitable for such weather, and the men themselves,
after their long tramp through mud, slush, and rain, must have felt exceedingly uncomfortable. The
supplies of woollen clothing, which on the recommendation of Dr. Mackellar were sent to the quarantine
station, did not arrive in time for the men to receive the benefit of them. It was a cruelty to keep the
men in such weather a moment longer than was possible, and it was a very general idea that their stay was
prolonged more than was necessary. As one deviation from the programme was made, another which
would have lessened the discomforts of the men might have been tolerated. A short quick march with a
brief dismissal would have been appropriate to such a day, and arrangements could have been easily effected
by which the men and their officers and the military visitors from other colonics could meet together in
some covered building in which the English custom could have been followed of refreshing the men and
delivering to them in comfort the speeches which were intended for their ears, but which none but their
brave Colonel heard. It is easy to be wise after the event, some might say, but had the authorities been
wise before the event, they would have followed the course indicated, and not have sacrificed the comfort
of the men. As it was the spectacle was rather a melancholy one. His Excellency the Governor left his
carriage, and advancing with the Ministry, several members of Parliament, and other gentlemen, to where
Colenel Richardson was stationed, delivered his address of welcome to the troops. The representatives of
the other colonies also inflicted congratulatory addresses upon the men, which might have been reserved for
more auspicious weather. The men, hearing none of the eloquent phrases intended for them, seemed
indifferent, as well they might, seeing that they scarcely understood what was going on. Colonel Richard-
son delivered an address in reply to the Governor’s, but he too, like his men, was evidently suffering severely


from the almost intolerable exposure. If, however, the Colonel and his brave followers were cold without
they were warm within, and when, in response to the solicitation of the Governor, Colonel Richardson
called for three cheers for the Queen, they were given in the heartiest manner by men and officers, while
the band—it was their final effort—sent forth the glorious old strains of the National Anthem. His
Excellency the Governor then announced that he had received from the Queen a message congratulating
the troops upon their safe return home. No military manoeuvres were executed. The members of the
Contingent formed fours for the last time, and, proceeding quietly to the drillshed of the barracks, they
delivered up their arms and accoutrements, and were disbanded. Before leaving they were each served
with a glass of spirits, which, by the foresight of Dr. Mackellar, the Government medical officer, had been
provided for them with a view to check any tendency to catch cold, after which they mingled with their
friends. The various bodies of troops who had assembled to do them honour marched off, and the barrack
yard became almost deserted. Some of the men who do not reside in or near the metropolis were given
quarters at the barracks, and provided with passes to their homes.
THE CEREMONY AT THE BARRACKS.
His Excellency and suite, the members of the Ministry, the representatives from the sister colonies,
and others, took up a position facing the men, and Lord Augustus Loftus then delivered the following
address :—“ Soldiers, —On behalf of Her Majesty the Queen and the people of this country, I offer you her
thanks and their welcome on your return to the colony. We rejoiced at the privilege of sending you on
the service for which you were despatched. Our joy is greater on receiving you back again, after having
performed that service to the credit of the country, to the entire satisfaction of the Imperial officers under
whom you were placed, and to the advantage of the Empire. It has been not the least gratifying circum-
stance in the history of our enterprise that you have not been called to exercise in any bloody engagement
the courage and devotion which prompted you to volunteer for the defence of the Empire. While this has
been doubtless a source of disappointment to you, it is a subject for our gratitude to Heaven. All the
duties that were laid upon you you have discharged with the instant obedience of good soldiers, and with
the alacrity of gallant men. In the desire to distinguish you in an especial manner, you were associated
with those chosen soldiers of the Empire, the story of whose exploits is inextricably interwoven with some
of the most glorious passages of our military history. They received you with respect, laboured by your side
in your short campaign, and would gladly and confidently have shared with you the glory of conflict. You
have come back to us more capable by experience and by discipline of securing our defence, because the
military strength of a body of troops depends, not so much on its mere numerical power, as on the special
completeness of training of each member constituting the force. By your appearance and conduct in
Egypt you have done good service to the Empire. The world had not imagined that such an act as this
which you have performed was within the range of our resources and patriotism. It is six-and-twenty-
years ago—on the 26th January, 1859—that a great English statesman, a great orator, and one of the
greatest men of letters of this age, said at a public banquet in London, speaking of these Australian
colonies, these simple and memorable words :— ‘ It may happen that the time will arrive when the other
great Powers of the whole world may rise up against the venerable parent of so many noble children. If
that period should ever arrive, I believe that the colonies will not be unmindful of the tie that binds them
to the mother country. I believe that their vessels will come thick and fast across the ocean to her assist-
ance, and that a voice will be heard universally among them saying in effect— 4 While Australia lasts
England shall not perish ! Your action has, as far as the sympathy of the colonies is concerned, made the
late Lord Lytton’s hopeful words a prophecy. For purposes of defence there has been practically now
established an Imperial federation. And your example has inspired your own countrymen with so much
enthusiasm that you find thousands of newly-enrolled soldiers to welcome your return, to reward your
devotion by their sympathy, and to share with you in the labour of the general defence. They will honour
you for your service, benefit by your instruction, and some day emulate their example. Soldiers, I welcome


you back to your wives, your families, and to the gratitude of the country; and may the blessing of
Almighty God ever attend you and them in all your employments. Before you leave the ground, I call
upon you to give three cheers for Her Majesty the Queen.”
Colonel Richardson then replied as follows;— 4 Your Excellency,— I thank you on behalf of the
soldiers whom I have the honour of commanding for the welcome you have given us in the name of Her
Majesty and the people of the colony on our return from Egypt. It has not been our good fortune to
enjoy the opportunities of service which we desired, and which, when your Excellency bid us 6 good-bye ’
on leaving the colony, we hoped we should have. But I may say of the fine body of men entrusted to my
command that in cheerful obedience to authority, in the willingness to discharge any soldierly duty, and in
their disappointment that the course of events deprive them of the honour most prized by brave men, they
did no discredit to the service of the Queen, or of the honour of the colony. From our landing to our
departure the picked troops of the Empire were our companions, This was an honour intended, my lord
for the country which sent us; but I can say for the men under my command that they did nothing to
make England regret conferring such a distinction upon them, or to cause you to be ashamed of them. 1
can say no more, except to thank you, my lord, for your generous expressions of welcome, and through you
to thank the country for sending us on a service of honour in which it was not our fault that we did not
reap for the credit of the colony a larger share of glory.” The Colonel's words were loudly cheered, and then
the representatives of the other colonies read their addresses, the order of precedence being arranged with
respect to the population of each.
Sir George Yerdon, the representative of Victoria, said : —“May it please your Excellency, Colonel
Richardson, Officers, and men of the contingent,—On behalf of the Government and people of Victoria, I
congratulate you upon your return, and I thank you for the services you have rendered, not only to New
South Wales, but to all Australia, It has been my privilege to represent Victoria on many important
occasions, but this seems to me to exceed them all in its greatness, its significance, and in its fulness of
promise. lam charged to convey to the Government and people of New South Wales the hearty greeting
which Victoria sends'you, and to say that it is universal and sincere. Your neighbours stretch out both
hands to you across the border, and wish you joy of one of the grandest and most significant events in the
history of Australia. While Ido not forget that my own and other colonies were ready to aid our father-
land in its time of need, the honour and credit of having set the example and of having done the right
thing, at the right time, and in the best way, must ever remain with New South Wales. We already see
some of the benefits which you have won for us. Instead of the indifference of which we had some reason
to complain, we now find, from the utterances of British statesmen and in the press, that our claim, not
merely to the respect, but to the esteem and affection, of our fellow-countrymen is fully admitted. You,
gentlemen of the contingent, doubtless regret that you did not find the fighting you went to seek. But
that was not your fault. You did your duty, and you did it well. You responded with eager alacrity to
the call of your Government for volunteers. You cheerfully submitted to the sharp discipline of an army
in the field, and you earned the high praise of the Commander-in-Chief, and of the generals under whom
you served. We are laying up materials for history, and in this event the historian will find the subject
of one of his most pregnant and interesting chapters. He will there record the services which Sir
Alexander Stuart, Mr. Dailey, and their colleagues have rendered their country in despatching the
contingent to the Soudan, honoured in remembrance as the first Australian soldiers who left their own
country to stand side by side her Majesty’s Imperial forces. The time may come when you may have to
fight nearer home, when we shall have to protect these shores against invasion. It is worth ten times the
cost of the expedition to have shown the world that Australia is able and ready to defend herself against
the Queen’s enemies whensoever they may come, and I reckon the effect upon the opinions and conduct
of foreign States as one of its most important and valuable results. But beyond all other gains is the
influence upon ourselves and our destinies. I believe that you have advanced our national progress by
many years ; that you have brought us much nearer to the time when, with the unanimous consent of all


her colonies, Australia will be enabled to speak with one voice in the Councils of the Empire, and take no
mean part in the world’s affairs. We have learned, too, how pleasant it is for nations, as well as men, to
render good and unselfish service. On more than one occasion we have given our money in aid of the
patriotic fund of the Empire; but you have not only given of your wealth with a lavish hand : you have
offered your lives to the State. You have crossed the Rubicon which separates a prosperous, rich, and
peaceful community from a nation, animated by the feelings of honour, chivalry, and a sense of public
duty, without which no mere aggregation of people can lay claim to the dignity of national life. Let me
conclude, as I began, by offering to the Ministers, soldiers, and people of New South Wales the congratu-
lations and thanks of the Government, the local forces, and the people of Victoria, and by bidding you in
their name a most hearty welcome home.”
The Hon. Colonel Haultain, representing New Zealand, addressed the contingent in the following
words :—“ Colonel Richardson and Officers and Members of the New South Wales contingent,—l have a
very pleasing and gratifying duty to perform, and if I fail to prove to you the hearty sympathy and
admiration of your fellow-colonists on the other side of the water, set it down to my deficiencies, and not
to anything lacking on their part, for I can assure you that there is not one of them who does not admire
if not envy, the proud position you hold to-day. lam deputed by the Government of New Zealand to say
to you that they regard with pride the action of New South Wales in sending a contingent of their forces
to the seat of war, and feel that this action and your conduct during the campaign, which has elicited the
high praise of every officer under whom you have served, have reflected honour and credit on all the
colonies of the Australian group ; and I am here on behalf of the people of New Zealand to welcome you
home again, and to join in doing you honour on your return from a voluntary and most important service
rendered to the Empire in what you believe to have been a time of need—a service that entailed, beyond the
ordinary chances of war, dangers and difficulties of an unusual character in a tropical and sickly region,
where the lives of many Englishmen have been sacrificed, and where blood has been flowing like water. 1
think I may, as a very old soldier, who has had much to do with colonial forces, and know their value and
many soldierly qualifications, congratulate you on having stood side by side in the battle field with some
of the proudest regiments of her Majesty’s army, from whom you have had the opportunity of learning
those lessons which make up the thoroughly efficient soldier. Equal to them in courage —for courage is
the heritage of our race, and whenever Englishmen, Scotchmen and Irishmen are to be found, there are
brave men ready to take up arms in defence of their own homes, and gallant officers to lead them—and
ready also, as you have shown, to serve in distant regions if needed by the mother country. Equal to
them in patient endurance of privation and toil —for where can a hardier set of men be found than the
stalwart settlers of these colonies ? Equal to them in unfailing loyalty to our Sovereign, and in obedience
to the officers placed over them, perhaps only falling short in that strict discipline which makes perfect the
British soldier—discipline, which is the abandonment of self and the surrender of the mind and will to the
spirit of the commander, which is only to be acquired by long training or by service in the field. 1
recollect the President of Harvard College, at the close of the great civil war, told the students whom he
was addressing that it had taken the American nation four years of the bitterest experience to realise its
true value and necessity. Of the great importance of this qualification you have had the opportunity of
learning much from the famous corps with which you have been serving, and you will have known how it
saved from defeat and destruction the force that but a few days before you landed had been startled by
the sudden and furious onslaught of Arabs at Hasheen. You have been taught this important lesson,
and you have the advantage of tried and diciplined officers to command you. And if again called upon, as
I think you may be, to defend your own shores, or to swell the ranks of the Imperial army in other
countries, the New (South Wales contingent should stand at the head of all colonial levies, and claim the
distinction of being ‘ Nulli Secundus’ to any troops in the world.”
Lieutenant-Colonel Mein then addressed the contingent on behalf of his colony—Queensland :
“Colonel Richardson and Officers and Men of the Contingent,—l have been deputed by the Government of


Queensland to warmly congratulate you, on behalf of the people of that colony, upon your safe return,-and
to tender you their most earnest thanks for your meritorious and distinguished services. The loyalty and
chivalry which urged you to voluntarily abandon the comforts of domestic life, and the blessings of peace,
to assist the forces of England in what seemed a time of peril and darkness, enlisted the heartiest sympathy
of all Queenslanders. Your subsequent career has proved that the honour of Australia, that was entrusted
to your keeping when you left these shores, was not misplaced. That honour you have brought back, not
only safe and untarnished, but brightened by increased lustre. You have not had an opportunity of
proving your valour by achieving victories in hard-fought and bloody battles. You have, however, shown
yourselves not unworthy to associate, to labour and to fight, with England’s bravest and most disciplined
and distinguished soldiers ; and in every labour and duty that have been imposed upon you, in cheerfully
and bravely enduring the privations and fatigues of a campaign in a deadly climate, and in patiently
combating sickness and disease, you have so conducted yourselves as to earn the highest approbation of
England’s most skilled and honoured officers, as well as the admiration and esteem of all your countrymen.
Nor have your services been confined to the scene of your labours; your movements have been watched
with keen interest by the statesmen of Europe ; and the loyalty which prompted the Government of this
great colony to offer your assistance to the mother country and your own heroic conduct since, have
demonstrated to the world that the patriotism of Australians is not restricted to the land which gave
them birth, but that it embraces the whole of the Empire of Britain, and that under the Southern Cross,
and in this free land, there has grown, and is still growing, a race of men worthy of the great name they
inherit, and ready and willing, at all costs and sacrifices, to maintain the integrity and glory of the
Empire. Having accomplished this, it was right that representatives of all the Governments of Australia
should assemble this day to do you honour on your happy return, and to wish you all success in the future.
In resuming your peaceful duties as citizens, you will be cheered by the assurance that your noble services
are duly appreciated, and that you carry with you the lasting gratitude of your countrymen.”
Brigadier-General Owen, of South Australia, delivered the following address :—“ Your Excellency and
Officers and Men of the New South Wales Contingent,—l have been commissioned to say that the colony
of South Australia on this auspicious occasion sends to you her most sisterly greeting and her approval of
the band of trained men that went forth to do service for the great Empire to which they belonged, and to
ally themselves in the field with British soldiers to uphold the honour of their country. She also con-
gratulates you most warmly upon your return once more to Australian shores. You have been far away
from your country, but you have ably represented Australia, and in the distance have behaved most nobly
as a band of New South Welshmen. Happily, there are no important differences between these great
colonies, and you went away bearing with you the title of the Australian contingent, and gallantly have
you represented Australia by your conduct in the field. I cannot express to you the deep feeling of
interest and sympathy with which South Australia has followed, not only your outgoing from your native
land, but your brave doings in the field, and your happy return to your colony and your beautiful climate.
You have shown that Australia, like a young giant, is a strength to the mother country in her difficulties
and when the happy time arrives when these colonies shall be united into a great Power, then your
children’s children will remember, and with joy and pride look back to, the historic days when this
contingent of brave men left these shores to fight under the British flag in Egypt. (Cheers).”
Colonel Legge, of Tasmania, handed over for publication the following address, which he would have
delivered had the weather not been so inclement: —“Colonel Richardson, Officers, Non-commissioned
Officers, and Men of the Soudan Contingent,—l should be wanting in my duty to the Colony, which I
have the honour to represent to-day, were I to omit tendering to you on the part of the Volunteers of
Tasmania, a most hearty welcome on your return to New South Wales. In no colony of the Australian
Group I am sure has the noble example of self-sacrifice and patriotism shown by the officers and men
under your command produced a more favourable result than in fair Tasmania, and that, too, among the
Defence Forces of the island. Numerous applications for service in the Soudan flowed in at the time of


your departure, and had it been decided to send an Australian contingent to Africa, Tasmania would have
added a strong unit to that contingent. But not only in this direction did the good effects produced by
the example of your force show themselves—a stimulus, likewise, to recruiting was given, and the ranks
of the Volunteer Corps was rapidly filled up, and their numbers increased owing to the spread of the
martial spirit engendered throughout the colonies by the formation of the Soudan Contingent. The future
power of the Australasian colonies to resist foreign aggression, will lie mainly in the federation of their
forces ; and the day may not be far distant when Tasmanian Volunteers will be afforded a welcome
opportunity of fighting side by side with the brave men who have to day returned to their country after
enduring the hardships of an African campaign.”
The addresses were each warmly cheered; then, as the rain still continued to pour down in torrents,
and the men in their light uniform were thoroughly soaked, the proceedings were hurried through as quick
as possible. At the conclusion of the last address three cheers were given by the contingent for his Ex-
cellency the Governor, another three for the Hon. W. B. Dailey, and others for the Premier and Ministry.
They were then formed up in line and dismissed. The Volunteer Corps marched to their respective
parade grounds, where they were dismissed.
CONGRATULATORY SPEECHES
The representatives of the Australian colonies who had visited Sydney to assist at the reception of the
returned Contingent were entertained at a banquet by the Ministers in the Parliamentary Refreshment
Rooms, on June 25. The chair was occupied by Sir Alexander Stuart, Colonial Secretary, and there were
present his Excellency Governor Loftus, Sir George Verdon, the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly,
Captain Lake, Captain Gribben, the Mayor of Sydney, the Colonial Treasurer, General Owen, Colonel
Spalding, Captain Des Voeux, Lieutenant Inglis, Colonel Wells, Lieutenant Binny, Lieutenant Pakenham,
Surgeon-Major Williams, Major Wardelh the Minister for Justice, Mr. Langton, Major Colstein, Major
Hocke, Lieutenant Taylor, Colonel Goodlet, Lieutenant O’Farrell, Lieutenant Chambers, Mr. Halliday,
Colonel Legge, the Minister for Works, Colonel Turner, Colonel Raymond, Major Perrin, Dr. Tanner, the
President of the Legislative Council, the Lieutenant-Governor, the Attorney-General, Admiral Tryon,
Major-General Carnegie, Colonel Roberts, Major Blanin, the Postmaster-General, Colonel Haultian, Major
King, Lieutenant Yeo, Captain Loftus, A.D.0., Mr. H. A. Unwin, Mr. John Turner, Mr. D. Gaunson,
M.L.A. of Victoria, the Minister for Public Instruction, the Hon. T. Bent, M.L.A. of Victoria, Sir John
Robertson, Colonel Richardson, and the Chief Justice. In proposing the toast of “ Our Guests,” Mr.
Dailey, who was received with prolonged cheering, spoke thus : —“ Of all the fortunate and gratifying
circumstances which had marked and graced their national act of sympathy, the intercolonial sentiment
which found its expression in the presence of their guests of that night was assuredly not the least source
of satisfaction to them, and congratulation to the colony. If their individual action in this country, the
success of which was due to a precipitancy which many might have, and some actually did regard as an indis-
cretion, had inspired envy instead of hearty admiration, they would have lost more for the Empire in the
disturbance of that Australian harmony than they gained by a manifestation of their loyalty and devotion.
But they have been doubly privileged to have done the service and provoked no jealousies. More than
this, the festival of their celebration of what had been achieved was honoured by the presence and gracious
sympathy of those with whom they were united in shaping in these seas the destinies of the noblest colonial
possessions of any empire. Scarcely inferior, in his judgment, to the duty of making any sacrifice to
uphold the power and glory of the Empire, was the duty of their standing together in these Australian
colonies with a loyal determination to help, respect, and protect each other to the fullest possible extent,
Indeed, the fulfilment of the former duty depended upon the performance of the latter. If they here were
divided in sentiment, distracted with jealousy, the Empire, which looked to their unity as an element of its
strength, was enfeebled by their divisions. And in this act of theirs the consummation of which brought


such a distinguished company there that night, they were enabled to give to the world the assurance that
Australia was one in heroic sympathy, in readiness for service and sacrifice. They all knew that what
they swiftly did every one of these Australian colonies would have done with equal ardour, generosity,
gladness, and pride. The only peril to the cordiality of their intercourse sprang from the circumstance
that they had not the chance of emulating and perhaps surpassing the exertions of this colony. And some
times in nations, as in individuals, out of wounded sensibilities of heroic natures whose ambition was to
serve, but to whom the opportunity had not been given, a feeling of disappointment sprang which chilled
the tenderness of friendship. It might have been that they would have looked in vain for any warmth of
sympathy with their service and success, but to their honour, their happiness, and the glory of the Empire,
they increased the distinction won by this colony by their noble, generous sympathy. And now when by
the blessing of Almighty God—a blessing which he believed their unselfishness merited—they had received
safely home again the gallant men who though sent by them were the representatives of Australia, their
guests of that night came to them members of one family to share their gratitude and increase their joy.
As members of their own family they greeted them. There were moments sometimes of sorrow, or of joy,
sometimes of peril or escape from danger, when those who loved each other and belonged to each other
were brought together. In these days of patriotic exultation over an honourable duty faithfully discharged
the family assembled and rejoiced. Shortly, they would be parted again ; but never more in spirit and
sympathy. The day might come, and it might not be distant, when, instead of being together as they were
listening in sympathy and in thankfulness, as in the words of a great German poet,
4 The soft peace-march beats
Home, brothers ! home !’
they Australians would stand together in tens of thousands, and take their place in the great army which
would have to maintain, not alone the glory of their Empire, but the freedom and civilisation of mankind.
They would be with them on their right hand and on their left with all the greatness and force and
resources of their civilisation—the millions
‘ Who speak the tongue
That Shakespeare spake.’
In that day they would meet again, and this was promised by the presence there that night of 4 Our
Guests.’ He gave the health of those gentlemen, and their gratitude to them for ever. (Prolonged
cheering.)
Sir James Martin, Chief Justice, proposed the health of the Contingent, and in doing so said “The
toast he had the privilege to propose was one of historical significance. The curtain had just fallen on the
last act of a great drama, and he was about to call upon them to applaud the actors. For some 12 months
or more well-meaning politicians here and elsewhere have been exercising their skill in devising some plan
for cementing the scattered parts of the British Empire into one great federation. The success which
attended the labours of these politicians was by no means commensurate with the activity which they
displayed. A perfect agreement had not been arrived at, and the ardently desired unanimity seemed
extremely difficult to obtain. All at once, while the whole world literally, 4 from China to Peru ’ was
anxiously waiting for the joyful tidings of the escape of the great hero of these times from the hands of
savage and merciless barbarians, the telegraph flashed the melancholy news of his death. They were not
called upon at that moment and at that board to express any opinion about the policy of those who sent
this hero to the place of his martyrdom, and failed to provide the means for his safe retreat. No part of
the responsibility of these transactions rested upon them ; but they, in common with all mankind, had the
right publicly to deplore the result. When the word was passed from mouth to mouth that Gordon was dead
there arose on all sides a cry akin to anguish, and a desire to punish his murderers. The enforced retreat
of a column of British troops which had been sent with great labour and expense to Khartoum was taken
advantage of by certain nations to do hostile things, which England, thus checked, would not (as it was
thought) have the power or energy to resist. It was manifest that a crisis had arisen, and at that moment


one among themselves, having the power, had also the wisdom and the patriotism to step forward and offer
military aid to the mother country. As always happens when an heroic thing is done, the community as a
body gave expression to its approval, and all the neighbouring colonies announced their readiness to join
this colony in rallying round the old Hag under whose folds they had grown and flourished and become
strong. On the 12th of February the offer of the Contingent was made, and a few hours afterwards it was
accepted. Instantly the call for volunteers was enthusiastically responded to. Troops were drilled, clothed,
armed, and fitted out, and in three weeks a force of nearly 800 men and 250 horses with all the needful
appliances to maintain them for six months in the field, left these shores animated by the greetings of tens
of thousands assembled from all quarters to witness their departure. In less than 30 days this force thus
efficiently equipped arrived at Suakim and joined hands with the Imperial troops there assembled. How
the news of their offer was received in England—how great was the surprise which their power to fit out
such a force with such rapidity to so great a distance everywhere caused—how profound was the impression
which their readiness to take their share in the defence of the Empire caused in foreign countries, they had
since learned through a thousand channels. Party strife seemed suspended for a moment to load them who
sent troops, and the sister colonies, who were ready to follow their example, with all kinds of pleasant con-
gratulations. It was then made known, not that a federation of the Empire was created, but that such a
federation all along existed. Then was seen the tie light as air, but strong as links of iron which Burke
in one of his great orations, with the unerring instinct of genius, pointed out as the true hold of England upon
her colonies. In that manifestation lay the merit of what they had done. The actual aid which they gave to
General commanding in the Soudan was small, but the moral effect of it was immense. It mattered not
that the men they sent there had fought no battles —had secured no trophies for nevertheless they had to
come back to us as victors. Their prompt response to the call at arms, the rapidity of their preparations,
the excellence of their discipline, and their efficient discharge of each duty imposed upon them, were in
every way honourable to them, and to the people who sent them. Their enrolment found the people here
in general estimation an isolated colony—their landing in Africa elevated the country at once to the rank
of a nation. The first tramp of their foot-steps upon Egyptian soil dispelled all doubt, indifference, or
ignorance, as to the means, the patriotism, or the courage here, and above all, proved in the clearest way
the love here for that grand country, which they, as well as their cousins in America, still fondly spoke of
as their dear old home. In this great service, more valuable to the colony than any laurels which they
might have earned in the field, they owed them their thanks. For this elevation of the people to a re-
cognised equality in all service, both in peace and in war, with the dwellers in the Imperial Isles
‘ Whose glory and renown
Are spread over land and sea,’
they drink their healths that night. Going back, as many of them would do, into civil life, it might not
be impertinent in him to express the hope that, whenever opportunity offered, their claims upon the Gov-
ernment for employment or otherwise would be recognised. The military spirit, which their conduct had
evoked amongst the community, would be of infinite value to them in the times that were coming. The
solution of national difficulties by arbitration was a dream in which good men sometimes indulged. The
examples which they had had of these arbitrations have, however, not been such as to commend them to
their approval. England has all along been too great to have justice done to her by any arbitrator or
umpire, however friendly. By her own right hand, as in days gone by, from Blake to Nelson, from Crom-
well to Pitt, under many famous commanders, and in countless battle fields, she has held her own against
all comers ; and in a righteous cause, and with all her sons gathered in arms by her side, she can with
God’s assistance do so still. No lover of peace need deplore the necessity for our occasional appeal to arms.
Nothing really grand is ever achieved without some difficulty and some sacrifice, and the road to greatness
often lay for nations, as well as for individuals, through fire and blood. There were heroic instincts which
could be evoked only by strife and combat, and nations often emerge out of the clashing of arms with
nobler aims than those which would have otherwise inspired them. Peace was a blessing which the leaders


of communities should endeavour to preserve ; but as mankind were constituted, to ensure the continuance
of peace, they should be prepared for wars, and it would be well for them if the military spirit which had
been called forth would keep them alive to their duty in providing adequately for their defence, and
putting themselves at any moment in a position with the rest of the Australian colonies to aid any part of
the Empire with a force, which, on many battle fields, would be formidable in numbers as well as in dis-
cipline and courage. A great historian once speculated upon the arrival of some remote period when a
New Zealander would be seen sitting on a broken arch of London Bridge, and gazing with serene and
pensive interest at the ruins of St. Paul’s. He felt assured that the time would never come, and that
that cultured representative of the Maoris of to-day would have to look for broken arches and ruins else-
where than in the place where Macaulay’s fancy located him. Day by day, and year by year, the bond
which cemented the widely spread parts of the British Empire together would grow stronger and stronger
and as time rolled on their remotest descendants will in all probability see the great metropolis still the
centre of commerce and civilisation, and of the true-ordered and well-guarded freedom which English-
speaking people have received in all parts of the world as the most px-iceless gift from their progenitors
He had spoken so far only of the Contingent as the object of the present ; but he must in conclusion be
permitted to make some reference to the statesman to w hose happy inspiration they owed its existence
With a wisdom which all recognised, and an energy which it was impossible to over-praise, he called it into
being, and gave it a robust vitality. The movement which his genius conceived he defended by his
eloquence, and amongst the men of mark whom this colony had produced, no brighter name could be found
in aftertimes than that of the father of the Contingent, William Bede Dailey. (Cheers.) He begged to
propose ‘ the health of the Contingent,’ with all the honours.” (Continued applause.)
Colonel Richardson, who commanded our troops in Egypt, responded, and on rising to reply was
received with enthusiastic cheers, which were renewed several times. He begged to call back to their
recollection that momentous day, the 3rd March, when the contingent left the colony stimulated by such
words as rarely fell to their lot to hear. On that day they took their farewell look at these shores, and
left to defendJ;he honour of New South Wales and the fair fame of her military forces. It was only when
they reached Suakim that they realised the fact that they were fulfilling a far higher duty, and were
representing Australia. They were invariably called Australians, and had the assumption and pride to
accept the situation. (Hear, hear.) That view, he took it, had not been a mistaken one, for he saw
around him a number of distinguished gentlemen representing the various colonies of this Australian group
who had met to welcome them. They had had their sympathy aroused, and had identified themselves with
the movement which it was the good fortune of New South Wales to bring into action. Of course they all
knew how the contingent was received at Suakim. From that distinguished man, General Graham, down-
wards, every English regiment and every English soldier vied with each other in extending to them the
hand of good-fellowship, and the culminating honour occurred when they were brigaded with Her Majesty’s
Imperial Guards, That they made a favourable impression might be gathered from the fact that within
four days of their landing they took part in what they expected to be a great fight. When the contingent
landed he said to General Graham that they were men of mettle, and were to be relied on. General
Graham appeared to think the same, as he said that whenever work was to be done the Australians would
be put to it. When that work was being done, and fighting expected, the men of New South Wales were
there. They were only disappointed at not coming to closer quarters with the enemy, but they bore their
disappointment like men, and when the want of water, so dreadful in the Soudan, was felt, no men ever did
better work than the troops of New South Wales. He took this opportunity of testifying to the very
able support which he had received from his ollicers, and which, under the circumstances, was hardly to be
expected, seeing that the contingent was but hastily thrown together, and had but little experience. He
was proud of that support, and ho could fairly say that it had relieved him of a good deal of anxiety
This, combined with the admirable work done by the non-com missioned ollicers, and the soldierly bearing
of the men, had lightened his work to a very great extent. He did not hesitate to say that the period of


his command in Suakim had been a very anxious time for him. He knew that he had a great charge, and
that a slight mistake might in some way or other reflect upon the colony, although it could not mar the
good name of the expedition. Thank God ! everything had gone well, and now, having done their duty
they were being amply repaid by the thanks and welcome accorded to them. He felt, by the generous
welcome they had received, that they had not failed. They had relinquished the duties of their
but were ready to resume them should the colony call upon them at any future time. He considered that
a high compliment had been paid the contingent when the task of welcoming them back was deputed to
Sir James Martin. That gentleman had been connected with matters of defence for many years, and to
him was due the establishment of the Permanent Artillery, and in the main their whole military organisa-
tion. He thanked them from the bottom of his heart for the splendid welcome they had received.
(Applause.)
CITIZEN'S BANQUET TO THE CONTINGENT.
The members of the New South Wales Contingent to the Soudan were entertained at a banquet at
the Exhibition Building on Tuesday, 28th July. The banquet was attended by about 900 persons, but no
provision was made for the admission of ladies ; about 500 of these assembled in the galleries to witness
the proceedings. The men of the contingent were as hearty in receiving the hospitality of the citizens as
the citizens were in offering it, and therefore the event passed off not only with enthusiasm, but with the
utmost good feelings. The scene was a brilliant one. Shields of every civilised country were displayed,
and flowers and bannerets were introduced to give attractiveness to the scene. Most of the men of the
contingent were clothed in khakee uniforms, but several who had belonged to the local permanent or
volunteer forces were arrayed in scarlet or blue. The tables therefore presented a brilliant aspect. The
chair was occupied by the Mayor of Sydney. His Worship had on his right the Governor, Admiral Try on,
Hon. W. B. Dailey, Hon. G. 11. Dibbs, Captain Lake, Hon. H. E, Cohen, Lieutenant-Colonel Spalding,
Hon. J. Norton, Lieutenant 0. H. Cross, Lieutenant-Colonel Raymond, Lieutenant Pike, Major Jekyll,
Mr. 0. A. Goodchap, Rev. C. F. Collingridge, Lieutenant W. C. Pakenham, Mr. Thomas Robertson,
Lieutenant Bouverie, Surgeon Williams, and Mr. R. B. Smith, M.L.A. On His Worship’s left were
Colonel Richardson, Sir A. Stephen, Right Rev. Dr. Barry, Hon. E. Barton, Captain Paul, Hon. W 7 . J.
Trickett, Colonel Roberts, Commander W. de Y. Hamilton, Major Airey, Lieutenant Marx, Mr. H. A. Unwin,
Major Mackenzie, Mr. E. Fosbery, Rev. H. Rose, Lieutenant A. M. Field, Alderman J. Young, Lieutenant
Airey, Surgeon Glanville, Mr. C. Pawsey, and the Hon G. Thornton. The vice-chairs were occupied by
Mr. G. N. Griffiths, Dr. Tarrant, Mr. J. T. M‘Mahon, Mr. James Hunt, Mr. H. A. Rose, Mr. E. J.
Welilow, and Mr. M‘Elveney. The executive committee were:—Messrs. G. Neville Griffiths, M.L.A,
H. A. Rose, J. S. M‘Elveney, Alderman John Young, Alderman P. M‘Mahon, Messrs. J. T. M‘Mahon,
E. J. Wehlow, and Walter Sharman. The hon. secretaries were : —Messrs. George Wallace and Janies
Hunt. Mr. G. A. Hewit performed the duties of acting secretary.
After the introductory toasts, which were proposed by the chairman, His Worship asked the company
to drink ‘ The Health of His Excellency the Governor.’ The Mayor said that in asking them to honour
this toast, he desired them to do honour to a gentleman who had faithfully performed the duties entrusted
to him by Her Majesty the Queen, and who had proved himself to be a true type of the English
gentleman.
His Excellency, Lord Augustus Loftus, said :— ‘ Gentlemen, —I thank you for the very hearty and
enthusiastic Avay in which you have honored me and my office, as Her Majesty’s representative, by your
reception of the toast just submitted. lam always conscious that a large part of the honour paid to the
Governor is due to the undoubted loyalty of the country to the Queen, and that he, as representing the
Sovereign, receives in that capacity a generous warmth of enthusiasm which is intended to manifest
devotion to Her Most Gracious Majesty (Hear, hear.) In that spirit and with that conviction I accept


the honour paid to me at this distinguished and memorable meeting to-night. It is to me, as you may
easily imagine, a source of great pleasure and pride that almost on the eve of my departure from a
colony where I have passed if not some of the most eventful, at least some of the most tranquil and happy
years of a long and busy life, I should to-night find my name received with so much favour at this banquet.
This is no ordinary occasion. It is the closing scene of a great national event. This is no ordinary
gathering. It consists of those gallant men whose services have given our country a place in the world’s
eyes and estimation which no other service could have effected, and at this board are present your first and
most influential citizens in all the varied walks and relations of life. It was not only a graceful act of
public courtesy, but in my judgment it was a recognition of a great act of public duty, that the citizens of
this great city should take the earliest opportunity after the return of the contingent to offer to that
gallant band an expression of admiration of their conduct—our gratitude for their service, and our sincere
joy at their return. And I desire personally to express my thanks to those gentlemen who have so
laboriously and so successfully enabled us to pay the debt which we owe to our guests to-night. I feel that
as the representive of the Queen there is no place I could more fittingly occupy than that which I do at
this moment in offering the thanks of Her Majesty and of her subjects all over the world, for what has
recently been done in the interests of the Empire by this colony. (Oheers.) It has been my inestimable
good fortune to be here at this most eventful period of your history, and I may say of the history of our
Imperial colonisation, to watch this new growth of patriotism from the beginning, to be in the midst of all
this enthusiastic devotion to the great old land from which you sprung, and of the glories and achievement
of which you are so proud. I owe to the movement—to watching it day by day here—to the sympathy
and honour, and reward, which it won for us wherever our flag floats, at home and abroad—some of the
happiest hours of my life. And I shall carry away from you, and to my grave, the proudest of my
memories in the fact that I was enabled to be a humble instrument in fostering its growth, and witnessing
its success; in conveying to our Queen the messages of your valour and your sacrifice, and conveying to
you from Her Majesty the messages of her gratitude for your service. (Cheers.) These messages were
not mere formal act of courtesy, but were on your part practical proofs of a loyalty of the highest kind
known to the world, and on the part of your Queen a proud and hearty recognition of your courage and
devotion. They were exchanged in the sight of all men when the strength of the bond between England
and her colonies was doubted by some timorous and ill-informed persons. They dissipated these doubts in
an instant, and showed mankind that in moments of danger and difficulty we are all shoulder to shoulder
in upholding the great and beneficent Power which, under God’s blessing, exists for the promotion of His
glory and the freedom and happiness of mankind.’ (Oheers.)
The Chairman then proposed ‘ The Health of the Ministry and the Parliament.’ They were aware
that during their term of office the Ministry had done much to make them feel proud of having such men
at the head of affairs. They felt proud at the amount of work the Ministry had performed, and he
believed that they would all admit that they had done one of the grandest acts ever performed in Australia
that of sending these men to the Soudan. (Loud cheers.) It was true that the general elections were
approaching, and that some persons had threatened that the Ministry would be put out of office. He s
however, was of opinion that no particular hostile action would be taken against the Ministry, and he
believed the loyalty of the colony was too pronounced for any party to put them out of office on the
strength of their having sent these men to the Soudan. (Loud cheers.)
Mr. Dailey, who was most enthusiastically received, said : —“ Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —I
thank you on behalf of my colleagues and myself for the way in which this toast has been offered and
received. It is not a personal, but a public compliment. It is offered to the great office which we
fill; not to ourselves. These offices present such opportunities for great public usefulness when their duties
are ably and honestly discharged that they are entitled to reverence, even should the occupants be
unworthy of respect. (Cheers.) While I shall not, in the disavowal of any personal claims upon your
gratitude, admit that we have done little to deserve it (for I feel deeply conscious that we have done all


that our ability and energy fitted us to do), I shall carefully avoid any tedious references to labours
upon which our vindication rests before the country. (Cheers.) Whether the existence of the Ministry is
to be lengthened or cut short—it has already had a long hold of power, has borne a heavy responsibility,
and has spoken and acted in the fullest light of publicity. (Applause.) Never did any body of men, I
think, more fearlessly and eagerly court public criticism. (Cheers.) Like the ingenious youth return-
ing from exhaustive foreign travel, who wishes to baulk an impertinent curiosity concerning his visitation
of some unexplored and inaccessible situations, we may calmly and truthfully say that * we have been
everywhere, and have seen everything.’ (Laughter and cheers.) There is no form of life—and may I not
add, of cookery ?—-(laughter)—peculiar to the country with which we have not been familiarised. We
have tasted kindly Avelcomes sweeter than the richest feasts ; —(cheers) —and I think, while accepting a
boundless hospitality, we have not diminished the number of our friends. Our lot in this respect has been
an enviable one. If we are to remain in office, I trust we shall be strengthened to endure our popularity.
If we are to leave it, I sincerely hope that our successors may be (as I feel sure they will be) equally
fortunate. (Hear, hear.) And why should they not be so ? And why should we not most sincerely wish
them a continuance of our good fortune 1 Though our political struggles were hard and protracted, they
were maintained (with a few—a very few contemptible exceptions) with generous gallant gentlemen, who
made a good fight a great pleasure, and almost caused us to regard a victory over such antagonists with a
feeling of regret rather than one of exultation. (A.pplause.) There is one of them indeed to whom the
public life of the country is under pre-eminent obligation for a chivalrous sense of fair-play, of perfect
courage, of admirable temper, and of old-world fidelity to old friendships ; and to whom our obligations
are not less. (Cheers.) We had no claim upon his forbearance. Our great work was in direct opposition
to his life’s labour. And yet on the one subject out of which springs this demonstration, he gave us a
hearty sympathy, a determined support, and helped us to victory. (Applause.) And this naturally leads
me to say a few words to you, gentlemen, of the event which you are helping to commemorate this evening.
They shall be few on many grounds, not the least of which is that if everything that can be said upon this
subject has not been already said, I am, having spoken of it in every part of the country, unable except
by repetition, which I shall avoid, to say anything new now. There is, however, one thing I should like
to say. It is but a word against a novel mode of taking exception, gentlemen of the contingent, to your
service by treating the object of your despatch with what the authors of this kind of attack curiously
enough deem to be ridicule. Some of these dismal and tearful humorists, whose sarcasms are far more
solemn than the most serious charges of the heaviest people—(laughter)—some of these insupportably
comic people have indulged in a melancholy laugh at your expedition, as if it was intended to effect a
change in the policy and attitude of European Governments to our own, (Cheers and laughter.) The
smallness of your numbers, the childishness of our presumption in sending you, even your misfortune in
failing to have an opportunity of signalising your devotion on the battle-field—-all these have been made
the elements of that oppressive, heart-breaking facetiousness, the exercise of which so dangerously tempts
a really humorous man—no matter how intense may be his love of peace—to ideas of violence. (Laughter.)
One feels what new and unbearable sadness is given to the world by some of its small humorists.
(Renewed laughter.) Gentlemen, the story of your service will not be read by the dismal light of these
exasperatingly funny people—(laughter)—but by the clear, and rich, and full light of history. (Applause.)
Not only your own people—as was to be expected—admired your action, but the most thoughtful and
most distinguished of European statesmen and men of letters were attracted by it. Nobody said,
when you were armed and despatched for the first time in our history, that nations were disturbed, and
European politics were changed. Your action was an humble but a great one. (Applause.) Humble
and beautiful in the offer of the best you had to give to the august mother of nations. (Renewed
cheering.) Great rather in what it revealed than what it of itself effected, or could effect. (Applause.)
What you did the tens of millions of your race and tongue all the world over could do, and if need were
would do. That was what constituted the value of your action. (Continued applause.) And this was


instantly and universally recognised. Within a few hours of your departure from this harbour this was
felt all over the world. If you had never reached Egypt at all—if your ships had sunk in the sea, the
effect would have been the same. (Hear, hear.) If you had been overwhelmed there by a victorious
enemy it would have been the same. (Cheers.) Your action revealed our Imperial resources. Gentle-
men, you have drunk from the loving-cup of praise—lifted to your lips at all feasts—to the dregs.
(Applause.) I shall say nothing to you to-night beyond thanking you in the name of the people of this
country for your services to the Empire. (Applause.) The names of many of us will hardly be
remembered beyond the continuing respect of our young contemporaries, or the love of our immediate
descendants. But your action will live in history when we are in the dust and are forgotten. (Cheers.)
And the only respect —turning to the toast which you have honoured to-night—in which this Ministry
will differ from others in the estimate of those who come after us will not be in its ability, its service, or
its patriotism, if indeed it has any title to these qualities at all, but in the accident of its being enabled
to give your heroic service to the Empire, your patriotic example to the world.” (Continued applause.)
On the invitation of Sir John Robertson, three very hearty cheers were given for Mr. Dailey, who
rose and bowed his acknowledgments for the honour done to him.
Sir John Robertson, who on rising was received with loud and prolonged applause, said that he had
no idea that he should be called upon to return thanks for the Parliament, because he had hoped that his
friend, Sir John Hay, on behalf of the Legislative Council, and Mr. Barton, on behalf of the Legislative
Assembly, would have performed the duty. Yet he had no fear in accepting the responsibility, because he
had spent more years in Parliament than any other man in it. However incapable this Parliament might
be said by some persons to have been, they had desired to do their duty faithfully and well; and, as
regards the contingent, he himself never felt a doubt as to what his duty was in the matter of the contin-
gent. He felt it his duty to support the Ministry in this great matter. (Cheers.) When the proposal to
send an expedition to the Soudan was made, no man sprang to support the cause quicker than he did, for
he felt that his friend, Mr. Dailey, had done a great thing. (Cheers.) It would always be a matter of
satisfaction to him that he had been the means of supporting such an action as this. As regarded the
toast, he presumed that they had called upon him to return thanks for the Parliament because he was the
only man present who had sat in one or the other of both Houses of Parliament for thirty years together.
(Applause.) He did not know that he should do so any more, but he intended to have a fling at it.
(Applause.) He need not say more than to thank them very much. (Applause.)
The Hon. E. Barton, who also responded, made a brief speech, in which he expressed his conviction
that the Parliament of this country would always do its duty. (Applause.)
The Hon. E. Barton then proposed the toast of “ The Army, Navy, and Colonies.” (Applause.)
He need not express to them the honour he felt in being called upon to propose this toast. The departure
of the contingent was a proof of our loyalty to the mother-land, and a magnificent demonstration in favour
of Australia generally. It had shown the world that the British Empire consisted not of an island here
and there, but was the aggregation of the greatest civilisation and patriotism that the world had ever seen.
(Cheers.) He need not say more. He claimed the right of a citizen to speak on this question, and also
claimed the right as senior representative of the most important metropolitan constituency. (Applause.)
Even those who doubted the policy of the Government were quite ready to say that we must maintain the
honour of our country, and would not listen to any sacrifice of our country. What need he say in favour
of our army and navy, whose victories had been countless, and whose defeats had been as glorious as the
victories of others? (Cheers.) How well Colonel Roberts had taken Colonel Richardson’s place they all
knew, and Admiral Try on had done all that a gallant sailor could to show us that we and England
united. (Cheers.)
Admiral Tryon rose to respond on behalf of the toast, and had uttered a few words wdien the band
struck up 4 Rule Britannia/ in the chorus of which everybody joined. The Chairman gave ‘ Hurrah/ which
was echoed round the room and taken up by all present, after which the Admiral said he returned most


hearty thanks for the enthusiastic way in which they had drank the health of his profession. He had to
thank those who had promoted the banquet for the privilege of being present on so important an occasion
with the Mayor and citizens of this great city, in order to show his appreciation of the services of the
contingent. (Applause.) He had to thank them very specially for allowing him to be there that evening
to join with them in the expression of their opinion—an opinion entertained not only by them, but also by
that large body of ladies who were there that evening, and whose power to reward them was so much
greater than anything he could bestow—that the contingent deserved well of their countrymen for the
work they had done. He was glad to be there that evening to say ‘We are proud of our boys/
(Applause.) It was a pleasure to know that the eldest daughter of the great mother-country had come
forward so generously to the assistance of Great Britain. (Hear, hear.) Great she assuredly was, and she
would be still greater, and hold a still higher position in the company of nations owing to the assistance
rendered to her by the colonies, an assistance which showed that though we were scattered round the
world we were yet a united people—(applause) —and able to make a sacrifice for preserving the integrity
of the Empire. He thought it was but fitting that the oldest daughter of our great mother should be the first
one to unfurl the flag. The departure of the Contingent showed that those young colonies had passed through
their childhood and had attained to man’s estate, and were prepared to accept the responsibilities of that
position. They had met to welcome the Contingent, but they had already received a reward which they most
heartily appreciated. They had received the thanks of the Queen, the congratulations of the generals, and the
citizens were here assembled to-night to say they they had deserved well of their country. In the middle
of the military enthusiam of the moment he would say that the first arm of defence must always be the Navy.
The first arm of defence must always be with the soldiery. Should war unfortunately break out in the im-
mediate future, he would be proud to escort a contingent from this colony to the seat of war, and work with
them, and endeavour to secure the success of their enterprise.
Colonel Roberts, in reply, said : Mr. Chairman, your Excellency, and Gentlemen, the toast to which
I have the honour to respond is one which for some 14 years past has been little more than a formal one.
When her Majesty’s troops were withdrawn much of the personal interest connected with the toast was
lost, for although we all recognised and felt proud of the brilliant deeds of our countrymen, yet the
distance from us at which wars have been carried on of late, and the very small concern we felt in the
object of these wars, to a great extent dulled our interest. The past six months have, however, entirely
altered this. Our colonial forces have been called upon to take part in one of Britain’s wars, and for a
time became a part of the British Army. What effect that companionship in arms with gallant regiments
like those who served in the Soudan, and underwent privations of a more than ordinary character, will
have upon our local troops, remains to be seen ; but when the bright example of her Majesty’s 49th
Regiment at Baker’s zareba is remembered, when discipline overcame the effects of a sudden surprise, it is
to be hoped that the memory of those days will incite them to a desire to attain to a higher state of
efficiency in every detail of duty. For the colonial forces must now look upon their liability to serve as
extending beyond our local requirements, as few of us can tell how soon the colonies may be called upon
again to help the mother country with men and arms. That the names of those who commanded in the
Soudan have been remembered I consider a most pleasing and grateful tribute to the army, and I feel
sure that the names of the officers will recall to many here present pleasing memories of the honourable
time when they served with and were received as brothers-in arms by the British army. (Applause.)
The Chairman next proposed “ The Health of the Contingent.” It was both an honour and a pleasure
to him to propose this toast, which was undoubtedly the toast of the evening. Five months since the first
paragraph appeared in the newspapers that the Government had offered the services of a Contingent to
the Imperial authorities. When these few words appeared the people did not take much notice of them,
as an offer had been made before which had been refused. At the time he happened to be travelling with
some members of the Ministry, and he saw that if the offer were accepted the Ministry were prepared to
carry it out. He had wondered how they could fit out a Contingent of 800 men in three weeks.


Knowing that they had no standing army here, he had wondered how the men could be gathered together
in so short a time. A day or two after the news was flashed out from England —and he was sure it would
never be forgotten as long as men lived in Australia—that “ England accepts New South Wales’ offer.”
If ever a Ministry at the helm of the State were backed up by the people it was the Ministry in this
present case. They knew that every man was loyal. (Cheers.) They knew that they had only to give
the word, and that every man would come out. (Applause.) What was the answer to the call? In 24
hours we had thousands of men, not only those born in England, Ireland, and Scotland, but men born
18,000 miles away from old England, who had been taught to love that grand old country, and who were
prepared, and only too proud, to fight for her. We all had the honour of the mother country at heart,
and it was a pleasure to us to help to sustain it. (Cheers.) How pleased and delighted the ladies here
were that their boys were going to show their gratitude to the country from whence they came, by
fighting for her. (Applause.) They had heard a great deal about the despatch of the Contingent being
unconstitutional, but the response to that was to be found in the grand meeting to be held in that very
building for the establishment of the Patriotic Fund, when ten thousand people came forward to give
their money and support to the movement ; when the principal speakers—and among them the Chief
Justice—were men who had been formed in the country, and who felt proud to come forward and help
forward this great movement. This was not the only time that the honour of the country was upheld
through unconstitutional acts, and when the history of Australia was written this would be the greatest
chapter in it. It had placed Australia in the first place amongst nations. When Lord Beaconsfield
ordered the British Admiral to enter the Dardanelles, he committed an unconstitutional act. When he
ordered the Indian army to Malta to fight the Russian Bear, he committed another unconstitutional act ;
but he knew he had the nation to back him up. He (the Mayor) thought that so long as we had men
like Mr. Dailey to guide us, we might have no hesitation in entrusting our liberties to their hands. It
was perhaps unfortunate that the Contingent had not much fighting, but they must remember that
fighting was not the only thing that a soldier had to do. It must not be forgotten that they had left
their homes and sacrificed everything in order to go out to do honour to England and to New South
Wales. They were trapped up several weeks in a transport ship and landed on a foreign shore, not to
be called feather-bed soldiers, but to fight like the old country warriors. He was sorry to hear that the
provisions had been lost, or that they had got astray ; but the men had determined not to grumble, but
to put up with every discomfort as well as the soldiers of the Imperial Army. None were more
disappointed than the men of the Contingent themselves that they had not more fighting. To show how
the way in which the men acted had been appreciated, and that it was the duty of the citizens to testify
their appreciation of it, he need only refer to the handsome compliments passed on them by the com-
manding officers, by the very Queen herself. In fact, the many kind things that had been said by the
officers at home showed that they, at any rate, had not forgotten—and, perhaps, would not soon forget—
their late comrades from New South Wales. It was for the citizens of Sydney now to show that neither
had they forgotten their own brave volunteers on their return home.
Three cheers were then given for the members of the Contingent, and the band struck up “ Cheer,
boys, cheer,” the Chairman resuming his seat amid the loudest demonstrations of approval.
Colonel Richardson said : By the terms of the invitation extended to the officers I gather that we
are invited here this evening rather as ordinary guests, and that this magnificent banquet is given solely in
honour of the non-commissioned officers and men of the Contingent. I can only say, as regards myself, and
I believe I echo the sentiments of every officer when I say we are heartily glad that it should be so, and
that, moreover, we are permitted to take part in this demonstration in honour of a body of men to whom
not only the officers, but the colony, is indebted, inasmuch as it is through their individual and collective
discipline, general good conduct, or bearing in the field, that the Contingent has upheld the good name and
honour of the colony. This is no slight achievement, when it is borne in mind that the major portion
of the Contingent, viz., the battalion infantry, was organised from the ranks of the volunteers, armed,


clothed and equipped, and sent on the spur of the moment to the seat of war ; that the officers were strange
to the men, and that the non-commissioned officers had to be hastily selected. Whilst the result says much
for the system of training for the volunteers, it says volumes for the patriotic and soldierlike spirit of the
men. That the Contingent so bore itself as to merit the warm acknowledgments of the distinguished
Imperial officers, under whom they had the privilege to serve, is due equally to the good sense of the men
as to the exertions of those placed in authority over them. In has been to me a matter of extreme
gratification that the estimate I had formed of the soldierlike qualities and assurance I gave Mr. Dailey
on that point have both been verified in all these circumstances. I, as their late commanding officer, could
not but feel a pride and affection for the body of men who have been the chief instruments in enabling the
colony to take a stand in the eyes of the world in a matter of momentary and historic import The fact of
New South Wales troops being pushed to the front on every occasion when fighting was to be expected was
of course due to the distinguished officer and universal favourite, Sir Gerald Graham. At the same time I
feel assured that your good fortune in this respect was also to a certain extent due to the favourable
representations of our immediate commanding officer, Major-General Fremantle, the Commandant of the
Guards Brigade —(loud cheers) —who, with his staff, on all occasions exhibited the greatest amount of
consideration for and interest in the Contingent. It is only a matter for regret that the Contingent did not
come to closer quarters with the enemy, more especially as on the few occasions on which we were exposed
to fire the attitude and bearing of the men were such as to give ample promise of their being worthy
associates of their British and Indian comrades. In the comparatively uninteresting portion of their work,
such as their marching, the furnishing of guards and picquets, and the various difficulties of fatigue duties,
they exhibited an amount of pluck and endurance which would have been highly creditable to any
body of troops. The Contingent shared alike in work and rations with the other troops, for they reaped no
especial benefit from the particular stores shipped from Sydney, inasmuch as by the previous arrangements
these, on landing, were handed over to the charge and control of the Imperial Commissariat, which, in
return, rationed the Contingent and provided all the requirements for the hospitals. As the commanding
officer of the late Contingent, I thank the citizens for their magnificent entertainment, as showing their
appreciation of the patriotism and services of these non-commissioned officers and men. I also thank his
Excellency the Governor, Admiral Tryon, the Ministry, and other distinguished gentlemen for their
attendance this evening in support of the objects in view. (Applause.)
Lieutenant-Colonel Spalding, in response, said ; Mr. Chairman, your Excellency; and gentlemen,—
After the excellent and exhaustive speech you have just listened to from the esteemed and able leader of
the Contingent, I think there is very little remaining for me, as second in command, to add; yet as a
soldier of over 23 years’ experience in the Imperial and colonial services, I have much pleasure in bearing
testimony to the excellent spirit which animated the Contingent. In the evident determination of all ranks
to do all that was required of them, work by day and night, they were not excelled by the soldiers of the
Imperial regiments. The artillery of the Contingent had not the opportunity of serving with the brigade
of Guards, but the New South Wales field battery had the high honour of practically being adopted, and
for the time being incorporated, with the most distinguished regiment whose motto is “ Übique,” the Royal
Artillery. Indeed, a most excellent feeling existed between the Imperial troops and the Contingent
generally. For the field battery the Royal Engineers of all ranks could hardly do enough. For instance,
after the hot and dusty march of the artillery scouts from Otao, and the field battery from Tlandoub to
Suakim, on the day prior to our embarkation for Sydney, the soldiers of the Horse Artillery insisted on
pitching our tents, grooming and feeding the horses, and generally assisting to our comfort. To the
citizens of New South Wales we and the Contingent now owe a debt of gratitude for their many useful
presents, for their generous subscriptions to the Patriotic Fund, and for this magnificent banquet. In
conclusion, I desire to say I am proud to have been honoured with the command of the first Australian
battery that has served side by side in the field with her Majesty’s Imperial army, it was my aim, in
which I was ably seconded by Major Airey, and assisted, I believe, by every man under my command, to


render the field battery efficient. In this we succeeded, in the opinion of Generals Lord Wolseley, Gerald
Graham, and Nicholson, who at various times and places expressed to me their satisfaction at the appearance
of the men, hoises, and guns, and at the celerity and smartness of their drill. It was not the good fortune
of your soldiers to take part in any of the engagements fought in the desert of the Soudan, but I am
confident had an opportunity of battle been afforded the Contingent, the soldiers of New South Wales
would have well maintained the honour of that grand flag which flies throughout the British Empire.
Should it again be my fortune to serve in the field with the soldiers of New South Wales, I trust we shall
again carry with us the good wishes and sympathies of the generous inhabitants of this great colony.
(Applause.)
Sergeant-Major Tuite, who was received with loud cheers, said he found himself placed in a predica-
ment that evening which few men in his position had been placed in before. He had to thank them on
behalf of the 800 men, who were all better able to perform the duties than himself. They knew how the
services of the Contingent had been called for, and how these boys sprang up at once in answer to the
call, and were accepted. I hey also knew that the conduct of the members of the Contingent had been
praised by the greatest officers in the army, who bore testimony to the fact that our boys had done their
duty well. He would say no more, but just thank them on behalf of the Contingent for the very
enthusiastic manner in which they had drunk their healths. (Hear, hear.)
Corporal Stourton, who was next called upon to respond, said : On the part of the late Soudan
Contingent, I return you our most sincere thanks for this grand entertainment you have given us to-night,
as also for the medallions which are to be presented to us to-morrow, and which we shall always keep as
souvenirs of our late expedition. The flattering terms with which our conduct has been alluded to we do
not deserve, as we simply did our duty the same as our Imperial brother soldiers; but if we have
advanced Australia’s interests in any way, we feel proud of having done so. I take this opportunity of
thanking you and our country cousins for the way in which you all turned out on the occasion of our
leaving the colony. Your cheers and good wishes we often thought of when we had the hard duties of
soldiers to perform in the field, and the remembrance of them made us still more determined to do our
duty well and cheerfully. But above all we thank you for the grand reception we got on our return
home. Ido not refer to the three days’ picnic we had up the harbour. On our landing in Sydney, it
was, to use a common expression, raining cats and dogs. In spite of this, tens of thousands of people
lined the streets regardless of the inclemency of the weather that they might, with their own voices,
welcome us home. I believe a more genuine welcome has never taken place in any part of the world.
Although getting wet through, men, women, and children, all had a cheering word for us; and we soldiers,
I can tell you, thought more of this than you can imagine. Many people will willingly come out on a fine
day and witness a review or other sight, but when you see thousands and thousands standing patiently,
in a pouring rain, there must be a deeper feeling prevailing than that of mere curiosity. Now I shall say
a few words about our doings in the Soudan. When we landed at Suakim, our reception by the Imperial
troops will never be forgotten by any of us as long as We live. Everybody seemed glad that we had
arrived. From the moment we left the Iberia until our departure for home their kindness to us could
not be exceeded. Both officers and men would do anything to oblige an Australian. General Graham,
the soldier’s idol, standing 6 feet 3 inches in height, and wearing ten decorations on his breast, including
the Victoria Cross—(cheers) —would come and ask the rank and file how they were getting on, and
enquire himself into anything pertaining to our comfort. He was a commander whom every soldier
would have followed through fire and water. The English soldiers were very curious to know what sort
of a place Australia was, and what kind of work could be obtained by steady men with good characters.
They would generally wind up by asking if we kept a standing army, each man receiving five shillings
a-day, and seemed a little disappointed when we replied in the negative. However, hundreds of them
said as soon as they obtained their discharges they should come out to Australia. (Cheers.) At Suakim
Aden, and Albany, whenever we came near an English man-of-war the sailors would all turn up and give


Its a regular British Jack Tar’s cheer. (Loud applause.) You know yourselves how they treated us here,
forming a guard of honour both on our departure and return —an honour few soldiers in this world have
ever received. Three days after our landing we received orders to advance on Tamai. General Graham s
report concerning our movements was published a few days ago, so you no doubt know as much about it
as we do ourselves ; but there is one remark I wish to make concerning the plan showing our relative
positions. We appear to be inside the square, as if we were being shepherded by the other regiments.
Such was not the case, as we were on the outer flanks, the same as the others. We were rather heavily
handicapped with the other troops, for you all know a man is not in the best trim for walking immediately
after a long sea voyage. We also carried 80 rounds of ball ammunition, whereas the other soldiers had
but 70 ; and our Henry rifles, with their sword-bayonets, are not near so light as the Martini ones.
Every pound tells when the ground is soft. We were much disappointed at not having a general engage-
ment. They say that Osman Digna is a well-educated man, speaks several languages, and was, when a
youth, educated in France. However, he had not the French politeness to offer us battle —(laughter)
which we all wanted so much. On our march out the heat and dust were something fearful, and we
suffered much from thirst. When we approached Baker’s zareba, which is situated about half-way between
Suakim and Tamai, we had to cross the ground where the desperate fight had taken place a week before
our arrival, and where so many brave men had been killed. The sight of dead Arabs and camels which
had not been buried was very sickening, and vividly re-called to our minds descriptions of battle-fields
which many of us had only read about. I have myself, when on active service, had many hard marches
in South Africa ; but never do I remember one half so fatiguing as this. As an old soldier, I hope you
will not think it out of place my making a remark in praise of my younger comrades. Only three
Australians fell out, and that was not until late in the afternoon. Two of them I saw myself. They did
not sit down, and say they were tired, but fell senseless on the ground. They were carried to the
ambulance waggons as if they were dead. They could do no more, and had kept up as long as they
retained their reason. (Cheers.) Now, some persons think a soldier can only earn honour on a battle-
field, but that is a mistake. During the Zulu war, when the gallant 24th were nearly all cut to pieces,
700 soldiers, under special service officers belonging to other regiments, were sent out in the Clyde
troopship, in order to bring the regiment up to its proper strength. On their second day’s march up
country, as they were approaching their camping-ground, after having done an eighteen-mile march under
a hot sun, Colonel Davies, the officer in command, ordered the captain of the leading company to “ front
form ” his men. This officer had just strength left to give the word of command, and fell down dead from
exhaustion. A well-known war correspondent wrote the following words to his newspaper about this sad
occurrence : — u Although his death was no battle-field death, I consider it was a more glorious one, for
he struggled on in spite of physical weakness, a bright example to his men, and when his work was done
he simply laid him down and died.” So you see, a soldier, if he does his duty well, either on the march
or in camp, can earn credit and honour. When I saw our two boys drop senseless on the ground, it
brought some sad recollections to my mind, as I thought of the officer I have just alluded to, for he was
my elder brother. Do you think if we had had a general engagement, and half of us had been killed or
wounded, that anyone here to-night would have been happier for it? I think not. I for one would never
wish to gain honour or glory at the expense of my comrades. Towards the end of our stay the climate
became very bad, so much so that all the field hospitals and shipping were full of invalids. Within the
last year thousands of men and camels had either been killed or died of sickness, and most of their bodies
had only been buried a foot or two deep in the sand, and some not touched at all. It was near there that
all Baker Pasha’s Egyptian army had been cut to pieces. Consequently the air became very bad, and
fever and other illnesses were rapidly spreading, so much so that nearly all the troops were withdrawn.
Pestilence is the worst enemy a soldier can have. He always has a chance of defending himself against a
foe, but against sickness lie can do nothing but remain and bear it patiently. When Baker’s zareba was
surprised nearly all the troops were away from camp, without their arms, cutting bush, and after the tight


108 men were reported missing, besides the killed and wounded. A few days before we left, most of their
bodies were found about a couple of miles away from the scene of the engagement. They, finding them-
selves defenceless, and cut off from the main body, evidently had tried to make their way to Suakim/when
they were butchered. Major James took out No. 3 troop of the Camel Corps, which consisted of 50
Australians, of whom I was one, and 50 of the gallant Berkshire, in order to bury the dead. We were
chosen because most of the white men missing belonged to the latter regiment. A young soldier, in going
up to a dead body, suddenly fell on his knees and burst into tears. He had recognised a handsome
meerschaum pipe sticking out of the pocket of the dead man’s clothes, by which he knew the corpse was
that of the greatest friend he had had in the world—a youth who had come from the same English
village as himself, and the pipe had been sent out by the poor fellow’s sister, as a birthday present, only a
week before the dreadful fight took place. You will, I feel certain, be glad to hear that we Australians
held our own in athletic sports. The week before we left, some English officers got up some sports, and
the two chief events were carried off by us, although there were men from every regiment out there who
competed. Private Barnes came in first in the 100-yards race, and Private Myers and Stevens won the
camel race. Of course, the latter race was the most important event, and created no end of interest. I
think there were 42 entries, and each camel was ridden by two soldiers, one behind the other, as they did
in service. The course was about a mile in length—half a mile out, round a redoubt, and back to the
starting-post. The camels went at a long swinging gallop, and the finish was most exciting. Our two
boys, after laying in hard with their whips, one on the starboard side, and the other on the port, won a
gallant race by a hump. Now, we soldiers do not wish for any praise or flattery. We simply did our
duty to the best of our ability, the same as any of our brother volunteers would have done, whether they
had come from Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, Tasmania, or New Zealand ; and as long as the
people of Australia can honestly say, “ We are satisfied with our boys,” that is ample recompense for any
hardships or privations which we may have undergone. (Cheers.)
Private J. A. Moutray, who was next called upon to respond, said : Mr. Chairman, your Excellency,
and gentlemen, I feel that a very great honour has fallen to my lot in being allowed the privilege of
responding on behalf of the New South Wales Contingent. lam sure the gentlemen who have worked so
effectually in providing this magnificent entertainment desire no greater reward than the knowledge that
their efforts to pay honor to the Contingent have been attended with success. Yet the thanks of the
Contingent are specially due to the promoters and citizens, inasmuch as your banquet to-night will tend to
implant pleasurable memories of an expedition that, for the greater part, has been attended by hardship
and much disappointment. The sudden collapse of the Soudan campaign was only equalled by the collapse
of our own military existence upon our return. I have very little doubt, however, that when our fellows
have settled down to their various occupations and pursuits in life the serious and responsible nature of
the duty they undertook will become more apparent to them, and we may see our way to arrange to
commemorate our military career in the Soudan by annual reunions. With regard to the campaign itself,
whatever opinions may exist amongst politicians, or however much the men may rejoice at leaving a deadly
and soul-depressing climate, as soldiers there was only one opinion amongst us, and that was that England,
not having considered the object of the invasion ended by the death of General Gordon at Khartoum, and
having continued operations involving great loss of life and expense, was bound to continue the campaign
until a more satisfactory result was obtained. We never for a moment doubted but that we should have
had the glory of effecting a junction with Lord Wolseley’s grand army on the Nile, and all ranks looked
forward to the storming of Berber and Khartoum with an eagerness that made the sudden abandonment of
the war the more disappointing. We have heard much about the enemy we were engaged with. The
Arabs are without exception a splendid race—tall, handsome people, of grand physique and great
intellectual endowment. I never see my way, however, to associate religious fanaticism with their extra-
ordinary valour and resistance to the extent generally credited to them. The Arabs fought from natural
courage, and from a desire to maintain their hereditary trade of slave-dealing, knowing that the encroach-


merits of English troops would eventually sweep away many of their abominable habits and customs which
they followed for centuries. The political and commercial advantages of the expedition I leave to abler
hands. It is an indisputable fact that through the sending of New South Wales troops to help England a
knowledge of the Australian colonies and their resources has been circulated to an immense extent
throughout the world. Amongst the Imperial soldiers a general wish was expressed that when the war
was over, if they could obtain their discharges, they would like to come out and take military service in
Australia. Much amusement was created amongst our fellows upon our landing at Suakim by the surprise
our appearance created amongst many of the Imperial troops, some of whom were heard to exclaim,
“Why, those are all Englishmen !” It was even reported that an officer had been heard to remark to a
brother officer, “ What remarkably good English those fellows speak.” If some little ignorance of our
colonists was found amongst the Imperial troops, a knowledge was found in another quarter that decidedly
surprised us. In conversation with Arabs who had been captured or who had surrendered themselves to
the British, we found men who were conversant with most of the large centres of population out here, and
in one instance at least I met an Arab who had been in Sydney later than last Christmas. As a military
expedition the experience of the Contingent must prove of great advantage to our colonial military
authorities. A volunteer system such as ours can only be properly tested by actual service in the field.
I do not think I can be accused of egotism in asserting that the great amount of success that attended our
operations in Egypt was mainly due to the fact that the men of the Contingent were determined to emulate
and rival the Imperial troops, and to defy all obstacles in performing the work they had offered themselves
for in Sydney. Before I conclude I would just say a few words about our Imperial comrades. Our
sojourn with the Imperial troops will ever be remembered by us with feelings of pride and satisfaction.
(Applause.) Divested of gaudy uniforms and glittering lace, it was impossible almost to distinguish one
regiment from another. All seemed thirsting to rival each other in action. We had Guards and Line
regiments, the marines, the fighting men of the Soudan, and naval men, crack cavalry corps, and Royal
Horse Artillery batteries. I would not presume to say that one corps was superior to another ; all seemed
actuated by a keen desire to be best, and to “ have at the enemy.” And yet these are the men who had
been represented to our colonists as a degenerated soldiery. We all know the mettle of our heroic Crimean
soldier. Lord Wolseley, in his splendid epitome of military science, “ The Soldier’s Pocket Book,” alludes
to the fact, that however incredible it may appear, immense numbers of the Crimean soldiers could not tell
you the name of the general who commanded them. The Imperial soldiers of the present day can
not only tell you the name of the general who commands them, but can draw his plans, write his reports,
and do all the ink-slinging necessary for the internal economy of a British army in the field, and in addition,
as experience has proved, fight as courageously and effectually as any soldiers of our past history. My
service with the New South Wales Contingent will always be remembered by me with feelings of pride, as a
service spent amongst a splendid body of comrades. Although none of us are particularly anxious to
return to the Soudan, should danger threaten the colony of New South Wales, I feel convinced that every
available man of our Contingent would eagerly seize his rifle and fall in for duty, and the old brigade would
be ready to advance with the same hearty spirit as of old. In conclusion, on behalf of the private members
of the Contingent, I tender my hearty and grateful thanks for the magnificent and substantial reception
accorded to us.
Private G. N. Stuart, who was also called upon to respond, said : “ Your Worship and gentlemen,
After what has been said by the previous speakers there remains for me but little to do but to thank you
as the representatives of the people of Sydney, and further as the representatives of the people of New
South Wales, in the name of my late brothers in arms, for the great kindness shown us, not only on this
occasion, but ever since the Hon. Mr. Dailey conceived the patriotic idea of offering our services to the
mother country in her Egyptian difficulty. There is not one of us here to-night who will ever forget the
memorable 3rd of March, 1885. The manner in which the people of New South Wales turned out to bid
us farewell was of itself enough to make the blood of every right-thinking man tingle in his veins, and I


believe that fiom that large concourse of people 10,000 men could easily have been found ready to go
forth if called upon to do service for their Gracious Sovereign Queen Victoria. But in tendering our
thanks to the people of New South Wales for the display at our departure, and for the manner in which
you welcomed us home, I think that in behalf of my comrades and myself it is but right to say at this
time that the reception given to us by the British soldiers in the Soudan from the Commander-in-chief
down to the private was enough to stir within us all the ennobling feelings of mankind, and cause us to
exclaim Well, we are not lighting for New South Wales alone, but for the dear old mother country
which gave us birth.’ and it caused us to feel that the world was only being shown that wherever the
British flag flies there is unity in the hour of need. Now, gentlemen, again in the name of the New South
Wales contingent I tender you hearty thanks for all your kindness, and if the hour of trouble should
again arise, I cannot help thinking that every man able to carry a weapon would arise to assist “ the flag
that braved a thousand years the battle and the breeze.”
The next business was the presentation by the Mayor of Sydney to Sergeant-Major Tuite of a massive
silver tea and coffee service upon a salver.
The Mayor, whose opening remarks were inaudible to most of those present by reason of a perfect
storm of cheers and groans by those immediately before him, said that when the New South Wales Con-
tingent was ordered away, he felt in his old English heart inclined to do something to encourage our men
to distinguish themselves in the Soudan. The gift which he made, and which was awarded to its recipient
in accordance with the decision of Colonel Richardson, could not be compared to the Victoria Cross, but
he was sure that the Victoria Cross was never bestowed by her Majesty with more pride than he felt in
handing this presentation to Sergeant-Major Tuite—(cheers and uproar) —who had received proof which
he could show, that he had been a good soldier in India. (Cheers.) He did not feel hurt at their groans
against the sergeant, because they showed that he had done his duty. (Applause.)
Sergeant-Major luite, in acknowledging the presentation, said that he had done his duty to the best
of his ability, and had tried his best to serve his fellow-colonists. If he had made a mistake, or done any-
thing which anybody did not like he could not help it. (Applause.) He bad a duty to do and he had
done it, with God’s help, in the best way he could. (Cheers and groans.)
Sir Alfred Stephen proposed the toast of “ The healths of Lieutenant-General Graham, Commander
in-Chief, Major-General Fremantle, commanding Brigade of Guards, and the army of the Soudan.”
(Cheers.) He said that it would be difficult to exaggerate the feelings with which New South Wales re-
garded the action of the men of the Contingent in going to the Soudan, and we must not forget that our
cordial thanks were due to those who had so well received them there. (Cheers.) The conduct of those
gentlemen towards the Contingent would never be forgotten. Our soldiers should be grateful for this re-
ception from soldiers of British birth, and that they were selected to fight side by side with tried soldiers
of the Imperial Government. (Cheers.) It was no small honor to them to be selected by such a man as
General Graham to fight side by side with the grand Imperial Guards of Great Britain, because he was no
untried man, but one who had fought well in the Crimea. He had fought at the Alma and Inkerman, had
led his men to victory, and had received the thanks of the Parliament of the Empire. On behalf of the
people of New South Wales, he had to express their thanks to the gentlemen named, and to the army in
the Soudan, for the manner in which our Contingent had been received. (Cheers.)
The Hon. G. R. Dibbs proposed “The Land we live in.” (Applause.) He said that he had been
suddenly called upon, because the toast had been allotted to the Bishop of Sydney, who had had to leave
before it came on. He thought that we were all proud of our country, of our people, of our climate, of
the magnificent soil of the colony, of our ladies, and, last of all, our Contingent. (Cheers.) He would
recall to their memory the lines of the poet —lines which would commend themselves to those who had
made this the land of their adoption :
“ Lives there the man with soul so dead,
Who never to himself hath said,
‘ This is my own, my native land.’ ”


Alderman MacMahon said, in responding to the toast of “ The Land we live in,” I must confess,
after hearing the very eloquent speech of Mr. Dibbs, Ido so with a great amount of diffidence. I, who
have spent the greater part of my life in Australia, can honestly endorse all Mr. Dibbs has stated. Celtic
Irish to my heart’s core, I am proud to claim this glorious sunny land as the country of my adoption, the
birthplace of my children \ while my heart throbs for the old green a Isle of the Ocean, they by birth,
sentiment, and feeling are thoroughly Australians, and with them I am willing to join in love and
affection for our southern sunny home. There are thousands this day in Australia who will endorse what
I say, and my only regret is that there are not millions, for there is room enough and to spare for millions
of industrious people to settle on this great continent. We have met here to-night to do honour to out
fellow-citizen soldiers who left our shore to fight old England’s battles in a foreign land. In volunteering
for this service the 750 gallant men reckoned they were doing the right thing, and what they did they did
right well. This great gathering, convened by the Chief Magistrate of Sydney, who I see has his
Excellency Lord Augustus Loftus on one side and the Primate of Australia on the other, supported by
the Ministry and the most distinguished of our citizens, will, I am sure, satisfy “ our boys ” that a full
meed of praise is thus voluntarily rendered them for the pluck and soldierly qualities displayed by them
when standing shoulder to shoulder with the flower of the British army. One result we have obtained by
the Soudan campaign is that we have now in our midst a body of thoroughly efficient men who will act as
a nucleus for 20,000 volunteers to rally round in defence of our wives, our children, and the hearths and
homes of the land we live in. This land of ours is truly a glorious land—a land well worth fighting for—
a land of corn, wine, oil, tin, silver, copper, coal, gold, and the golden fleece—a land upon which the
Almighty God has poured his choicest blessings. (Cheers.) Since the return of the Contingent I saw
day by day honours and compliments showered on the officers. I felt as a citizen that something in a
similar way should be done for the rank and file of the Contingent —the men who had borne the heat and
burden of the day, the bone and sinew of the army. (Cheers.) In conversation with a few friends—one
of them a namesake of my own and an excellent organiser—we determined to bring the matter under the
Mayor’s notice officially, and he at once threw his whole heart into the business, and he gave us and the
executive committee every encouragement and support. Backed by the hearty and untiring co-operation
of our grand old military veteran, M. James Hunt, Ave have rolled up here to-night to welcome back to
their homes our gallant citizen volunteers, and show them that if they have been applauded elsewhere for
their gallant conduct we not only applaud but drink, as we have, their healths in brimming
The great gathering will satisfy all Australia’s sons whose patriotism impels them to stand up in their
country’s defence, that their names and deeds will ever be held in grateful remembrance by the people of
the land we live in. Finally, to use the words of a distinguished countryman of mine :
“ May Australia’s voice be ever heard
Amid the world’s applause,
And never be her flagstaff stirred
But in an honest cause.
May freedom be her very breath,
Be justice ever dear ;
And never an ennobled death
May son of Australia fear.”
The next toast was that of “ The Ladies,” which was proposed by Dr. Tarrant, M.L.A., and was
suitably responded to. The toasts of “ The Press ” and “ The Chairman ” were also honoured.
AN IMPERIAL PARLIAMENTARY PAPER.
Among the Imperial Parliamentary papers relating to the colonies was one which included the bulk of the
“ Correspondence respecting offers by the colonies of troops for service in the Soudan,” This paper, or
rather book —for it consists of 64 pages of printed matter, foolscap size—is a continuation of others pre-


\iously published, a full report of speeches delivered at Dubbo on the occasion of a dinner to Sir Patrick
Jennings, at which addresses were delivered by Mr. Dailey, Mr. Dibbs, and Sir Patrick Jennings ; a long
extract from 4 Our Mail Letter, published in the Sydney Morning Herald of March 19 ; and the Parlia-
mentary Paper on the “ Soudan Expedition Contingent/’ the printing of which was ordered by the Legis-
late Assembly of New South Wales on March 18, 1885. No less than 11 pages are appropriated to the
repi eduction of this paper, the printing ot which, as an Imperial paper, is no less a recognition of the im-
portance of the subject and of the interest excited by it than it is a compliment to this colony. There are,
however, contained in the book some letters and despatches to which publicity has not hitherto been given
so far as this colony is concerned, as well as some matters the publication of which would doubtless prove
interesting to many. In a despatch dated Sydney, February 16, the Governor writing to the Earl of
Derby, K.G., says: “In the telegram 1 addressed to your Lordship I strongly urged its acceptance, as a
refusal would cause disappointment, and be deeply felt by the colony. I consider that the acceptance of
this oiler, which will be supported by all the colonies, has a great importance both now and in regard to
the future. The creation of the German Empire was mainly effected by the various German nationalities
fighting shoulder to shoulder against a common enemy. It was ‘ blood and iron ’ that brought about
German unity. I here can be no more practical mode of realising federation of the colonies than by a
blending of the several colonial forces, and co-operating with each other in actual warfare. If
proof were wanting of the attachment of this colony to the Queen and to the British Empire, the present
occasion has fully afforded it, and I feel confident that the same feelings will prevail throughout all the
Australasian colonies.” In a despatch under date of Sydney, March 10, from the Governor to the Earl of
Derby, in which Lord Augustus Loftus reported the despatch of the Contingent, his Excellency enclosed
a report from the Sydney Morning Herald, , “ giving the details of the procession of the troops to Circular
Quay, and their embarkation.” Another despatch from the Governor to the Earl of Derby, dated Sydney,
March 17, deals with the opposition which was raised to the sending of troops to the Soudan. The despatch
is as follows :—Governor the Right Hon. Lord Augustus Loftus, G.C.8., (New South Wales), to the
Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G. (Received April 28, 1885.) Sydney, March 17, 1885. My
Lord, —There is a certain party here, of which Sir Henry Parkes may be called the leader, which is excit-
ing opposition to the policy of my Government in regard to the sending troops to the Soudan. The party
is insignificant both as to number and to influence, and the large amount of subscriptions to the Patriotic
Fund, now amounting to about £25,000, offers evidence of the approval of the Ministerial policy, and of
the heartiness with which it is supported. 2. A banquet was lately given by the citizens of Dubbo to
their representatives, which was attended by Mr. Dailey, who was anxious to enlighten the general public
as to the general nature and importance to the colony of the policy he has pursued. I enclose copy of Mr.
Dailey’s speech, to which I specially invite your Lordship’s attention. 3. The press of Sydney, with the
Sydney Herald at its head (from which I annex two leading articles) highly approve the course which has
been taken, and consider it is the opening of a new epoch for the Australian colonies. I have, &c.,
(Signed) Augustus Loftus. The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G., &c.” Before the list of the
Patriotic Fund was closed the subscribed sum amounted to upwards of £35,000.
Another despatch was in the following terms: — u Governor the Right Hon. Lord Augustus Loftus,
G. 0.8., (New South Wales), the Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G. (Received April 28, 1885.)
Sydney, March 19, 1885. My Lord, —I have the honor to annex a report by the Sydney Herald of the
debates in both Houses of the Legislature on the Address in reply to the Speech. 2. The debate in the
Upper House was concluded last evening, and the Address voted with only one dissentient voice. 3. It is
probable that the Address will be voted this evening, and carried by a large majority. 4. The local press
lias been favourable to the policy of the Government, and may be said to reflect the public opinion of all
classes in the colony. 5. I annex leading articles of the Sydney Herald , the Daily Telegraph , and
Evening News , approving the policy of the Government. 6. I also annex the fortnightly letter of general
news published by the Sydney Herald for transmission to Europe by the Orient mail, which leaves to-day.
I have, &c., (Signed) Augustus Loftus. The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, K.G., &c.


CONCLUSION.
We have now traced this great event in our history from its opening to its closing scenes. Enough
has been written to evidence the extent to which the popular feeling was stirred by the movement, and
the whole of the Australian colonies moved by the action thus opportunely taken by New South W ales,
the mother of the group. It is such great events as these that make history. In the hands of capable
men, and directed by great minds, they are charged with the most momentous consequences to the future
of the State. To such men every hour is rich with golden opportunity. They live their public life in the
light of that grand saying of George Eliot: —
“ What times are little 1 To the sentinel
That hour is regal when he mounts on guard,”—
and the record which they leave behind is illustrated with acts that we cannot but choose to regard as historic.
Whenever this great act in our history is recalled, it will necessarily bring up with it the name of its
responsible author. In an early part of this volume we dealt with the career of the Honourable William
Bede Dailey, up to within a few weeks of the inception of the great movement which has since marked a
signal departure in our history. Up to that time, as we then pointed out, his career had been a literary
rather than a political one. But the events with which his name has since connected itself have now
placed him in an entirely new light before the country. He is now one of our representative men who
have helped to make our history. He saw the opportunity which presented itself, and at once availed
himself of it. An irresolute or an incapable man would have let the occasion pass by, and deprived the
country of the advantage and the glory which should have come from prompt and decided action. The name
of William Bede Dailey is now written beside those of the f minders of our Constitution. With an eloquence
and grace peculiarly his own he defended the action of the Government in despatching the Contingent, at
various places throughout the country, as the foregoing pages have shown; and thus, by his brilliant and
spirited speeches, educated the public feeling up to a higher standard of appreciation and enthusiasm.
These public utterances of the Acting Colonial Secretary form now the chief part of the literature of this
splendid movement. Wherever they were delivered they were received with the most striking expressions
of enthusiastic appreciation, and it is quite safe to say that never in the history of the colony was the
popular feeling so deeply or so widely moved. It was during the illness and temporary absence from the
colony of the Premier, Sir Alexander Stuart, that action in the matter was taken, and the responsibility
of leading the Cabinet fell directly on Mr. Dailey. He was ably assisted by the Colonial Treasurer, the
Honourable G. R. Dibbs; the Minister for Works, the Honourable F. A. Wright; and the Minister for
Public Instruction, the Honourable W. J. Trickett. The two former of these gentlemen took an active
part in the preparations, the Minister for Works in particular giving unremitting attention to the fitting
out of the expedition; while Mr. Trickett contributed some effective speeches to the discussion of the
movement. From the moment the project was submitted to the Council it was taken up with eagerness.
Within sixteen days after the first minute was penned the expeditionary force had been organised,
equipped, and despatched. In recognition of their services in connection with the despatch of the Austra-
lian Contingent the Premier—Mr. (now Sir Alexander) Stuart —and the Attorney-General—Mr. Dailey —
were offered by Her Majesty’s Government the distinction of Knights Commander of the Order of SS.
Michael and George. This honour Mr. Stuart accepted. It was very generally felt throughout the colony
that some higher acknowledgment of Mr. Dailey’s brilliant and exceptional services should have been
tendered him. But that gentleman declined all distinction or reward for his disinterested and patriotic
action, as he had already done on a previous occasion ; and elected to continue to be known by the name
which his strongly-marked character has familiarised to the country. His refusal gratified the country.
It was widely and generally felt that his great and historic part in the public life of his native land had
no need of the accidental aids that glorify the names of less distinguished men. A marble bust of the
Honourable William Bede Halley has just been placed in position in the Legislative Council to com-
memorate his action in despatching the Australian Contingent for service in the Egyptian Soudan.


OO^TTEITTS-
PAGE
Introduction 3
Sir Edward Strickland’s letter to the Herald 9
Extraordinary Cabinet Council, February 12 10
Mr. Dailey’s Interview with Colonel Richardson and Colonel Roberts ... ... ... ... 10
Cablegram from Mr. Dailey to Agent-General 10
Sir Saul Samuel’s Reply ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Mr. Hindson’s First Offer to Patriotic Fund ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Mr. Halliday’s Contribution to Patriotic Fund ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Mr. Dailey Telegraphs to all Australian Premiers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
Mr Service’s Reply 11
Mr. Dailey Receives Telegram Notifying Acceptance of Offer of Troops, at Tarengo ... ... 11
Colonel Richardson’s Record ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
Arrangements Commence February 16... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Question of Remuneration... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Strength of Contingent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Telegrams from various parts of the Colony ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Question of providing transport of Contingent ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 13
Feeling of the Public ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Lord Wolseley Telegraphs to Lord Loftus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
Contributions in Money and Kind ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 14
Enrolment of Volunteers continues ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
The “ Iberia ” chartered ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
Mr. Wright’s Minute relating to Supplies ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
Enrolment at Victoria Barracks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
Terms of Engagement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
Oath of Engagement ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
Mr. Ferguson’s Contribution to Patriotic Fund ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
Rates of Remuneration ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
Impression at Berlin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Ambulance Corps ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Excitement in the Country ... ... ... ... ... ... v.. ... ... 19
Chaplains to Accompany Contingent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
Day of Departure 3rd March, 1885 ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... 20
Victona Barracks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 20
Order of March from Victoria Barracks to Circular Quay ... .. ... 22
General View of Procession... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 22
Darlinghurst to College-street ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
College-street to George-street ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... ... 24
George-street to Circular Quay... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
The Embarkation ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 25
His Excellency the Governor’s Address to Contingent ... ... ... ... 27
Telegram from Sir H. B. Loch, Governor of Victoria .. ... ... ... ... ... 28
Colonel Richardson’s Reply to Governor’s Speech ... ... - . ... ... 28


The Scene at the Circular Quay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 29
Special Church Services... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
St. Andrew’s Cathedral, the Primate’s Address ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
St. Mary’s Cathedral, Archbishop Moran’s Address ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 35
The Patriotic Meeting ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
The Mayor’s Address ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 38
Sir James Martin’s (Chief Justice) Speech... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38
Sir P. A. Jennings’ Speech ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
Mr. H. S. Badgery’s Speech ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42
Mr. Henry Copeland’s Speech ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
The Hon. Edmund Barton’s (Speaker) Speech ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
The Hon. George Thornton’s Speech ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46
Mr. R. B. Smith’s Speech ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46
Mr. Thomas Robertson’s Speech ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47
Ministerial Utterances ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47
Mr. Dailey at Orange ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47
Mr. Dailey at Dubbo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 49
Mr. Dailey at Grafton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 52
Mr. Dailey at Wagga Wagga ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 54
Mr. Trickett at Young ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
Opposition to the Movement ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 60
Thanks from the Mother Country ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 62
Proceedings in Parliament... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 63
Sir Alfred Stephen’s Speech .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66
Hon. G. R. Dibbs (Colonial Treasurer) Speech ... ... ... ... ... ... 70
Sir John Robertson’s Speech ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 77
The Contingent in Egypt ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 82
Review of Contingent by Lord Wolseley ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 82
Lord Wolseley’s Farewell Despatch ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 83
Her Majesty’s Farewell Message ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 83
The Return of the Contingent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 83
The Procession... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85
At the Victoria Barracks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 86
The Ceremony at the Barracks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 90
Lord Loftus’Address to the Contingent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 90
Colonel Richardson’s Reply to His Excellency ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 91
Sir George Verdon’s Address ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 91
Colonel Hautlin’s Address ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. 92
Lieutenant-Colonel Mein’s Address... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 92
Brigadier-General Owen’s Address ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 93
Colonel Legge’s Address ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 93
Congratulatory Speeches ... ... .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 94
Mr. Dailey’s Speech at Banquet to Representatives of other Colonies .. ... ... ... 94
Sir Jas. Martin’s Speech at Banquet to Representatives of other Colonies ... ... ... ... 95
Colonel Richardson’s Speech in Reply to the Health of the Contingent ... ... ... 97
Citizens’Banquet to the Contingent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 98
His Excellency’s Speech at Citizens’Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 98
Mr. Dailey’s Speech at Citizens’Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 99
Sir John Robertson’s Speech at Citizen’s Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... 101
Hon. E. Barton’s Speech at Citizens’Banquet... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 101
Admiral Tryon’s Speech at Citizens’Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 101
Colonel Roberts’ Speech at Citizens’Banquet... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 102


PAGE.
The Chairman’s Speech at Citizen’s Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 103
Colonel Richardson’s Speech at Citizens’Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 103
Lieutenant Colonel Spalding’s Speech at Citizens’Banquet ... ... ... ... ... 104
Sergeant-Major Tuite’s Speech at Citizens’ Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 105
Corporal Stourton’s Speech at Citizens’ Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 105
Private J. A. Mourtray’s Speech at Citizens’Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... 107
Private G. N. Stuart’s Speech at Citizens’ Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... 108
The Mayor’s Presentation to Sergeant-Major Tuite ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109
Sir Alfred Stephen’s Speech at Citizens’Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... 109
Hon. G. R. Dibbs’ Speech at Citizens’ Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 109
Alderman McMahon’s Speech at Citizens’Banquet ... ... ... ... ... ... Ho
An Imperial Parliamentary Paper ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 110
Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 112


Sfafrneg;
W. M. Maclardy, Mercantile and Book Printer,
319 George Street.
1884,








■ ; * 4* . ■.. ' i., .,v ,•'■' ■ ■; % : '■'•:'■'■■ .-v : ,-/
HHB I
*y
* * lC:
8
*V • ~ * • V j > v .v /; -v > ‘V V • v » f r i v ■ i *v -'■J **- .*.■.• 1 *• • - v *-'- *-* ' i r J • • ; v .. vj VV. -•i: \d#J J«I ** a WIV** > V? t -?»><: )C*. Jr* * Or JJ' -*J- • */,VCsi«/ M i >31S fxv* • •'• iVliFi /jlviifct .2} W'£» RwiV- 1 '*i%W‘i5f#, «'•?;** A //.Ww •%
, • ,.*;/■’• 1. 'i»ft (!>>!• j ;Hff.-.}: ,/fj; f,}u:{*n'JJ;Kr5lr- j;, r ';?j* r•- » ! % ; i ■ *wjKy f J• , ~.;! ; jj-?V*5:PjffiEpV: 'Jjifi -'1*'^fn 1^ **'**#*,^JwJl yffAB ;*• •*
■ I
/ ; - - . , ' a gM ■HHi 1
