

THE
SPIRITUAL
OR,
f i
EXHIBITED IK
BOMBSHELL;
POPERY AND (PROTESTANTISM
THEIR RELATION TO JUDAISM, CHRISTIANITY
AND EACH OTHER
I A
1 ]
j-ioBAKT Town :
James C. Pratt, Printer, 42, Meeville-stheet.
1871.
“ For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, to the pulling down of strongholds.”—2 Cor., X., 4.
“ Earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the
Saints.”—Jude, 1., 3. $
“ Having the form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from
such turn away.”—2 Timothy, HI., 5.
A PRIEST OP THE LIVING TEMPLE




THE
SPIRITUAL
BOMBSHELL;
POPERY AND PROTESTANTISM
EXHIBITED IN
THEIR RELATION TO JUDAISM, CHRISTIANITY
AND EACH OTHER.
“For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, to the pulling down of strongholds.”—2 Cor., X., 4.
“ Earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the
Saints.” —Jude, L, 3.
“ Having the form of godliness, hut denying the power thereof, from
«uch turn aw 7 ay.”—2 Timothy, 111., 5.
A PRIEST OF THE LIVING TEMPLE
James C. Pratt, Printer, 42, Milville-sxrjebt.
1871.


ADVERTISEMENT.
This Pamphlet is designated “The Spiritual
Bombshell,” because its object is to bring truth to
bear upon all who come within its range, irrespectire
of all party ism ; and as this appears to be a time when
the weapons of warfare are greatly increased for the
purpose of slaughter and mutual destruction, I do not
see why the spiritual weapons of the Christian warfare
should not be increased also ; more especially as their
purpose is not to make widows and orphans, but that
men may become the wounded of the Lord, and healed
by the great Physician, and thus producing peace on
earth, goodwill towards men.






PREFACE.
To gain a proper view of the symmetry of a building it is
necessary to behold it from a position that commands the whole
structure, and not merely from a nook or recess. In reference
to Divine truth the same principle holds good, for it is just as
difficult to have a right apprehension of the scope of the
Gospel, viewing it from the stand point of certain doctrines, as
it is to appreciate the fair proportions of an edifice from a
corner. To avoid, therefore, all narrowness I have taken a
rapid glance at the whole construction of the Christian system.
Beginning with the Jewish economy, and following its
development into the Gospel dispensation, I have stated the
doctrine of justification as the ground work of the Christian
edifice, and as a touchstone by which to try every erroneous
creed. By this it will be seen how far Judaism is connected
with Christianity—the superiority of the latter over the former;
also how far the Horn is h and Protestant churches are in
accordance with the Divine original—wherein they diverge
and apostatize, and agree, and differ from each other.
If it be asked by what authority I speak with such positive
assurance in Divine things, seeing that so many learned men
have differed upon these subjects, my answer is that learned
men oftener mystify than elucidate religious doctrines—as Mr,
Barnes says, “ a plain, common sense individual in humble
dependence on Divine aid, oftener hits the mark than the
sophisticated scholar.” Learning, of course, is essential, and
not to be despised. But having the wonderful works of God
made plain to us in the Bible, the true understanding of which
can only be reveal 'd by Him that wrote it, and as that
influence is as free for one as another, according to their
proportion of faith, it is the duty of all to know it, and thereby
earnestly contend for the faith. I therefore take my stand
on the Gospel of God, fortified on the north by reason and
common sense; on the south by the testimony of the first
fathers of the Primitive Church; on the east by the testimony
of the most learned and pious men of our day; and on the
west by the practical experience of the truth, which, after all,
is the only true way by which a man may know the certainty
and divinity of the Christian religion. For in such an experience


the eyes of our understanding being opened, a discerning
spirit is given, so that (as the Apostle saith), the righteous
judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged of no man, for the
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit. Being
brought out of darkness into his marvellous light, we can see
light in God’s light, for the Spirit searcheth aU things, yea
the deep things of God, and reveals them unto us. It is clear
that a true believer has no more doubt of the Gospel than a
man emerging from the dungeon has of daylight. Nevertheless
let itnot be thought when I speak of the spiritual understanding
of the righteous that all are alike enlightened, or that it is in
the spirit of a vain Pharisee, I speak; by no means ; but simply
as a recipient of Divine influence, or as a sinner saved by grace.
In this sense the most unworthy, and least of all, may make
their boast in that righteousness which alone exalteth, and in
Him who giveth knowledge to the simple.
In reference now to the style and manner of this work, I beg
leave to say a few words, and declare once for all, that I entertain
no ill feeling personally to any creature on account of his
religious belief, for he that would hate a man for his creed,
and cannot distinguish between principles and persons, is but
a narrow minded bigot. To defend and contend for the truth
is the duty of all, but to persecute is diabolical, and only
manifests weakness.
If I have made use of strong language in showing up the
practical effect of false doctrine, it is because there is a
necessity for it. The world is full of smooth things, which
are no sooner read than forgotten. To instruct the docile
with meekness is the Christian duty; but systematic perverters
and opposers must be treated in a different manner. If reason
and Scripture fail to make impression, must not othermeans be
made use of? If men will shut themselves up from enquiry, and
nurse their delusions, is it not justifiable to knock the louder ?
If after three hundred years of protest and exhibition of
light in every form, men still hold to the most outrageous
nonsense and make themselves the slaves of ceremony, instead
of it being their servant, they must expect to be laughed
at, and their absurdities knocked from under them with a
somewhat rough hand. If those who profess to be teachers
and leaders put sanctified nothings in the place of saving and
vital truth, it is right to use such weapons as will make them
feel ashamed, and abandon their folly. Ridicule is a weapon
lawful, powerful, and justifiable, when all ordinary means fail,
and when true charity directs the shaft.
I could pity and respect the feelings of that poor Hindoo,


who, never having heard of a Saviour, or of the Word of God,
worships according to the best of his understanding. But will
any one say that men living in tiie midst of such Gospel light
as we have, and holding in absurdities as great as any heathen,
are worthy oi respect ? I trow not. I treat them spiritually as
the Madagascar idols were treated physically,—that is, take
them and by the force of truth smash them to pieces, break
their charms, and show the emptiness ot their pretensions.
Sacred truths, sacred subjects, and the true ministry of Christ
have a right to be treated in a respectful and solemn manner.
But let not that be called impudence, flippancy, and irreverence
which makes free with what the lolly,ignorance,andsuperstition
of men have agreed to idolise and place on the altar of an
unknown God.
If therefore I use strong language in some parts of this
pamphlet, and deviate from the spirit of the times, in which
we live, it is not the violence of bigotry, of party spirit,
or personal hostility, nor yet for the purpose of insulting your
religion and outraging your feelings; but on the contrary, it is
that you may be roused from your spiritual torpor, and
shaking off the theological nightmare that envelopes you.
Arise like men : who to be free must themselves strike the first
blow.
Cool courtesy and doubtful hesitancy did not characterise
our Lord and his Apostles in dealing with men who bring in
damnable errors, and seduce the simple; for they knew That
tiue chanty in such cases was to warn, rebuke, and denounce;
for there never was, nor ever will be, but one way for saving
men; and therefore if an angel from heaven were to teach any
other he is not to be heard. J
This is the more necessary in these times, seeing men in hio-h
places, receiving large salaries for the defence of that which
they are only betraying, and which the carelessness and
disregard ol Christians in general about theological subjects give
them ample opportunity for succeeding in. For to what may
we attribute the heresies of the times and the state of religion
throughout the world hut the ignorance of Christian believers ?
Tae spirit of the world having made sueh subjects dry and
uninteresting, are wholly left to the clergy. Thus error creeps
in, . and is perpetuated ; and instead of every man being able to
give a reason of the hope that is in him, defend his creed and
try the spirits, he remains shut up in the most deplorable
indifference, either being so spuriously liberal as to barter
away his most valuable interests, or otherwise filled with the
most wretched bigotry, not knowing either his own or his


adversary’s principles. Under these circumstances 1 have
thought a little work such as the present may be useful,
containing in a condensed form a practical defence of the
Catholic faith, irrespective of creed or party, suitable for those,
it may be, who have not time nor inclination to read more
extensive works. My object is not to advance any new
speculations, nor yet to gratify a morbid taste for controversy,
but to show that true piety and a Christian life can only be
maintained on true and evangelical doctrines, and that just as
far as men practically obey the Gospel, so far they wdll know
its true and spiritual character, and no farther.
This pamphlet is not written for Hobart Town in particular,
but for the world at large. I am aware that it will give offence
to some, but that which interferes with men’s passions and
unlawful appetites and desires always did and ever will be
offensive. Besides, what man is willing to be convinced of
error, when the knowledge of his delusions will cost him
perhaps his reputation, friends, emoluments, and everything
he holds dear ? Will not the whole soul of such a person rise
against conviction, and bar out truth, and will he not try to
shun it in a thousand ways, as well by sophistry as slander?
Nevertheless whether they hear or forbear, truth must be
asserted, false teachers exposed, and hypocrites warned. “He
that loves father cr mother better than me,” says our Lord,
“is not worthy of me : and he who saves his life shall lose it,
and be who loses bis life for the Gospel’s sake shall gain it;
and blessed are they that shall not be offended in me.”


JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH.
None but sceptics and very ignorant Christians deny the
connection between a right faith, true doctiine, and a holy
life. To say that every doctrine, whether Romish or
Protestant, is alike good if only acted up to, is a fool’s creed,
and as pernicious as to mix poison with water to quench the
thirst. Such persons forget that the Gospel is God’s plan for
saving men ; and that to add to or take from it, is not only
dangerous, but highly destructive of peace and salvation.
There is such a thing as perverting and frustrating the
Gospel, and of leaving it of none effect upon the heart; and
there is no subject the Apostle has been so vehement in
denouncing as this; for instance, when he declares, “If an
angel from heaven preach any other Gospel than that you
have received, let him be accursed.”
St Paul, showing how far erroneous dogma may be
entertained with safety, says, 11 If any man build wood, hay,
stubble, gold, precious stones/’ fee., on the true foundation,
ie he shall suffer loss, but may himself be saved so as by fire.”
It is admitted by all that these figures—gold, precious stones,
&c., mean erroneous doctrine, and that the true foundation is
the Divinity and atonement of Christ. Prom this we may
learn that, so long as the atonement of our Lord is not
interfered with, there may be a possibility of safety, even
though we believe in some things that are erroneous. How
this foundation has been, and may bo, subverted, we may also
know by the same Apostle’s Epistle to the Galatians. The
Galatians believed in the Divinhy and atonement of Christ,
and yet St. Paul tells them if they be circumcised Christ shall
profit them nothing. This seems strange at first sight, seeing
that Paul himself circumcised Timothy. It was not, therefore,
the mere act of circumcision ; but the evil lay here: St. Paul
circumcised Timothy as a matter of temporal policy in which
he put no confidence whatever; but the circumcision of the
Galatians was enjoined as a ground work of justification—
Gal. ii. 16. That is, they thought of mixing up their own
works with the atonement of Christ, and of being saved by


both, thus making Christ a half Saviour. Thus Paul says,,
if a man commits himself to the law in any measure he is a
debtor to keep it altogether—Gal. v. 3. The Galatians
thought as thousands do now, that they could put their works
along with the atonement of Christ as a ground for their hope.
But St. Paul shows them that such patch work is an abomination
to God, and equivalent to making another Gospel, which
would leave them in sin and bondage. Being ignorant of the
claims of the moral law, and the righteousness which is of faith,
they frustrated the Gospel, and made it of none effect.
Now this error of the Galatians is precisely what the
Romish Church has fallen into, for it was not the act of
circumcision, but the principle it involved, that of uniting faith
and works together as a ground of justification,thus confounding
both law and Gospel. The mischievous and disastrous effect of
putting laith and works for justification has changed the whole
nature < f the christia.! religion into forms, ceremonies,
sacraments, &c., and is the sole came of the spiritual blindness
and bondage ol that church. The whole of the controversy
between Romanism and Protestantism hinges on these two
doctrines, salvation by faith alone and salvation by faith and
works.
The Apostle Paul, seeing this inveterate spirit of self-
righteousness in human nature, fully sets himself to oppose it
in all his epistles; he declares salvation to be a free gift.
Eph ii. 8. —“Not ol works lest any man should boast.'”
“By the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy
Ghost.” “by grace are ye saved through faith.” Eph. ii. 8.
u Arid that not of yourselves it is the gilt of God/’ In the
Epistle to the Galatians he shows the consequence of any
other way and warns against it, and it is a remarkable fact
that the Cliuich to which he has taken so much pains to
explain and enforce this doctrine is the very church that was
split on this rock that he has taken so much trouble to warn
them of ; lor whilst the Church of Rome held to this great
doctrine of justification by laith alone (which she did lor the
first three centuries), she triumphed over earth, hell, and
death ; hut just in proportion as she declined therefrom she
leli into supeistition and ceremonial bondage, substituting
baptism for a new conversion, penance and sacramental efficacy
for peace of conscience by laith in the Atonement; and now
there is no doctiine she so much opposes, knowing well that
if it prevailed Othello’s occupation would soon be gone, their
craft in danger.
The great objection that has been raised against this


doctrine of faith proves that they do not understand it. To
suppose that it is an open door for licentiousness, and that
good works and holiness are not connected with it, is the very
opposite to the truth ; for so far from this being the case,
until a man is justified he cannot do a good work in the proper
sense ; for until then he has no spiritual life, and that
are in the flesh cannot please God” Horns, viii. 8. “An evil
tree can only produce bad fruit; first make the tree good and
the fruit will be good also.” Matthew.
The idea of uniting faith and works for salvation has arisen
from ignorance of the nature and claims of the law and Gospel,
and the mistaken idea of what a true faith consists in, and of
substituting a baptismal belief in creeds for regeneration,
whereas a true faith realises Christ, and experiences pardon,
peace, and satisfaction. A true faith unites to Christ now.
Thus when we say a mao is justified by faith alone he must be
truly penitent, abandoning all sin and renouncing every plea,
and every work of his own, and receiving Christ into his
heart, Homans v. 11, by whose Holy Spirit he becomes
regenerated, and is enabled to produce the righteousness of
faith, being newly created to good works, for if any man be
in Christ he mugt be a new creature, if he is not/ he is a
withered branch.—Matt. If a man be justified he walks
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, the fruit of which
is love, joy, peace, long suffering, goodness, truth, holiness,
&c., the works of the flesh being adultery, murder, fornication,
pride, covetousness, &c.; they that do such things shall never
inherit eternal life. See Gal. i., Rom v. vi.- and Eph.
In the Council of Trent, Canon 20, it is declared that
whosoever shall affirm that justifying faith is nothing else than
confidence in the Divine mercy, by which sins are forgiven
for Christ's sake, or that it is that confidence only by which
We are justified, let him be accursed.
Here is a Council professing to be infallible, pronouncing
damnation against St. Paul and the Holy Catholic Church on
oe of the most important d gmas of our holy religion Being
blinded by the God of this world they have mistaken their own
light lor the light of the glorious Gospel which shines not
unto men whose object is to enslave mankind and glorify
themselves. May not the language of St. Paul to the Galatians
with very little difference be addressed to you: O foolish
Roman Catholics, who hath bewitched you, are you so foolish
as always to continue the dupes and victims of your own
delusions, do you not feel your own bondage and spiritual
death, your beginning and ending in the flesh ? What has so


■often been said to you before, I now tell you again that if
you do works moral or ceremonial, penance or alms deeds, by
way of meriting salvation—making compensation and atone*
ment to God for sin—Christ shall profit you nothing, you are
yet in your sins and ruin will be the consequence,—know ye
not that it is as impossible to mix up works of penance with
Christ’s merit, hoping to be saved by them through him, as it
is to keep the law whole and entire, and sustain its avenging
curse, you that would put works with faith for justification do
you not hear the law. —“ He that offends in one point is guilty
■of all”—James ii, 10. He who commits one sin, the law
condemns to eternal death. Why is this strictness, but to show
the unchangeable righteousness of God, as well as to shut up
self righteous mouths, and make us fly for help to the
righteousness of another, even Christ, who becomes our surety
when by a living faith we trust in Him, the law being a
schoolmaster for this very purpose, Gal. iii, 24, Christ being
the end of the law for righteousness to all believers—
Horn. x. 4.
To say that it is through Christ that your works receive
their value is the Galatian error and utterly repugnant to the
Gospel, for although we are called on to work Out our salvation
after receiving the vital principle by improving God’s grace,
it is utterly false and presumptuous to think we can work out
cur redemption, for neither angel nor man could take part in
that. The duty of the patient is not to assist in preparing the
medicine, but to take it. The duty of the sinner is not to make
atonement or compensation, but to receive it—Rom. v. 11.
There are no two ways to eternal life, neither a half way
between both. It must be either by the law or the Gospel.
If works, either ceremonial or moral, are trusted to in any
degree, then are you under the law, and a debtor to keep it
altogether, which no man can do (see Rom. iii. v. vii.). It
must therefore be by grace, for as the apostle says, “ If it be by
works, then grace is no more grace; but if by grace then
works are no more works. It is of faith that it might be by
grace —Rom. iv. 16.
Now as the law demanded a perfect obedience, and that
obedience was fulfilled in Christ, so the Gospel demands an
undivided faith in a perfect atonement for a perfect salvation.
The law being fully honored and God’s justice, truth, and
righteousness fully vindicated, the sinner is saved by faith
alone, because faith appropriates the work of Christ to itself,
and this faith is imputed for righteousness, Rom. iv., God
esteeming the sinner righteous on account of the work of


Christ, whose Holy Spirit applies that work to his heart, and
makes him anew creature. Thus it is that Christ is everythin**
to the believer, his prophet, priest, and king, and wisdom”,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; being complete
in him. On the other hand, if you try to be saved in the middle
way, that is by faith and works, rendering compensation to
God for trespasses, aud doing good works through Christ,
then you immediately entrench on the perfect work of Christ,
render the Gospel abortive, and oblige the Almighty to throw
you on your justification, by which no man (Tan * be saved.
Then both the law and Christ will condemn you, for they will
not be compromised, and you cannot patch the Gospel. ' You
might as well put a piece of rotten wood into a good foundation
to support the building, as to put your works with Christ’s,
hoping to merit though his merit. The Lord does not share
His glory with another, and thus in this plan of eternal
wisdom we see God the Father has all the honor, being the
first mover; God the Son the glory of its execution, and o God
the Holy Ghost of applying it, and perfecting the souls of his
people ; the sinner is put into the dust, and all honor, glory,
and salvation, are to Him, who is the incomprehensible Three-
one Almighty.
Now, as this doctrine of justification by faith alone is of
such vital importance in the Christian scheme, and as the rise
and fall of every church depends upon its proper understanding
and practice, it being the key that unlocks the Gospel
treasury, and the main spring of holiness and good works, and
without which no progress can be made towards the kingdom
of heaven; moreover, as the Church of Rome, by her
repudiation of this great truth, has fallen into spiritual death
and bondage, to sin and ceremony, her whole system being
based on merit, spiritually saturated with it, penance,
mortification, conventual discipline, her alms deeds, vvoiks of
supererogation, her masses, purgatory, &c., all being the effect
of the doctrine of the merit of works, I shall dwell a little
longer on this subject, and further prove from the words of St.
James that faith alone instrumentally saves us.
The Council of Trent in quoting the words of St. James in
proof of faith and works being united for justification, have
only given another proof of their learned ignorance, and
brought the two Apostles to conflict with each other, whereas
every child in Theology knows that St. Paul and St. James
mean the same thing. St. James defends a true and saving
faith from the mere nominal belief in creeds, which passes for
faith in our days, for there were two baptisms then, as there


are now, the one of the Holy Ghost, the other of water ; the
one pertaining to the filth of the flesh, the other the answer
of a good conscience. The one discipled into the principles
of Christianity, the other put on Christ and regenerated the
soul; the one was unproductive of holiness and good works,
the other prepared the soul to walk in them.
St. Paul insisted on faith alone, because it not only saved
from hell, but produced that love which is full of good fruits.
St. James declares if there be no such fruit appearing—if a
man be not benevolent as well as holy—visiting the poor, and
keeping himself unspotted from the world—(James)—doing
good works out of a pure heart and good conscience—(Tim. i.)
such a man’s religious faith is vain—no better than that of a
devil. He is neither begotten, nor renewed; and whatever
other faith he may have, he has not saving, justifying faith,
for true faith, holiness, and benevolence are inseparable; one
cannot exist without the other. St. James, putting the effect
for the cause, declares a man is justified by works, and not
faith only, because the action of works is the living test that
proves faith to have existence. If a man took poison the
natural effect would be disease and death. But if an infallible
antidote were administered, and life and health restored, the
effect would justify the cause, and prove that he had taken
the medicine. The sinner is poisoned with the disease of sin.
The Gospel is the infallible remedy which, when received by a
right faith gives spiritual health, peace, power, purity, and an
ability to perform good works from pure motives, and thus the
effect justifies the cause, and by his health does he establish
the reputation of the medicine, or as St. James says, by works
is his faith made perfect. Show me your faith by your works,
and I will show you my works by my faith, or, in other
words, if you have faith show it by benevolence and holiness,
for one is no good without the other, for any sinner can give
alms, but a true faith can alone produce love in which we are
begotten (James ii.) by the Holy Spirit, for love is the
whole of religion, without which we may p-ive all our goods to
feed the poor, have faith to remove mountains, and give our
body to be burned, and withal have not charity. The love of
God shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Ghost.—Rom. v. 5.
“ We are but sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal.”—Cor.
Good works flowing from a purified heart being the effect of a
living faith, will be the grand test on the day of judgment,
when our Lord shall say —“l was an hungered, in prison,
naked, &c., &c., and ye took me not in,” Thus according to
the Scriptures there are two kinds of faith and works. St.


Paul defends the Gospel against spurious works done in
spiritual death, showing that circumcision, baptism, penance,
&c., avail not, but a new creature. St. James warns against
a dead faith, the mere doctrinal belief of Christianity. St.
Paul shows that all works done by way of meriting salvation
are only the fruit of an evil tree. The shining garments of
hypocrisy and self-righteousness, the ignorant meretricious
presumptions of unrenewed man, dead in sin and trespasses,
St. James guards the Gospel against Antinomianism, and a
fictitious faith that imagines alms deeds and formalities of
worship will be sufficient without the heart being first purified,
begotten to a lively hope, purged, and then leaving the first
principles of repentance from dead works, going on to
perfection.
This is the true faith. Apostolical Christianity, for which
we are earnestly to contend. The faith of all the reformed
churches, and if Protestants had carried it out in their lives as
well as having it in their books, Popery would have diminished
long ago. It is as much opposed to mere formalism as fire is
id water, and produces those changes and privileges practically,
which Romanists teach theoretically concerning baptism; that
As, it adopts into the family of God. It communicates
sanctification, whereby you become God's Holy Temple, and
gdves strength and power over sin, whereby you can always go
forward, for the path of the just is as the shining light which
shineth brighter to the perfect day. It puts you into
possession of the spiritual armour whereby you are enabled to
fight the good fight of faith. It lifts out of the miry clay of
sin and enables you to run the race of eternal life, and enables
you to understand what St. John means when he says, “the
just man sinneth not.” It is the substance of that of which
baptism is the shadow. A new birth unto righteousness and
the making you a true member of the Church of Christ. It
is getting from under the law of your own dead works to the
peace, love, and certain hope of the Gospel. “ The earnest of
the Spirit.”—Eph. “ The end of your faith, the salvation of
your soul.”—lst Peter, i. 9. It is the remedy of fanaticism
preventing a man from presumptuously expecting to arrive in
heaven without walking the road that leads to it. It is the
cure of self-righteousness, for in Christ's righteousness alone
does he make his boast. There is no pettifogging, nor
jugglery about this Gospel, nor have you to go out of the
world to prove its genuineness. The pardon of God, unlike that
of the priest's, gives power to retain it. The soul being raised
up through the spirit and power of the resurrection to a new


life, faith being- the substance of things hoped for, the evidence
of things not seen, he realises the powers of the world to come,
and is made a partaker of the divine nature. He that
belie vet h that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. Out of his
belly shall flow rivers of water. And he shall never die. The
work of God is to believe in me, for to such a faith his flesh is
meat indeed, his blood is drink indeed, for such alone can
discern the Lord’s body.
This is the true eye-salve and mollifying ointment that no
unconverted priest or minister knows anything about, that
the Phillippian gaoler, and thousands on the day of pentecost
experienced and that the first fathers well understood ; that
Luther, Knox, Bunyan, Wesley, Whitfield, and thousands of
witnesses from the beginning down to the present day, attest,
men who have been slandered and persecuted, of whom the
world was not worthy. It is this religion that gives certain
assurance of hope, takes away the fear and sting of death, and
opens the door to immortality and eternal life.
1 know there are many, both Protestants and Roman
Catholics, who think this experience fanatical, presumptuous,
and unattainable in this life. The old saw, “the just
man falls seven times a day,” “there is none righteous,”
and that certainty of salvation is impossible, and that
such experience was only peculiar to the Apostles’ days,
when miracles abounded; these notions, and many others,
for which there is not the shadow of an authority in
the Word of God, are embraced by many to their ruin,
and which amounts to a denial of the Gospel of Christ
and His holy promises, the work of the Holy Spirit as well as
our peace and safety. The very end of the Gospel is to
reconcile us to God, and to know and live and die in that
state. The views of those who hold to the contrary are
altogether the effect of an apostacy from the faith. “In the
latter days some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits.” It is also written that men shall love the
form and deny the power, from whom we are commanded to
turn away.
What is thought a high state of grace is in fact a very low
state, for until a man is justified he cannot be said to be a
Christian at all, for there are not three classes, but only the
righteous and the wicked, the son and the alien, the lost and
the found ; in bondage and fear, or in liberty, hope, and life.
It is only the beginning of the Christian course, and if some
who have attained to this state have fallen away, and others
hypocritically pretend to possess it, what has that to do with


the reality and our responsibility? St. Peter, David, and
thousands have fallen away, and so may any man, but that
does not prove they were hypocrites ; many are allowed to fall
that they may rise and gain by their fall. The wonder is not
that they fall, but that they stand. Sinners know nothing of
the Christian’s warfare, and make no allowance for infirmities,
because they would gladly believe it to be a delusion.
Having now seen that the Romish Gospel and our Lord and
Saviour’s Gospel are two different things, diametrically opposed
to each other, I shall in the next place show more fully this
great apostaey by glancing at the Jewish religion in its
connection with the Apostolic Church. After which I shall
dissect in detail some of the leading dogmas of the Romish
Church, as for instance, the Mass, Transubstantiation,.
Purgatory, Penance, the Pope’s Supremacy, &c.; and may He
who alone can give eyes to see and ears to hear, give all who
shall read this work wisdom, and attention to those things
that make for their eternal welfare, before they are hid from
their eyes.
THE JEWISH CHURCH.
The Jewish Church had three characteristics peculiar to
itselfi viz., it was local, temporary, and emblematical. Being
local, it had its residence at Jerusalem ; being temporary, it
had its priesthood and its sacrifices ; and being emblematical,
it had its temple and furniture. Christianity being neither
local, temporary, nor emblematical, could have no head but
Christ ; it being for the world, no priest and sacrifice but
Christ, he being once offered up for all; nor any emblematical
service ; all being fulfilled in the fulness of the Holy Ghost—-
Eph. ii. 22 ; Col. ii.
The Jews were the Lord’s candle to give light to the world;
His broom to chastise the heathen ; His repository for the care
of the Holy Scriptures; His inheritance to show forth the
genealogy of Christ, and are now his argument for the proof
of prophecy.
Judaism was a system of sights, sounds, sacrifices, offerings,
&c., appealing to the outward senses, which could not make
the conscience perfect—see Hebrews. Christianity was the
ministration of the Spirit purifying the heart and converting
the soul, &c.
The Jews worshipped God bv offerings,sacrifices,and ritualistic
performances adapted to their infant state. The Christian
church put away these childish things, and worship God in
spirit and in truth.


Judaism had its holy things, holy times, and holy places.
Christianity makes all things, times, and places holy, being
sanctified by the word and by prayer—Col. ii. 16, 20.
There was not a pin, or bolt, or bar but what was specified
by the Lord to Moses in that institution, because all was to be
emblematic of the perfection and fulness of the Christian
Church, in which there were but three figures specified, viz.,
bread, wine, and water. .Circumcision and the Passover being
the two Jewish ordinances for admission into the church and
preservation in the covenant, Baptism and the Lord’s Supper
are the two Christian sacraments ; the one for admitting into
the church, the other a perpetual remembrancer of our
redemption.
There were inward and outward court worshippers under the
Jewish dispensation, for as he was not a Jew who was
outwardly circumcised, but circumcision was that of the
heart (Rom. ii. 28.), there are two classes of Christian
worshippers—the water baptized, and the Holy Ghost baptized.
Judaism made no provision for the direct breaches of the
law, ceremonial excepted; Christianity is the house of refuge
for all sin. “ The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses
from all unrighteousness.”
Judaism had its holy robes—incense and furniture.
Christianity hath its more glorious robes of righteousness—
incense of praise and furniture of good works, the substance,
of what the others were shadow.
Judaism had its daily and annual sacrifices, always imperfect,
having to be repeated, and which “could not take away sin.”
Christianity has “no more offering for sin,” having by one
offering perfected for ever them that are sanctified (see
Hebrews viii. and xi), the Holy Ghost coming down and
purging the conscience from dead works to serve the living
God.
Although Judaism had much tliatwas gloomy, burthensome,
and oppressive in its arrangement, yet was there much that
was exceedingly glorious; as for instance, the magnificent
temple and its service; the priests wuth their splendid
garments ; the great high priest appearing before God within
the Holy of Holies ; and then there was the beautiful music,
ritualism, &c., &c.; all of which was exceedingly imposing and
magnificent. And yet what does St. Paul say concerning it ?
Mark this my friends ! That it had no glory in comparison to
that w'hich excelleth (see 2 Cor. hi. 9.), viz.,—the Gospel
dispensation—First, because Christ is temporal head of the
Christian Church, being prophet-., priest, and king, as Moses


was head of the Jewish Church- Second, instead of the
sacrifices being on an altar of wood, or of earth, the blood of
Christ, the great sacrifice, is sprinkled on the conscience, and
places Christ on the altar of the heart, the hope of glory—
Ephs. hi. 17. Thirdly, the Christian dispensation is superior
in that it admits a sinner to go into the Holy of Holies
himself, without a priest or intercessor of any kind (Heb.
x. 19.), a privilege that only belonged to the great high priest
then, and that only once a year (see Hebs. ix. and x.).
Fourth, in respect to the Christian temple being built of living
stones (1 Pet. ii. 5), instead of dead ones, every believer
being now a temple of God (1 Cor. hi. 16), “and if any man
defile that temple him will God destroy/’ Fifth, instead of
requiring a priest to sacrifice for you, you become yourself a
priest, offering up spiritual sacrifices of praise and prayer
continually (see 1 Peter, ii. 5) . Lastly, Judaism had its altar
priest and sacrifice; Christianity has its more glorious altar in
the heart, its sacrifice above the throne, and its priesthood, all
believers—Christ having sacrificed his humanity on the altar
of his divinity, became the victim for sin, and is now priest
for ever at the right hand of God. Having therefore swept
away all shadows, to continue a sin-sacrifice in Christianity
is to go back to the beggarly elements, to bondage and
shadows. To institute a sacrifice for sin without blood, is a
scripture anomaly, an impossibility. But to convert the
Lord’s Supper into a sacrifice for sin, is to offer false fire to
God, and is an utter blasphemy.
Christianity therefore is nothing more nor less than Judaism
simplified. The burthen of its rites, ceremonies, sacrifices,
offerings, and priesthood, thrown off to give place to the
glorious sun of righteousness in the fulness of the Holy
Ghost, to entire devotion to God, heroic deeds of love, spiritual
worship, and an entire sacrifice of body, soul, and spirit to the
Lord. All outward show and ornament was to be discarded,
except so far as decency and convenience required ; the true
glory altogether consisting of s pirituality, holiness, benevolence.
The King’s daughter was to be all glorious within, Christians
were to be “ a peculiar people, zealous of good works.”
From what has been now advanced, and I challenge any
priest in Christendom to deny it were according to their own
Douay Bible, it will be obvious to all, that Popery is no
continuation of Christianity; that her whole system is one
mass of Jewish. Pagan, and Christian elements, all tending to
greater bondage than Judaism itself.
It will also be understood that as the office of priesthood


was done away in the perpetual priesthood of Christ—there
being no more sacrificing for sin—the ministry of the Gospel
now takes its place in order to show, not only the death of
Christ, but his resurrection, for it is by this we are raised to a
new life and made partakers of the divine nature which they
were to show —not by cymbals, emblems, or figures, but by
the exhibition of divine truth. The wisdom and power of God
in the sovereign display of his love in connection with the
harmony ol all his glorious attributes and perfections, thus
exhibiting the manifold wisdom of God (Cor.) now made
known to his Saints. The preaching of the Gospel being “ the
wisdom and power of God,” the whole of religion centres in
this fact—Christ in the heart, the hope of Glory (Cor.), St.
Paul declaring he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel. The commission of Christ was not to administer
sacraments, but to preach the Gospel.—(Matt.) It was not
sacraments that made men free, but the truth. Christ is u the
way, the truth, and the life.”
THE APOSTOLIC CHURCH.
This will be more apparent as we now glance at the Apostolic
Church of the New Testament. The Apostles stood alone,
and could have no successors, as such being eye witnesses of
the Lord’s resurrection. Having plenary inspiration and
unlimited authority, none could be Apostles but those that saw
the Lord. They could unlock the kingdom, communicate the
Holy Ghost, bind and loose, take away life, make laws and
articles of faith, &c. They were commanders, ambassadors,
stewards of the mysteries, presbyters, pastors, and ministers,
&c. As Apostles, they fulfilled all these relations, which no
men could do but themselves, and therefore there could be no
succession of Apostles as such. First, for the establishment of
the church there were apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers,
evangelists, &c. After which all these offices merged into two,
those of elders or bishops, and deacons. The elders were also
called presbyters, bishops or pastors. These were to be the
standing ministry of the church, whose office was to preach
the Gospel, to feed the sheep, to oversee, and direct by precept
and example, and the Word of God. The deacons attended to
the temporalities. Both were ordained and set apart by the
laying on of hands of the presbytery and the voice of the
people. The laying on of hands did not convey the Holy
Ghost, or any especial gift, for they had that previously
(Acts), even the deacons had the Holy Ghost previously to their


call (Acts). Now between these pastors and people there was to be
the greatest equality and no mastership whatever, the church
being a spiritual theocracy, a commonwealth, one, household
where Christ was Father, Governor, King. There was to be no
distinction, but that of esteem. The eye could not say to the
foot I have no need of thee. (See 1 Cor) The title to their
respect was superior humility, charity, faith, and wisdom. In
this sense they were leaders, rulers, overseers, &c., and no
other. The idea of lay and clerical was not thought of, nor is
there the slightest authority for such a distinction. It arose
from the ambition of the Bishops and carelessness and ignorance
of the people. The same cause producing the same effect to
the present day.
If the ministerial office is the highest on earth, its dignity
does not consist in vain pretensions to unlock that which is as
open to all believers as to themselves, nor to offer sacrifices
that cannot be repeated; but, on the contrary, in their being
permitted to serve those who shall be, and are, heirs of
salvation and joint heirs with Christ. If they are pastors,
believei's are priests and co-workers; and if they are called the
angels of the churches, believers are Christ’s jewels and his
younger brethren. If apostles were foundation stones, pastors
and believers alike compose the spiritual building; and in fajt
thppeople could do better without a pastor than he could do
without them, for whether in church or State the people are
the source of power. The minister is the church’s servant and
not its lord; he lives by the church, and without the church
the clergy would be nothing. The church is the pillar and
gi’ound of the truth, and is composed of spiritually enlightened
and regenerated men, and he that will not hear the church
shall be as an heathen. No sinner or open transgressor is or
can possibly be a member of Christ, for what fellowship hath
light with darkness, or impurity with holiness, or the templa
of God with idols/ (See Cor ) Missionaries were not the
messengers of the clergy, but of the church. If ministers are
commissioned with authority to preach the Gospel, feed the
sheep, administer the Sacraments, &c., believers are to be
co-workers, and have power to do the same—Acts; the
church being united, and consisting of people, leaders,
ministers, and deacons. If the pastors had superior authority
to rebuke, to rule, and command, it was not by any means as
being lords over God’s heritage —St. Peter, Ist Epistle ; nor as
having dominion over their faith. Their ruling and authority
therefore lay in being ensarnples, holy and of sound faith. “ A
bishop must be blameless, &c.,” (Ist Epistle Timothy), “ the


husband of one wife.” They were not to be lords nor princes,
nor despots, hirelings, nor speculators. They were not to
make merchandise of the flock. They were not to be
confessional pimps nor sacramental conveyancers. t( Pay and
obey,” was not then the order of the church. Active service
was their chief claim to greatness, being forbidden all titles of
distinction. There was no such thing known as an exclusive
assembly of bishops or elders to make laws for the church.
The people had a hand in all that concerned it. They expelled
(see Corinthians), and readmitted into the church. They had
freedom of opinion—Acts xv. They had the election of their
own ministers. They had power to settle litigated points—
(see Corinthians), to prove all things, to try false apostles, to
mark those that cause division, and cast out heretics, &c.
In fact all things were for the church, for whether Paul or
Apollos or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, things
present or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ’s,
and Christ is God’s—l Cor. iii. 22. Not that we would have
dominion over your faith, saith the apostle, but are helpers of
your joy, for by faith ye stand—3 Cor. i. 24.
Thus we see a beautiful harmony and equality prevailed in
the first model church. Christ was the recognised head, and
all were his members, composing one household of faith,
Christian brethren and co-workers.
But this state of things did not continue for many centuries,
for as the church extended and developed itself the lust of
power and ambition took possession of the clergy, mere
priestism took the place of apostolic example.' The pastorship
became transmuted into an episcopacy, holy orders was made a
sacrament, the two simple ordinances of our Lord’s Baptism
and the Lord’s Supper were manufactured into sources of
priestcraft and spiritual lordship; five more w r ere added, as so
many stepping stones to their dignity. Proselytism became
conversion, a belief in creeds and the power of the Sacraments
effectually obliterated the religion of the Holy Ghost and of
faith. The whole structure of Christianity became changed,
and developed itself into a monaichy, taking its form from the
political institutions of the empire, from the simple elder or
bishop to that of metropolitan, primate, patriarch, until finally
a Pope was put at the head to top the climax. The most
outrageous claims were made of lordship, to the utter servility
of the laity. New doctrines were propounded to support these
claims. The Holy Scriptures were tortured to answer these
vile purposes, and thus an apostacy was established, which,
being allied with the secular power, was able to stand her


ground against the intelligence of the world, the protest of
martyrs, and the Word of God, compelling the true church to
fly into the wilderness, till the Lord brought her out at the
Reformation.
Let us now examine a few of those corruptions that compose
this huge system of fraud and delusion, as, for instance, the
Pope’s supremacy, &c.
THE SUPREMACY OF St. PETER.
The doctrine of the Pope’s Supremacy won its way by the
force of political circumstances, and was consummated in the
seventh century, by a murderer.
Every one knows the words of Gregory, viz.—That he who
would usurp the position of universal bishop would be the
forerunner of Antichrist. It was Phocas who murdered the
Emperor Mauritius and transferred his court from Con-
stantinople to Rome, that took the appointment from the
patriarch of that city and conferred it on Boniface the Third,
in the year 607. This has been the means by which the
Pupedorn das been established, and to perpetuate the fraud
forgeries, called the Decretals of Isidore, were imposed on the
churcn for ages, which have been shown by Romish historians
to be\sp gross as to be unworthy of the least credit.
Having established a Pope, they soon found means to
defend the doctrine of the supremacy, from Scripture. Thus
they quote the words of our Lord, “ Thou art Peter, on this
rock 1 will build my church, &c ” The controversy" on this
subject is known to every one. The claim is a direct usurpa-
tion of the place ol Christ over the church, who alone guides,
preserves, and directs the whole family of believers by his
Holy Word, Holy Spirit, and Holy Providence.
Peter’s priority of call has been manufactured into a
primacy of jurisdiction, authority, and command over the
other Apostles, which clashes with almost every line of the
New Testament, and the most plain declarations of our Lord,
who said, “ My r kingdom is not of this world,” “ One is your
master, and all ye are brethren,” ye must be “as little
children,” &c., &c.
It is true Peter was honored and noticed by our Lord in
many respects, his name being generally first mentioned, but
not always. He sometimes presided, which might justly
entitle him to be first amongst equals. Other Apostles were
equally honored. Was not St. John the favourite Apostle ?
Did not our Lord come from Heaven to call St. Paul, who had


revelations that could not be uttered ? Did not St. Paul feed
one hundred sheep to Peter’s one? And has not his Thirteen
Epistles done more to shepherd, instruct, and build up the
Church of God than all the other Apostles? Does he not say
himself he was not inferior to any Apostle ; that he was in
labours more abundant; and has he not shown that as Moses
was head over the Jewish Church, so Christ is the only head
of the Christian Church; “ One faith, one Lord,” See., not
two. The attempt to institute a temporal head over the church
has proved its absurdity: as well try to build the Universe on
an atom, or a pyramid on its apex, as build the Church of
Christ on a man. To be grand clerk of works for one city
would be a great enterprise. But to be clerk of works, or
grand master Pope, for the whole world, would be a herculean
undertaking. The result of such an attempt has been to
overbalance the Romish Church on the side of secularism, and
cause her to become a mere political engine.
“On this rock I will build ray church,” did our Lord say
Thou art Peter, on thee will I build my church ? By no
means ; does he not say the meaning of the word Peter is
Cephas, a stone ? indicating solidity and firmness. As much
as if he had said, “ Thou art a stone Peter, and on the rock of
your profession of my divinity I will build my church/' &c.
Does not the whole tenor of the New Testament bear out this
view, and is it not utterly absurd to imagine that the Church
of Christ could be built and sustained from error by anything
less than the divinity of Christ %
THE POPE’S SUPREMACY.
Is it not expressly said that Christ is the Rock, and
the Twelve Apostles the twelve foundation stones? “Lovest
thou me, feed my sheep.” Would any one but the
most prejudiced suppose from these words that “ feed my
sheep” meant the government and jurisdiction of Peter
over the other Apostles; and that “feed my lambs” meant
the Laity. Did Peter himself take it in that light ?
If so, why was he grieved? Surely if he thought
our Lord was investing him with superior authority he
would have rejoiced. Peter was grieved because he was
reminded of his fall, and because it was necessary to reinstate
him in his office after a threefold denial. Did the Apostles
believe that Peter was made chief? Why then did they
dispute about who should be made greatest a short time
after these words were uttered if the primacy had already


been conferred on Peter ? Did not the bishops and elders
icceive the same instructions to feed the flock over whom the
Holy Ghost had made them overseers ? If Jambs mean the
laity, do not lambs become sheep, and would not all be
clerical together ? Is not Christ the chief shepherd ; were
the Apostles the vicar of Peter and not the ministers of Christ y
were they built on Peter, or were they not all foundation
stones alike i “To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom,”
&c. Where was Peter's supremacy when our Lord said,,
receive ye all the Holy Ghost. Whosoever sins ye retain*
they are retained, &c. If the keys weie given for the
regulation and government and discipline of the church, did.
not all perform alike these duties ? Does not Christ exercise
the power of the keys first, in its fulness, by the Apostles, the
Scriptures, and the Holy Ghost; and does it not remain there
except in a limited ministerial sense. Did not our Lord give
first apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers*.
(Eph. iv. 2,) for the edification and perfecting of the church 9
.But where is there a word about a church monarch, a Pope to
whom all should bow, and be united under penalty of eternal
death ? All the lower offices, and the duties pertaining to
each, and the subjection required, are stated. But not a word
about his holiness, his office, his prerogative. Not a word
about an infallible tribunal to maintain order, unity, faith, &c.
Do you say the church had to be developed ? What ! was one
of the most essential articles of the church to be left in doubt*
to an inference, or to men always bent on glorifying themselves?
Did Peter himself ever claim such lordship; was not James
Pope in the first Council of Jerusalem I Did Peter send his
legates to Antioch, or was the decree in his name, or in that
of the apostles, elders, brethren ? Does a Pope permit himself
to be called to account for his actions (Acts); to be sent on-
errands (Acts), and to be buffeted by his inferiors I (See
Acts of Apostles )
What proof is there that Peter was ever at Borne ? Does
not St. Paul’s epistle to the Romans, as well as his other
epistles written from Rome, furnish a strong confirmation
against it, or else he would have been acknowledged as well
as the other principal personages in that city. It is certain
Peter did not plant the Gospel in Rome at all, but disciples
from Jerusalem. However, he and St. Paul may have
suffered death there.
The whole affair hangs on the supposition that Peter was
Bishop of Rome for twenty-five years,which is an impossibility,
for an apostle’s mission was the world, a bishop was stationary.


If Jam *s was Bishop of Jerusalem, Peter of Antioch, John of
Ephesus, and Paul of Rome, it was only a temporary oversight
as they passed from place to place. If Peter was Bishop of
lie me, who appointed him ? Did our Lord? Was he
nominated by Uie apostles, or did the people chouse him, or
was he self constituted ? What a farce to suppose that Peter
was Grand Master Pope, and that the whole episcopacy and
plenary fulness was vested in him to come down in succession,
to the exclusion of all the other episcopal sees, Antioch,
Jerusalem, Constantinople, &0., which would have had a
thousand times greater claims than Rome. What ! a fountain
neah ul all authority, spiritual power, and jurisdiction, upon
which the salvation ol the world depended, and not a word
about it! Neither Peter himself, our Lord, nor apostles say a
word about it; no homage or command to obey the Pope ;no
bulls, nor witnesses, nor testimony of any kind for 300 years.
To make such a claim as this, the spiritual empire of the world
on an old doubtful tradition ! The head quarters of salvation
not mentioned when every essential element of the Christian
church was specified. Impossible! It is a gross fraud
introduced when the Scriptures were very little known, and
when alliance with the power of this world had enabled her to
perpetuate the imposition.
But on the supposition that Peter was at Rome, and
presided there as Supreme Bishop, he could not constitute a
succession, for the apostolic office could not be perpetuated by
derivation; the apostles were divinely inspired, their commission
was the world. They could perform miracles, communicate
the Holy Ghost. They were infallible. They were holy.
They saw the Lord, &c. Christ made apostles, but they could
not constitute themselves. Therefore there can be no
succession of Apostles. Pastors and teachers, they did appoint.
Tue primacy of Peter therefore, if he had such, ceased with
himself. But he never professed, nor claimed it. The apostles
knew, like Gregory, what such pretensions portended.
The Holy Ghost was not conferred by ordination, for if
they had it not before, it is certain they were not called of
God. Even the deacons had the Holy Ghost before they
were set apart by the brethren. Timothy received the gift of
an entire preparation and qualification for the ministry, by
prophecy, but what proof do Romish priests give that they
have the Holy Ghost ? None whatever.
From the above I think we must conclude that if the Popes
of the last twelve hundred years have derived their authority-
through Peter, St. Peter must have received an entirely new


and different commission from his Lord, and which we may
suppose to run as follows :
Dear Peter, —It is true I condemned you once for savouring
of things of earth, bat since then times are changed, and now
you must wear for me tne Regal, Sacerdotal, and Paternal
Crown, and try what a little powder and shot will do. Instead
of getting money out of the fish’s belly to give to Caesar the
things that are Caesar’s, you must yourself become Caesar, and
reign in one of the most magnificent temples in the world, the
highest pmnacle of earthly glory which the devil offered me to
worship him. But now you know idolatry is a different thing.
Instead of conquering by suffering, love, and the spiritual
sword, you must apply the rack, the thumb-screw, the
inquisition, the auto da fe, the bull under the name of the
civil power ; and instead of converting the heathen and your
refractory children, by patience, forbearance, and the force of
truth, you must convince them by the more invincible
argument of bayonets and bullets, and the standing argument
of six thousand Zouaves—accomplishing what you cannot do
hy force by Jesuistry, fraud, lies, and hypocrisy.
Instead of being a prisoner, as you were once for the truth,
you must yourself become head gaoler, holding the keys of
Heaven, Hell, and Bridewell, and instead of being a simple
bishop with other bishops, you must become cold water
high priest, king, prince, and Lord God the Pope, pulling
down, building up, rooting out all heretics by fire and faggot
when in your power, causing your enemies to lick the dust and
kiss your toe; being not only able to bless well, but to curse a
great deal better.
Instead of feeding the lambs with the sincere milk of the
word, you must feed them with spiritual flummery, called
sacraments, by changing and multiplying, of which you will
not only save the trouble of preaching the Gospel, but you
will raise yourself to honor and lordship, and bring in an
accession of wealth beyond your most sanguine expectations.
Thus, by an extension of the keys, you keep them from rusting.
You will develope the church and keep the sheep in the lowest
slavery—and by stamping infallibility on the whole, not a
tongue shall wag. The sheep shall take their food as an
unfledged bird takes the worm, putting their responsibility
into your pockets, and by keeping your spiritual cargo well up
to the wind of outward profession of Catholicity, Apostolicity,


&c., &c., no one but the heretics will suspect that you have
become yourselves The Gates of Hell.
THE ROMISH SUCCESSION.
The Romish succession is one of the most repulsive and
delapidated affairs that can possibly be imagined; repulsive in
respect to its having the most abandoned of men as
representatives and vicars of Christ; and delapidated as to its
broken gaps, frauds, and impositions. It was vacant after
John 111. ten months; after Gregory, five months; after
Raul one year; after Nicholas L, eight years, and at various
other times. There were 28 schisms amongst the Popes
themselves ; the last of which lasted 30 years, the Popes of
Rome and of France excommunicating each other. Enginius
was proved to be a schismatic, and yet the descent flows
through him. Pope Zepherius was a montanist; Marcelias
was an idolator; Pope Liberius was an Arian; John 111.
•disbelieved immortality ; so that to trace succession through
Popes and Anti Popes through fraud, poison, incest, bribery,
murder, magic arts, excommunication and heresy, would be a
Herculean undertaking indeed.
The succession that came down from the apostles was one of
simple holy men, holding the faith in a pure conscience and
righteousness of life, and the true apostolic doctrine free from
corruption; any other succession than this is a mockery and a
delusion, because the rise and continuance of an apostacy in
the Christian church was prophesied to continue till Christ
came.
I shall divide this subject into two parts, and prove that the
Romish succession is unapostolic, both with respect to men
and doctrine. And first with respect to doctrine—the true
ancient faith. It is maintained by Popish writers that though
their church was sunk for ages in the lowest sty of polution
and iniquity, yet, notwithstanding, the faith came down pure,
and no new doctrine was ever permitted to contaminate the
ancient records ; and this they assert in the face of their new
creed composed by Pius IV., in the 15th century, every article
of which is at war with the religion of Christ and that of the
fiist three centuries. Purgatory, the mass, transubstantiation,
penance, worship of saints, &c., were unknown in apostolic
times, and to support them the Romish Church is obliged to
fly to tradition and a corrupt church authority, which she
places against the Word of God, and thus there is an
irreconcilable war going on between falsehood and truth,


Popish innovation and apostolical Christianity, against the
traditions of men and the Word of God. Thus Rome makes
every effort in an underhand way to throw contempt on
Scripture, and has adopted a mode of explanation and a rule of
faith, which, with devilish ingenuity, she can make them
speak in her behalf, or silence their voice altogether. (See
Articles on Rule of Faith, the Mass, Purgatory, &c.) Thus
it is clear that the doctrines of Popery as introduced in her
new creed of Pope Pius IV. are in direct antagonism to the
law and the testimony, and although she acknowledges the
three essentials of Christianity, viz., the Trinity, the Divinity
of Christ, and the Holy Ghost; yet does she nullify every
one of these doctrines by her inventions.
The worship of the virgin, the host, and the saints, robs
God of his glory, as if there were no God; the supremacy of
the Pope usurps the Divine headship of Christ over the church ;
the priests and sacraments nullify the office of the Holy
Ghost, and tradition takes the place of Scripture ; so that
under the guise of an apostolical religion she more effectually
annihilates the truth than an open infidel, for error is always
more successful, when varnished with truth.
I now come to the second part of my subject, that of
Unapostolic Men. As soon as the apostacy was fully set in,
a succession of priests was kept up irrespective of moral
character, all spiritual power being vested in the Pope; it
being supposed that the Holy Ghost flowed through him to the
bishops whose ordination is said to be indelible, and not to be
reiterated, so that if they became ever so wicked and dragged
down thousands to hell by their abominations, still they would
have power to administer the sacraments, and unlock the
kingdom of heaven, as Bellarmine says, “ If this were not the
case, a wicked Pope could not be head of the church, and as a
consequence the Romish hierarchv would fall to pieces." Thus
provision was made for a set of the most abandoned of men
that ever Jived on earth, to represent Christ and rule the world
as his vicars on earth, and to give liberty to a set of carnal,
ungodly priests to administer the sacraments; by which a local
succession was maintained and an outer crust of union kept up
more political than religious.
There were three classes of men in the early church and
Romish succession, of which I shall speak a few words
separately. The first were the early fathers, good men who
felt the power of Christ’s love, and experienced deliverance
from condemnation through the Gospel, whose experience was
no doubtful twilight formality, but consisted in power,


assurance, and the Holy Ghost, enabling them to meet death
and the loss of all things with joy. These were the first
bishops and converts whose holiness was no sham, communicated
in virtue of their office, but of their living faith in Christ.
B iptism in these days was often connected with regeneration,
but, as Dr. Milner says, “To call baptism regeneration in
these days is poison.” Such men weie Clement, Ignatius,
Justin Martyr, Iranius, Clement of Alexandria, Cyprian, &c.
It is true some of these men were not clear on justification,
and held to much of the superstition and error which began
to work, as >t. Paul says, in his own time —2 Thes. There were
not many of this class of men alter the third century, for as the
church degenerated and increased in temporal power, so she
increased in secularism, so that sincere man began to branch
off from her, until at last she became herself the persecutor.
The true church was driven into sects, Nestorians, Paulicians,
Albigenses, Waldenses, &c., who became the sackcloth witnesses
according to Revelations for twelve hundred years, —being
slandered, persecuted, and put to death till the Reformation,
when God’s witnesses again shone forth.
The second class of ecclesiastics were men who felt the power
of sin and cirruption in their hearts, and struggled against it.
But the way of deliverance by faith being confounded with that
of works, they spent their life in bondage an i self-devised ways
of obtaining holiness, in gratuito is afflictions, unnatural
mortifications, penances, fastings, &c., and thus a cold spectral
sort of piety took the place of the witness of the Spirit and
true love of God. Thus they spent their life in bondage,
misery, and condemnation. Some of these were men of
great theological knowledge, indefatigable laborers for the
advancement of the church, and in extensive alms deeds. But
with all this they were perfectly ignorant of the true work of
the Holy Ghost on the heart, the true peace, power, and love
conveyed by believing. Such men were Chrysostom, Jerome,
Ambrose, Leo, Gregory the Great, and a host of others who
groped their way in spiritual darkness and much superstition.
The Great Gregory being asked was there such a thing as
certainty of salvation in this life, replied, there was not, that
we should always be repenting, thus reversing the true
Christian’s experience of leaving the first principles and going
on—see Hebrews. Augustine says the illiterate rise and seize
heaven, whilst we grovel in corruption. Jerome could not
understand the Epistle to the Romans, and thought St. Paul
was wrong when he reproved Peter. Thus if at this early
period such men as these were mere dwarfs in true spiritual


enlightenment, what are we to expect as thick darkness and
ignorance overspread the face of Europe, and when a man of
even this description wa-i considered a luminary in comparison
with them that surrounded him.
Tne third class who co.npo-.ed the Romish succession were
reprobates of toe highest order, who wallowed in sensurlity
without restr lint. Tney were magicians noted for proHigacy,
for war, slaughter, simony, murder, incest, &e. Tnere were
thirty Pontiffs who reigned in the iUtn century, each one
demoralised beyond his successor. Tnere were shocking
monsters put into the oh air by vile harlots, as John X., who
was a noted sensualist. John XII. was found guilty of
blaspnemy, perjury, simony, incest, and murder. Boniface VII,
was a murderer. Ba coins calls him a thief, a miscreant, a
monster. Gregory VII. was trailed a fornicator and an
assassin. Sixtus VI. was a murderer, a debauchee, established
brothels in Rome, and was termed the Vicar-General of God
and of Venus. Alexander VI. was execrated by all Europe.
Julian 11. was a drunkard and an assassin. Leo X. called the
Gosp 1 a lable. To only quote the names of these men would
tak- up several pages. But not only the Popes, but the
bishop s, cardinals, and tne whole church, according to
Beliarmiiie, their own historian, was for ages sunk in the most
deplorab e pollution. The councils also were composed of the
same worldly schemers, so that if there were a few good men
amongsttoern their voice was not heard, where everything
was carried by vote and bribery. Now, to imagine for one
moment that such men as these would be presided over in
their councils by the Holy Ghost, the spirit of truth and
holiness, to keep them from error, is one of the greatest
absurdities tint ever entered the heart ot man. What! a
murderer the vicar of Christ ! A captive of Satan in the gall
ot bitterness and ol* iniqu ty, opening the prison doors
to others teat are bound. Wnat I the streams of salvation
flowing down through drunkards, liars, and adulterers. The
pure streams of celestial bliss administered through cesspools
of mi juity, blessing others whilst they themselves are cursed;
cu-woikers with Ciirist and at league with the Devil. ‘‘Oh,
tell it not in Gath.” Can apostacy go further? The fountain
of living waters coming down tnr-mgh the floodgates of Hell,
corrupting and polluting and cursing the church through all
its ramifications. The bread o* immortal life handed down by
xavenous wolves and consecrated ruffians. Surely, if this is
not Simon Magus’s rnanuiactory in full operation, I don’t
know what is. Surely the Devil may set up shop after this


and give out diplomas for journeymen soul saviours.
Sacramental pipes of legerdemain and jugglery you may be,
but apostolical successors you are not. Such a succession is of
the Synagogue of Satan, for his works you do, whose servant
you are. Be not deceived, for neither whoremongers, nor
drunkards, nor liars, nor swearers, hath any part in the
inheritance of the Saints in light.
I am aware it is said there are bad men in every society,
that there was a Judas amongst the Twelve, and that our
Lord said of the Jewish priests in his time, “Do as they tell
you, but not as they do to which I reply, there is not the
remotest encouragement in all this to follow such an example.
For Judas’s case was an exceptional one, whose wickedness
was overruled for the fulfilment of prophecy. Judas was not
in the last commission to preach the Gospel, and therefore no
precedent was given to follow his footsteps, Peter fell, and
so may any man, but until he repented he had neither part
nor lot in the matter.
In reference to the Jewish priests, they had to fulfil their
appointment as by law established, whether they were bad
men or not; the Jewish economy being sacrificial and
ritualistic, which consisted in outward acts and repetitions of
the law ; our Lord says, “Do as they tell you, but not as
they do.” But the Gospel was to be carried out ministerially,
experimentally, practically, and the language of Christ is, “ If
you do my commands you shall be my friends, if not, ye shall
be as a man building his house on the sand,” “ Ye are the
lights of the world,” “My witnesses ! ye are the branches,
if ye bear fruit, well; if not, cut it down.” St. Paul says,
“ Follow me as far as I follow Christ,” u I keep my body
under lest I become a castaway,” “ If any man sin he is of the
devil,” “ A bishop must be sober, just, holy”—Tim.
Thus we see there is no warrant for unconverted men, much
less for notorious profligates, to minister in holy things, nor
will all the Episcopal touches in the universe give such an one
licence to preach the Gospel. Such are aliens, they climb up
another way, they are wild boars and hirelings and dumbdogs,
and no heralds of Christ.
But again, in reference to the Romish Succession, in what
respect, may we ask, are they apostolical. Did the Apostles
claim dominion over the believers faith and make automata of
them by demanding an unconditional surrender of their
understanding? Did Peter feed his babes on holy water, oil,
salt, fine pictures, music, and a wafer idol ? I think it was
the sincere milk of the word with which he nourished his


sheep—l Peter. The Apostles did not make use of penance,
strait-jackets, confession gags, nor exterminating bulls, to
keep up a»lbreed and spurious union, thereby making the
brethren the slaves of men, for whom Christ makes free they
are free indeed. Neither were they men that were frightened
•to look truth in the face. They did not blockade their dupes
against every chink of light and regard the Bible as the
greatest of heretical ghosts.
It was not a succession of pretended eunuchs, a corporation
of bachelors cut off from the affinities of life that they might
be more effectually the tools of the Pope. Neither was it a
succession of tyrants, wolves, and despots, nor worldly
schemers, political plotters, Jesuitical craftsmen, who have
deluged the world with their impious perversions; their
persecutions, inquisitions, their bulls and curses, confiscations
and death. How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of
such men as these !
The Apostles did not profess to shepherdize by sacramental
mesmerism, for St. Paul said he was thankful he did not
baptize. Neither was it to be a succession of ritualistic
performers, who could lift up Christ on a bit of wood and
make a pleasant song and theatrical performance of the
Gospel. Neither was it to be a succession of men called
priests, who were to be grace conveyancers, sacramental
conduit pipes, holding the salvation of the world on the
cobweb of a right intention.
As to the present race of Romish ecclesiastics in protestant
countries, if their outward deportment was not decent, they
would not be tolerated in the present light of scripture and
education. Hence the thing that is most dreaded is discovery
and outward scandal. There are many highly educated and
intellectual men amongst them, also active and benevolent, so
far as alms deeds and effort for their church is concerned.
But they deny, as their fathers did, the doctrine of justification
by faith, by which they would have power over sin, spiritual
understanding, union with Christ, and be made good according
to the Gospel, and rescued from their superstition and
pernicious delusions, and without which they can be nothing
but blind guides under the dominion of their passions, weak,
helpless, and unstable as a bubble on the wave. This their
experience testifies by their penance quackery. The idea
therefore of such men as these conveying the Holy Ghost, is
altogether utopian. A carnal lump of flesh puffing the Holy
Ghost into another like himself whilst both remain bound in
the grave clothes of their unconverted nature would be


laughable, if it were not awful. A poor weak dark benighted
slave of sin and Satan, bowing down in one character, and
rising up in a new and totally different one. And «11 this too
without the slightest evidence to himself or any body else,
conscious of no change within or without, spiritedly dead,
knowing no more about the operations of the Holy Spirit on
the heart than a dead man knows of what is passing around
him. And yet withal professing to be his organs and spiritual
ad. inistrators, furnished for demolishing Satan’s kingdom,
transmitting the gilt down through perjurers, false witnesses,
and worldly and political schemers, just as if the Lord would
open his kingdom at the bidding of every knave v\hu could
mu-ter up the price of a commission in the Gospel treasury.
And yet these are the men that walk into the people’s affections,
pockets, and Consciences, and who profess to jump into and
out ol their divine and human nature as olten as they please,
biing weak, like other men, when they are tempted to sin,
but all powerful to heal the breaches. These are the men that
can drive the devil out of stone walls, little children, and
spirits in prison, but cannot move him an inch out of their
ov\ 11 hearts ; who hold the eternal interests of millions at their
bngei ends by the aid uf their fictitious picklock (whatsoever
ye bind on earth), and are supposed to » mit holiness by touch,
just as a boiler emits steam when the fire is well up ; whose
j;0( r victirr s kiss the hem of their garment, imagining
holiness to be in their breeches, and who olten submit to their
ill treatment and injustice for tear < f losing w hat is called the
rites ol the church. Men who would not allow a ray of the ;
sun of right t ousm ss to lighten any but through their own
Golgatha. Men who have made the religion ol Christ to
slink in the nostrils of the nations by their political
manoeuveiing, their convents and nunneries, iron bolts and
bars, their frauds and grim hair cloth sanctity and merit
n ongevy, who prop up the faith by sophisticated dectors
and old wives’ iables, who call the truth fanaticism, and
the power ot God in comersion delusion; and who bind
their dupes with -i fictitious pardon, and the forlorn hope of
purgatorial refinement. They who would claim succession
through such a source prove themselves to be what they are, the
harlot’s eldest daughter.
This may appear to some to be strong language ; but it is
ne t as strung as what was said to Simon the Sorcerer, “0
thou lull of all guile, thou child of the devil, how lung shall
thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord/’ It
is not too strong for men who have resisted three hundred


years of a protest, who trample the word of eternal truth
under their feet, who put a strait j on the intellect, and
who would instruct by torture if th-y had the power, who
would put the world into priests’ leading string* bm lae’e,
and spii itual death. Teach whatsoever I command von, saith
the Lor 1, and I am with you to the end, otherwise take heel,
having not spared the natural branches, I spare not the wild
olive. For Christ is the King of Zion, wh >se eyes are as a
flame of fire, who trieth the reins of the children'of men. He
is the bright and morning star who worketh and no man can
hinder, and shntteth, and no man can open, and wlio removeth
the candlestick—the light of truth from one place to another
for the gates of hell shall not prevail against His church.
PENANCE AND REPENTANCE.
The doctrine of penance, according to the Romish C.itechCm,
is that there is no sin ever so enormous, or often repeated,
that it will not remit. That it is a sacrament and contains
four divisions, viz., contrition, confession, satisfaction, and
absolution. That penance is a compensation for offences
against God, a willingness to do which is contrition. It is
declared also that when the eternal punishment of sin is
remitted, the penitent must satisfy the justice of God, as far
as the temporal punishment is concerned, either by doing
voluntary or compulsory acts of penance, all satisfactions being
made through Christ, whose passion, imparting to our g »od
actions the twofol 1 quality of meriting etern d life, and also of
satisfying for our sin. (See Council of Trent, &e., fourteenth
session, Canon Ist.)
This is the substance of the doctrine of penance, and a
more destructive dogma, and more opposed to the truth, there
exists not in the whole system of poperv. In the first place,
there is no such word in the Bible as penance. Romanists
themselves translate the word “repentance.” and as Doctor
Cummings says, it is only where the word penance would be
too gross that they translate it repentance, but where
practicable it is penance, as for instance, in Acts ii. SB, they
have it do penanew, but in Acts iii. 19, it is be penitent and
be converted. To soy the word repentance contains penance
is utterly false, for the spirit of repentance and tint of penance
are as opposed to each other as emptiness and fulness. Nor
did the early church ever make use of it, as the modern papists
do ; viz., that of making compensation for sin, for they knew
too well the doctrine of justification by faith. Canonical


penance was then simply a wholesome discipline in admission
and expulsion from the church.
The doctrine of penance frustrates both the law and the
Gospel, and leaves the soul without true peace or power.
Romish doctors acknowledge that you must be saved by faith,
but say they, it must be furnished with charity and good
works. This proves their entire ignorance of the Gospel plan
of salvation, for to try to unite works and faith for justification,
is as foolish as to try to unite fire and water. The Gospel and
the law never did, nor ever will, unite for such a purpose.
This putting faith and works together for salvation may
appear a small matter to some, but, as Lather says, it is more
ruinous in its consequences than angel or man can tell; for as
good works spring from love and gratitude, and are the effect
of justification and not its cause, it follows that to unite works
with faith for salvation is to put the cart before the horse, and
frustrate the truth. To do good works in obedience to the
Gospel, and from a sense of duty to God, will prepare the
heart to receive grace and lead to salvation, as in the case of
Cornelius, and agreeably to the command bring forth fruit
meet for repentance.
The idea o r meriting a reward for our works, and of atoning
for sin, is a dream of the darkest age; for how can a thing be
a gift and yet be merited ? does a culprit merit his life by
listening to his reprieve and walking down from the scaflold ?
If we are rewarded for our works, it is not of merit, but
because they are wrought in Christ, the fruit of a living faith.
An insolvent debtor who has nothing to pay cannot merit his
forgiveness, and every sinner is an insolvent debtor having
nothing to pay, till he is frankly forgiven through Christ,
who pays his debt, and afterwards rewards his works through
his own merit—for the highest archangel in glory is
unprofitable to him; he only does his duty; how much more
then are sinners, who come short in everythi.ig ! All these
notions about merit arise for want of a true discernment of the
law and the Gospel, for as the Apostle says, the law is good
if a man use it lawfully; that is, gives it its proper place;
for although the ceremonial and moral laws are abolished as
regards justification, yet the moral law reigns still over every
man until he is in Christ a new creature. Baptism will put no
man from under the law’s curse who commits wilful trans-
gession, for he that committeth sin is a transgressor of law—
James ii., 1 St. John iii. 8. For if ye be led by the spirit, ye are
not under the law—Gal. v 18. Penance, alms, and works of
satisfaction being done with hope of gaining heaven and


making atonement for sin, constitute jour own righteousness,
puts you under the law, and deprives you of the benefit of the
Gospel; for cursed, it is written, is every one who continueth
not in all things written in the law to do them.
The great end of the moral law is to restrain the wicked, and
to prepare the sinner for the Gospel. It is the hammer to break
in pieces. The law can neither justify, quicken, give peace,
nor is the Holy Spirit given through the law. It makes no
allowance for a single breach. Its purpose is to drive sinners
to Christ; to terrify, condemn, work wrath, increase sin, and
destroy the plague of self-righteousness; to make sinners feel
their bondage, helplessness, and misery ; a schoolmaster to
bring you to a house of refuge in the Gospel. The law, as the
Apostle says, is holy, just, and good; but in the article of
justification we must have nothing to do with it,or with charity,
or works of any kind ; because righteousness cannot be had in
that way, Christ is alone our righteousness, and faith alone
apprehendeth him; by this we come under a new law, the law
of love, by which we are enabled to keep the commandments
and serve God in spirit and in truth. This is simple to all
who seek it practically, but mysterious to the disobedient.
The law may be abused in four ways : first, by open violation,
of its precepts; second, by trying to keep it in part, or in
whole, as a ground of justification through Christ; third, to
be so driven by the law’s condemnation as to become desperate,
hopeless, melancholy, seeing the more you try to come up to
its requirements the more it will condemn you ; fourth, by
trying to blind the conscience and satisfy its claims by penance,
or other works of satisfaction. Instead of instantly rising up
superior to the law, and laying hold on Christ for deliverance
from its curse, its claims, its righteousness, its torments ; for
nothing but this can destroy sin, abolish death, create a true
righteousness, and give life, for Christ alone is the end of the
law for righteousness to all that believe.
The spirit of repentance therefore which prepares the wav
for Christ, is that of an insolvent debtor, and the language of
true contrition is, “ nothing in ray hand I bring, simply to the
cross I cling.’ But penance is a work of the carnal man,
vainly puffed up in his fleshly mind, which has exhibited itself
on pillars and through the streets. It says to all, behold ray
righteousness; and to God, here is my compensation. It puffs
up with imaginery merit, and knoweth not that it is poor and
blind and miserable and naked.
Repentance gives up its own righteousness, that it may he
clothed with that of another; but penance is a perverter and


obtruder. It refuses mercy on God’s terms (that of faith
alone), and obtrudes its own. It insults Christ by attempting
to attach its ragged righteousness to his perfect robe, for if by
faith, then works are no more works, &c.
True repentance is the work of the Holy Spirit, changes the
heart, its affections, desires, and regulates the passions, &c.
But penance can be done by any hypocrite, or reprobate, who
has taken a temporary fit of abstinence from the bowl, the
gaming table, the horse race, or any course of sin whatever.
Repentance breaks the power of sin, destroys the most
inveterate habits of pollution, subdues every passion and
temper to the obedience of Christ. It is an inward and
outward change, for no man can love God and sin at the same
time ; ye cannot serve two masters.
On the contrary, penance is a quack’s plaster over an angry
wound. The untempered mortar of a false peace. An iron
trammel and work of death that keeps out of Christ and binds
up in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity.
In reference to the doctrine of penance, it is said by popish
canons, that good resolutions against sin are necessary to the
right reception of the sacrament. But what are all the
resolutions in the world worth if not carried out into practice ?
The promise of God is not to them who confess and promise
to sin no more, but to them alone who confess and forsake sin.
i( A broken and a contrite heart thou wilt not despise, O God.”
Homan Catholics talk of performing acts of faith, and acts of
contrition, as if it were in their power, and could pump up
these feelings at their will, instead of beseeching the Holy
Spirit to work it for them.
A repentance that does not give up sin and be done with it
for ever, is no repentance. Will not a man be satisfied to half
crucify himself sooner than part with his bosom lust, and is it
not much easier to confess and make compensation by occasional
privations, than to crucify his affections and lusts, and mortify
his pride, ambition, covetousness, &c.? A justified or pardoned
sinner does not go on to repentance, but leaves it behind as a
first principle. His repentance is not that of a sinner, for a
wrong thought gives him more pain than a wilful transgression
did prior to his conversion. These popish rules therefore about
good resolutions are worth nothing, the whole system being,
not for the promotion of righteousness, but to gain submission
to the clergy. This will be more evident when we look at the
distinction their doctors make between contrition and attrition :
A true contrition, say they, will obtain the pardon of God with
the intention of receiving the sacrament, but as a true


contrition is very severe and difficult to be experienced*
attrition, or the fear of hell, along with the sacrament, will
answer the same purpose; the fear of hell, patched up with
what is called infused charity, the effect of the sacrament it is
said will do the business. What is this but to open a door of
licentiousness to let the world into Heaven through the
priesthood ? According to this, every reprobate whose guilty
conscience (like the devil’s) bids him fear and tremble, may by
the incantation of a priest get in at last where nothing unclean
can enter. Here is a broad way for transgressors of every
kind, who put their faith in a priest to get into heaven in spite
of the plainest declaration of God’s truth that, without
holiness, truth, and love, no man shall enter the kingdom.
This shows what these pious rules and good resolutions
come to. That the whole system is only a periodical remedy
for habitual sinners to cling to their sins till death and then
give them entrance through purgatory into heaven.
I appeal to Roman Catholics themselves if this is not the case,
and in nine cases out of ten, if these penitential feelings and
good resolutions are not worked up for the occasion ? And if
not, what means your constant repetition of the same course,
and the words of the Trent Council, “ There is no sin ever so
great, nor often repeated, that cannot be pardoned through
this sacrament V’
Love is the essential element of a Christian, which no
natural unregenerate man can possess. It is the soul
qualifying power for obedience on earth and enjoyment in
heaven; without the love of Christ man is accursed. May not
a Papist’s taith, therefore, be called a notion, a phantasy, and
a delusion, when he imagines the priest can by the aid of
what is called a Sacrament convert his fear into love, hostility
into obedience, his unrighteousness into holiness, and slavish
guilt and bondage into the love, joy, and peace of the Holy
Ghost ? Surely repentance unto man and faith in a priest do
not produce these results, themselves being witnesses. Well
may the Romish priests say that they possess the keys, and can
bind and loose, bind in chains of sin and iniquity, as strong
as death : but loose to righteousness and the true love of God.
True repentance must be personal; one man cannot repent
for another, nor can any man atone for his own sin, much less
for that of another. But in doing penances, one man can
satisfy for another, or they can be bought off by indulgences
or a legacy, or pilgrimage. A severe penance may be lessened
by changing your confessor, or giving an oblation to the priest;
it being a canonical rule, unless you pay you must suffer.


To the hypocrite penance is a blinder, a false soother ; to the
sincere an iron trammel, to the presumptuous merit monger a
puffer up; and to all, it is a total extinguisher on the evangelical
doctrine of justification by faith in the righteousness of Christ.
Penance, therefore, is a slaughterer of consciences; it
blasphemes grace, puts you under the lavv, abolishes faith,
overthrows the Gospel, and takes away Christ. It is cursed,
and makes devils martyrs. If an angel from heaven were to
come and preach such a Gospel, let him be Anathema, for
there never was, nor ever will be but one way, and that way is
the righteousness of God, and not of man ; for there is joy in
heaven over one sinner that repenteth ; but who ever heard of
joy being over a sinner doing penance ?
“ Priests of penance,”—there is no such office in the Church
of God, for the Lord gave unto the church, first, apostles, then
prophets, teachers, evangelists, &c.; but not a word about
priests. Pope’s fugle men you may be who appoint ashes for
beauty, mourning for the oil of joy, and the spirit of heaviness
for that of praise, and who can kill two birds with one stone,
by making a penance of prayer, or can otherwise dose your
patients according to the warmth or coldness of their spiritual
constitutions, making your devotees sign the cross with their
tongue and other edifying processes. How beautiful on the
mountains are the feet of such men who say unto Zion bring
forth your oblation, and look up to the Pope, who published
flagellations and the mutterings and thunderings of purgatorial
wrath.
The ministers of Christ proclaim liberty to the captive, the
opening of the piison doors to them that are bound, heal
the broken hearted, and turn from darkness to light, from
Satan to God; pour in the wine and the oil of the kingdom
to the bruised sinner, and direct him to an inheritance amongst
them that are sanctified in the bosom of their God.
AURICULAR CONFESSION.
To make confession to God, to an injured person, or to the
church in certain cases, is salutary and agreeable to reason and
Scripture. Such open and voluntary confession was the
practice of the early church, nor was such a thing as auricular
confession to a priest thought of till Innocent 111. in the
fourth Council of Lateran established it. Dr. Wiseman
acknowledges that voluntary, open, spontaneous confession
before the church was the ancient practice, nor was it till
some of the priests and bishops found themselves implicated in


these open revelations that it declined, and a more private mode
was adopted. Notwithstanding this, the Council of Trent
declares that auricular confession is of Divine obligation, and
necessary to salvation; the power of the keys being the short
and easy way by which they pass off their nostrums, and
raise up additional turnpikes to bar access to God. Thus they
presumptuously affirm that they are the ministers of
reconciliation, and as such it is necessary, say they, to know
by confession the state of the mind, that appropriate
instruction may be administered. But this is wholly a mistake,
for St. Paul himself was not a minister of reconciliation, but
of the word of reconciliation (2 Cor. v. 19), for it is Christ alone
who reconciles sinners to God, the Holy Ghost applying the
atonement to the heart. Thus they preached repentance
towards G>d and faith in our Lord Jesus ; but not a word
about confession or penance. Neither the prison keeper,
Mary Magdalen, the thief on the cross, nor the three thousand
on the day of Pentecost, made any disclosures of their
wickedness but to who alone is fit to hear revelations of
darkness, being incapable Himself of being polluted. This
being an apostolic fact, we may ask for what purpose do
priests demand admittance into the heart by auricular
confession. Is it that they may direct and sanctify its
affections, and bring it to the obedience of Christ ? By no
means, for how can questions that suggest pollution, evil
concupiscence, and gross sensuality tend to purify the soul; is
not the cure worse than the disease ? Or is it that by
exploring the hidden recesses of the mind, they may be better
enabled to warn the innocent from the path of the destroyer,
the wiles of seduction, and from becoming the victim of
licentiousness? By no means, for never was a tribunal more
calculated to break down the fences of virtue, overcome
modesty, rack the feelings, and prostrate female honor in the
dust. Once let a priest walk into your affections, desires,
passions, by confession, and from that moment you throw
down your fortifications of self respect, lay your dignity in the
dust, and give a sinner like yourself power to take advantage
of your weakness, and tread you in the dust. But, again, it
may be said that auricular confession is necessary to relieve the
soul from its burthens of sin, ceremony, and care. Not at all;
the reverse is the case, for never was Jewish bondage more
oppressive than that a sinful man called a priest should have
surveillance of your words, thoughts, and actions, day and
night, if he wishes to demand it. Verily, auricular confession
answers no good purpose. The greatest of villainies have been


and may be perpetrated under its seal. The religion of Christ
has no need of any such coadjutor. It requires no devil’s dark
lanterns, nor catechisms of blackguardism, no legerdemain by
which priests can assume divinity and humanity as they please,
being Gods to confess to, but very literal flesh and blood, when
they are enticed. Christianity requires no perjury and false
oaths to screen the evil doer from law and justice, under the
pretence of the inviolability of the seal.
Auricular confession is an inquisitorial espionage for the
subjectionfof the world; a Pope’s submarine telegraph, that
enables him to know the under current of events throughout
the world, and send out his watchmen, the Jesuits, to preconcert
measures accordingly. It is the most powerful instrument in
the hands of priests, whether they be libidinous designers,
political intriguers, or clerical conveyancers. They have the
most ample means for self-protection and secrecy for carrying
out their purposes.
Auricular confession ! It is the admission of a wild boar
into the inner temple. The egress, regress, and progress of a
carnal man into the sacred precincts of the heart, where alone
the Almighty has declared it is his prerogative to enter, for he
alone searcheth the heart and trieth the reins of the children
of men. Auricular confession is a polluter to the hearer and
reciter; to the hearer it is a devil’s arsenal for weapons of
temptation; and to the reciter it makes a pawn shop of the
heart, where sins are kept in pledge till manumitted by a priest.
What is a confessional priest but a household receptacle, or
moving dirt cart, with the inscription written outside, u All
sorts of rubbish may be shot here f a reservoir of corruption, a
clerical scavenger who creates more filth than he clears away ?
It is a desecration of the keys from the opening of the
kingdom to that of a Pandora’s Box, where holy men snuff up
the stink of moral pollution, gauging it by Peter Den’s
spiritual hydrometer to the most exact depth of moral
delinquency.
St. James gave directions to the brethren to confess, and
pray for each other, anointing with oil, that the sick might be
forgiven and raised up. But what has this to do with
compulsory confession to a priest \ The one was to restore
soundness to the afflicted; but in auricular confession and
extreme unction there is only a touching up for death. In the
first there was the power of faith and prayer exhibited in the
restoration of the sick. In the other there is nothing of the
kind. The sick man dies, or is expected to die. In St.
James’s confession the brethren were to confess to each other.


In the latter, a priest demands, on pain of damnation, a
perpetual surrender of your soul, whether male or female, to
his vulgar gaze. Had such a confession as this been essential
to salvation, the Apostles would have been explicit in directions
about it, as they have been in less important matters : as for
instance, they would have ordered every church to have its
confessional box, the elder ladies to confess the younger, and
by no means to allow an inflammable young priest to confess
young women. St. James did not believe in casting fire balls
into powder magazines. Nor did the Apostles give authority
for institutions called nunneries; that women should be shut
out from all the relations of life, and made voluntary slaves
and pliant tools of the priesthood ; state power and iron bars
protecting them from all law and public opinion : such women
traps have been a curse in all ages, and have been proved to
be no better than legalized sodoms, licensed brothels, and hot
beds of infamy. (See Hogan on Confession, &c.)
This system makes kidnappers and polished hypocrites of
the abbesses, and it converts priests into legacy conveyancers
and heiress hunters.
Auricular confession therefore is not of God, but of Satan ;
it answers no good end; its objects are earthly, sensual, and
devilish, under the hypocritical appearance of Christian utility.
The canonists doctors Aquinas, Bonaventura, Cajetan, and
Baronius, do not allow that confession was instituted by Christ,
and assert that confession to a priest cannot be inferred from
the words, a whosoever sins ye retain they are retained.” As
a man may confess everything and promise and intend
amendment, and yet be only a hypocrite; on the contrary, a
sinner may not confess in detail, and yet be a true penitent.
Chrysostum says, a let God only see thee confessing.”
Augustine says, te what have I to do with men, that they
should hear my confession as though they could heal my
disease ?” Mr Elliott says they have so many distinctions of
mortal and venial sins, and so many devices for changing one
into the other, that they can slight iniquity altogether. It
has been said that confession contributes to social order,
restrains licentiousness, coerces the evil propensities of nature,
&c. But the reverse of this is proved by a comparison of the
state of morals in protestant and popish countries. Den’s
Theology is enough to saturate the world with vice. If there
are some pure priests, it is not the system, but the man, for it
has dragged down thousands to profligacy and perdition. It
is a devil’s slave market that bows the neck and revels in your
thraldom, drags you down in chains and bondage, crushes out


30 the priest’s pardon and the almighty’s pardon.
the life blood of freedom and self-respect, robs yon of your
purity, modesty, virtue, and innocency, racks the feelings,
outrages decency, takes advantage of the most holy feelings,
breaks heaven's barriers, and pollutes the soul.
Let not these be thought exaggerated statements, for they
can be fully proved by reference both to Protestant and Romish
historians ; and if some Roman Catholics themselves will only
consider what has come under their own observation in reference
to the confessional, they will be convinced of their truth.
See Milner’s u History of the Church,” “ Hogan on the
Confessional,” Mr. Elliott’s “ Delineations of Popery,” &c.
THE PRIEST’S PARDON AND THE ALMIGHTY’S
PARDON.
The Scriptures proclaim one way of pardoning the sinner,
and that is, ministerially; as for instance, when St. Peter said
repent, and St. Paul said, believe in the Lord Jesus and thou
shalt be saved. The Church of Rome, contrary to this example,
takes upon herself, in virtue of the words of our Lord,
“Whosoever sins ye retain they are retained,” &c., to
pronounce pardon judicially, that is, “ I absolve thee in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.” The
most wicked priest is said also to possess this power. See
Council of Trent and Romish Catechism.
These words so often referred to by the Romish Church,
viz., “ whosoever sins ye retain, &c.,” have nothing to do with
the ministry of Christ. The Apostles were called to a special
work. If they had the power to forgive sin they never
exercised it; and if they aid, it would not follow that others
could, for they stood alone in respect to office, inspiration, and
authority. Nor is there a single instance in the whole
revelation of God, of patriarch, prophet, priest, or apostle,
forgiving sin. Indeed, such is the enormous presumption of
such an act by man, that some will acknowledge they cannot
forgive sin, but only pray that it may be forgiven, and this
they do, notwithstanding their oaths, and subscriptions to the
canons of the Council of Trent.
There are many reasons why men cannot pardon sin
committed against God ; because, to pardon a sinner without a
preparation of heart to receive it would be to give a premium
for crime and encourage iniquity. As it is the office of the
Holy Spirit to give repentance, and none but God can
know whether that work is genuine. It follows that none


but God can forgive sin. If men could repent whenever they
thought proper, the result would be presumptuous profligacy
and sinning that grace might abound. True repentance is as
much a gift of God as the pardon of sin is, and therefore as no
man can bestow that gift, neither can he forgive sin. The
heart being deceitful above all things, no sinner knows whether
he is in a true state of contrition or not. Thousands mistake
the sorrow of the world, its losses, disappointments,
bereavements, blasted reputation, blighted hopes, and utter
disgust for true repentance. Such sorrow, says the apostle,
worketh death, because the true element of having grieved
God is wanting. Thus it is, thousands go into nunneries and
monasteries, and spend a long life in a gloomy process of
sanctimonious puerilities and self mortification, but the peace
and joy of God’s pardon is utterly unknown, because the true
contrition and a right faith are wanting.
The church that pi'ofesses to pardon sin is the same that
denies that you can know anything about it. Thus
presumptuous arrogance on one side and doubt and uncertainty
on the other characterizes the whole of Popery. Thus her
pardon at baptism, after confession, and extreme unction give
not the slightest proof of such a blessing being possessed, and the
reason they give for its not being retained, viz., the weakness
of man, proves the stronger that their pretensions are false, for
the pardon of God always communicates strength to live in it.
The pardon of the Almighty is tin; most glorious thing
under the heavens. It changes your position from that of
enmity to friendship, from bondage to liberty, from weakness
to strength, and from darkness to light. It clothes with the
garments of salvation, and decorates with the beauties of
holiness. For proof texts I refer to John, Ist Epistle, to
Psalms, to Ephesians, Colossians, Acts of the Apostles, &c.
What now, let us ask, is the fruit or proof of the priest’s
pardon ? In the first place it conveys no power to retain it,
but keeps its devotees tied to the priest’s apron strings in a
constant repetition of sins, pardon, penance, confession, thus
they never get out of the horrible pit and miry clay, nor make
any advance towards heaven.
The pardon of the Lord fills with divine peace, which passeth
understanding. A calm flows over the soul like music on a
moonlit river, the love of God being shed abroad in the heart
by the Holy Ghost. The path of the just shineth brighter
and brighter to the perfect day.
A priest's pardon fills the mind with presumptuous levity,
carnal security, and a happiness that vanisheth at the first


38 the priest’s pardon and the almighty's pardon.
approach of sin ; like the Egyptian taskmaster, he sends his
poor slaves away to make bricks without straw.
When the Son of Righteousness arises with healing in his
wings, he gives beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning,
and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; Christ
springs up as a living fountain of water in the soul to
everlasting life. But the priest’s pardon is like a vision in the
desert, which, in the distance, appears to the poor thirsty
traveller refreshing streams, but on a nearer approach finds it
all an illusion. The poor parching sinner, in like manner,
expecting relief, bows before an empty tank (a priest), who
has not wherewithal to quench his own thirst, and is sent
empty away. For bread he receives gravel hath (penance),
and for the water of life an empty sound, “ I absolve thee, &c.,”
for life he is left in death, for liberty in bondage, and for the
Holy Ghost an hallucination.
The pardon of God is a tangible thing, it can be seen,
known, and felt, by both possessor and beholder ; the liar, the
swearer, the drunkard, and self-righteous change their
character, and bring forth the fruits of righteousness and holy
living. “ Barnabas saw the grace of God and was glad”—
Acts. “ Such were some of you, but ye are washed, &c.”
But the priest’s pardon is like the Upas tree, nothing goodly
grows beneath its shade, noxious weeds and poisonous plants
spring up, vanity, pride, and the love of the world still hold
their affections, and the habit of confirmed sin still remains
unbroken. A superficial reformation takes the place of a true
conversion, and the sow wallows again in the mire.
Whilst the Lord’s pardon communicates the highest sens e
of the free abundant mercy of God in Christ, it, at the same
time, impresses the mind with such a sense of the enormity of
sin, that death would be preferable to committing a wilful
transgression. There is such a sense of the love of God
communicated, that ingratitude or disobedience would at once
annihilate it. Thus the Apostle says ? “ They that sin are of
the devil, and have not known him; if we love him we must
keep his commandments.” Sins of ignorance and infirmity
are not judged, for we are not under the law, but grace.
The priest’s pardon, on the contrary, makes little of sin and
encourages it. The idea of making compensation to God for
sin takes away the sense of its infinite demerit, hardens the
mind, blinds the conscience, destroys all tenderness and true
compunction by its frequent repetitions, till hardness and
insensibility become the habit of the soul.


When the Almighty pardons sin he awakens the soul to its
responsibilities, causing entire devotion to his cause, and gives
power to continue on his course, for if any man draw back
my soul shall have no pleasure in him—see Hebrews. But the
priest’s pardon being rotten, and the materials with which
it is attempted to be mended, viz., penance and the sham
sacrifice of a mutilated sacrament, being also rotten, the sinner
breaks through them at every step, casts his responsibility on
the priest's back, and continues in his downward course to
the end.
The Lord's pardon cannot be obtained but by a contrition
that breaks the heart. A repentance that gives up every
sin, and a faith that gives up every plea but that of, for me
the Saviour died.
The priest’s pardon can be had by a confession that makes
you the slave of a slave. By a penance that patches the
Atonement, and by a faith that trusts more in the priest, the
church, and the virgin, and its own performances, than in the
Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world.
The Lord's pardon makes you free from the bondage of sin
and the fear of death, from ceremony and men; for whom
Christ makes free he is free indeed. His yoke is easy and
burthen light.
The priest's pardon makes tenfold more the servant of men,
of ceremony, of sin, causing the sinner to drag a lengthened
chain, every link of which bars access to the throne of God.
Popish pardons, penances, satisfactions, confessions, purgatory,
&c., are all figments of men, and frustrate the Gospel,
inasmuch as they are all done on the basis of self-righteousness.
The Almighty’s pardon is done in wisdom according to his
omniscience, lifting up out of the miry clay, and putting your
feet upon a rock, and establishing your goings. In proof of
this I could point to hundreds in this and other places who
can say, as David said, viz., “as far as the heavens are from
the earth, so far hath he removed my transgressions from me,”
and this not only by words alone, but by their lives of truth,
purity, and holiness, “ blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputeth not sin.'' On the contrary, the priest's pardon is
done in presumptuous ignorance, without a proper knowledge
of the state of the heart, or the work of the Holy Ghost,
whose office it is to plough up the soul and prepare it for the
grace of salvation. The Almighty’s pardon is efficacious from
the most scarlet sinner up to the most self-righteous white
washed Pharisee. The priest’s pardon' cannot reach some
cases, but must be referred to the bishop, others to the


archbishop, and some are reserved alone for the Pope. Sm
against themselves and the church are often reserved, but sins
against God are in general forgiven.
In fine, when the Lord pardons sin, you know it, and if
you did not, it would not be of much use, so far as our peace on
earth is concerned, for it is the very end of the Christian
religion to give peace to them who all their life were subject to'
bondage. It communicates power to retain it, for otherwise
we should be children of Satan to-day, and of God to-morrow.
It gives power over sin and the world, over death, hell, and
the devil. It frees from bondage, slavery, and ceremony. It
gives peace, hope, love, cloths with righteousness, and
qualifies you to sit at the right hand of God for ever, for “ whom
he justified, them he sanctified, and whom he sanctified, them
he glorified”—Romans viii.
On the contrary, a priest’s pardon, like the phantom of a
ghost, eludes your grasp, and leaves you to darkness and to woe.
It communicates no true peace, spiritual power, purity,
holiness, or love, neither strength, freedom from bondage, nor
righteousness. It is a mockery that deludes the soul, and
lulls to sleep in carnal repose ; a cloud without water that
quenches not the thirsty sin-stricken soul; a Jonah’s gourd
that withers up when wanted most; like extreme unction
which lubricates the outer man, but does not prevent the
shame of your nakedness. It is a quack’s ointment that
extracts no venom from the sin poisoned soul; a bubble that
bursts at every touch of temptation, and a ticket of leave for
renewed criminality. It is a delusion, a humbug, and sham ;
the very existence of a sin-sacrificing and sin-forgiving priest
in the Christian dispensation, is a monstrous imposition that
no man with any common understanding, who reads his bible
with the least degree of attention, need for a moment be
mistaken about.
TRANSUBSTANTIATION.
Thousands of volumes have been written upon this subject,
the whole of which lies in the nutshell, viz., were our Lord’s
words, “ This is my body,” to be understood literally or
spiritually. It is declared by divine truth that the natural
man has no spiritual discernment of divine things, and on this
account it is that not only the Scriptures, but the early fathers
have had their strung figurative language literalized and
misunderstood by those who have been unacquainted with
their Christian experience.


Is there anything* more usual in the Bible than to give to
the sign the name of the thing signified, as for instance, “ I
am the door, the vine, the bread,” “ That rock was Christ,”
&c., signifying that they represented Christ. Was there a
word of instruction, of doctrine, or an ordinance given by our
Lord in which there was not metaphorical language, and to
which the Jews were well accustomed ? Was not circumcision
called the covenant, and was not the lamb, which was only a
memorial, called the passover?
In the sixth chapter of John it is said, u except ye eat the
tlesh ot the Son ot man, and drink his blood, ye have no life
in you.” This chapter has reference to the Lord’s Supper, or
it has not. Xt it has, then our Lord explained his own meaning
by declaring the language to be spiritual and not literal. The
words that I speak unto thee, saith the Saviour, they are spirit,
they aie hie, the flesh proliteth nothing. On the other hand, if
the sixth ul John has nothing to do with that subject, then I
mean to say the language is so similar to that made use of at
the supper, viz., “Take, eat, this is my body, &c.,” that the
Apostles’ minds were fully prepared to receive their Lord’s
words as he had formerly taught, that is, in a figurative
manner. That they did receive them as such is evident r rom
their making no remark, nor manifesting surprise, which they
would have done had they understood him to say literally,
“ This is my body, &c.,’' as the carnal Jews had done previously.
In reference to the flesh profiting nothing, that is, of course,
as regards the present subject, and not the atonement made in
the flesh, which profiteth everything. From the above it is
evident that Roman Catholics have fallen into the same error
as the Jews, with this difference, the one thought ol eating
Christ carnally, the other eat him the same, sacramentally,
both are alike foolish, wicked, and absurd.
In the Council of Trent, canon the Ist., it is asserted that
whosoever shall deny that there are truly, really, and
substantially contained the body and the blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, together with his soul and divinity, and
consequently Christ entire; but shall affirm that he is present
therein only in a sign and figure, or by his power; let him be
accursed.
They also maintain that the body of Christ in the Eucharist
is the same as that which was born of the Virgin, which was
crucified, and is now in heaven ; that the body, blood, bones,
sinews, &c , of Christ, his soul and godhead, are contained in
either the bread or the wine, or in the smallest particle of
either; that alter the words of consecration there is neither


bread nor wine left on the table, but accidents and species,
that is, color, size, weight, taste, &c.; that after consecration
the wafer becomes God, which they are to worship and adore.
It is also asserted that whosoever shall affirm that Christ,
as exhibited in the Eucharist, is eaten in a spiritual manner
only, and not also sacramentally and really; let him be
accursed. See Canons Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, sth, 6th, 7th.
Doctor Wiseman has written two hundred pages on the
sixth chapter of John in an endeavour to prove that our Lord
changed the style of his teaching from the figurative to the
literal from the fifty-third verse of that chapter; whereas any
unsophisticated man can see that the language is figurative all
through, only more intensified alter the fifty-third verse than
before ; which the subject required, as there were two points in
our Lord’s ministry he always inculcated, viz., his Messiahship
and Atonement; as the one he was the Son of God, sent to
instruct the world in righteousness; as the other he laid down
his life a sacrifice for sin; it was as necessary to enlighten men
by truth as to deliver them from wrath ; he showed the necessity
of belief in his doctrine by comparing it with bread which
nourisheth the body ; but in reference to the Atonement he
compared it with the eating of his flesh —“ Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man,” &c.—because a true faith in the
Atonement produces so close a union with Christ as to make
us one with him, for we are members of his body and of his
flesh, &c.—one bread. “If any man open unto me,” saith the
Lord, “ I will come into him, and sup with him, and out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living waters, springing up to eternal
life.” From the above it is clear that the Doctor’s two
hundred pages of metaphysical ingenuity and fine spun
sophistry is all a dream, which proves that learned men can
prove in their own way anything they like.
The blasphemous balderdash which Romish Doctors have
invented to support this doctrine of Transubstantiation is a
sufficient refutation of its absurdity and wickedness. Where
does St. Paul speak about accidents and species ? Surely if ever
it was necessary to guard the sacrament against abuses, and
show that the smallest particle of a transubstantiated wafer
contained a whole Christ, body and soul and divinity ; it was
when the Corinthians got drunk on the Sacramental wine after
the feast of the Passover. Surely here were grave reasons for
saying something about a dry wafer being a substitute for
bread and wine changed by the word of a priest into the Maker
of the world. St. Paul had been reproving the Corinthian
believers for their sacrilegious, irreverent, and loose views of the


ordinance of the Lord, and commanding them to sup at home,
lest in abusing the representatives of Christ’s passion in drinking
the wine to excess, they abuse Christ himself, and thus be guilty
of the Lord’s body. But if, according to the Popish theory, the
wine was changed into blood, and nothing but accidents
remained,could these accidents and species make the Corinthians
drunk, or is it likely they had the remotest idea of the wine
being literal blood. Is it not monstrous lor a moment to
suppose it/ Surely if it were found necessary in after ages to
take the wine from the laity for fear of abuse, it was necessary
in St. Paul’s time,when men had such loose views about it as to
get drunk on it, for so miraculous a change as is said to take
place by the words of a priest, so extraordinary a proceeding as
transubstantiation, would at least require a little inspiration to
give it authority. But not a word about accidents and species,
nor the long list of the defects of the Mass; nothing about
securing the wafer God from mice, or licking up from the floor
a drop of Christ’s blood if it should accidently fall there.
These, and a host of other revolting absurdities, impious and
blasphemous, all showing the work of man’s hands, and the
daring impudence of changing that which infinite wisdom
hath appointed for all ages. Talk about omnipotence doing
everything ! Can the Almighty contradict himself? Can he
deceive or be deceived ? Can he make the same thing true
and false in the same time, and in the same respect, or make
the same thing to be and not to be at the same time, all of which
he must do if transubstantiation be true ? Can a corporeal body
exist without its accidents, or its accidents without its body ?
Does accidents and species rot or poison, or grow stale, or make
drunk? Was it by accidents and species our Lord proved his
miracles when he turned the water into wine and fed the five
thousand, or was it by changing the substance and making it
palpable to the smell, touch, and taste ? Does the Almighty
contradict himself? If he has given us five senses that one
might correct the other, and if his appeals for the truth of his
resurrection and other miracles was to these senses, is it for a
moment to be entertained that he would make a perpetual
miracle greater than all the others, that of giving power to a
man to make himself, by changing a wafer, into a living
Christ ; would he, I say, thus perform such an astonishing
thing without it being able to stand the same test, that of our
outward senses, and by so doing leave his holy religion out of
the power of sceptics to make a scoff at?
You talk of transubstantiation being a miracle. What
proof have you that it is a miracle? Nothing under heaven


but the simple figurative words of our Lord, “This is my
body/’ and this you hold by a violation of interpretation
against reason, and the general usage of Scripture. Does it
not say as literally “ That it is bread/’ as “ That it is flesh,”
and does not our Lord himself call it, after consecration, “ The
juice of the grape?” St. Paul, in four different places, cads it
bread after the consecration. Why not, therefore, choose the
easy way that would extricate you from inconsistency,
contradiction, and blasphemy ?
But again: Does the Lord contradict himself? Has not
St. Paul said that the body of Christ, which was sown in
weakness, is raised in power, and is no more subject to
corruption; or can Christ be alive and at the same time dead
and helpless on an altar of wood ? Can Christ’s glorious body
be in heaven and in a thousand places on earth at the same
time? Or could he have eaten his own body and given to the
disciples to eat whilst he was yet living and in the flesh ?
These, and a thousand other monstrosities, you are obliged to
gulp down, which utterly confound all ideas of truth, and
have, I fully believe, made infidels of thousands.
Talk about faith in such a doctrine as this, and the
harmlessness of believing too much. It is not faith but
idiotic credulty, as pernicious in religion as to believe two and
three make seven would be in arithmetic. Cannot a child be
trained to believe anything, and if it never exercises its reason
will it not cling to the same opinion for ever ? Take this
early prejudice into account, and the skill and sophistry
that learning can invest a subject with, and you see the
difficulty there is for truth to convince such a mind. Thus it
it is one generation after another follow in delusion till
antiquity sanctifies what common sense, reason, and Scripture
repudiates; and thus it lias been with all nations.
There is no darker notion amongst the heathen then to
suppose a man can make, worship, and then eat his maker, or
that the corporal body of the Redeemer taken into the stomach
can spiritualise the soul, you might as well try to mount up
into the heavens on a steam engine, as to try to realise the
presence of Christ by corporeal manducation. To receive Christ
is wholly a spiritual act; that which is flesh is flesh, and for
such a purpose it profiteth not. A living faith is the substance
of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, and
transforms the whole man, his affections, desires, and unites
him with its object of adoration, and thus we are changed into
the image of Christ from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the
Lord—see Corinthians.


I am certain there are thousands of intelligent Roman
Catholics who would reject this dogma with disgust were it
not for the way it is buttressed up by their sophisticated and
deluded doctors, whose subtleties and hair breadth distinctions
confound even the learned and sagacious. It is thus they
classify this doctrine (transubstantiation) as one of the great
mysteries of revelation, and even have the temerity to place it
beside the Holy Trinity and Divinity of our Saviour as being
equally above the comprehension of men. But in the name of
truth and reason what has belief in the Trinity or Divinity of
Christ to do with transubstantiation ? The one is clearly
revealed in the Word of God, the other is not. The one is above
the comprehension of men or angels, the other is on a level
with every understanding. The Trinity, though above our
reason, is not contrary to it, but transubstantiation is opposed
to reason. The doctrine of the Trinity and Divinity of our
Lord does not come within the cognisance of our senses; but
the other, the wafer, is a simple body which the five senses
can test and prove, as well as the understanding can reason
upon and investigate, for any one can tell what a piece of paste
is made of. Therefore to bolster the doctrine by such means
is to throw the whole of the Christian religion into jeopardy,
doubtfulness, and unbelief, and to make it the scoff of the
infidel.
But to conclude this subject, who would ever suppose for a
moment that such a meaning could be put upon the simple
words of our Lord, u Do this in remembrance of me,’’ for is it
not most evident that it was a commemorative ordinance, and
not a sacrificial one or sin offering by any means, for that
changes the whole character of the Christian religion ; the
priesthood being swept away in the new dispensation, and the
final commission being not to sacrifice Christ, but to go and
preach the Gospel (Matthew) to all the world. Therefore it
never was intended that this ordinance should become a badge
of office in the hands of spiritual necromancers, that they
might waive their magic wand over the conscience and
understanding, in an attempt to bring down the miraculous
power of God, and put it on a level with a conjuror’s trick,
thereby exalting themselves under the pretence of exalting
their Lord. Neither was it intended to be made a Juggernaut
and carried about the streets, as in some countries, at the point
of the bayonet, compelling men to bow down to a deity of
their own making. Nor yet was it to be made a fire brand
that fanatics might show their burning love to heretics, as
n the days of Queen Mary. Nor yet was it to be transmuted


into an idol, to be set up in the Pope’s treasury, to worship
and make merchandise of.
In reference to the cup being taken from the laity, Dr.
Adam Clarke says, without the cup there can be no sacrament
at all: with respect to the bread our Lord said, “ take eat,
this is my body,” but concerning the wine, He said, “ Drink
ye all of this.” It was the wune that pointed out the very
essence of the institution, namely, the blood of atonement. It
was necessary that each should take it, and therefore he says,
ci Drink ye all of it.” By this we are taught that the cup is
essential to the Lord’s Supper, and they who receive not the
cup are not partakers of the body and blood of Christ. The
bread might better be dispensed with, but the cup pointed out
the blood poured out, that is, the life, by which the sacrificial
act was performed and remission of sins procured; it is
absolutely indispensable. From this it is evident there is not a
Popish priest under heaven that can be said to celebrate the
Lord’s Supper at all. It is all an absolute farce, so long as the
cup, which is the emblem of the atoning blood, is denied. To
demand a literal meaning for " this is my body,” and yet deny
all meaning to “ drink ye all of it.” O Romanism! O
Infallibility!
THE MASS
Its Doctrine and Worship.
Having shown that the doctrine of Transubstantiation is of
man’s device, and without any proper authority from God ;
the Mass, as a natural consequence, falls with it; as, however,
it may be necessary to show more fully its unscriptural nature,
I shall divide it into two heads, viz., first, the Doctrine of the
Mass, and afterwards its worship.
Ist. The Doctrine op the Mass.
The Mass was in existence many centuries before
Transubstantiation was thought of. It originated by mystifying
the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, which at first was only a
simple commemorative rite spoken of by the apostles as
breaking bread from house to house. But the Jewish and
Pagan elements entering in and mixing up with the Christian
system, certain ceremonies and forms began to be attached to
it; an altar was raised, and a priesthood established altogether
different from that of all believers. The Sacrament then began


to be called the Sacrifice of the Altar. This prepared the way
in the course of a few centuries to change it still farther into
a propitiatory sacrifice, or the Sacrifice of the Mass. This
change was brought about by Radbert and others, who in the
ninth century introduced the doctrine of transubstantiation,
which, after much contention and opposition, was partially
established by Innocent the Third on his own authority. The
Council of Lateran adopted it, but it was not finally and
authoritatively settled as binding on the conscience till the
Council of Trent, 1582.
The substance of the doctrine of the Mass as declared by
this Council and Romish Catechism, is that our Lord instituted
the first Mass at the Last Supper, when He said to his disciples,
<f Do this in remembrance of me/’ That he there and then
gave power to the priests to change the bread and wine into
the body, soul, and Divinity of our Lord, and to offer him up
a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead.
That it is the same sacrifice that Christ offered up himself on
the cross, with the exception that the priest who now takes
his place offers in an unbloody manner, under the appearance
of bread and wine this sacrifice of the new law. They also say
they are priests after the order of Melchisedec, and that they
personate Christ, saying, after consecration, “This is my
body,” &c. It is also asserted to be a Sacrament as well as a
sacrifice, and that it is eucharistical, commemorative, and a
means of applying the benefit of Christ’s death and passion to
the living and the dead.
~ The most extraordinary part of the wisdom of this
Infallible Council is that in the same breath that they assert
the Eucharist to be an unbloody sacrifice without suffering
and death, it is declared to be a propitiatory sacrifice for the
sins of the living and the dead. Could it be that these learned
gentlemen did not know the nature of a propitiatory sacrifice
or could they have been so ignorant as to suppose that without
shedding of blood there could be a sacrifice for sin ? There
were various sacrifices under the old dispensation, as there is
under the new, but in neither could there be such a thing as a
sacrifice for sin without the shedding of blood and the life of
the victim (Hebs. ix. 22). Nothing is plainer in the New
Testament than this. Should not the learned gentlemen,
therefore, in order to make this doctrine consistent, have
insisted that immolation and blood shedding had taken place
on the wafer as well as transubstantiation, and explained it in
the same way, viz., by accidents and species ? But no, there it
is, without any ambiguity, an unbloody propitiatory sacrifice ,


Never was suck a thing known from the foundation of the
world.
A propitiatory sacrifice means that there were hindrances in
the divine government that had to be removed before favour
could be shown to transgressors. Justice demanded an
equivalent for a broken law; holiness could not have fellowship
with impurity; truth had declared the soul that sinneth it
shall die; to honour the law and satisfy the claims of divine
justice in such a way as that the divine attributes will be in
harmony with each other was the work of Christ, who laid
down his divinity on the altar of his humanity, making full
compensation for sin and transgression, and now justice and
mercy, righteousness and peace, kiss each other. God can be
just and justify them that believe in Christ, and having risen
triumphant over death, is now at the right hand of God an
eternal priest, sacrifice, and altar. Therefore, the whole work
of pacification through propitiatory sacrifice being perfectly
accomplished, the Lord himself having declared it is finished,
to attempt again to renew or continue the same sacrifice is to
unsettle all the arrangements of heaven. It is to go back to
shadows, and to blasphemously obtrude a worthless sham in
the place of the everlasting and glorious fulness of Christ’s
sacrifice, which, as St. Paul says, was once for all offered to
put away sin. See Hebrews, ix. 25, x., &c.
The monstrous nature of this popish patchwork will be more
fully seen as we glance at its parts, and the nature of its
construction, as for instance, the mass is said to be the same
sacrifice as that offered up by our Lord, just as if a thing can
be the same that is done at a different time in a different place
and by a different person. A, lifeless wafer that may be blown
away by a puff of wdnd, or eaten by a mouse, is the same as
the living bleeding body of our Lord, or that the shedding of
blood and the shedding of no blood means the same thing.
If this is not infallibility with a vengeance, I don’t know what
is. Christ offered up himself. If the wafer be Christ does it
offer up itself, and if not, how can it be the same ? Does the
wafer bear the’father’s wrath, shed its blood and expire ? and
if not, how can it be a propitiatory sacrifice. Can the offering
of a weak sinful imperfect man be the same as that of the
infinite and perfect Lord Jesus ? Is the priesthood of priests
the same as that of Christ ? Was not Christ God ? Are they
not men? Does he not continue ever? Do they not pass
away ? And is not this stated by the Apostle as one of the
grand reasons why there can be no repetition of his sacrifice,
because he coutiuueth over; but they pass away—See Hebrews


vii. 23 and 24. Was he not perfect ? Are they net imperfect ?
What has Melchisedec, who offered wine as refreshment to
Abraham, to do with men who profess not to offer wine, but
the real flesh and blood of the Lord ? Did Melchisedec attempt
to offer bread and wine as a propitiatory sacrifice ? he knew
better things.
But again ; The saciifice of the mass is said to be not only
propitiatory, but also a sacrament of commemoration. Now
if it is one,it cannot be the other,for a sacrament and a sacrifice
for sin are two opposite things. A sacrament is a thing given
by the Lord to man. But a sacrifice is given by men unto
God. In the one the sinner receives the inward and spiritual
grace of the thing signified. In the other he offers, by faith
to God, the fruit of a grateful heart. It is known by every
child in theology also that a sacrament must have a sign,
which, if the wafer be God, becomes the thing signified, and
leaves it without the true nature of a sacrament.
The sacrifices of the new dispensation are prayers, gifts,
devotion, worship, a broken heart, and the Eucharist—Psalm
i. 19, Bom. xii., Heb. xiii. 15 and 16, And not under any
circumstance can there be a sin or propitiatory oblation the
same as our Lord’s.
But again; It is said that the sacrifice of the mass is not
only propitiatory, commemorative, &c., &c., but applicatory;
that is a means of applying the benefits of Christ’s death to
the souls of the living and the dead. Now this also is an
utter impossibility, for as we have already seen that there can
be no such thing as an unbloody propitiatory sacrafice; that
our Lord’s sacrifice being infinite and perfect could not be
repeated, it follows that the sacrifice of the mass is no
sacrifice at all. How, therefore, can you apply an abortion, a
nonentity, a blasphemy ? The mass sacrifice is not of God,
for its priesthood are not of Aaron, who offered blood, nor of
Melchisedec, who offered bread and wine, nor Christ, who
offered himself once for all, never to be repeated,. It is therefore
neither Jewish, Pagan, nor Christian.
Having now seen that the doctrine of the mass is an utter
absurdity, contradiction, and blasphemy, may I ask by what
magical process these learned doctors of Trent could have put
into their logical crucible the simple text, a do this in
remembrance of me,” and bring it out an opposite and totally
different thing, or (what is more wonderful still) by what
incantation they can get learned men to believe such nonsense.


Certainly it was necessary to put an embargo on the reason
and understanding, by denying the right of private judgment
to pass off such monstrosities as these.
It is a libel on the first fathers to say they patronized this
dogma. It is well known their writings have been interpolated
and misunderstood. As to the traditions of after ages, every
old dream has been introduced in the name of some father or
other. Is not the only source of true spiritual knowledge as
open to us as to them ? Have we not a throne of grace, the
light of the Holy Spirit, and the Word of God, as well as
they ? and have we not a thousand times better opportunity
of knowing the truth than they, having the benefit of their
mistakes, and the experience of the most learned men that
ever have been in the world ?
2nd. The Worship oe the Mass.
The mass is considered the highest act of popish worship,
the concentration of her gilded glory. By it she covers her
spiritual nakedness and maintains the homage of her dupes.
The whole performance does not amount to A B C in
Christianity. It suited the barbarian taste in the time of the
Great Gregory, who elaborated and brought it to perfection.
To me it is one of the most pitiable sights under heaven to see
four of five full grown men, called priests, and as many boys,
exercising themselves for two or three hours in the mere
swaddling clothes of Christianity. Spiritually dead men ! A
dead language ! A dead wafer Christ! And a congregation
of the dead ! What can be more deplorable ! The repetition
of the sacrifice of Christ proves that you are not risen with him
in the power of his resurrection; that you are not brought nigh
by the blood of Christ —Ephes. ii.; that your conscience is not
sprinkled ; and that the one offering has not perfected nor
sanctified you. Your sacrifice being a mockery, you can have
no access to God, nor can the Holy Ghost attend on an effigy,
an abortion, and sanction a fraud and a cheat. It proves you
are still in spiritual Egypt amongst the pots of your corruption.
That you are at Mount Sinai within the mutterings and
thunderings of the law. That your cry is, let not this Holy
Lord God speak to us, but give us intercessors. It proves
that you are not come to Mount Zion to angels and spirits of
just men made perfect. That you are in the valley of dry bones.
In bondage to ordinances, to ceremonies, and commands of men.
That you have not risen by the faith of Christ and are not being
changed into the same image from glory to glory. I defy you to


advance one step towards heaven whilst you hold to a perpetual
sacrifice for sin in the faith of a mutilated sacrament. The God
that answers by fire regards with contempt such a contrivance.
Nor can you have a true peace whilst you hold to such
idolatry; one thing is certain, that however you may have
fellowship with the Pope through the bishop and by the priest,
your fellowship is not with the Father through the Son and by
the Holy Ghost. Such a system is not fit to suckle slaves,
none but the swallow-well family could endure it. It is an
outrage on the pure spiritual worship of Christ. It is a
distorted devotion, and throws the glorious Gospel into the
devil’s blue light, and makes a theatrical performance, a
pantomime, and a caricature of Christianity.
He who thinks he can eject sin, promote devotion, and break
down polluted habits and propensities by fine music, fine
colors, symbolic drapery, and tragic representation of our
Lord’s passion, knows nothing of the plague of sin, its depth
and its length. It is true David soothed the evil spirit in
Saul by his harp, but he did not expel him, he was there still.
Fine music may play upon the passions, and soften the wolf
till he become a lamb, but take away the cause, and he is a
wolf still. The strong man armed takes a stronger than
himself to dislodge. Neither is Christ applied to the heart by
lifting him up on a bit of wood, or in the reception of a wafer;
a living faith alone realises Christ, and forms A him in the
heart the hope of glory. The real presence of Christ dwells
not on altars made with hands. His people’s hearts are his
temple, and if any man defile that temple, him will God
destroy.—Corinthians. Like Baal’s priests you may cry to
him, and afflict yourselves with fasting and penance, but he
will not hear you, your oracle will give you no response. Yon
may say, “ holy wafer, omnipotent paste of man, I adore you ;
holy virgin, exterminator of heretics, intercede for us. Most
potent gate-opener, money, penance, alms, deliver us; priests
of the mysteries of theological candle light, help us. Angels,
saints, and martyrs, come to our help. But, alas ! there is no
response, the finger and thummum God is silent. The money
God cannot redeem its brother, and to which of the saints
canst thou turn. They have only enough oil for themselves.
Priests of supererogatory works are empty vessels, spiritual
insolvents, the same as other sinners, till they buy without
money and without price—lsaiah. All these resources are
refuges of lies, cisterns that can hold no water; you worship
an unknown God, the mere work of your hands, you draw nigh
to God with uncircumcised hearts, whilst your lips mutter


prayer by the inch. Your service has no Holy Ghost in It,
and therefore is an abomination to God.
I do not mean to say you are not sincere, nor that you do
not believe in the Holy Ghost and resurrection of Christ. But
that the office of both Christ and the Holy Ghost are so
abnegated by priestly interference that there might as well
be no Holy Spirit for what you know or feel of his presence;
nevertheless there are some no doubt whose knowledge and
faith rises above the system they are educated in, and realises
both the help and comfort of that divine agent.
There may be deep feelings of devotion and reverential awe,
profound adoration and respect for that you esteem as sacred
and divine. There may be veneration for the eymbols of that
which is holy, and a great appreciation of the magnificent and
sublime as connected with religion. All this, and a great
deal more, may exist as the mere temporary effect of outward
circumstantial pomp and ceremony on the passions, whilst the
heart withal remains unchanged from its natural course of
sin, and the soul continues earthly, sensual, and devilish —
remove the cause, and the effect ceases, religious feelings
temporarily excited by music and tragic representations of our
Lord’s passion, by fine colours and other performances, is one
thing; but to put on Christ and abide in him, a new creature,
and worship him in spirit and in truth is altogether another.
The one is only a temporary play upon the imagination, and
surrounding yourself with the sparks of your own kindling;
the other is a reality, spirit and life.
The reformed Christian church charges you with idolatry;
of saints, virgin, relic and host worship, how can vou deny it,
will the scholastic distinction of the latria, h/perdulia, and
dulia definitions extricate you ? By no means, for there is
not one in a thousand who think anything about them, and
if he did, he would find it impossible to gauge his affections
to the exact point where the latria or God’s adoration ends,
and the hyperdulia or inferior worship begins. The whole
thing is a deception, a pretence, like other ingenious devices of
the doctors. Do not the power and perfections attributed to
the virgin constitute her more than a creature, and does not
worshipping and praying to a creature instead of the Creator
constitute idolatry ? For however highly honored and blessed
the virgin may be, she is still but finite, as far removed from
the Infinite as a drop is to the ocean. Thus our Lord says,
when it was said, u Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and
the paps that gave the suck.” Yea, saith he, more blessed is
he who believes in me, and keeps my word ; the same is his


brother, his mother, &c. If Christ be the elder brother of every
redeemed saint, the Holy Virgin stands on the same ground
as a co-heiress with him. Therefore to worship or pray to her
is a gross dishonor to Christ, and degrading to men ; for there is
but one Intercessor between God and man, the Man Christ
Jesus.
A true believer in Christ does not look to saints nor angels
nor outward helps, objective or subjective, to realise his
presence, for he has always that presence by the Holy Spirit
that dwells within him—Romans viii. 9. He has access into
the Holy of Holies, without an intercessor at all times
(Hebrews ix.) more especially at worship, and the Eucharist,
he has fellowship with God through Christ and by the Holy
Spirit, and communes with him as a man with his friend. He
enjoys the communion of saints, whose united faith brings
down the sacred influence, which like holy oil spreads over the
soul joy, sweet peace, and righteousness. He has hold on his
father's promises, which are all yea and amen in Christ, and
beholding Christ’s image as in a glass is changed into the
same likeness from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the
Lord—2 Corinthians iii. 18, A true believer has the spirit of
prayer, power over sin, freedom from bondage, slavish fear,
ceremony, &c These and many more are the infallible effects
of being in Christ and worshipping him in spirit. And now
my dear friends can you say without deception these are the
fruits of Popish worship ; you know well they are not, and
that you might as well expect a crop of cucumbers from a field
of ice as to expect such influences. The priest not only thinks
such feelings fanatical, but positively denies that in these days
such can be experienced; that they belonged to the first ages
when miracles were in the church —forgetting that this is
wholly a dispensation of the Spirit and of power and of life.
Ist and 2nd Corinthians, &c. Is it not therefore most evident
that Popery is an apostaey, the make shift of a dead faith, and
the Mass God a dumb idol ? Now, as Elijah was called to
bring down the three hundred and fifty false priests to Gilgal,
and slay them there, so do I by the authority and power of that
word that is sharp and powerful, sharper than any two-edged
sword, and is a discerner of the thoughts of the heart, &c.; so do I
cut up and smash to pieces your wood, hay, and stubble, your
learned ignorance and patchwork of ages, threshing it with the
sharp threshing instrument of the Gospel; for the foolishness of
God is wiser than man, and the weakness of God stronger than
man, and the weak things he makes to confound the wisdom
of this world, that no flesh may glory in his presence.


The sacrifice of the mass is the staple trade of Rome, by
which she keeps her priests in constant employ, and by which
she has gained more wealth than all her other devices put
together. The Gospel cries to all, “Ho, every one that
thirsteth come to the water of life freely without money and
without price.” The mass says to all, without money and
without price you cannot have my assistance,the right intention
of the priest being necessary to make it valid—money secures
that end. The mass is a laboratory for transmuting the grace
of God into fine gold. It is a clerical whitewash for daubing
over venial transgressors, and the souls of harlots, murderers,
adulteresses, liars, blasphemers, drunkards, and workers of all
iniquity, who by pumping up a little sorrow, by confession and
penance are quieted with the assurance of other men’s merits.
It is the abomination of desolation, spreading infidelity over
the world, and if Roman Catholics think that God winks at
this piece of blasphemy they are greatly mistaken, for a far
worse blindness than that of Simon Magus is upon you, even
that spiritual blindness which makes you the unconscious
victims of your own delusions.
And is this the beautiful system that our Anglican High
Church men would hand us over to? What an edifying spectacle,
the Romish, Anglican, and Eastern Churches all united in one
strong bond of dismal delusion. May the Lord help their silly
heads. Ashes to ashes, dust to dust. Let the dead bury the
dead. Come out of her, my people, lest you be made partaker
of her plagues, which now are not afar off.
PURGATORY.
Human wisdom hath devised three places after this life for
three classes of individuals, viz., the bad, the good, and
indifferent; but human wisdom has always proved itself
lamentably deficient in things pertaining to the soul, for the
wisdom of this world in reference to such matters has always
been foolishness with God. That there will be different
degrees of blessedness and misery to the righteous and the
wicked, according to their works in another world, is admitted
on all sides; but that there will be a third place called
purgatory for the punishment and purification of venial
offences is altogether a pagan idea, contrary to the analogy of
faith, and the whole structure of the Christian religion.
The doctrine of purgatory was entertained by the Greeks
and Romans centuries before the Christian era. It was
introduced into the Christian church by Gregory the Great in


the sixth century, it being found to be a powerful engine for
working on the susceptibilities of the superstitious in the
promotion of alms deeds, by which vast accessions of wealth
were accumulated to the church, these alms deeds beino-
supposed to mitigate the sufferings of the souls in prison.
The early church was in the habit of praying for their
departed friends and celebrating their martyrs’ deaths, from
which ancient practice modern Roman Catholics fallaciously
concoct an argument for their belief in purgatory, viz., as the
souls of the righteous have no need of prayers, and as it would
be equally useless to pray for those in hell, it must have been
for those in purgatory they prayed. But what is fatal to this
argument is that the early Christians prayed not for venial
sinners that their sufferings might be alleviated in purgatory,
but for holy justified perfect martyrs, apostles, prophets, and
for the Virgin Mary herself, that their joys between death and
the resurrection might be increased; and that they might
stand justified on the great day of judgment, when the fire of
ordeal was to try every man’s work. There were other good
reasons also for these prayers and offerings by the ancient
church, without in the lemotest degree having any reference
to a purgatory of torture to make satisfaction for sin, nor was
such a thing thought of till the doctrine of the merit of works
vitiated and obscured that of sanctification by faith through
the Holy Ghost; which, as I have before observed, is the sad
cause of all her other corruptions.
I shall first state the doctrine of purgatory as taught by the
Council of Trent and Romish catechisms; secondly, answer
tbe principal scripture texts which are quoted to support it;
after which I shall prove its utter falsehood and pernicious
tendency, and let him who has an ear to hear, hear!
The doctrine is that the souls confined in purgatory have
left this world in a state of grace, but are subject to the
punishment due to venial sin, of which the eternal punishment
has been remitted, and also to that which is due to mortal sin,
imperfectly expiated. It is asserted by the same Council that
whosoever shall affirm that the entire punishment is always
remitted by God, together with the fault, and therefore that
penitents need no other satisfaction than faith, whereby they
apprehend Christ, who has made satisfaction for them; let
him be accursed.
It is also taught that these sufferings in purgatory may be
mitigated and bought off by masses, fastings, prayers, alms
givings, and other pious and laborious works In this life.
This is popish theology, from which it is apparent that all


classes of sinners, both venial and mortal, can be put into a
salvable state through the priest's pardon, their own sufferings
and friends' works, alms and paid masses, so that according to
this theory none are lost. The vilest transgressor may have
as good a chance of being saved as the virtuous and holy, only
with the addition of a little more suffering, unless bought off
by paid masses. Here then is an open door for licentiousness
for mortal sinners who have received the rites of the church,
and also for venial transgressors, worldly lovers, covetous,
proud, &c., who are the regenerated and venial sinners in
popish estimation. If this is not salvation by cash, and by
suffering, nothing else is.
But as space will not allow me to enlarge, I must pass onto
the scripture texts, with which they attempt to prove it; I
say attempt, for there is not a direct text in the Bible to
establish it. An inference, a metaphor, and a text taken from
a spurious uninspired book, disowned by the Jews, is tortured
into a purgatory by their doctors. For instance, what can be
more ridiculous than to build a doctrine upon which men’s
salvation is supposed to rest, upon the text in Matthew xii.
32, “ hath neither forgiveness in this world nor the world to
come;’' does not every one know that there are two
justifications that men must undergo, one in this life, and one
on the day of judgment; and that our Lord meant he should
not have pardon either in this life or in the next, meaning
the day of judgment ? If there were any doubt in reference
to this view, does not St. Luke settle the matter by declaring
in a parallel text, “ hath never forgiveness," &c.
But the text in Matthew is quoted, viz., “ shall not come
out till he pay the uttermost farthing that the punishment
referred to here by our Lord was that of the temporal judicial
polity of the Jews, having no reference whatever to another
world is as evident as light, a direction to settle disputes at
once ; for who can pay the uttermost farthing for trangression
but Christ alone ?
In like manner the text in Corinthians referring to the
wood, hay, and stubble, explains itself, for it is not said men’s
persons shall be tried by fire, but their works, and these works
are not of men in purgatory, or venial sinners, but every man.
Neither is it said they shall be saved by fire, but so as by fire,
simply meaning with great difficulty. The contradiction of
the fathers on the words fire, prison, stubble, in this passage
of scripture have proved their interpretations to be stubble,
and their judgments to be impressed with the superstitions of
the time m which they lived.


The last text which gives any semblance of authority for such
a place as purgatory is in 1 Peter iii. 19. The question arises
here, where was the prison, whether on earth or in another
world, who were the spirits that were in prison, when was the
time, and by what spirit Christ preached to them, whether the
spirit of his humanity or the Holy Ghost. First, that the
prison was on earth in which they, the Antedeluvians, lived, is
evident, for how otherwise could it be said that they were kept
for 120 years, that the long-suffering of God might be
manifested, and while the ark was preparing ? It is not said
that Christ himself preached to the spirits in prison, but by
his spirit in Noah, by which it is said he became a preacher of
righteousness, and condemned the world of the ungodly—•
1 Peter ii. 5. Second, the time of this preaching was not
when our Lord descended to Hades, but is expressly said to be
in the days of Noah, while the ark was preparing ; the whole
tenor of Peter’s discourse proves this. Third, who w r ere the
spirits in prison ? Most undoubtedly the Antedeluvians, who
were disobedient, and were given 120 years to repent, and who
died in mortal sin. It could not therefore be the limbo of the
patriarchs, for they were obedient, justified, the friends of God.
Sinners are often represented in Scripture as being reserved in
a prison under condemnation. Lastly, that the spirit with
which Christ preached to the spirits in prison was not that of
his humanity, bub his divinity, the Holy Ghost, is certain,
from the fact of his often speaking and revealing his will to
the patriarchs, by which, as the text says, “ He was also
quickened, when during his passion he was put to death in the
flesh, and raised by the power of the Holy Ghost/’ So that
in all this there is not the remotest allusion to a place of
suffering for venial sinners bought off by masses and alms. As
to tradition, Dr. Cummings has proved that there is not a
single father nor council for the first five centuries that say a
word about it, tradition has been so contradictory owing
to the interpolation of their writings and their superstitious
notions that their testimony is of no value whatever on
this subject. But if even they were united what would
their voice be worth if they say one thing and the Lord
God says another ? Dr. Wiseman acknowledges that there is
no certain proof in Scripture of purgatory, and therefore
depends on tradition. Dr. Milner has endeavored to make a
purgatory of Abraham’s bosom, the abode of the blest; such
are the shifts that men are obliged to resort to when they
depart from the law and the testimony.
Superstition and ignorance of the virtue and extent of the


atonement lias caused them to make several limbos, as well as
that of purgatory. The patriachial limbo, which is now said,
to be empty, the limbo of unbaptised infants, just as if the
whole work of redemption was of none effect, because the word
and touch of a priest were wanting. The spiritual lordship
and self interest of these men must be upheld, although all the
infants in the universe were to perish. Having now seen
how this doctrine originated, and with what materials it is
defended, I shall proceed to demolish this Papal dogma by
annihilating that upon which it rests; I mean the doctrine
of mortal and venial sin, which not only frustrates the truth*
but leaves the soul in uncertainty and presumptuous unfitness
for the presence of God.
How often have X heard it said, is it lawful to be sent to
hell as well for stealing a pin as committing murder? But
such persons forget that whilst they talk of stealing a pin the
whole body of sin remains unchanged, pride, selfishness*
covetousness, vanity, ambition, the love of the world, of
pleasure, and a thousand impurities which stamp the man
unregenerate. Take even the most moral man that is
unconverted by the Holy Ghost, and is he not dead in sin and
trespasses, and without life or fitness for the enjoyment of
God? To talk therefore of venial offences, when through
spiritual blindness you are nothing but one mass of sin, is
simply ridiculous; for if you are not in Christ, a new creature,
venial sin places you under the law the same as mortal offences,
and if you are a pardoned sinner and in Christ, you are in the
freedom of the Gospel, and the law has no power over you to
condemn you,for “ Christ is the end of the law for righteousness
to all that believe in him/' But on the supposition that a
man were only guilty of stealing a pin, or of indulging a
wrong thought, that slight venial offence would as effectually
shut you up into hell, as the most wicked act; and if Christ
did not pardon that sin you would go out of the world under
the law, and be liable to the curse of the whole—see James—-
for Christ’s pardon not only justifies from all things, but
sanctifies the heart and enables a man to obey the truth and
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. Thus
producing the righteousness which is by faith. Venial
and mortal sin are both repudiated. The justified man
as St. John says, does not sin wilfully, or if he should
through infirmity, or ignorance, commit a venial offence, he
still lives by faith, and the act that first justified him still
keeps him just, for u the just shall live by faith/’ and “ if any
man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him'— See


Hebrews x. 38—having an advocate with the Father, and the
blood of Jesus Curist ckansing him from all unrighteousness.
Where then is venial sin? it is annihilated. The law cannot
be more condemnatory of venial sin than the Gospel is in
absolving from it, for otherwise it would be imperfect.
Unbelief, or a mere doctrinal belief, or baptismal faith, will
keep you shut up in venial sin, and out of Christ as effectually
as mortal sin, so called, A true faith saves from venial and
mortal sin alike, from a guilty conscience, from the law, death,
and hell, and thus it is there are two places for two classes;
he that believeth, and he that believeth not. You are shut out
from the law altogether, as through the weakness of the flesh
it is impossible to keep it, because making no allowance for
sin. You are saved by another’s righteousness, given as a
gift; so that to make a distinction of sin as not breaking
charity with God is a flat contradiction of the truth, and
proves that you neither know the design of the law, the nature
of sin, nor the redemption and justification through the Gospel
by a living faith.
It is true the Lord punishes his children after their
acceptance, but not punitively, but from love—See Hebrews
xii. 6. Not by a church, but by his providence. Not by
penance done as compensation for sin, but of correction in
righteousness; for warning and example, as in the case of
David, &c., &c.
The doctrine of purgatory therefore is a calumny on the
justice and mercy of God the Father; for if he would not
pardon without requiring compensation from the sinner, he
would be unjust. But it is because he is faithful and just, as
St. John says, that he forgives us our sins and cleanses from
all unrighteousness.
It is a libel against the Son of God and his Atonement;
for if a man could atone for one sin, why not by accumulated
sufferings atone for all his sins, and then what becomes of the
work of redemption ? To him it would be useless. And it is
a denial of the work of the Holy Ghost, whose especial office
it is to purge the soul from all defilement—Hebrews ix. 14.
If it be possible to give your body to be burned, all your
goods to feed the poor, and have faith to remove mountains,
and still not have charity or love, how will fire produce that
which is done alone by the Holy Ghost. All the fire and
sufferings in the universe could not purge a soul into the love
of Christ. It is faith of the operation of God. It is mind,
not materialism, that can accomplish it.


If a justified man sometimes produce wood, hay, and stubble,
and lose his reward, but be saved himself so as by fire, how
shall an unrenewed man be saved who is himself stubble ?
u For if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the sinner
and ungodly appear?”—lst Peter, iv. 18.
If the Christian armour is thrown off at death, his race run,
his labour over, and if he goes to where the wicked cease from
troubling, and the weary are at rest, (Job,) how can he fight,
run, labour, and be tormented worse than ever in a place called
purgatory? “ Mark the upright man and behold the just,
for the end of that man is peace”—Psalm xxxvii. 37.
If at death the unjust remain unjust still, and the unclean
be unclean still, aud the impure be impure still, how can they
be changed in another state of existence where probation does
not extend? For behold to-day is the day of salvation
Hebs. ii. 7. And if Moses, Daniel, or Job stood before me,
saith the Lord, he should only deliver his own soul.
The true believer dies wrapped up in the Trinity, God is Ins
reconciled Father, Christ is his elder brother, and the Holy
Ghost his sanctifier. He is a temple of God, a member of the
body of Christ, and the last enemy being death, he suffers no
more. The sting of death (sin) being extracted, he dies
happy. “ O death, where is thy sting ! O grave, where is thy
victorv !” is his languige. Hedies triumphant over death,
hell, the grave, over the law, the world, and sin, for, as St.
Paul says, “There is therefore now no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flish but
after the spirit”—see Romans viii. 1. “Being absent from
the body we are present with the Lord.” “ Blessed are the
dead that die in the Lord, for their works do follow them”—
Rev. xiv. “This day shalt thou be with me in paradise”—
Luke xxiii. 43.
Purgatory is Popery’s last shift for patching up the soul in
its own rags of righteousness, in penances, satisfaction ■, and
mortifications. It is the Pope’s bye-way for schemers, who do
not wish to go the King’s high road of holiness, which the
unclean shall not pass over —Isaiah xxxv. 8. It is the rich man’s
retreat, and the poor man’s heart ache; an intolerable scorpion
in the dying pillow of the poor penitent, and a soporific dose
to the carnally secure. It is a subverter of true contrition and
of the faith that purges and renews the soul in this life.
Purgatorv is the most ruinous of all doctrines, for what man
will seek for that renewal that parts with its bosom sin and
heart’s lusts, whilst a hope is held out to escape by purgation
in another world ; for be assured that Holy Ghost regeneration


means more than being baptised, doing penance, hearing
mass, and giving aims. It is a total change of affections,
motives, desires, feelings, and actions, for nothing unclean can
enter the kingdom of heaven, and unless you be converted and
become as a little child, you can in no wise enter the kingdom
—see Matthew.
The doctrine of purgatory throws power into the hands of
bad priests to become spiritual wreckers, who hold up this false
beacon of fictitious fire on the coast of eternity to lure to
destruction in another world, that they may secure earthly
possessions in this ; and it makes devil’s dupes of sincere men
who lead others as blind as themselves into the ditch of hell.
When Pope Clement XII. had placed outside of the church
door, u A soul shall be delivered out of purgatory to-day,” one
cannot but think of the words of the drama, viz.—
Glend.—l can call spirits up from the vasty deep.
Hot.— So can I, but will they come?
The question that a celebrated cardinal put to his vicar, viz.,
How many masses would deliver a soul out of purgatory ?”
and the reply being, “as many snow-balls as would heat an
oven,” showed that he had an exact estimate of its value.
If Pope Leo X. had said of purgatory what he said of the
Christian religion, viz., “ This fable pays well,” he would have
told the truth once in his life.
Purgatory and the mass are good friends; like Jonathan
and David they are inseparable. The one dovetails into the
other admirably. Purgatory offers to do the executive, and the
mass the financial part. Purgatory chariots its victims over
the flames, but it is the mass that sets its wheels in motion.
Purgatory answers two ends, to purge and punish. The mass
also is an outlet for the offerings of the faithful, and an inlet to
their piety.
Purgatory being in an unknown region, and the mass in an
unknown tongue, are twin-sisters in mystery, darkness, and
superstition. The mass pays in advance what purgatory
performs on promise, and in fact without the mass purgatory
might shut up shop.
Purgatory is a sort of Platonic High School, where the
science of burning souls into love is inculcated. It is a sort of
devil’s antechamber, where he prepares the Pope’s children by
torture for glory. It is a chancery, where the case remains in.
statu quo , ad-libitum. It is a telegraph that never gives a
response; a voracious maw that never says ci enough.” It is the
Home of Procrastination, and the last false prop of the
unregenerate. It is a piece of antique wisdom suitable for the


Simon Gullable and swallow-well family, and it is an infernal
fraud on the credulity of mankind.
Purgatory is Popery's own verdict that her religion is a
delusion and a snare; that all her pretensions vanish into thin
air. It proves that she cannot deliver from the condemnation
of the law into the glorious liberty of the Gospel, and that her
pardons are spurious, unprofitable, and vain : that she knows
nothing of the justification and righteousness by which a sinner
may stand the piercing eye of a holy God, and be made
complete in Christ. It proves that her doses can only lull to
sleep the guilty conscience into carnal security, and that she
has not the mollifying ointment, the Gospel eye salve, and
true balm of Gilead, and cannot apply it to others, and in fact
that all her spiritual power is a sham.
These are the men gifted with the mighty power, forsooth,
that can bring down Christ on the altar; the true succession
that can bind and loose and transmit the Holy Ghost, and now
according to their own acknowledgment going into the eternal
world in doubt and darkness, without any witness of their
acceptance with God, bound hand and foot in venial corruption,
begging for a few masses to do for them that which a true
faith in the blood of Christ can alone perform. These are the
men who profess to pardon sin, to stand responsible for others
before God, and now going into another world themselves
under condemnation of venial guilt, which, if God's eternal
plan for saving man be true, they shall as certainly be damned
as if they committed every crime in the calendar; for venial
sin unwashed away by the blood of Christ puts you under the
law, leaves you spiritually dead, and as unfit for heaven as a
fallen spirit, and if Christ is not better to you than your false
theology, where he is you never can go. These are the men
who profess to have the power of seven sacraments; to have the
virgin's and saints' help; that can regenerate and open heaven ;
that glory in their superb altars, music, incence, and candle
light, and now sending the souls of their victims with their
own out of the world in spiritual nakedness, bondage, fear, and
death, depending on an old Pagan phantasy, called purgatory,
to perfect their venial offences ; the doctrine of penance and
merit of works obliging them to find another method of
purification besides that of faith in the blood of the Lamb.
These are the men who think themselves rich in a baptismal
faith ; in alms, prayers, penances, fastings, and masses, who
think they can merit through Christ’s merit, but now they
find their own righteousness shorter than will cover their
nakedness, and that the Lord will not permit his - work to be


patched, nor will he be a justifier of other men’s ragged
righteousness, now they find they are poor and blind, and
miserable and naked; their wound unclosed, and the mollifying
ointment has not been applied to their soul.
This is the system that professes to be the Holy Roman
Catholic Church, having an infallible head with all power to
rule, govern, preserve, and direct into all truth, and who can by
his potent touch not only pardon sin, but transfer the super
abundant merit of Christ and the saints to whom he pleases;
and now behold him going down into the grave in bondage,
darkness, fear, and sin. May not the devil say, (e M ow art
thou fallen, bright son of the morning, and become weak as
one of us.” To die in venial sin puts you under the law the
same as mortal sin, and proves that you were not justified
from all things—Acts xiii. 39. That you are not regenerate,
that the love of Christ which alone qualifies for heaven has
not been shed abroad in your heart by the Holy Ghost
Rom., v. That you die in fear as slaves or in carnal security.
It proves that you die out of Christ, and are not complete in
him—Cor. ii. 10. That you die in your own righteousness. It
proves that your idea of sin is all false. That when you talk
of venial sin you know not the plague of your heart, nor the
exceeding breadth of God’s law. It proves that you have not
the saving faith that purges the heart through the blood of*
Christ, and raises to a new life through the resurrection’s
power; and, lastly, to die in venial guilt proves that in your
case sin has its sting, the law its power, the grave its victory,
and hell its prey. It proves that you are not a son of God, a
joint heir with Christ, a holy temple. That you are not
pardoned of God ; for if you were, there is not a power in
heaven, earth, or hell, that could singe a hair of your head,
for, as the Apostle says, “ who shall lay an} thing to the charge
of God’s elect? it is God that justifieth. Who is he that
condemneth ?it is Christ that died. Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ ? yea, in all things we are the
conqueror, through him that loved us.’’—Romans viii. 33, 34,
35, 36.
THE PROTESTANT AND ROMISH RULE OF FAITH.
The ground of difference between Romanists and Protestants
is as follows : The ancient creeds, St. Athanasius, the Apostles,
and Nicene, are now, and always have been, the faith of
protestants. Those creeds which have all been taken from and
proved by scripture, we hold in common with Romanists.


The difference therefore between us is in her introducing
another creed, called that of Pope Pius the Fourth, established
by the Council of Trent in the year 1564, Now it is because
we protest against this innovation and modern faith, that we
are called protestants; so that it is clear when Romanists
designate us new lights, they put the saddle on the wrong
horse, and drive to a wrong place. Having shown in this
work that the articles composing this creed, viz., the mass,
transubstantiation, penance, purgatory, &c., are utterly opposed
to the Gospel and destructive of every green thing in
Christianity, I shall now endeavour to exhibit the ingenuity
and hypocrisy by which Satan has beguiled these men in
introducing a rule of faith that has enabled them to establish
a new religion and give it currency. For as the Council of
Trent knew well they could not support their new creed by the
written word (the Holy Bible), they have resorted to two
manoeuvres, by which they have succeeded. These manoeuvres
are the assumption of infallibility, and placing tradition on an
equal footing with the Word of God. By the first she has
been enabled to force her dogmas, prevent inquiry and gain
submission. By the second she can play off one part of what
she calls scripture against another, leave the true Word of
God of none effect, or get rid of it altogether.
The protestant rule of faith is the scriptures alone, not as
interpreted by every fanatic and deluded person, but according
to the ancient decisions of the true church; the light of the
Holy Spirit and general tenor of the whole. Neither Roman
Catholics, Socinians, Swedenborgians, Latter-day Saints, nor
other deceivers interpret the Bible according to this rule.
The Romish rule of faith consists of the Holy Scriptures
written and unwritten. By this she means the Holy Bible, the
Apocrypha, oral and written tradition, and these as expounded
by the Church. This rule comprises about 135 volumes of
Acts of Councils, Pope’s Bulls, Decretals, &c., &c., about
three and a half cart loads of the acts and sayings of the
Saints, all locked up in Latin and Greek, which would take a
whole life to read them.
The Scriptures speak of three sorts of tradition : first, those
of men condemned by our Lord as leaving his word of none
effect; second, there were traditions of temporary and
indifferent matters, such as giving milk and honey to the
baptized, &c., &c.; and third, there were traditions by
inspiration, vvhich were first communicated . orally, and
afterwards committed to writing, and are now in the New
Testament.


The Holy Scriptures, the Creeds, and Our Lord’s Prayer,
were called by the early Fathers The Tradition , by which they
confuted heretics, settled controversies, and converted the
heathen. Chrysostem says, there is no other method left for
those who are willing- to discover the true church but by the
Scriptures alone.
These creeds above referred to were held in common by all the
churches—the Eastern and Western. Thus, when Augustine
says he would not believe the Scripture but on the authority
of the church, he meant the universal church, and not the
Romish, in particular of which he was no member. The
assurance of modern Papists quoting this passage as an
authority for their tradition is truly rediculous. Tradition in
Augustine’s time did not consist of three and a half cart loads
of superstitous fathers, but, as I have already said, the
Scriptures, the Creeds, and Our Lord’s Prayer.
First it is declared that oral tradition is a part of the Word
of God ; a mere hear say she classes with divine inspiration;
is there any nonsense under heaven that may not be imposed
on religion in this way, for who ever heard of a tradition
coming down pure through one generation, not to talk of 1800
years of corruption and darkness that might be felt.
Another part of her rule consists of the Apocrypha, books
that patronise suicide and prayers for the dead. The Apocrypha
have been condemned both by the Jews and early church as
uncanonical and spurious, and no more inspired than Robinson
Crusoe. The Church of Rome embraces also the ancient
litanies proved by her own historians to be interpolated, added
to, and of no authority whatever; and, lastly, she claims, as
part of her rule of faith, the writings of the fathers. Now, as
the fathers of the first three centuries were totally opposed to
those of a later date, and knew nothing of the Creed of Trent,
the mass, purgatory, &c. Pope Pius the Fourth has published
a bull proscribing such of their works as is offensive to the
Romish See, under the title of indices of prohibited books,
having also expunged all such sentences from their more
modern writings as make against her. She has by this means
gained what she calls the unanimous consent of the fathers,
and brought them over to patronise her impositions.
Finding the Word of God opposed to her new dogmas, she
has put the writings and sayings of the Fathers on an equal
authority with the Scriptures, because the explanations and
definitions of the Scripture by the fathers being for the most
part in favor of their own figments, inventions, and superstitions.
They (the Council of Trent) have gained that countenance and


support from their expositions, which they look for in vain
from the Word of God fairly interpreted and left to its
own simplicity. Therefore do they pronounce the Bible
imperfect and insufficient as a rule of faith, and with the
most audacious presumption put the words of blind and fallible
men on a level with the words of eternal truth, and declare we
shall not understand the Bible only according to their
unanimous consent, although that consent has never been
given.
St. Basil (A.D. 370) tells us it is right and necessary that
each one should learn from the inspired Word of God whatever
is needful for his growth in grace, and to defend himself
against the evils of human tradition.
To conclude this part of the subject, is it not a thousand
times safer to commit yourself to a rule of faith—the Scriptures
alone—which are acknowledged by both Romanists and
Protestants to be the genuine Word of God, as well as by the
voice of the early and pure anl iquity, then a rule which one
half of Christendom denounces as false; that no one can
understand, and that an implicit faith in a priest is required;
what a relief therefore to get away from all such impositions
and uncertainties, and rest as upon the rock of ages sure—
“ Thus saith the Lord. 0
Having seen the hypocritical nature of this part of the rule
of faith and its inability to stand alone without help, another
expedient is resorted to, viz., the assumption of infallibility to
give it support-*
Infallibility.
Infallibility, say these modest gentlemen of Trent, is
necessary for the right interpretation of the scriptures, the
settling of controversies, and maintainance of union and order.
*As it is by the Romish rule of faith so many of our Puseyite
and learned men of the English Church are caught, I shall
exhibit the process whereby they are entrapped, and thereby
show the evil consequences of giving up the great principle of
the Reformation and birthright of our Lord, viz., the right of
private judgment.
As Dr. Fry says “He (the Puseyite) sets out with the idea that the church
is to be the divine interpreter of Scripture, and with the enquiry what is the
church whose decision he is bound to receive as the true sense of Holy
Scripture ? It will be in vain for him to persuade himself that the Church of
England, or any other Protestant church, has the authority which he seeks.
They disclaim it, they refuse to exercise it, they denounce it as Romish.
Regardless of this he imagines in opposition to all reason that the Churches of


&c., &c. What is this assumption but only an earthwork
thrown up to protect her twelve articles from detection by
silencing the voice of reason and preventing inquiry ? The
Council of Trent must have known that such an attribute as
infallibility has never been fulfilled in any one particular,
neither as respects the explanation of scripture, the settling of
controversies, nor unity. As respects the elucidation of
scripture, every one knows she has not made one obscure text
plainer than it ever was, for that is not her practice. She has
no authorised translation of the Bible, no infallible
commentary, nor any work to make the word of God more
simple and easy to the common understanding.
It is assumed by Romanists that there is a necessity for an
infallible tribunal, &c., but who is it that asserts it ? Why,
those who require it to bring in a new creed. The early
church had no such standard, and it will be time enough to
believe in such an attribute when it is clearly revealed in
scripture, and not when a text or two are tortured to answer
her purpose. u On this Rock/’ “ I am Peter/’ “ Hear the
church,” ie Lo, I am with you always,” appears to be a resource
for every innovation. But as in other refuges, so in this.
They are false, for neither the Apostles nor our Lord taught on
the principle of infallible authority, but always appealed to
evidence. They challenged faith, not in their authority, but
referred to the written word, and to the exercise of reason.
If I bear witness of myself saith the Lord, my witness is not
true, &c. Search the Scriptures, prove all things, was their
England, Greece, and Rome are all sister branches ot the one Catholic Church,
whose decisions are to be his rule of faith. But their doctrines and systems
are opposite and conflicting, and they condemn each other as heretical. What
is he to believe ? Which is he to obey ? In this state of mind Romanism
addresses him with her authority, which the rule of faith that he has adopted
compels him to submit to. He believes and seeks for an authority in a
church to overrule his own judgment, and he finds that authority claimed by
the Church of Rome alone. He sees at once that if the decisions of the church
are to determine the true sense of Scripture, and to deliver to the people what
they are to believe, the church, whose teaching is to be received as divine
truth must be infallible, or its decisions cannot be certainly true ; and as
the Church of Rome alone claims to be infallible, he is bound to submit to
her authority and embrace her communion. If he is withheld by the
conviction that many of her doctrines are unscriptural, his objections are
silenced and overcome by the fatal principle, that he has no right to set up
his convictions in opposition to the teaching of the church, that he is not to
interpret Scripture in matters where the church has pronounced her decision,
and that the church has a right so to overrule his judgment, that he is bound
to receive her teaching in opposition to his own convictions of the truths
revealed in Scripture.”
Thus we see by giving up the noble principle of the Boreans and not
discerning the one true faith as held by the reformed churches, he strains at


constant cry. Thus we see those who had authority and
infallibility, appealed to reason and the exercise of our judgment.
On the contrary, those who have neither the one nor the
other, demand implicit faith in their ipsi dixits. The promise
to the church was not infallibility, but perpetuity.
Dr. Wiseman repeats the words of our Lord, “ I am with
you always,” &c. Surely, says he, here is a guarantee for the
preservation and infallibility of the church to the end of time.
But the noble Doctor forgot that the promise was not to an
apostate church, that neither taught his commands, nor
obeyed his counsels. He forgot that the Church of Rome was
only a branch of the Catholic Church, having no existence at
the time these words were spoken. The Doctor and the
Council of Trent also must have been aware that when they
referred to this passage of our Lord for their infallibility, the
Romish Church had put to death many millions of God’s
saints; that she had caused the earth to groan with monster
Popes of iniquity; that she had introduced lying frauds called
miracles, with idolatrious worship ; that she sold the grace of
God in the shape of indulgences, changed the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord, brought in a new creed, and made
a secular warehouse of Christ’s kingdom: that her Popes
trampled upon the necks of kings, and rode rough shod over
the world; and yet with as much affected innocence, and as if
they were unconscious of all that had passed. They claim the
promise of the Lord’s presence just the same as if she had been
the spotless bride, the Lamb’s wife, the holy Catholic Church,
the minor differences of protestants and swallows a whole camel load of
absurdities and contradictions in Romanism. The very method he takes to
ascertain the truth is the very one that lands him into the middle of fraud
and delusion. Abandoning the use of his common sense and judgment, which
were given him that he might avoid imposition, he becomes a mere tool and
a dupe, and la ys down his intelligence in the place where he ought to exercise
it, viz,, in testing Popish doctrines. He forsakes the Word of the living God
and listens to poor erring mortals, whose passions, prejudices, worldly
philosophy, and self-righteousness, have always left them in spiritual darkness,
and, so far from infallibility being their attribute, they have need to be taught
the very first principles and elements of the Christian religion ; like blindmen
they stumble at noon day, and in the midst of Gospel-blaze are midnight
gropers.
Infallibility and divine authority reside alone in the Word of God, To
submit to the decisions of the church, so far as her teaching is in accordance
with that word, is the protestant rule; if there are some evils attending the
abuse of this rule, there are ten thousand times greater evils in connection
with the other, (that is, in blind submission,) for to it may be attributed all
the evils that afflict the Christian world—priestcraft, licentiousness, fraud,
superstition, infidelity, and revolution—whether it is better to obey God than
man judge ye, yea, let God oe true though all were liars.


the queen’s daughter all glorious within; instead of that of a
wolf in sheep’s clothing, and the great apostacy, as foretold so
repeatedly in the Word of God.
Infallibility is the most impudent claim ever put forth by
fallen humanity, and as if to make such a pretension the derision,
of the world, the Almighty has confounded its framers as he
did the Babel builders of old, with confusion and disruption, to
the present day ; for from its first promulgation it has been
nothing but a bone of contention, and a rod to whip themselves.
The place of its rest has never been decided, till the year 1870,
and then at the risk of outraging the common sense of all
Europe and splitting up the whole system into fragments.
According to Romish theologians, there have been four
classes of speculations about infallibility ; one said it resided in
the Pope alone, another that it was in a council, a third that it
resided in a council and Pope, and a fourth class say that
infallibility resides in the universal church. Here is a rule
with the very essential element, the basis of the whole,
unknown, for 1800 years; for not to know the seat of
infallibility was to throw all their decisions into chancery and
doubtful disputation; for that which passed for infallibility
with one class of bishops must have been of no authority with
another party, who denied that it existed in that form. This
throws the whole of Popery into jeopardy, and probably has
been the cause, as the least of two evils, at all risks, to proclaim
the maniac assumption.
Hitherto it appears that infallibility has been received as an
article of faith by all; but its seat has been regarded as an
opinion, the thing itself remaining in durance vile till a
definition : that is, I suppose, infallibility being the shadow,
and the place of its residence, being the substance, they have
managed to put up with the shadow for eighteen hundred
years, and left the substance until the immortal Pius IX.
hunts up the airy ghost to life and immortality. Is it anv
wonder that at the proclamation ot such a blasphemy the rain*
poured down floods, the lightnings flashed their fiercest flames,
and the thunder rattled about their ears, the foretokens of
coming wrath, and prevented the sounds of their voices and
cannons from rising higher than their heads ? Surely the
mercy of the Lord is infinite, or having other purposes to
accomplish, he has not taken instant vengeance on the
enormous lie proclaimed in the name of the God of truth. But
although not so sudden, yet not the less surely, has he marked
this consummation of wickedness, absurdity, and folly, for on the


very day that this assumption of omnipotence took place, on
that very day, if not in the same hour, the challenge of war
went forth, which has resulted in driving the Pope from his
usurped throne, and crushing the proudest stronghold of
Popery.
Surely if something of the kind did not occur we might
doubt whether God judgeth in the earth as in the armies of
heaven ; and if he did not arise to shake terribly the earth and
vindicate his cause and religion, we might think him just such
an one as ourselves.
Having now seen that infallibility originated in forming a
scheme to prevent enquiry into a false creed; that it has no
reality, and would be of no use unless all were infallible ; that
it has never fulfilled what it proposes; that it causes divisions
and strife amongst themselves, and is the cause of the separation
of other churches; also that it prevents reformation; that it was
not the rule of the ancient church; that it denies the right of
private judgment, and makes automata of believers : and also
that such a rule is not tangible; that it cannot be known; that
it depends upon fallible men called priests who acknowledge
themselves liable to err, and many of whom have been and
now are sceptics, I shall conclude by answering a few of the
principal objections to the Protestant rule, which, as the great
Chillingworth says, is the Bible and the Bible alone, for there
are such contradictions of Popes against Popes, councils
against councils, some fathers against other fathers, and the
same against themselves; a consent of fathers of one age
against that of another age; that in the midst of such a chaos
there is not the remotest rest for the sole of the feet. All cry
out infallibility is not in me; away with such pretensions, and
to the sure word of prophecy, the Word of God alone.
OBJECTIONS TO THE PROTESTANT RULE OF
FAITH ANSWERED.
The Church of Rome having committed herself to a rule of
faith that opposes the Bible, she makes use of every means
to lessen its authority, and destroy its influence. Thus she
says its general reading does more harm than good, that they
cause sects, that they are imperfect, and do not prove some
doctrines ; that they could not be a rule when people could not
read; that the Protestant Bible is a false translation, and a
thousand other objections, which have been all answered a
thousand times over, and which the Bible itself refutes. For


OBJECTIONS TO THE PROTESTANT RULE OE EAITH ANSWERED. 7 I
instance, can there he any thing more erroneous than the
meaning she puts on the text, viz., “That no scripture is
of any private interpretation, but holy men of old spake as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost”—2 Peter i. 20.
This text has no reference whatever to the general reading
of the Word of God, but is a simple statement, that as the
prophecies of old were inspired by holy men, none were to
interpret them as of their own origination or disclosure; but
as the inspiration of God. By isolating texts from the general
tenor of Scripture, may you not prove anything ? Romanists
harp upon this text, and that also of 2 Peter, where it is said
that the ignorant and unstable wrest them to their own
destruction, just as if there were not a hundred plain literal
and unmistakable commands throughout the Scriptures for all
men to read and know them. If St. Peter says there are
some parts hard to be understood, he by no means prohibits
their general reading, for otherwise he would not have
admonished the study of Scripture as a source of spiritual
growth and edification—l Peter, ii. 2. Neither would he be
silent on the necessity of an infallible standard of elucidation,
if such were necessary. If some of St. Paul’s writings are
mysterious, has Romish infallibility made them plain, or is
that a reason that the great bulk of the Apostles’ and our
Lord’s words are not easily understood ?
If the unlearned and unstable wrest the Scriptures, it is
because they do not read them as they command, that is,
with an humble heart, a wish to obey the truth, and with
dependence on the divine spirit, and, therefore, to have their
ignorance and instability removed, they should read the more,
for if any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God—See James
i. 5. Romanists confound the enlightening of the Holy Spirit,
the common privilege of all believers, with that of inspiration,
thus proving they neither know, nor have faith in Him.
No Christian church has so wrested the Scripture as the
Romish, who cry out so much against it. If all the differences
of the six denominations were put together, they would not
amount to one hundredth part of the mischief that the two
false dogmas of penance and purgatory have wrought in her.
And how is it that Papists wrest Scripture ? Just because
they come to the Bible full of prejudice, and big with the idea
of the Pope’s supremacy, infallibility, penance, purgatory,
the mass, and Saint worship, and not finding these doctrines
there, they say the Bible is a dangerous book, that it does
more harm than good, and is the cause of disorder and


disruption, and, no doubt, to all false and hypocritical systems
of religion and despotism they are dangerous, and will always
be so till renounced.
Protestant and Romish Unity.
The next objection is, that the reading of Scripture causes
sects, divisions, &c. Popery magnifies the evil of dissent in
order to entice the simple into her stagnant pool of corruption.
One would think, to hear her priests descant on this subject,
that nothing but shipwrecks, tempests, and desolation, was the
lot of all who sailed not in her rotten planks of unbelief just
as if there have not been sects in all ages; even in the
Apostles’ day the Gospel was preached from opposition, but
were they considered as enemies on that account; by no
means. There were some also who cast out devils who did not
unite themselves to the Lord, on whom the disciples wanted to
call down fire, but were rebuked by being told they knew not
what spirit they were of.
Take the six denominations of Christians, viz., the Episcopa-
lians, the Presbyterians, the Methodists, the Independents,
Baptists, and Quakers, with their different sections, and
examine their articles of belief, and you will find the greatest
harmony. If these articles are perverted and misrepresented
by some, it does not alter the principle of their one faith; none
but those who want to make controversial capital, and who put
faith in shadows, will make exception to this unity by reference
to Calvinian or Baptismal differences, for these subject*
interfere not with salvation. Churchmen and dissenters differ,
not because of a different faith, but because their faith has not
subdued them to the love of Christ and of each other. The
fact of being Episcopalian, or Dissenter, by no means unites to
Christ, the regenerate alone being his members. Their unity
is a unity of the spirit, which consists in allegiance to Christ
and oneness in holiness, truth, and love, —with this binding
cement they can afford to differ about nonessentials. It is
true there are some, who being unenlightened and narrow,
know not how to forget their Baptismal and Calvinian
distinctions, and some also who are unsound, and make a
crochet of their Episcopacy. But taking the church even in
this aspect, is it not a thousand times better to have freedom
of opinion and liberty of conscience, where truth at last is sure
to triumph, than a forced and silent acquiescence in a union
that allows pestilential error to grow and increase till a miasma
ames that envelopes and suffocates all in one common ruin ? T«


not tempest and storm better than putrescent quiescence, and
may there not be tranquillity in the depths whilst the surface is
ruffled ? The church of Christ is not bound up to any form or
ceremony or government or ritual of any kind; sects might work
well for the church if they forgot the spirit of sectarianism.
Without liberty in minor things, there may be agreement in
certain creeds, ceremonies, and forms, but it is only compulsory
concord, orthodox hypocrisy, an unnatural contortion, wanting
the true element of freedom in Christ, unity in the Spirit, and
love. There may be an outward agreement in every particular
in church matters, and yet nothing but rottenness, disaffection,
discord and irregularity of every kind exist within, and not
a particle of union with Christ, for like can only unite with
like; fraud and lies cannot afford to give liberty, for liberty
requires truth as its basis ; truth fears nothing, it is omnipotent,
it requires no inquisition, or fagot, or Jesuit, or sword of
•tate, or earthly patronage.
The union of the Church of Rome may be likened to men
•hut up in an iron cage, gagged, chained, and covered with a
cannon. The church is the cage, unenquiring submission
the gag, auricular confession and penance the chain, and the
Pope's bull the cannon. It is true, inside this cage there is
liberty enough in one way, that is, obey the church, and you
may sin as you like against God, but if in the remotest degree
you touch their figments, their ceremonies, and priestly
pretensions, immediately the gun bristles, and you become
obnoxious and a marked man.
Rome has no inward and spiritual union with Christ ;
therefore she magnifies her outward conformity in church
articles ; her visibility which is made up of the world, and of
which she so much boasts, is one of the strongest proofs
against her, for no unregenerate man can have fellowship with
Christ, or union with the Spirit, in which true Christian
unity consists, so that her unity, like her infallibility, is false,
unreal, slavish, and hypocritical.
Alleged Insufficiency of Scripture for Salvation.
This is the most extraordinary saying of that extraordinary
church, the Scriptures insufficient for salvation, that is, the
law, the prophets, the Psalms, the Epistles, the Acts, the
Revelations, and four Gospels, in the fulness of Jesus Christ
and his resurrection. No doubt Romanists find them
insufficient, but this is strong evidence that her religion is a
fabrication. It is usual to hear Roman Catholics ask (and


Dr. Wiseman has repeated the same question), “ How do you
know that there are not other commands of Christ contained
in Scriptures that are lost that may be as essential to believe as
those you have This is another proof of the blinding effect
of putting works for salvation, for it prevents her from
perceiving that the one act of faith in the atonement justifies
from all things, because apprehending the righteousness of
Christ, and therefore if there were no other Scripture but the
Old Testament and one Gospel, they would be amply sufficient
for salvation, as is proved by the case of Timothy and many
of the Jews. The Romish act of faith, viz., “ I believe
whatever the church believes,” leaves her to the mercy of every
whim and commandment of men, so that confounding the
faith that saves the soul with that of doing works, leaves her
without either faith or works acceptable to God. I could fill
three or four pages with Scripture texts to prove their fulness
for salvation. A few will suffice. St. Panl says: u All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction in righteousness. That
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good works.”. Again, Psalm ii., “ The law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure,
making wise the simple; the statutes of the Lord are right,
rejoicing the heart,” &c. Again (John), “Search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think ye have eternal life : and if they speak not
according to the law and the testimony, it is because there is
no light in them.” The apostle Paul says, “ Take unto you
the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God and in
Col. iii. 16, “ Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all
wisdom.” St. Peter says, “We have a more sure word of
prophecy whereunto you do well to take heed and, again,
“ Desire the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow
thereby.” The very instinct of a regenerated Christian leads
him to delight in the Word of God, and it is remarkable that
the Scriptures were not addressed to bishops or priests, but to
the people; thus St. James writes to the twelve tribes scattered
abroad. St. Peter, “To those who had obtained like precious
faith.” St John writes to the fathers, young men, and
children. They were commanded to be read by all the holy
brethren; even the most difficult book in the Bible, the
Revelations, a blessing is pronounced on its careful perusal.
If Christ is the great example and life of the world, are we
to walk in his footsteps without knowing the Bible, for he is
the way, the truth, and the life ? Again, how are we as
Christian soldiers to know how to handle our armour, or avoid


OBJECTIONS TO THE PROTESTANT RULE OF FAITH ANSAVERED. 75
the traps, gins, and pitfalls that beset our path, if we cannot
say with David, i{ Thy word is a lamp to my feet, and a light
to my path. ’ Or how are we to get light, comfort, and
direction for every day's trials, unless we study the Word of
God, for i( Blessed is the man whose delight is in the law of
the Lord, and in his law does he meditate day and night; he
shall be like a tree planted by the water side, and whatsoever
he doeth shall prosper—Psalm i. Lastly, how is a Christian to
pass through the valley of death, unless he lays hold to the
great and precious promises, which are yea and amen in Christ ?
If it be asked how are the thousands of ignorant people who
cannot read the Scriptures to know anything about them, I
answer, they can get them read in the same way as they
would that of a letter, a novel, or a newspaper. They can
learn to read, or they can hear the Gospel preached, or they
can ask of God, which St. James says, if they do in faith, they
shall be taught. The most ignorant man knows he is a sinner,
that he must repent and believe the Gospel, which, if he does
sincerely, he shall know what is necessary for salvation, foi it
is declared the wayfaring man, though a fool, shall not err
therein. Such is the simplicity of the Gospel that a little child
may understand and experience its saving power, for a father is
not more willing to give bread to a child than our heavenly
Father is to give his holy spirit to them that ask him. How
can it be said in fact that we are Christians at all, if we read
not the Scriptures, and yet it is asserted that they do more
harm than good. The Pope loves the Bible with a veneration
so profound, that he would lock it up as a I’elic only to be seen
and kissed on state occasions. But the heretical Bible Society,
whom he has denomiced, has put it out of his power. It is
said the Protestant Bible is false; this charge confutes itself,
for if the Protestant translation be false, the Douay must be
wrong also, for, as has been proved, both the English and
Douay translation agree in ninety-nine cases out of every
hundred, the difference being merely verbal.
But to return : It is evident the Scriptures are a perfect
rule of faith and morals lacking nothing ; that it is the duty
and privilege of all to know them, and for Avhich they shall
have to give account; and if men are imposed on by false
teachers they shall be left without excuse; for if the ordinance
of heaven, the sun, moon, and stars, were a book of divinity
to the heathen, which St. Paul declares (Rom. i.) left them
inexcusable, how much more does the written Word of God
imply that men should learn to read and understand it for
themselves: for as he has not sent down the natural bread of


this life from heaven, but left it to our own industry to prepare
it, so he has given this spiritual bread that, by the exercise of
our faculties, vve might obtain nourishment and salvation for
the soul. What the sun is to the natural world, the Scriptures
are to the moral world. Their light has rolled back the night
of heathenism and superstition from over Europe, confounded
the wisdom of this world, and, like an invulnerable fortress,
has withstood all the shafts ol hell, the false philosophies of
infidels, and the still more dangerous sophistries of false friends.
The Scriptures are high and low, broad and narrow, difficult
and easy, to suit universal humanity. They are high, that is,
incomprehensible, and sublime to indicate their divinity. They
are low, that is, plain for the general instruction of all. They
are broad, to give scope to the intellectual faculties. They are
narrow to separate the way of life from earthly traditions and
philosophies. They are difficult to the self-sufficient,
hypocritical, and prejudiced. They are easy to the docile,
humble, obedient, and sincere, for they shall know of the
doctrine whet her it be of God. In fine, the church that would
attempt to say as the Romish Church does say, that the
general circulation and reading of the Bible does more harm
than good, is a slanderer, a false witness, and an enemy to
God and man ; she is a stranger without any part in God’s
inheritance, and, like those of old, who left the Word of God
of none effect through their traditions, kept the key of
knowledge from the people, neither went to heaven themselves,
and prevented them that would, so do these wretched men.
In order now, to get a more practical view of Romanism, as
exhibited by Roman Catholics in Protestant countries, I shall
divide them into five classes, viz., the Sceptic, the Brinkedge
Schemers, the Treadmill Formalist, the Automaton Formalist,
and the Jesuit Sapper and Miner.
Ist. The Sceptic.
Ido not wonder at sceptics, both lay and clerical, being in
the Church of Rome, for there is no one of intelligence who
has read the history of Popery, and is acquainted with its
internal working, and has the moral courage to exercise his
own reason in comparing it with the Apostolic religion of the
New Testament, but must come to the conclusion that it is a
fabrication of man, gradually worked up and developed for the
thraldom of the world and glorification of priestcraft; for
whether you look at her grasp for political power, her despotic
sway over the conscience, her insatiable lust for wealth, and


her adaptation to the carnal mind. It must be evident that
whatever she may have been at one time, she has become what
St. Peter prophesied, men who lord it over God’s heritage, and
make merchandise of their souls—2 Peter. This will be more
evident when you look at the vast hold that confession gives
them over the mind, that superstition and ignorance leaves in
their power ; that wealth and state influences have enabled them
to command. When you look at her fraudulent death bed
truckling often at the expense of the orphan and widow, the
rich duke’s legacy, her masses, her purgatory, her indulgences,
and her ten thousand toys and relics, you may well stand
aghast in doubt, and say as the devil said to the sorcerer,
“ Paul I know, and Peter and John, but who are you V*
Again, look at her (not through Protestant representation,
but by her own friends and historians, &c.), and see her
forgeries, her corrupted litanies, her false quotations and
fraudulent dealings with the writings of the fathers, her
doctrines of persecution and penance, of transubstantiation and
infallibility. These latter two doctrines alone are enough
to make fools or infidels of any man with any claim to reason.
See again her hollow artificial and mechanical sanctity : the
devotion, self-denial, and zeal of her slaves, of whom she
makes her boast, and when you see men as representatives of
Christ, who have been murderers, idolaters, perjurers, and
everything abominable and unholy, I defy you, if bigotry and
the force of education have not totally warped your
understanding, but to come to the conclusion that either
Popery or the New Testament is a fraud, or that there is no
true religion at all. This is more particularly the case in
France and Popish countries, where the evangelical religion is
never seen examplified as amongst Protestants and Dissenters.
At the revolution in Paris nearly all the priesthood became
infidels, and subscribed to the goddess of reason.
There are many reasons why men of this character attach
themselves to Romanism, and hypocritically profess what they
do not believe a word of, independently of making a respectable
living, and carrying out other purposes. There is a wide field
for promotion to honor, rank, eminence, and fortune, if they
are men of talent and their ambition lies that way. There
are others also who enter that church sincere believers, who,
from having seen its interior workings have become sceptics,
but whose pecuniary means being exhausted, and having no
other resources, remain in her for life. Others again who have
been sincere Romanists, get convinced of their errors by the
reading of the Bible, or in their communication with


Protestants, but wanting the moral courage to make the
sacrifice that Christ demands—remain, hoping to do good
where they are till their preaching and principles are discovered,
and then they are obliged to leave. Such men were Luther,
Gavazzi, Father Chiniquy of Canada, who brought with him
six thousand of his people. There is but a step between
Romanism and infidelity, for the people being taught that
their salvation rests in the sacrament, if in asserting their
liberty, the Pope cuts them off from these ordinances, they
imagine there is no other way left, and so casting off all belief
in the system they become infidel. If the Pope gives liberty
it will recoil on his own head, and break the chains that bind
it; and if he will not give liberty, then revolution and
rationalism is the consequence, so that the Romish despotism
wears its own winding sheet.
There can be no doubt that had the Romish church fulfilled
her first mission, and retained the true faith, the greater part
of Europe, if not of the world, would have been converted to
Christ; instead of which, with few exceptions, a nominal
Christianity prevails, and the greater part of the world is
sceptical, or tending that way. On her rests the responsibility,
and for it she shall have to give account. There are thousands
of learned men amongst the laity who hold on to the
system because of their family associations who are perfect
sceptics.
The next class of Roman Catholics are the
Brink-edge Schemers.
This class of Roman Catholics compose the great bulk of
the Papacy. They manage to have as little to do with church
matters as possible. They so hang on to its outer edge
without entering into any of its offices or orders as will enable
them to come in at last for the church’s rites; that is, the
priest’s pardon, extreme unction, burial in consecrated ground,
and the benefit of a mass or two which the church throws in
sometimes gratis.
The Brink-edge schemers are composed of all sorts of
characters, from the most licentious to the most moral; like
nominal Protestants, they are thoroughly worldly, not having
any scruple to take unlawful advantage in business speculations,
nor the remotest qualms of conscience about attending
theatres, horse-races, circuses ; many are gamblers, drunkards,
swearers, adulterers, liars, &c. ; they are what the apostle says
sensual, having not the spirit; they are proud boasters,


covetous, slanderers, &c., wholly bent on making money,
fashion and pleasure ; they are of the world, and utterly opposed
to anything like evangelical godliness, and nothing gives them
greater pleasure than when they hear of a break down of any
of the professors of piety.
They go to confession once a year, receive a penance in
proportion to the enormity of their sin, which, if not committed
against the clergy, and only the ordinary failings of nature,
are let off with a round or two at the stations, a certain number
of Pater Eves, with other works of fasting, which, if too severe,
may be bought off by indulgence, or a dispensation from the
Pope, on condition of a right disposition and proper donation.
They generally attend mass once on Sunday, after which
they think they have a sort of licence to carouse or amuse
themselves as they like. In France they attend the theatre.
There are many that give alms, support the church by gifts,
and generally lay by a sufficiency for the payment of a mass
or two after death, which, with the Priest’s Pardon, the Holy
Eucharist, Extreme Unction, and the benefit of Purgatory,
they hope to make a good thing of it at last, and in spite of the
warnings of Christ, “ that what they sow they shall reap,”
they still hope to disappoint the devil of his prey, and hell of
its expectation.
Sometimes you will hear men of this class say, with an oath
in their mouth, that it is only from the lips, but that their
hearts are good, Others keep a bottle of holy water in cases
of emergency; and others again would not let their dogs eat
meat on a Good Friday. Some perform evolutions with a
lighted candle around their head when they lie down, making
the sign of the cross, &c. Different customs prevail according
to the superstition and education of the people in different
places.
There are others of the Brinkedge Schemers that take
serious fits of piety and devotion, especially after a heavy bout
of drinking, the death of a relative, some accident or warning
of providence, or perhaps they think by such a reformation ft
will be better for their worldly interest and save money. But
as these impressions and warnings wear off, and their old
habits get the victory over them, their temporary penitence
having no depth, they fall away and become worse than ever.
Notwithstanding this, though hopeless in themselves, they still
cling to the church, and as the priest undertakes to manage all
his eternal concerns of the soul, they have not the remotest
idea of their responsibility to God, and are as ignorant of the
promises and thrcateniugs of the Bible, as if there never was


such a book in existence. The idea of proving what they are
taught by God’s touchstone never enters their brain, or if it
should, their prejudices and church sophistry leave it of none
effect; their minds are so poisoned by priestcraft against truth
that you might as well give them a dose of medicine as a
tract, or good book of any kind. Offer them a novel, a
newspaper, or loose book, and perhaps they will accept of it
with thanks, but only mention the Bible and you at once throw
them into such a state of trepidation and irritation, they will
tell you Luther and Henry the Eighth are the authors of the
protestant religion, and that they alone are of the true faith.
Such is their ignorance and superstition, that the holiest and
best men, not in their profession, are regarded as heretics,
whilst they vainly suppose themselves of the Church of Christ.
Thus do they cling to the system because the papacy clings to
them, and thus it is the Popish religion answers them. They
can live after the flesh and still have a hope of gaining heaven,
and thus they defend it at all risks, and are ready for any
enterprise, either as a Pope’s body guard, a Canadian raid, a
political Irish row, an English crusade, the burning of Bibles,
a scuffle to prevent outside street preaching, or Fenianism in
all its.operations. They can sing a good comic or sentimental
song, dance an Irish jig or hornpipe, act the tragedian or
buffoon when called upon, and patronised by some of the holy
fathers, who make use of them to raise the wind.
The Treadmill Formalists.
These are a better class of Romanists than the former, more
moral and upright in their dealings, and pious in their ways.
They are Popish devotees, very superstitious and bigoted,
entirely under the priest’s thumb, in whom, it might be said,
they live and have their being. They are Tread mill Formalists,
because they are always going the same round of confession,
penance, and absolution, without any advance in true piety :
for the system of Popery yielding no spiritual power, they
are ever the same slaves to sin, to form, and ceremony. As
many however endeavour to live upright lives in justice,
sobriety, and truthfulness, and are diligent at the stations and
other duties, confessing perhaps once or twice a week, their
penances are of course very light, sometimes being let off with
a limited number of Ave Marias, making the sign of the cross
on the floor, or kissing some relic or something else. There is
not a corner of their heart nor household that is not known to
the priest, nor is there anything of importance done without


his counsel and advice : particularly if the parties are wealthy
and very old, or near death, there will you see the eagles
gathered together.
The Treadmill Formalists are so thoroughly priest ridden
that they believe every word he says, and if a Protestant
were to tell them that many of their Popes were monsters of
wickedness, they would not believe a word of it. Tell them
that their own historians relate the fact, and that Dr. Wiseman
acknowledges to twenty-three, they will tell you it is all
Protestant misrepresentation and lies. If you tell them that
the Pom is h church patronised and sustained the inquisition
for centuries, and the sale of indulgences by auction in the
public streets, pardoning sin for money, they will tell you you
are only caricaturing their church and defaming others to
excuse a licentious reformation. Such is their infatuated
credulity in priestly rule, that that which is patent to the
whole world is to them either unknown, disbelieved, or denied
altogether, or the fact so changed as not to appear the same.
This class of Romanists also put themselves under the patronage
of some saint, or of the virgin, and generally belong to some
of the orders. They wear the scapular inside and the cross
outside. They think it a great privilege to make holy garments
for the priests, and esteem a visit from their bishops a great
honour. Alter communication with Protestant heretics they
sprinkle themselves well with holy water, making the sign of
the cross; some perform a more extensive devotion in prayers,
&c., penances, retaining their beads for that purpose. They
are exceedingly diligent at the Easter fasts and Christmas
duties, and look up to the Virgin as their chief joy, protection,
and support. It is utterly vain to tell them that she is only a
creature, and as such cannot hear prayer, and if she could
would have no more influence than any one else. That earthly
relationships are not carried into heaven; that Christ stands
nearer to every believer than any creature ; that we are not
the members of the virgin, but of Christ’s body; that the word
is plain and decisive, which declares there is but one Mediator
between God and man, and not two or a thousand ; that it is a
reflection and dishonor on the love of Christ who shed his blood
for us to think he should need to be propitiated in behalf of
sinners to intercede with the Father. The whole is a trick
of Satan under the appearance of voluntary humility, to worship
the creature instead of the Creator, and thereby establish his
old dominion of idolatry in another form; but to return.
The Treadmill Formalist also devotes great portions of his
property to the church for masses, the building of convents,


and other purposes, and if they have sons, generally contrive-
to have one ordained to the priesthood, which they imagine
will be a great source of salvation to their own soul. They
have great zeal for the church, and compass sea and land to-
make a proselyte; they aim to instill their principles into the
young, and accomplish much by getting silly women to be
their dupes; they pick up many stragglers by their kind
deeds ; many are exceedingly moral, kind, and charitable.
This class ol Romanists also believe in the legends of the
Saints, in all the old impositions called miracles, such as the
liquifaction of St. Jananu’s blood, which Dr. Wiseman
patronizes, and a thousand other pieces of foolery, which the
priests themselves laugh at, and think them very good to
promote devotion; but they forget that however fraud and lies
may do to build up Popery, it does not do to build up truth.
Some also of this class live in the constant practice of their
constitutional sins of coveteousness, vanity, drunkenness. Just,,
and pleasure, who give up struggling against it and take
advantage of the remedy which the system affords. Thus you
will often see the greatest sinner the greatest saint and devotee,
their carnal indulgences counterbalanced by their zeal for the
church, their penances and good works, the sacraments and
priestly efficacy coming to their aid, and purgatory finishing
up the work which the others leave incomplete. Thus, under
the appearance of much that is exemplary and pious, you will
see two streams, one of saltwater and the other of fresh,
proceeding from the same fountain—a sort of Queen Isabel
religion, consisting of breviary’s and bastards, sensuality and
sanctity, gifts, prayers, and penances, and the love of the world
and its forbidden fruits—or like the other Pope’s favourite, the
farcical Eugene, who was foremost in fashion and frolic, and
led the van to the sick man’s chamber, courageous for God and
the devil, great patroness of lighted lamps and looseness,
devotion to the Virgin and bull baiting, benevolence and
bigotry.
The Treadmill Formalist being extremely ignorant of
Scripture,are proportionally superstitious. They axealways quite
sure that something destructive will happen to all whom the
Pope or the priest curses, that say or do anything against
what they call the church. They have as many cock and bull
stories about this subject as would choke an elephant. The
English nation was to be sunk long ago, but still she swims
and prospers gloriously. They also profess to be very liberal,
but like the Paperwall Protestants their liberality hangs on
hinges ; they throw a sprat to catch a salmon. So long as they


can get Protestants to sell their birthright for a mass of
pottage, they will be liberal, but let them stand to their arms,
and their liberality will vanish into thin air.
They are also quite sure that the present crisis of their Pope
is only temporary, and that he will again rise and regain his
temporalities, and reign triumphant. Thus like the Jews they
cannot see the hand of God upon them in the dissolution of
their whole system, but like desperate men they stick to the old
rotten fabric while a plank holds together.
There are many respectable and educated Romanists, who
being better acquainted with the under current of Popery and
■priest’s lives, and have seen and heard of their confessional
dealings, have had their eyes opened, and do not recognise
them as the immaculates that other dupes imagine. These,
therefore, carry a more independent bearing, and sometimes
resist their tyrannical and fraudulent practices. In Rome,
France, Spain, Italy, they have cast off their political
oppressions, and many have been driven into infidelity. But
so long as the spiritual power is acknowledge, the Pope can
keep them on his hookline waiting his opportunity, and then
he will draw it in and let them know what infallibility,
spiritual power, and the vicar of Christ mean.
The Automaton Formalists.
These are composed of various orders of Monks, Nuns,
Sisters of Charity, &c. The white-veiled nun serve as novitiates
for twelvemonths before they take the black, the one being
intended as a sort of preparation for the other. Of all the
Pope’s slaves these are the most pitiable and abject. They
are supposed to abandon their own will to act, think, and
speak by permission of their superior, holding no communication
with the outer world, but that of their confessor. They toil
on from day to day in one continual round of sanctimonious
performances, in the repetition of prayers, litanies, confessions,
penances, meditation, and works of charity, in the superstitous
adoration of relics, of saints, and of their clergy. They are
not allowed to exercise their judgment, reason, or common
sense, but make an unconditional surrender of themselves,
body and soul, to their church, the bishop of which can tighten
or slacken the reins of discipline through the abbess, who is
generally the most accomplished and refined adept in cunning,
duplicity, and hypocrisy.
Under such circumstances, does not all intelligence cease,
and would not a parrot, or a machine, be made to offer as good


a service to the Lord. Walking automata they truly are, and
servants of men under the mistaken idea of serving God. As
the whole system is based on the profitableness and meritorious-
ness of suffering, a spirit of hardened insensibility to pain is
cultivated, and I suppose in no place will you receive less
kindness and sympathy in affliction or sorrow than you will
inside these unnatural associations, especially if a sister in any
way becomes obnoxious to her superior. Imagining the more
they suffer the higher will be their reward, they become
callous to their own and each others trials, and often inflict
upon themselves aggravated torments, and even rejoice at a
near approach to their final decease. Thus their constitution
soon give way, lingering out a miserable existence.
Many are the noble and heroic creatures who enter these
abodes of dismal delusion; they are completely ignorant of the
world, and of the system itself, as they are of their own
hearts. Tuey meet with disappointment in life, their affections
blighted, or having naturally a devotional turn, or being
spiritually ambitious to shine as a saint, or excel in self
righteous, which Popery promotes as congenial to the natural
man. They make up their mind to become the slaves of men
instead of the freemen of Christ, toiling on debilitated in body,
depressed in mind, till premature death seals their fate, and
many die the brides of despair. For that which they imagined
to be the precincts of heaven have turned out to be a very
literal rendezvous of flesh and blood. The same devil and five
senses that lived outside lived inside also; bickerings, envyings,
jealousies, pride, and lust reign, and when it is too late
discover that they have given £SOO too much for their religious
whistle.
I do not speak of the darker aspect of the cloister, and show
what villainies have been and may be perpetrated in such
places; the proof of which is their expulsion and destruction
by Romanists themselves in Romish countries, nor how much
greater temptations there is to those who make vows of
poverty, chastity, and obedience, shut up from the eye of the
world, and exposed to men who have the utmost security to
act as they like without restraint, as history has a thousand
times shown how easy it is to educate those who renounce their
sense and reason to anything they may think proper, and that
under the idea of religion. But looking at it in its best aspect,
its self-sacrificing devotedness, its pure but mistaken surrender
of everything gratiflying and lawful on earth. How much
more good could they do, and how much safer would it be were
these three principles carried out to Christ instead of to man.


OBJECTIONS TO THE PROTESTANT RULE OF FAITH ANSWERED, 85
poverty, obedience, and virginity if you will. The idea of
being more holy in seclusion is a total fallacy, for the world
and Satan, the passions and senses cannot be locked out by
bolts and bars ; there is but one way of subduing them, that
io the blood of Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost. The
holiest man and woman that this world has ever seen, lived
and acted among their fellow men, performing all the duties of
life.
I will, says the Apostle, that the women marry, &c. The
fact is it is all a fascination. The piety of such persons is a
fictitious artificial mechanism, consisting of works of merit,
which puff up with an imaginary holiness, whilst the
true and genuine love of God and man by the Holy Spirit
is not known. The basis of the whole is false, for these
works and penances, done with so much self-denial and
devotion, are either done from a principle of merit, or
they are not. If from the former, that is, the expectation
of gaining heaven, then are you guilty of the Galatian
error, and Christ profits you not. If on the contrary,
Christ is alone b}' faith your salvation, then your works
of faijfch and labour of love will be the effect of gratitude,
and not done from the mercenary spirit of barter. Herein lies
the fundamental error of the Papacy, as I have already shown ;
works of supererogation therefore as taught by the Council of
Trent is an utter blasphemy against grace, and so are all
religious performances done in self-righteousness. Christ’s
followers were to be the lights of the world, the salt of the
earth, a city on a hill: a spurious faint-hearted, cowardly faith
flies from the world, but the true soldier of Christ with bis
helmet of salvation, sword of the spirit and breastplate of
righteousness meets his foes, braves danger, confronts the
adversary, does not consider his life dear unto him so long as
he can benefit his fellows and glorify God. O what scandal
and deeds of darkness done within those grated doors, iron
bars, and stone walls, would this plan of our Lord have
prevented, and how intensely ridiculous to allow men under
such pretences of piety to shut out and defy all law, inspection
or control under such appearances; for there is nothing more
certain than that there are deeds done in these places that
would not bear the light, or otherwise the light and the law
would be invited instead of rejected, for there is nothing in the
religion of Christ but what is light, and it is because men love
darkness rather than light that their deeds are evil. What
are such places but ecclesiastical prison houses, where the
religious element in inexperienced girls is taken advantage of.


8(5 OBJECTIONS TO THE PROTESTANT RULE OF FAITH ANSWERED,
and made subservient to priestly power, priestly pelf, and
priestly lust !
THE JESUIT FORMALISTS, OR FORK’S SAPPERS AND MINERS.
The Jesuit Formalists are the Pope’s sappers and miners,
who devote themselves body and soul to the interests of their
church, under vows and oaths of the most awful character.
Having a dispensation from his Holiness, they have liberty to
dispense with certain duties and forms, according as
circumstances may require; indulgences and privileges are
bestowed upon them according to the nature of the work they
have to perform. There was a time when these wretches
considered no villauy too great to perpetrate for the good of
the church; one of their rules being that it is perfectly lawful
to do evil that good may come; that the end sanctifies the
means; but now they are more cautious, well knowing that
such deeds do them more harm than good ; a different discipline
obtains, carried out more privately, and varied according to the
country and people with whom they are mixed up.
In one sense the bishops and priests are Jesuits, but there
are also certain orders set apart for certain work, some of whom
are political plotters, religious casuists, and legacy hunters, by
which the Pope can pull the string and work his oracle to the
undermining of the state, the perverting and overturning of
the Protestant religion, and accumulation of wealth.
Such is their cleverness and ingenuity that there is scarcely
a position in church or state, the army, the navy, public
schools, newspaper offices, colleges, noblemen’s families, and
even royalty itself, that these indefatigable plotters have not
access to; even private families are not exempt, servants being
trained for the purpose of revealing the secrets of the household.
Like so many rats they burrow in the dark, and by the aid of
confession gain all the secrets of the family, the city, and
nation. They adopt all measures, and assume all garbs; the
education of youth is their grand object, not that they may
instruct, but that they may strangle by craft what they cannot
crush by force; attacking knowledge, as Dr. Wiley says,
under the pretence of diffusing it, they enact the schoolmaster,
and by the aid of the pulpit, the press, and the confessional
they accomplish their purposes.
The Sapper and Miner Jesuits are the most dangerous set
of locusts that ever corrupted this world with their infamous
prevarications. Having been turned out of every country on
the continent of Europe, they have established themselves in


England, America, and the colonies, and are now playing such
a game that if revolution or Popery does not prevail, it will
not be their fault.
They have made Popish theology a complicated web of
sophistry full of divisions and subdivisions of scholastic
quibbles, insomuch that they can extricate themselves from the
plainest commands of the Bible. If they make one good law,
they have made twenty to evade it. What was said by Daniel
O'Connell in reference to the British constitution, may with
equal truth be said of Jesuits in respect to Bomish theology,
viz., “ They can drive a coach and four through it.”
There are two sorts of casuists, strict and lax, by which they
can accommodate themselves to all classes. If they are
charged with loose maxims they can refer to their austere
directors for their strict laws, and by their manoeuvering in
reference to circumstances, mental reservations, and other
evasions, quibbles, and subterfuges, they can pervert
Scripture, accommodate themselves to the heathen, and gratify
the strictest pharisee, or the loosest liver.
They also adapt their theology to the amount of Protestant
light that surrounds them ; the doctrine of justification has
been changed three times—see Elliott’s Delineation of Popery.
At one time penances were fashionable, flagellation, hair cloths,
pillar standing, &c., but now by the aid of indulgences they
can be softened down, or got rid of altogether. Sometimes
they will direct the dying sinner to look alone to Christ,
irrespective of sacraments or pardons; and at other times they
will deny their doctrine of merit, thus contradicting themselves
and their councils.
Popish Jesuits were the miscreants who first invented the
inquisition, by which, for hundreds of years, thousands were
tortured and put to death. Had they nothing but truth to
propagate, force, fear, and fraud had not been their weapons. It
is not surprising that Bomanists of the present day wish all
their past history annihilated, but history that is written in
blood shall never be forgotten. The Lord has set a mark upon
all such deeds of darkness, the slaughtering of his saints, as
he did upon Cain, and from the first martyr to the last shall
they from his holy heaven cry, “ How long, 0 Lord, just and
true, shalt thou not avenge the blood of thy saints ?”
The Lamb’s wife nourished, supported, and defended by an
inquisition with fourteen different methods of torture; by
Jesuit spies, who betray their friends and each other; the
head of the church, the head gaoler, holding in his hand
indulgences and thumbscrews, rosaries and halters, beads and


bayonets, bulls and blessings, cameos and curses. How do
St. Paul’s words accord with these proceedings, u Thou that
doest evil that good may come —whose damnation is just”—
Bom. ii. “ Love your enemies, render to no man evil for evil,
do good unto all men,” for God sent not his Son into the
world to condemn it, but to save it.
These things might have remained in oblivion if the same
statutes were not in existence still, and openly and daringly
avowed by some; there is also the same intolerant bigotry,
superstition, and false zeal existing, only requiring to be
roused into action with an opportunity that gives impunity.
The wolf is a wolf still, though covered with the garments of
a lamb.
It is true that Protestants have persecuted also, but where
did they learn the lesson, how long did they continue it, and
to what extent? Protestant persecution was the effect of a
reaction, the excitement of a moment. It is not their principle
to persecute. They have no statutes for that end, nor have
they ever patronized an inquisition. It is calculated that,
including the Waldenses and Albigenses, the Huguenots, the
Inquisition, and the Sraithfield Martyrs, not less than fifty
millions have been slaughtered for their faith, for obeying the
dictates of the Bible, their conscience, and their God. Ido
not state these things to hurt your feelings, but to show that
a church that has such an account standing against her cannot
be the church of Christ, and therefore to take warning and
come out of her lest you be partaker of her spirit, her evil
deeds, and her punishment. To shuffle off these atrocities on
the civil power is like all her other shifts and evasions; for
who were the civil power but the creatures of the Pope, who
would themselves have been sacrificed had they not obeyed
him.
The fathers and the church are everything with a Jesuit, as
they are with all Papists. By this they can find precedents
for all their superstitions and hide themselves from the
commandments of God. The Popish Church is the Papist’s
idol, because it comes between him and Christ and his Holy
Word, accommodates his carnal nature, and gives liberty to
every reprobate who acknowledges the Pope, the Virgin, and
the church, to become one with it. Thus they think no
sacrifice too great, and that fraud and lies, persecution and
slander, have been their weapons in all ages for its promotion.
The whole system being based on falsehood must therefore
be defended by force or sophistry. Thus it is that Jesuits are
So necessary to the system and have never been destroyed.


Pius the Seventh has restored them to power, and now they
have possession of the Papal chair. Their present policy is to
secure the support of governments and nations that have any
Popish population, on behalf of the Pope, and to pervert the
aristocracy and youth of our land.
A few specimens of their theological thimblerigging and
refined art of lying may not be amiss :
“ One may commit an evil deed if he have thereby no intention of sinning,
but wishes rather to attain some allowable end.”
“It is sinful to read a forbidden book, but not so to read the individual
leaves, for they are not a book.”
“ He who merely swears with words without the intention of swearing, is
not bound to keep the oath, for he has only been playing with the oath.”
“ A small theft is not a mortal sin, nor are several of them, if a proper time
exists between them, say two months,”
The limited nature of this work will not permit me, or I
could show scores of worse cases of perversion and hypocrisy
than these. But an idea may be formed of the state of* morals
where these gentry are the counsellors and confessors in a
nation, not that their object is to corrupt, bat to gain such an
influence over the people as will enable them to carry out the
Pope’s design.
CONCLUDING ADDRESS TO ROMAN CATHOLICS.
Taking now a view of Romanism, and the principle laid
down at the commencement, viz., that true holiness and a
righteous life can only be maintained on evangelical and true
doctrines, it is most evident that a perverted Gospel will
produce corresponding fruit, and leave the soul naked, helpless
and depraved ; tor taking even the best and most pious portion
of the Romish church, is not their devotion distorted, their
morality dilapidated, their worship idolatrous, their faith
spurious and superstitious, their hope doubtful and dark, full
of slavish fear, their whole spirit narrow, bigoted, intolerant,
ignorant, and unenlightened by the Holy Ghost ? These
are only the minority. As to the great body of Roman
Catholics, they have no religion at all; they may have
certain feelings and notions in their head about the Romish
church and its sacraments, but as for having union with
Christ, purity of heart, walking with God, and doing all
things to his glory, regeneration by the Holy Spirit, they have
not the remotest notion, nor of the Scriptures that declare that
11 without holiness no man shall see the Lord.”
Popery, as a system, is the most stupendous effort of Satanic
wisdom this world or probably any other has ever beheld, for


it is so constructed as not only to deceive the nations, but to
deceive themselves, its propagators, carrying out the most
complete spiritual despotism, under appearances the most
sanctified, made complete by the sophistry of ages. She can
accommodate all tastes, suit every fancy, and gratify every
whim. Having attractions for all, she suits the wealthy,
because all her great doctrines, her masses, penances, purgatory,
&c., all hinge upon money. She suits the careless, because
they can throw off their responsibility on the priest's back, and
think to make it right at last. She suits the anxious and sin
burthened, because her penances and pardons give false peace
and blind security; the fleshly, carnal, and earthly-minded like
her because of her outward appeal to the senses; the learned
and intellectual are hoodwinked by her metaphysical ingenuity,
worldly philosophy and outward appearance of order,submission
and infallibility. The wicked and licentious cling to her ia
hope of a pardon and a purgatory, and the superstitious devotee
and self-righteous love her because she gratifies their spiritual
vanity and the independent spirit of the natural man, who
would gain heaven by merit. The sincere take refuge in her'
because she can daub with a false peace, and the hypocrite
loves her shades because he can learn lessons of Jesuitry, and
have his conscience guarded against the Bible; the poor help
to swell her political importance; the poet, the architect, the
musician, the sculptor, the painter, are all entertained and
gratified. Thus she gives hope and promise to all to the most
unlimited extent. Her power at one time has been appalling,
and her dominion all but universal; her decorations enchanting,
her music superb, her embroidery gorgeous, her painting
splendid, everything calculated to attract, to dazzle, and affect
the senses. Thus under this sublime cloak of hypocrisy the
religion of Christ and of the Holy Spirit is buried; the
dispensation of the Holy Ghost becomes one of form,ceremony,
childish emblems, and dumb figures. The outward man is
entertained with the fine arts and the inner man with
unsubstantial shadows,blasphemies,sacraments,and pantomimic
priestism, ending in spiritual death, bondage, and sin. The
ancient superstition and idolatries of heathendom set up under
another and more subtilised form with Jewish rites and Pagan
ceremonies. The priests work their oracle under the covering
of what they call Christianity, but beneath it all there reigns
stagnation, putrifaction, corruption, and death, for in her will
be found by Him with whom there is only one eternal now—
arrogance, blasphemy, oppression, and fraud, perversion, the
orphan’s cry, the widow’s curse, the martyr’s groan, the


blighted hope, heartless selfishness, peurile sanctity, abject
slavery, creature worship. In her will he found a neglected
and contemned Bible, works of supererogation, sale of
indulgences, the merit of works, spurious pardons, blasphemies,
penances, and the blinding dust of infallibility, inquisition,
Jesuitical spies, doctors of sophistry and sensuality. In a word,
you will find in the remarkable words of the Holy Scriptures,
“The mystery of iniquity : the mother of all abominations I”
In conclusion, now, my dear friends, at the risk of grieving
your most sacred feelings and disturbing your most cherished
prejudices, I have dealt with you with a freedom that, had it
been exercised in other times and places would have made a
bonfire of me as it has done of thousands. But is it because
I love you not ? the Lord knoweih. I take him to witness
that if it were not for the principle wrought in my heart, the
necessity of which has been advocated in this work, I would
not care a rush for you, nor your spiritual interests, nor yet for
my own, much less run the risk of your ire, as well as the
pjrobable eontempt of my Protestant brethren. I declare to
you it is with great reluctance and searching of heart that I
bring out this pamphlet, the language of the prophet of old
being very similar to my own in this respect, viz., <l Send
whom thou wilt, but send not me/' for I feel my unfitness for
such a work as this, and were I not assured that benevolence
is its foundation, I should not attempt it; for the Lord’s
thoughts are not as our thoughts, and that if he be for us none
can be against us. I have been, therefore, as the clay in the
potter’s hand, and have endeavored to say, through honor or
dishonor, life or death, “ Thy will be done.” This being the
case, perhaps you will think I have taken an extraordinary
way of manifesting my kindness; know ye not that to put a
healing balsam over a broken leg would be worse than foolish,
and that the most earnest denunciation and strongest language
against old established error, deception, fraud, and delusion is
the truest charity and divinest form of Christian sympathy and
earnest love.
I therefore implore you to examine your principles ; do you
not see that to be forbidden to do so ought of itself to cause
your utmost suspicion, that all is not right; would you act
so in an earthly transaction ? O you are sure your priests
would not deceive yon. But what if they are deceived
themselves. Thousands of them have acknowledged that they
have been. If the Scriptures (without the sophistry of your
doctors) spoke your religion you would have never been told it
is a dangerous book ; upon what authority do you assert you


are right? Why, upon that of man, but the Word of God is
above all human authority; it is the touchstone, the infallible
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; it is the
foundation and rock upon which Protestants build, and the
floods shall not prevail against it, for if any man speak not
according to this law and testimony, it is because there is no
light in him.
I beseech you, therefore, to seek God through his word
by his Holy Spirit, exercising repentance towards God and
faith in Jesus Christ, and thou shalt not as with a priest’s
pardon be sent empty away, casting your confessions, penances,
spurious pardons, sacraments, purgatory, and merit of works,
behind your back, not only throw off the temporal power of the
Pope, but what is of more importance his spiritual despotism
and usurpation, and become the servants of Jesus Christ rise,
great, glorious, and free, the world under your feet, and heaven
in jour eye. May the Lord bless you, and give you ears to
heal, and eyes to see. Amen.
THE CONCLUSION—THE POPISH SHIP.
The Popish Ship is a phantom of outward magnificence,
with a cargo full of wood, hay, and stubble. She is composed
of Jewish, Christian, and Pagan figments, with very much
brass. Having made shipwreck of faith and a good conscience,
she has neither captain, pilot, compass, chart, or helm. Her
foundation is in the dust; she is built on man, Peter at the
bottom and the Pope at the top, cuts her off from the spiritual
headship of Christ; she can only sail for earthly glory ; but the
Lord being the temporal, spiritual, and eternal head of his
church, is the true captain and pilot, who alone is able to
guide her through the stormy billows of this world to the
haven of bis repose. Your compass, the Holy Ghost, is gone,
for you have sacrilegiously bartered him away for priestly and
sacramental jugglery, the compass of the church of Christ
guides into all truth, and sails direct for God’s glory and the
good of men, but you sail for spiritual oppression and political
power. Your chart, the Word of God, is mystified, the ancient
way marks are obliterated, the old paths are interspersed, the
whirlpool and sunken rocks of spiritual pride, lust, ambition,
and priestcraft are covered over; piratical incendiaries, with
hypocritical veneration for the Scriptures, have twisted them
by their crucked sophistry to their own purposes, and tradition
like a nose of wax enables them to sail in every direction but
the right one. Your helm of faith and anchor of hope are


lost, your baptismal salvation by proxy, by works, alms,
sufferings, and merit, and your virgin and saint worship have
unshipped your spiritual rudder. This being the case, your
anchor of a true hope, sinks into doubt and darkness, a
fictitious purgatory will disappoint your expectations. Having
no helm, you are left to the mercy of the waves ; every fresh
flow of the Word of God drives you farther on to the rocks of
your own bigotry and tremendous stupidity; storms, tempests,
and commotions; the rebound of Austrian, Spanish, and
Italian oppression are surrounding you. The price offered by
the devil to our Lord lor his allegiance is taken away. The
glory, renown, and worship of this world is about to leave Pius,
and his enthronements to end in the smoke of their powder.
The patrimony of kept afloat so long by donations and
french bayonets is sinking in the waves, her crew is in mutiny,
one more desperate push is made for safety, infallability is pro-
claimed, the reverbration of which shakes the earth and opens
the gates of hell, waiting till a few more acts of such consum-
mate folly and presumption shall cause them to close on her for
ever, when she shall go down amidst the war of her own
elements, the wreck of her hopes, and the crash of one of the
greatest apostacies that ever darkened the earth in the name of
the true religion.
CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
No candid man will object to look at both sides of a question,
for if the principles of the English Church are according to
righteousness, the more they are tested, the brighter they will
shine, and if they are not, the sooner we get rid of them the
better. Hitherto the cry has been very much on one side, as
if the Protestant Church were the very acme of perfection, and
sin and error all lay on the Popish side, but as the old proverb
says, “ let justice be done though the heavens fall.”
I do not intend to explore the dark regions of the past
history of the English Church, its fraudulent truckling with
the state, its siraouical barterings, its immoral and fox-hunting
parsons, its pompous ten thousand a year bishops, its tythe
system, star chamber, &c. Neither would I be insensible to
the good she has accomplished. Many glorious institutions
have risen up under her patronage, many great and noble souls,
highly learned and intellectual men, have defended Christianity
against the infidelity and heresies of the day ; and at present
there are hundreds of as good and devoted Christians in her as
nver blessed the world with a good example. Notwithstanding


this, it must be acknowledged that there have been, and now
are, as grave evils in her, both doctrinally and practically, as
that she may with very much propriety be called the Pope’s
eldest daughter, having the same lineaments of earthly pomp,
formalism, secularism, and infidelity, that characterizes her
mother of Rome, with this distinction, viz., in the Popish
Church there is no redeeming element; she is shut up in
corruption and apostacy; but in reference to the English Church
there is liberty of conscience, an open bible, free inquiry, a
scriptural creed, the grand doctrine of justification by faith;
and a good many evangelical ministers, as the salt of the lump.
The reformers, though sincere and good men, as a whole,
were still imperfect, and although the reformation threw off the
nightmare of superstition, ignorance, and despotism, and
opened a door for general intelligence, light, literature, &c.
Yet have they left such elements of corruption as greatly to
nullify their own work, and to leave the English Church more
a bulwark for the form than the power of the Christian religion,
more a political engine to work out a right understanding of
certain great principles, the laws of toleration and religious
freedom, &c. Then as a spiritual witness for Christ, which end
having been accomplished, it is probable her mission as a State
Church will soon cease. This, be as it may, there are five
sources of corruption in her which, unless a miracle intervene,
will speedily end in disruption, dissolution, popery, and infidelity.
These elements are, first, her connexion with the state; second,
her want of a proper standard of authority; third, the doctrines
of apostolical succession, baptismal regeneration, and sacri-
mental efficacy. These doctrines contain the very essence of
popery, and are the source of priestly domination, hirelingism,
formality, and delusion, and are without any real foundation in
the Word of God, or the Church of the three first Centuries.
In reference to her connexion with the state, there is
no man of any spiritual enlightenment, and who is not blinded
by self interest and prejudice, but must know that the spiritual
kingdom of Christ can have no union with that of this world.
That such a connection from Constantine to the present day
was always disastrous to her real prosperity, and ruinous to
her spiritual life—when you can unite Juggernaut and Jesus,
light and darkness, corruption and holiness, loyalty and
treachery, then may you link together the gospel and the state—•
such a union is putting the ark of Christ into the hands of the
Philistine and making Beliol head-coachman to the Gospel
chariot. It is placing a chaste virgin under the protection of
a procuress; the house of God under the' management of


traitors. If one enemy within the camp be more dangerous
than ten outside, what must be the result when there are ten
enemies to one friend in the camp of Zion. State patronage I
To open her purse to both enemies and friends endowing all alike,
is to confound all sense of truth or falsehood, right or wrong.
What a paternal nurse to suckle—the fox and the dog, the
hyena and adder, all at the same breast. Here is a millennium
for you, where the wolf and the lamb, the little child and the
cockatrice, lie down together and partake the wine of her
fornication. Here is a bulwark that supplies munitions of war
for the destruction of herself and the mutual destruction of all
who put a hand in her treasury; that gives bones and sinews
to an apostacy that will never cease till she utterly destroy the
Protestant constitution—down with a church that kisses
Christ and stabs him at the same moment. It was not the
sword of state, nor mammon of unrighteousness, that gave the
victory to the Church of Christ, and caused her to triumph
when the world, the sword, and the fire were against her in
their most terrible form. Talk of the danger of such a
seperation, the danger is altogether in their union.
There are three evil spirits that ever accompany a state
church and hastens its downfall, and these three are formality
secularism, and rationalism. Nor would the warning of a
Noah, a Daniel, or a Moses, prevent it, for as these men were
considered alarmists in their day, so they would be in our day.
The first of these spirits is formalism, inasmuch as it rests
short of a supernatural change of heart, and puts baptism,
morality, and good works in the place of spiritual regeneration*
leads direct to Pome, for Romanism is nothing but formalism
intensified. Secularism, the second unclean spirit, is the most
deady enemy, which so keeps the mind in the grasp of pounds,
shillings, and pence amidst the whirl of earthly engagements
as leaves neither room nor disposition for the attainment of
Scriptural knowledge, or an ability to give a reason of the
hope that is within us, and as a consequence leaves the soul
the easy prey of the Jesuit and sceptic. The third spirit is
that of rationalism, which looks upon the creeds of all nations
with alike indifference, presuming there may be something
good in all, if only left to reason to improve on. Thus we
see foimalism unites with Popery, secularism prepares the way
for it, and rationalism, which puts human wisdom above revela-
tion, unites in the same spirit of self-righteousness and infidelity.
Now these three spirits, as they exist in church and state, all
work together in a policy called liberal, which, with the great
mass of the people, passes for enlightened wisdom, and which in


reality is nothing more than a false generosity and betrayal of
rights, which the Jesuits knows well how to take advantage
of, so that under this spirit they can endow Popish colleges,
provide army and navy chaplains, or permit and encourage
monasteries and nunneries, and allow the House of Commons
to be swayed by a handful of Papists, and the approach to the
throne itself made easier. We can see the nobility and clergy
embracing her delusions, and all bent on lending a hand to the
beast; so that under this policy it is no wonder that the
Church of England has been likened to Sampson amongst the
Philistines, or more properly, fallen amongst thieves, for I da
not think she has ever been a spiritual Sampson, however
similar her circumstances may be to that champion figuratively.
As for instance, the Philistine Jesuites are crippling her
political power, so that she cannot do what she ought. The
Puseyite renegades are binding her with the sophistical cords
of ritualism—unconscious and asleep she lies in the arms of her
state Delilah; she has lost the eyes of her faith in the
providence, of God, and her spiritual strength is all but nil ;
so that she is at this moment the derision and sport of her
enemies. But the time is not far hence, in my opinion, when
the Almighty will give the true spiritual Sampson (his united
church) power to pull down the two pillars of state patronage
and endowments, out of the ruins of which shall arise, Phoenix
like, the true spiritual united and evangelical church of all
sects and parties, shining forth bright as the sun, and terrible
as an army with banners, free from hypocrisy and fraud,
priestly domination, hirelingism, and infidelity, when true
pietry shall establish true loyalty, so that if the t’ope were to
attempt for a moment to place his old smutty blood red Hag in
the place of the Union Jack of old England, there is not a
height nor a depth, a length nor extent, but would raise a
voice like that of many waters upon a sea of glass, crying
“ Allelujah ! the Lord reigneth,” “ God save our Queen, long
may she reign over us, happy and glorious, God save the
Queen/’*
WANT OF DISCIPLINE
The next source of weakness in the established church is her
want of an authoritative standard for the expulsion of heresy
* Although there are parts of this address that only apply to the Anglican
Establishment in the Colonies, yet, as a whole, it may be received as having


and immoral conduct. As to what amount of synodical action
they can bring to bear upon disaffected and false brethren in
the colonies, I am not prepared to enter upon, but it is to be
feared if there is any such power, that it is too often exercised
for the benefit of the disaffected at the expense and disease of
the flock of Christ. This is a sad state of things enough, but
it is not worse than at home, where, out of eighteen hundred
clergymen of the English Chnrch only three hundred are con-
sidered to be evangelical and sound in the faith. From the
scepticism of Doctor Colenso to the popery of Pusey, they all
maintain a footing in the establishment, and cannot be dis-
lodged.
The attempt to restrain the outward ritualistic exhibitions
by force of law, shows a want of ability to put them out
altogether as the most dangerous pests, or of a proper zeal for
the honor and safety of the church. To retain such men as
these in office, with a mere prohibition of ritualistic display, is
like staunching one leak in a ship whilst a hundred of others
are sinking her, for it is not so much the outward tendencies
of ritualism that is to be dreaded, as the principles that give
rise to them which they may and will spread in hundreds of
ways, as well as in their churches.
It is not so many years since a noble bishop in Hobart
Town refused to admit to Holy Orders several gentlemen of
evangelical principles because they would not subscribe to a
Popish rule of faith, and believe in baptismal regeneration, and
although the Archbishop of Canterbury was appealed to and
gave his decision against him, he still maintained his position,
and his creed, declaring that the Archbishop’s opinion might
go for what it was worth, but that he had no business to
interfere with him.
In this loose, disjointed, and broken state of things consists
the weakness and danger of the establishment; a house divided
against itself cannot stand. To permit men to torture and
twist the articles and rubrics of the church to their own
purposes, without a proper standard for trial and expulsion of
such delinquents is ruinous in the extreme. To appeal to such
a judicature as the Privy Council just now is pretty much like
holding the court in a very warm place, and going to law with
its proprietor.
reference to the English Church throughout the world, whether in connection
with the state or otherwise.


As time and space will not allow me to enter upon this
subject, I must hasten on to the next element of disruption of
the English church, that of
APOSTOLICAL SUCCESSION.
We have already seen in a former part of this work that an
ordinary local succession from the apostles is of no value
without true doctrine and purity of character, for as a grievous
apostacy was prophesied to take place in the church ot Christ,
a mere succession of ecclesiastics are no witnesses of Christianity,
unless they teach and live as did the apostles. Melanchon
says the church is not bound to an ordinary succession of
bishops, but to the Gospel; when bishops do not teach the
truth an ordinary succession avails nothing; it is enough to
have the faith that was held in the pure age of the church.
When the ordinary succession became corrupt, the Lord has
always raised up an extraordinary one to reform and provoke
to jealousy and good works; even under the Levitical priesthood
prophets were raised up to rebuke and reform, as in the case of
Amos, Eli, &c. Our Lord and apostles reformed the Jewish
Church, and in the Christian Church the same process was
followed, as in the case of the Paulitians,Waldenses, Albigenses,
until we come down to the Reformation, and from that to the
Wesleys, Whitfields, &c., down to the present day, for the
presence of the Lord was not promised to reprobates and
speculators, but to them who obey him and preach a pure
Gospel. It is thus he says, “ I send you forth as sheep amongst
wolves “ wherever two or three are gathered together,
there am I in their midst/’
In the apostolic day every church had power in itself to
ordain ministers consistent with the Word of God. The form
of ordination varied, as for instance, Matthew was chosen by
lot, Timothy was ordained by the Presbytery, the apostles by
our Lord. To connect the gift of the Holy Spirit with an
external rite is to impose a charm or a spell in the place of
that which is obtained by faith. The pretended catalogue
of Bishops of the different churches, from the apostles
down, has been found to be a total fallacy. The absurdity
of hanging a man’s salvation on the reception of a
sacrament, that depends upon such a thread or rope of sand
must be apparent to all, for if a single link in the chain be
faulty, it nullifies all the rest. If a bishop has not been duly
consecrated or rightly ordained his ministration is nil, and so
are all his ordinations. Now when we take a view of the


dark ages, and read of the numerous corruptions of doctrine
and practice, the gross superstitions that crept in, when we
read (as Mr. Elliot says) of bishops being consecrated when
mere children, of men officiating who did not know their
letters, of prelates expelled and others put into their place by
violence, of illiterate profligate laymen and habitual drunkards
admitted to holy orders, and of the prevalence of every kind of
disorder, who can for a moment be so stupid as to imagine his
salvation depend upon the ministrations of such a succession
as this. Furthermore, when we consider the mercenary and
secular spirit of which many of these men have entered the
ministry, their pride, pomp, and ambition, their false oaths
and subscriptions, and the sophisticated character of those who
only enter the church to betray it, we may well be astonished
at their presumption and folly.
And these are the ambassadors of heaven forsooth, who,
with the Queen’s patent, look down on men a thousand times
better than themselves. That whilst they lay so much
importance on such an authority as this, they for the most
part are totally unacquainted with the call of God, and that
true spiritual enlightenment of the nature of Christ’s kingdom
and their own salvation, without which all other advantages
and accomplishments are not worth a straw, for without this
they can have neither fitness nor authority to preach the
Gospel. They came not in at the right door—through
Christ, but climb up another way—that of self-interest or
ambition, and are but hirelings, blind guides, clerical patented
mechanists, &c.
It is true some may be moral and devout, highly intellectual
and learned, but withall, if they are not born of God, having
a true spiritual regeneration, and not the thing that passes for
it in baptism, they can have no true authority, nor will they
profit the people. The disorder of a frozen heart, an
unenlightened conscience, are a thousand times more offensive
to the Lord, than that of being out of a local succession, even
if it could be proved, which it cannot.
Will it be credited that the Almighty does not raise up true
witnesses to confound all such selfish formality and hypocrisy,
and that such men as Wesleys, the Whitfields, the Knoxes,
&c., and their descendants, down to the present day, are unfit
to preach the Gospel and administer the sacraments, and have
no more authority than laymen to be ministers of Christ ?
Surely such conduct as this is highly unchristian and indecent,
and, at the present time, impolitic, and must end ruinously to
yourselves if persisted in. For in what are the nonconformist


and dissenting ministers deficient that you think them
unworthy of your embrace ? Is not Christ’s kingdom one,
and do they not serve and obey the same master ? These men
can point to the time and place when they obtained redemption
in Christ’s blood, and can testify that the Gospel is no fable,
and that it came not to them in word only, but in power,
much assurance, and the Holy Ghost: can you ? They know
the power of sin, the curse of the law, and the peace, love, and
purity of the Gospel, experimentally and practically : do you ?
They have felt the call of God, seen the opening of his
providence, and have knowledge of their acceptance by
receiving fruit to their labour : have you ? They do practically
what you do theoretically, that is, open the prison doors of
them that are bound, and instrumentally give liberty to the
captive. They can point to their converts and say as Paul did,
ye are my witnesses, my fruit, my joy, and my crown in the
Lord : can you ? These men can preach and pray as the spirit
giveth liberty either with or without written documents, and
are not afraid of wearing out the patience of their hearers by
a sermon of three-quarters of an hour; can you ? Many of
the dissenting ministers (I speak of them as a body) are as
well educated as yourselves; they are rich in Christian
experience, in theological knowledge; they preach God the
Father in all the round of his glorious attributes and
perfections; God the Son in the glory of his redemption as
prophet, priest, and king; and God the Holy Ghost in all his
sanctifying and quickening influences; they have added
greatly to scriptural literature; they denounce Popery as an
apostacy, and warn their congregations against her approaches,
and they preach the grand doctrine of justification by faith.
Seeing, therefore, that they are evangelical in principle, hold
to the same faith, are well qualified by gifts and graces, are
called of God, and withstand Antichrist. What are you that
you should not recognise them as fellow labourers in one body,
one spirit, and one Lord ?
Is there anything more required in these times than unity,
and would it not be one of tin greatest blows to the common
enemy? If sceptics, puseyites, and secularists, are allowed to
occupy your pulpits, why not admit an evangelical ministry
to counteract them ? If your churches are overrun with
formalism and spiritual death, why not invite a reviving and
quickening element ? Is there a true hearted Protestant that
is not shut up into the most deplorable bigotry that would for
a moment oppose it? In what respect is it that church
communion and fellowship is more perfect in the establishment


than can be realized among the sects ? Is it in your ritualistic
service your prayer book, local succession, and the sacraments,
&c.? Why the Romish Church professes to have all these
advantages more perfect than you, and yet she is but a rotten
branch. It was not litanies, prayer books, and sacraments,
that spiritually revolutionized the three kingdoms in John
Wesley's time, but the preaching of the Gospel.
You say you have comprehensiveness, authority, tradition,
prestige, social influence, culture, &c., &c. I pity your
comprehensiveness. Babylon might be written on your gates,
and confusion worse confounded on your pulpits. The church
of Christ has always prospered better without these alliances
than with them; like a bruised herb, she has emitted her
sweetness and power more by the pressure of opposition,
contumely, and hardship, than when everything of a worldly
character was in her favor. The tradition of the noble works
of our fathers, the prestige of saving souls, the culture of
knowing the depths of Satan, and the social influences of true
charity is of far more importance than the polish of colleges
and the patronage of this world’s groat ones.
But again, it has been asserted that you teach the truth
more perfectly than in the other denominations. What is
truth? Why, the Gospel is the whole of the truth, and if all
the litanies, prayer-books, priests and priestly sacraments,
drapery, and candlelight in the world were in the bottom of
the Red Sea, the Gospel and the Bible would save men, and
be the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth.
The Lord’s succession being sent by himself they will accomplish
that whereunto he pleases and prosper where he sends it, for
how can they hear without a preacher, and how can they
preach unless they be sent ? But are you sure you hold the
truth more perfectly than Dissenters? Then what mean*
your high and your low, your narrow and your broad
distinctions ? Do Pusey and Colenso, Lind and Hoadley,
Mr. Hook or Mr. Noel, Mr. Newman or Mr. Voysey, or the
Bishop of Winchester and Mr. Maconochie, Dean Stanley
or Mr. Maurice teach the same truths, and if they do not, what
becomes of your succession and ordination ? Does the Lord’s
succession excommunicate, oppose, and betray each other’s
principles ? May you not believe in the Bible and the prayer
book, and still be as far from truth as a Unitarian?
The sects are all united in one creed in every particular, one
faith, one Lord, one Holy Ghost, baptism, one Father, one
aim, one end, and one love ; conformity is only a devil’s strait
jacket to prevent those tactics that would do execution. There


may be both unity and alliance without conformity, for the
church’s captain is not the Queen nor the Pope, but Christ;
and being united to him and allied to each other in the bond of
love, they meet the common foe, and go on from conquering to
conquer. But of what use would it be if a thousand regiments
were linked together in the most perfect order and outward
regularity, if, withal, one-half of the army were disaffected and
could not be trusted, who, perhaps, would be blank cartridge
men, shoot over their enemies’ heads, or,- perhaps, not fire at
all; and on the other hand, if there were ten thousand
regiments, all equipped in the most hetregenous manner, with
tactics entirely different from each other, yet if they had but
one purpose, to be faithful to their sovereign, and determined
to beat the foe, would their apparent outward irregularity
interfere with their efficiency or prevent their success ? It is
so in respect to Immanuel’s army; the great point is not
outward conformity, but inward integrity ; not the regularity
of priestly authority and supremacy, but that love to the great
King and the brethren that would be subject to each other for
the good of the whole. The irregularity, therefore, is not on
the side of Dissenters, but on yours, you are the irregulars ;
they only differ as to outward organisation, but you differ on
essential doctrines. They exhibit Christ, and keep themselves
in the background, but many of you would smother the Gospel
in drapery, and exhibit yourselves in calico. The Dissenters
preach Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God ; but
many of you preach the sacraments, the succession, and the
prayer book; you would exalt a spurious, inefficient, and disloyal
set of men, who do not the real work of the ministry, and yon
would deprive the true succession of their dignity and authority,
who give evidence and proof of their efficiency. The Dissenters
inculcate the necessity of inward purity, plough up the soul
and insist on universal righteousness and spiritual worship;
but you deal in shadows, flowers, white dresses, and cathedral
vanity, and endeavor to make your ritual as soothing and
sustaining to the patience of the carnally minded as possible by
the help of musical intonation and other artistic appliances.
You would lift up the hirelings, the speculators, the ritualistic
repeaters, whilst you would put down the Lord’s ministry,
regard them as laymen, and from the height of your episcopal
dignity look down with a patronising smile, whilst they helped
to clean out your Augean stable.
As to church fellowship with Episcopalians, if ever a time
should come when you will see that, unless a great change
takes place in your experience and prayer books, sad will be


the condition of Dissenters, for even now it is apparent that
just in proportion as they appropriate the service, litanies, and
music of the establishment, have they declined from spiritual
life and settled down in the form.
As to John Wesley being a churchman, he was so from
necessity; his safety, influence, and prejudice kept him
there, but now there is much more light on the nature of
schism and heresy than in his day; schism and heresy do not
consist in getting up different organisations to carry out the
work of the Lord ; but in perverting truth and substituting
the form of religion for the power, from the teachers of which
the apostle commands us to turn away.
May I ask, are you really serious when you invite what you
call the irregulars to a unity, and at the same time hold on to
a priestly succession, or is it only a cloak under which to
manifest your arrogance ? I can tell you that light is
breaking in on the public on these subjects; and if you do
not soon abandon such absurdities, you will subject yourselves
to be treated in the same way that pretension and fraud are
invariably dealt with in other departments.
To see men with professedly one object and holding the
same essential principles standing apart when their union is
of the greatest consequence, both to themselves and the
world. What would be thought of an army who, being
surrounded with enemies without and foes within, would
refuse to have the assistance of allies who would help to defend
and deliver them—who would cry out to their enemies, stand
back, we are one ? Should we not conclude they either courted
destruction, or were all bent on betraying their cause ?
Do you say the laws of the church don't allow it; then I
ask how is it they allow the prevelance of other kind of disorders
a thousand times worse, the one-half of which if I were to
mention would startle some of you? Are wealth, worldliness,
and the bond slaves of the devil to dictate terms to the church
of Christ; or is it a time to be counting the stars when the
floods are around you ? <f He that is not for me is against me,”
saith the Lord. Neutrals cannot be trusted by the Lord
or by Satan; beautiful litanies, sweet music, and wooden
crosses will not keep back the gates of hell; neither will the
baptismal spell or sacramental charm. There is more required
these times than good reading and Greek and Latiu to make
an efficient minister of Christ. "You may have a good musical
ritual, be bright and hearty in your service, and yet be but
respectable formalists ; you may preach from the lessons of the
day, but if you preach not Christ and against Popery as the


Antichrist, it will be for any day but the day you live iu. The
baldness of a Christian church does not consist in the want of
ornament and drapery but in the want of spiritual drapery ;
you may attract Satan’s connossieuis by music and the fine
arts, so far as outward worship is concerned, but to bring
them to a present salvation other metal is required.
What is the character of your pulpit ministrations in a
general way ? How seldom do we hear the doctrine of salvation
made clear. The attributes and perfections of Diety illustrated
in the redemption of man by the exhibition of his justice in
the vindication ot his laws, in order that mercy, truth, and
love may be seen in the face of Jesus Christ; the mystery of
wisdom from the foundation of the world. May there not be
much oratorial and flowery display of the nature and history
of the Christian institution, of the doctrine of the Divinity,
Trinity, and resurrection of our Lord, and much said about
the opening of the prison doors, and deliverance of the captive,
and withal so feel the prison chain of sin around you as to
know nothing about deliverance or the resurrection power, nor
the love of God, only as mystics and speculators know it,
that is by theory.
How seldom will you hear the doctrine of justification by
faith explained and enforced, or sanctification by the Holy
Spirit, or the promises of Christ, or the true nature of a saving
faith. To preach the power of the sacraments which many of
you do in a slywwar,y r , is to preach priestcraft, formality, and
delusion. How many sinners has such preaching turned from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God ?
Can you point to one jsound conversion in the whole course of
your ministrations; or how many true believers have you built
up in their most holy faith by the sacraments ? Sacraments
have been found to work so well for Romanism that out of two
they have manufactured seven.
I do not wish to speak irreverently of the Holy Sacraments,
nor of their proper use and divine authority, but of their abuse
and the ignorance of men who ought to know better. I
declare I have often received more spiritual light. Scriptural
knowledge, and general theological information, especially on
the doctrine of salvation, in one sermon from those you
despise than I have from one hundred of your drowsy
speculations and theoretical tinklings, which lull the fold to
sleep.
I am happy to say there are exceptions to this rule, and that
there are many, both at home and abroad, who preach not
themselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord—but what is it to


preach Christ? To preach Christ is to show the need of
Christ, (for the whole need not a physician,) and to show the
need ot Christ is to preach the law, and to preach the law is to
show the necessity of the conviction of sin by the Holy Ghost,
and to preach the Holy Ghost and conviction of sin is not only
to know we are sinners, but to feel its curse, consequence, and
danger, till by a living faith you become a sinner saved by
grace.
Are not most of your sermons dry moral essays on the
example of Christ, just as if unconverted sinners have anything
to do with our Lord’s example till they are first awakened to
lay hold and get into Christ, and then, and only then, can
they walk as he walked. You might as well try to build a
house over a volcano, as to try to build a spiritual house upon
the mere nominal baptismal belief of the Gospel. The first
burst of passion, or breeze of temptation, will blow it to the
winds—without a true conversion there is neither strength nor
union with Christ, power nor love, the consequence of which
is, a perpetual going back to repentance and first works
which being done from form, the heart remains insensible and
callous, and you never can rise above the dead level of a Popish
formality.
There are four parties in the English Church who take
different views of Apostolical Succession. The first are those
who profess to come down through the Eastern Church, which
they say is a much purer source than that of the Western
but it is patent to all that this line of succession is equally
beclouded with doubts and difficulties, superstition and breaks
of various kinds, as that of the Western, as John Wesley has
said, the roll of their bishops could never be made out, and he
was certain it never would. The second class take their descent
from the Romish Church. They say the reformation was a
mistake, that the English, Greek, and Romish Hierarchies are
all branches of the one true Catholic Church. They say the
Romish Church has fallen into error, but by no means that she
has lost the faith and become heritical. This they acknowledge
to save themselves from apostolical shipwreck, and thus you
will hear them denounce some of the Popish doctrines as being
false, but they never treat the Papacy as being an apostacy,
hence a union of spirit subsists between them, and holding the
same views on baptismal regeneration, only a paper wall and
good living separate them. There is a third class who regard
these lines of succession as a baseless fabric, a rope of sand,
but notwithstanding think the Queen’s patent, a college
education, &c., communicates a source of authority that does


not belong to dissenters. But it may be asked who made the
Queen head of the church—does not St. Paul say, I suffer not
a woman to rule—and if the state can give authority for such
a purpose, then, in the event of a Papist being on the throne,
would not you be the nonconformist and dissenter ? There is
yet a fourth class who see the invalidity of these claims, and
the foolishness of their pretentions. They hold that men are
called and fitted by gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit, and
ordained according to the Scripture, by whatever church they
may be connected with. These are the true evangelical ministry
who can damage Satan’s kingdom and build up the people of God.
Such were the Presbyterians, Wesleyans, Congregationalists,
and many also of the Church of England ; men who have done
more good in one year by turning sinners from their evil ways,
than those who call themselves the succession have done in all
their life.
Tiiere are also extraordinary witnesses, with special messages,
who may appear to be out of all order, but by the overruling
hand of providence are made to work for the good of all, and
the glory of God.
BAPTISMAL REGENERATION.
If, in the Jewish economy, children were admitted into the
church by circumcision, it is not unreasonable to think that
Christianity does the same by baptism; and if it was usual, as
St. Paul says, for a Jew to be circumcised, and still not be of
the true spiritual seed, so it is possible for Christian children to
be baptised and not be regenerated.
To dedicate an unconscious infant to God by water, baptism
is not more absurd than it was to admit a child by circumcision
into the Jewish church. If it be declared that he that
believeth and is baptised shall be saved. It is not said that he
that believeth and is not baptised shall be damned. That
unconscious infants are capable of receiving the grace of God
is evident from the words of our Lord, that such are of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and from the fact of them receiving his
blessing. That regeneration and baptism are not necessarily
connected is evident from the Scripture, which speaks of many
who received the Holy Spirit both before and alter baptism,
and also from St. Paul’s words, ie I am not sent to baptise,"
&c., which he could not have said without frustrating his
mission, if baptism and regeneration were united. It is evident
the apostle was no baptismal knight errant, and the spirit of
inspiration foreseeing that both Jew and Gentle would make


aparty Sheboleth of this article places it in its proper position
by declaring that neither circumcision nor uncircumcision,
baptism or no baptism availeth anything, but a new creature
and faith that works by love ; St. Peter says the same in other
words, viz., that baptism doth now save us, but explains
himself in the next verse, not the putting away of the filth of
the flesh, or in other words, not the mere outward dip, but the
answer of a good conscience—a true conversion.
From the above we may conclude that infants are not
excluded from the Christian church, that baptism is a sign of
that of which in maturity they are to seek the substance.
That regeneration is not necessarily connected with it, and
that as the baptised and unbaptised, with few exceptions,
produce the same fruit of unrighteousness, it follows that either
they have not been regenerated, or, having been, they have lost
it, and therefore there is a necessity for all who have not
experienced a change of heart to be converted and renewed by
a thorough heart repentance and a faith that realises a present
salvation. The true believer is renewed daily, but this is a
different thing from a renewal in church forms and a dead faith.
From the days of Nicodemus to the present time men have
mistaken the nature of a true regeneration, and asked, “ how
can these things be ?” Nor will they ever know better till
they throw aside their dependance upon human wisdom, and
become as fools and little children before they can be truly
wise. Never whilst they seek the truth, theoretically instead
of practically, and in dependance on the Divine Spirit, will they
know what a true regeneration means, and it is worthy of
remark that this change which is said to take place in an
infant, when nobody can know anything about it, is denied, and
considered enthusiasm, when a real regeneration takes place
on an adult, and when the most incontestable proofs are given
of a change from sin to holiness, and the power of Satan unto
God.
The spiritual blindness of learned men on this subject would
bo astonishing if we were not told that the natural man
knoweth not the things of the Spirit, for they are foolishness
to him. It is in this respect that often one poor ignorant
man can reprove, rebuke, and exhort those that are in other
respects infinitely above him, that (figuratively speaking) an ass
may reprove the madness of the prophets. That one may be
wiser than a council, and do spiritually what David did
physically, viz., kill the Goliah.
Hundreds of volumes have been written upon the subject of
the Holy Spirit’s influence by learned men, but they have only


darkened counsel by words, without knowledge, and confused
the minds of the simple by their different opinions, thus
Doctor Paley believes there is such a thing as spiritual
influence, but says it cannot be known from, nor discovered,
any more than any other silent operation of nature, otherwise
it would be miraculous. Doctor Croly says, if regeneration is
to be known at all, it can only be discovered in the silent
progress of personal virtue. He also says, amendment and
renewal ought to be preached instead of conversion, and that
the consequences of such preaching is to produce a discipline
of sighs and groans, and that the effect is eetacies and agonies,
or fanaticism at its full. Here is a master in Israel proclaiming
bis ignorance of the first principles of Christianity, attributing
the work of God, in the conversion of the soul, to the spirit of
fanaticism and the devil.
Mr. McGee, who has written a mod learned work on tho
Atonement against the various phases of infidelity, denounces
John Wesley as a fanatic of the highest order, because he has
presumed to assert that that very atonement was sprinkled on
his heart by the Holy Ghost, when by a personal application
by faith he received pardon, peace, and holiness, a true
regeneration. Hundreds of men of this class I might point to,
who are highly intellectual and learned, that have defended
the outworks of Christianity, who, when they came to speak of
a personal work of grace on their hearts, are as blind as
heathens, and, not only like Nicodernus, ask how these thing#
can be, but deny them altogether, denouncing such persons
as dogmatical, ignorant, presumptions, narrow, bigoted,
uncharitab e, and fanatical. But notwithstanding this, the
truth is the same, you must be bora again. The obedient
shall know of tho doctrine and wisdom is justified of her
children. Not many wise are called, but the Lord hath
revealed it unto babes.
Now to the mystification and denial of this doctrine of
regeneration may be attributed the state of the church and the
world at the present day, for without this experience
christiainty may communicate light, but not power, knowledge,
but no divine energy. And thus it is that so many are led
away into divers creeds and forms, into popery, secularism,
and infidelity; for as no man can truly say Christ is God but
by the Holy Ghost, so no man can truly know the Gospel is
of God but by a true regeneration; for by this change the
powers of the world to come are brought into the soul—see
Hebrews, faith realizes the substance of things hoped for, and
enables its possessors, with full assurance, to say the Lord i»


now my salvation, a« the Apostle says, “ receiving the end of
your faith, the salvation of your soul.”
These truths, scoffed at by the world and formal professors,
the devil knows full well, and therefore has he laboured to
subvert them by substituting a spurious imitation, which,
consisting of sacramental devotion and acts of piety, done more
through outward form than from a principle of love to God,
allows its professors to carry the world in one hand, and
Christ in the other. A sort of serio comico regeneration that
is all sanctity to-day and frivolity to-morrow; that unites
steps to the altar and steps of a dancing master; the gate of
heaven and the avenue of hell (the theatre) ; the Lord’s
table and the billiard table ; that confounds true charity with
almsgiving; galvanized formality with spirituality; the love of
the world with the love of God ; the spirit of holiness with the
spirit of the vine; righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost with dramatic readings, card playing, and pantomimic
buffoonery; a Te Deum of the Lord and a devil’s jubilee.
There can be no doubt if this sort of regeneration goes on
for a few more generations, we shall have as good a supply of
play actors and actresses, musicians and gamblers,as any other
infidel country whatever; for what are our public entertainments
and club amusements, and amateur readings, but preparatjry
schools for the theatre, the gaming table, the ball-room and
saloon ? You have only to continue on the same course of
jollification and sanctification of squandering thousands of
pounds in cathedral and stone wall churches ; the same spurious
liberality towards false creeds, the same bigotry towards
Dissenters, the same course of vanity and worldliness, and
you will find your congregations high and dry formalists on
the road to Popery, and you their ministers, nothing more than
conservatives of prayer book etiquette, thirty-nine articles on
paper and endowments and good livings. I know it may be
useless to tell you so, and that you cannot see it; but once let
the Spirit of God enter your heart in the genuine work of a
true conversion, and you would have no need to be told, you
would see it yourselves, and esteem it as charity to be told. I
do not mean to assert that there are not some exceedingly nice
men and true hearts among you; nor do I deny that there may
be a higher tone of morality, greater earnestness in the forms
of religious worship, also increased activity in the cause of
benevolent and philanthropic enterprises; but all this may
exist, and a great deal more, and yet your churches be a valley
of dry bones, aud the ministers plasterers of uutempered
mortar.


To what may be attributed the broken up, hypocritical,
false, and perjured state of the Church of England, but the
effect of this doctrine of baptismal regeneration, and the piece
of jugglery connected with it, that of confirmation ? The child
is taught to believe in what it does not possess. The sponsors
are compelled to undertake for another what they do not for
themselves, and the minister to complete the farce takes off the
one and puts on the other, what neither of them have any
proper conception of. Wild boys, young scamps, and reckless
youths are all led to suppose themselves regenerated and made
members of Christ, whilst they are fast bound in the chains of
Satan and confirmed in iniquity; or, if othervvise, any are
disposed to be serious, they are led to believe a slight
reformation, and the sacramental unction will renew them, and
put them on the road to heaven. What is wanting in all this
to make them complete Papists, but to add confession and
penance, and then are they not one spirit both on the same
dead level of formality, the sober prayer book religion of
Protestants, and does not this account for the sympathy that
exists between so many Romanists and Protestants, as well as
for the spiritual blindness of the latter in reference to their
own principles and that of their enemies ?
By perpetuating this delusion, the doctrine of justification
by faith is subverted, for what use is it to preach conversion to
those who already think themselves in the family of God ? And
here also lies the secret of ritualism, for what is more natural
for men then to supply their spiritual emptiness within by-
artificial means without, and here also is the secret of what is
called sacramental efficacy, another plank, which these
spiritual mariners have thrown out to save themselves from
shipwreck.
SACRAMENTAL EFFICACY.
The priest, the altar, and the propitiatory sacrifice is the
glory of Popery. The apostacy which commenced in St.
Paul’s day was matured by mystifying this simple ordinance of
the Lord, and as bishops rose in power, so this article rose in
importance till it became an instrument of priestly arrogance
andsuperstition. Luther fell intotheblunder of consubstantiation,
but even Luther held in the priesthood of all believers as well
as that the Christian altar was Christ’s Godhead, the sacrifice
his human nature, and that the unchangeable priesthood also
centres in him. Any other altar, priest, or sacrifice has no
authority in Scripture; all believers being priests have a right


to preach and administer the sacraments as well now as in the
apostle’s day, notwithstanding for order and propriety sake it
may be left to them who are over them in the Lord.
The Christian believer does not live by sacraments at all; he
is saved by faith, justified by faith, he walks by faith, overcomes
the world by faith, and is sanctified by faith ; he conquers
hell, death, the law, and the devil by faith, for this is our
victory, even our faith.
No ungodly man, or self-righteous pharisee, or formalist has
any right to touch the sacrament, nor does its acceptance
renew such men, but adds to their condemnation. The Supper
of the Lord is for the communion of saints, the commemoration
of Christ their Lord, and the strengthening and comforting of
true believers and sincere penitents. Any other use of the
sacrament is idolatry, blasphemy, and perversion.
I am persuaded there are many ministers in the Church
of England who agree with these truths, but I believe they are
vastly more numerous who are of a different opinion, who regard
themselves as the channels of divine efficacy and the anointed
of the Lord, holding the salvation of men in their hands, and
communicating the Holy Ghost by their sanctified touch. Such
is the power of delusion and spiritual blindness and vanity.
How often have I seen the teaching of these men made
ridiculous by boys and children, who having experienced
conversion, have scattered more light by their fervency ot
spirit, their prayers, and exhortations, than all such men with
their vain pretensions; and how of ten have 1 seen of themselves
transformations as great as any in the world I
I knew an extremely nice man, a minister of the parish
church of Wexford, Ireland, who, being in the habit of
instructing the youth of his congregation, asked a young
woman, who was a member of his class, if she knew her sins
were forgiven, who, upon receiving an answer in the
affirmative, was so offended as to say he would hear that class
no more, and called his clerk to take his place. A few days
after, however, he sent for her, and requesting to know the
particulars of how she obtained such a blessing, she related them,
the substance of which is as follows :— <f You know, Sir/' she
said, “ I have carried away many of your prizes given for
Scriptural knowledge, and so far as morality and strict
attendance to ordinances, 1 have not been deficient; but
notwithstanding this, having accidently heard an itinerant
Methodist preach the Gospel, and declaring that morality and
good works will not deliver from the curse of the law, from
sin, the fear of death, nor give true peace, spiritual life, nor


union with Christ, I was convinced of sin, and filled with
condemnation; but having been exhorted to believe there and
then for a present salvation, I was enabled to cast off my load
of sin, and lay hold on eternal life by faith in Christ, by whom
and through whom I have received the Holy Ghost, testifying
with ray spirit that I am his, filling me with love, joy, peace,
strength, light, and life, and now I can go on rejoicing to the
still higher life of sanctification; this stage being the mere
childhood of the Christian course.”
The minister having listened with great attention, replied
that he believed what she said to be the truth, but did not
appear in his pulpit that Sabbath.- The week following
however he did, and great was the change indeed. He had
sought and found the same blessed experience, and now,
instead of abusing dissenters as so many hypocrites and
fanatics, he declared they were the true people of God, and
that it would be well for all to follow their example. This
occurred some years ago, when methodists were much more
alive to God and consistent than they are now. Nevertheless,
the truth is the same in all ages.
I am aware of what is said in some pulpits, viz., that moral,
amiable, and devout worshippers, educated and refined persons,
have no need of such a revolution in their soul, and that the
more proper and scriptural way is, to be gradually drawn to
Christ by love, &c. Now, with due deference to the superior
intellect of such, I beg to declare that it is just such characters
(the moral and refined) that require a spiritual revolution and
conversion, as much as any sinner whatever’. Cornelius w’as
an upright man, full of alms and prayers, but he had to be
saved and converted by faith in Christ. Lydia was gently
drawn, and her heart was opened by the Holy Spirit to attend
to the things of her peace ; what things ? why, repentance
and faith and entire devotion to Christ.
The young man in the Gospel was exceedingly amiable and
moral, insomuch that our Lord loved and pitied him, but the
love of money kept him from salvation. St. Paul was perfect
concerning the righteousness of the law, but this he counted
dung after his conversion to Christ. John Wesley was
preaching the Gospel to others before he was made acquainted
with the way of salvation by faith, through the instrumentality
of the Moravians. Doctor Chalmers was a most upright and
strictly moral man when first he entered the ministry, but
finding out his spiritual nakedness, and experiencing a change
of heart, be declared he knew nothing before as he ought to
have known it, and contradicted his former sermons. The


bones, sinews, flesh, and skin, were all perfect, but the breath
of the Lord was wanting to give life.
I could point to several in this city who were strictly correct
and upright in their conduct, and thought themselves as much
regenerated as those who professed it, and who were accredited
and approved members of their churches ; who, having heard
Mr. Douglas, soon found out their mistake, and experienced a
change that totally altered the character of their piety and
conduct. I would beg to remind such preachers as referred to
above, that a man may appear very beautiful to his fellow
creatures, when in the sight of God he is nothing but a mass
of corruption. The most moral and beautiful characters,
without a true conversion, are only whitewashed sepulchres,
for their actions spring from unpurified hearts, tend only to
the effect of self-glorification, instead of the glorifying of God.
There are many beautiful qualities naturally, such as love of
benevolence, of country, of family, &c., and withal, not oue
item of the love of God connected with it. The most amiable,
moral, and benevolent persons, unchanged from above, have in
their hearts the love of the world, pride, and vanity. They
have no true love of God, no union with Christ, no spiritual
mindedness, no hungering and thirsting after righteousness,
no zeal for Christ’s kingdom, no jealousy for God’s honour, no
zeal for the faith, no spiritual enlightenment, no righteousness,
joy, and peace in the Holy Ghost. With all their outward
show they are spiritually' dead in sin and trespasses, and as such
are out of Christ, under the law, in the flesh, under
condemnation, and have just as much need of a true conversion
as the most profligate sinner under heaven ; and, in fact, it is
more difficult to convince and arouse such persons from their
Pharisaic self-righteousness and false security, than the most
guilty. It is thus our Lord says, the vile and reprobate go
into heaven before those that think themselves more righteous,
and although it is extremely difficult to deal faithfully with
these creatures, because there is so much apparent loveliness
and goodness about them, yet there is the greater necessity,
seeing their influence is deadly, and calculated to deceive
themselves and others, as to the nature of a true regeneration,
I do not deny that a man may be gradually drawn to Christ
till he is one spirit with him, but I ask where do you see it ?
Is it not a fact that men die as they live; that instead of
growing mure like Christ, they become more earthly and
selfish ; the old man never being subdued by a genuine work
of grace, there is ever a relapsing into sin and their old habits
of unrighteousness. I would not wish to repel or discourage


for a moment any sincere persons, though slow their progress,
or weak their faith, for Christ does not quench the smoking
flax, nor break the bruised reed. If a sinner is indeed a poor
prodigal, and not a pharisee, there is not a gracious promise of
God but what belongs to him ; yea, the very heart of Christ
is open to receive him. But what is it to be a sincere seeker
of salvation ? It is to strive, to knock, to wrestle by mighty
prayer and faith; it is to take the kingdom of heaven by
violence ; it is to cast away every idol, the love of the world,
pride, vanity, ambition, lust; to cut off the right eye-sin;
to crucify the affections and lusts and passions ; to be prepared
to give up every thing, father, mother, brother, and sister,
that stands between you and the love of Christ. Let a man
seek salvation in this way, and see if he will be long without
knowing the difference between a mere outward whitewashed
sepulchre, and a living temple of the Lord.
And now, gentlemen, with your permission, I will ask you
a few questions in the fear of the Lord. Ido not enquire
whether you are patented by the Queen, episcopally ordained,
andean administer the sacraments; or whether (as some of
your brethren in the ministry at home appear to think) you
can conquer the devil by consecrated candle light, banners, and
holy water; or whether you can overcome the law, sin, hell,
and death, by sacramental unction ; or whether you can storm
Satan’s kingdom by a good bold stand up declaration of
baptismal vows in the light of candles, &c. But Ido enquire
whether the breath of the Lord has been infused into you;
whether the entrance of his holy spirit has given you light to
see the overwhelming corruption of your fallen nature;
whether you have ever been whipt by the ten lashes of the
law, and felt their notches rankling in your flesh, making you
feel full of wounds, bruises, and putrifying sores, causing
you to cry out, a O, wretched man that 1 am, who shall
deliver me from this death. Woe is me; lam undone; *
whether the sun of righteousness has risen over your
soul with healing in his wings; whether the storm has
become a calm, and the peace of God which passeth
understanding, hath filled your breast; whether the beauty
of the Lord has been put upon you, and clothed you with the
garments of salvation; the spirit of praise for heaviness and oil
of joy for mourning; whether the prison door of your house is
opened,and|the Holy Spirit testifies with your spirit that you are
born of God; whether you have love, joy, peace, and holiness,
Christ in your heart the hope of glory ; whether the experience
of this love caused you to enter the ministry, and by this love


labor for souls, counting it your chief joy to glorify Christ.
These are for the most part the common fruits of all God’s
children, of all who are truly regenerate, for now and only
now can you go forward in the Christian course, handle the
Christian armour, and experience what is called the consolation
of the Christian religion, St. Peter’s command being not to
add to your faith sacramental efficacy, but to add to your
faith brotherly kindness, charity, &c.
Again I ask, do you experience these things; for if you do,
1 wish you joy;, I could kiss the ground you walk on, and they
who would not respect, support, and defend such men are not
worthy of the Gospel; but if, on the contrary, you know
nothing about it, and think such experience foolishness and
fanatical, I pity you; you are not in your right place, and the
sooner you give it up, or seek to be made right, the better, for
if the blind lead the blind both shall fall in the ditch, and a
great price cannot ransom you.
I pray you let not the words I have spoken be received with
contempt or indignation, for they are the sober words of truth
and righteousness. Neither regard me as of a malignant
spirit; remember the open rebuke of a friend is better than
the kisses of an enemy. Let the righteous smite me, says
David, and I shall count it as excellent oil, &c.; remember
that mild ointment put over a cancer would be a mockery, and
the world is full of such quackery.
Having now shown the corruption of the Protestant Church,
that she is the eldest daughter of the Pope, and that having
accomplished her mission, her disconnection with the state is
soon likely to take place; having seen that there is no real
standard of authority, or if there is, it cannot be exercised so
as to extricate herself from heresy and infidelity; having also
proved that apostolical succession is a rope of sand, and that
baptismal regeneration and sacramental efficacy are all popish
figments that prepare the way from whence they came to
return back again, and, moreover, having seen the consequences
and effects of these principles in the hirelingism, formality,
Puseyism, secularism, hypocrisy, perjury, and infidelity of the
Protestant church; it may, therefore, be said with all safety
reformation, separation, or ruin !
There are two courses open before you, the honest,
straightforward, offensive, defensive, and aggressive way of
the true Gospel, and there is that of a hypocritical,
temporising, conciliatory, and false charity. To be neutral in
such times as these is to be found in the enemies’ camp, when
fitting opportunity arrives; to conciliate and sympathise with


an enemy that is within your borders, and will use these
concessions against yourselves, is to act the part of a traitor,
and betray your Master’s cause to the enemy. To adopt
a policy called liberal, under the idea of charity, peace,
and goodwill towards men who are bent on the destruction
of everything you hold dear in religion and polities, is to
promote bigotry, hatred, and intolerance when you will
not have it in your power to prevent it. To call that religious
liberty, toleration, and equality which will annihilate truth, is
to embrace tyranny, falsehood, superstition, and oppression,
and to betray tbe Gospel, and open the flood gates of crime
and revolution. To preach against Popery as being a branch
of the true church only holding some errors, instead of
denouncing her as the great apostacy and foe of God and man,
is to be a false witness and a partaker of her evil deeds. To
stand up for apostolical succession, baptismal regeneration, and
sacramental efficacy, is to prepare your people for embracing
her on the first strain of the man of sin. To refuse to fraternize
and unite with evangelical ministers of all denominations is to
think more of your dignity than the honor and safety of
Christ’s cause. To continue in the forms of church worship,
without warning and getting up classes, and instructing
your people in the Protestant and Popish principles,
is to sleep the sleep of death, and let your con-
gregations go to destruction. To be ignorant of your own
weapons and that of your enemy’s armour, is to give up all
chance of a successful battle; and to be careless and reckless of
these things resting in the form without the power, is to
throw yourselves into the jaws of the lion, and become the easy
prey of the Jesuits.
I shall now, without respect of persons, put the Protestant
Churches through the same category as that of Romanists, by
dividing them into five classes, viz., the Political fire-eater, the
Pious Privateer,the Rationalist, the Babylonial and Evangelical
Protestants. This will be necessary to show that, although
Romanists and Protestants yield fruit so much alike, in one
respect, that is, a worldly spirit, yet there is this difference,
Protestants have freedom from superstition, ignorance, idolatry,
spiritual slavery, priestcraft, and from a creed and system that
encourages sin, fraud, and delusion—Popish countries will bear
no comparison with Prostestant ones, either as regards
morality, intelligence, or commercial prosperity—and although
the majority of English Church Protestants do not act up to
their principles, and are but formalists, yet there are thousands
who do, and including the Protestant dissenters there are


hundreds of thousands of as devoted, consistent, and pious
Christians as ever breathed the breath of life, fully proving
that a true creed, a right faith, and holiness of heart, can
alone walk together. With this unprejudiced distinction, I
proceed to exhibit the Political Fire-eater Protestant.
THE POLITICAL PROTEST AMT OR FIRE-EATER.
These are a numerous class, and are composed of various
parties, some of whom shall be considered under the head of
evangelical. At present I shall confine myself to the political
fire-eater Protestant, whose banner is the bible, the church,
and the constitution; the Cdueen, British liberty, and no
popery. They are no ritualists, for they know well that
ritualism is only the cloven foot of popery ; nor are they, as a
whole, evangelical, for they hold in doctrines subversive of
true piety, and of justification by faith ; whilst with one hand
they are opposing the man of sin, with the other they are
preparing the way to his embrace by their doctrines of
apostolical succession, baptismal regeneration, and sacramental
efficacy. This class of Protestants are in general worldly in
spirit and formal in worship. They are the good old stock
that attend church regularly of a Sunday, lawfully pay their
debts, do works of charity, and profess to have very good
hearts. They are great enemies to hypocrisy and holiness,
and love Methodists as a cat loves a mouse. They do not
stand nice in reading a newspaper, a novel, or looking over
an account by way of recreation on the Sabbath, after dinner,
or, perhaps, finish up with a game of cards, or billiards and the
wine bottle.
It io not because they have felt the saving power of the
Gospel that they are Protestants, but because their forefathers
suffered by the rebels, or because it promotes their worldly
interest, or knowing Popish encroachments endanger their
privileges, and will lead to persecution. They stoutly resist
every Romish trick boldly, openly, and honorably. They do
not stab in the dark, nor act Jesuitically, but still they meet
Popery in the same spirit as themselves, that is, with carnal
weapons. They can fight and pray, put their trust in God and
keep their powder dry, drink the glorious, pious, and immortal
memory, and down with the Pope. Their motive is not so
much to glorify God as martyrs for Christ as hatred to the
oppressive, idolatrous, and treasonable creed of Rome. They do
not so much exemplify the Gospel by a morejioly and devoted


life as they defend their political privileges from the aggression
of their enemies. °
In their association for law, order, and mutual protection,
they have displayed more zeal for the Queen and constitution,
than the Queen and constitution has shown sympathy for
them. The ofangs has not floated over the breeze so gracefully
as they could have wished,and the Irish church disestablishment
has greatly chilled their affections that way ; nevertheless, self
protection and hatred to Penianism keep them together, and
notwithstanding their discouragement and repulses in their
efforts for the safety of the State, they can still show a bold
front to their enemies, and when the steam is well up, their
glasses well charged, and their soul brim full of King William,
then may Popery flee to the mountains and oppression hide its
head. The health of the Queen, the church, and the glorious,
pious, and immortal memory being taken into their stomachs,
a union is cemented, and the constitution strengthened, and a
strong defence is maintained for a church and state composed
of the raw material However, as I have already intimated
all are not of this spirit, some are truly pious and attend the
sacraments, keep the Sabbath, read the Scriptures, and have
family prayer. They advocate the teetotal cause, and are
strictly upright in their dealings ; others, again, are utterly
careless, and may be called Christmas Protestants. They go
to church once a year, and live in drunkenness, impurity,
vice; generally speaking, however, the political fire-eater is
far superior to this; they glory in their beautiful litany, and in
the principles of the Reformation, and if they acknowledge
themselves sinners, it is not that they are worse than other
men, only that they are no saints, and although they pray for
the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, that they may perfectly
love God, and be kept this day without sin, it is not that
they believe a word of it; and although they say, (e I will
arise and go to my father,” they have not the least notion of
it, and although they profess to be the sheep of his hand,
regenerated and confirmed, they declare they are no enthusiasts;
and although they repudiate the Popish nostrums, her masses,
penance, and purgatory, are not themselves purged from their
sins by the Holy Spirit; and although they believe nothing
unclean shall enter heaven, live in carnal security, and without
conversion; and although they reject the bondage of Popish
superstition, are themselves the bond slaves of sin and Satan;
and although they oppose the sign of the cross, do not take up
their cross; and although they condemn the rosary, the holy
water, and incense, do not live a life of prayer, of faith, and


holy obedience, and praise. Like the Papists they say, the
just man falls seven times a day, there is none righteous; the
flesh is weak, and God is merciful, be not righteous over much,
there is a time for all things. Putting their good deeds
against their bad ones, they think Jesus Christ will make up
for the deficiency, and then they take the sacrament; and if a
miracle of grace prevent not, quietly drop into the hands of
death and the devil as fast asleep in their sins and fallen
nature as ever Romanist, Turk, or Jew left this world.
PIOUS PRIVATEERS, OR NEUTRAL MINISTRY,
This body of Protestant clergy are composed of men of
indistinct perceptions of divine truth ; they are mystified in
their mind, and have no clear and practical experience of the
power of the Gospel; their conscience has not been enlightened
so as to know the value and importance of unadulterated truth
as it is in Jesus ; hence they adopt a policy they call liberal,
that embraces all sorts of creeds, from the ultramontanist down
to the evangelical, thus they are denominated the broad church
party. They might properly be called the awkward squad
ministry , for what the spiritual weapons of one defend, another
throws down, and thus there are such contradictions in the
different pulpits of the English Church,
The various classes that compose this body are the neutrals,
the rationalists, the paternal love and no wrathites, with a
slight sprinkling of the babylonial and evangelical. As I shall
treat the rationalist, babylonial, and evangelists separately,
and as the pious privateer compose the chief body of the English
Church, I shall exclusively devote this address to them.
The pious privateers, as I have before intimated, having a
sort of twilight or doubtful experience of Gospel truth, causes
a corresponding course of action. They have not the political
fervour of the fire-eaters, the open boldness of the babylonials,
nor the single eye and loyalty of the evangelicals. Of course,
there are various degrees, higher and lower, amongst them.
Some are extremely nice men, kind, affectionate, moral,
benevolent, devout, and active in their duties, by which they
have much influence; others do good works to be seen of men,
and make an ostentatious exhibition of their charities in order
to gain popularity, conceal their real character, and
counterbalance the influence of dissenters. Some are mere
secularists in canonicals; they are just as worldly in spirit as
the world ; they are the creatures of their passions, their
eelf-interest, and their bishops; they go through their routine


of religious performances quite mechanically; their sermons are
composed of the most silly twaddle about Old Testament and
Pagan usages, with a finish up on charity and good works. A
good warm prayer meeting after the service would throw them
into the utmost consternation. Some of these characters can
play billiards, frequent taverns, always drink, and never get
drunk ; they can curse and swear, and be guilty of many other
immoralities, which I shall not mention, all done under the
rose ; they are like the devil, who a monk would be, but when
the wind of pelf or popularity blow against them, the sorrowful
monks are they. Being all things to all men, they would
be Babylonials, Evangelicals, or Ritualists to-morrow, if
circumstances permitted or suited their interest; they hold as
much popery as would unite them to Rome, and as much
English churchism as enables them to keep their livings; they
are Neutrals; the devil cannot trust them, for they sometimee
do and say good things, when it costs them nothing, and ths
Lord cannot trust them, for they would sell the Gospel over
again if it stood in the way of their endowments, ambition, or
pleasure.
Theie are other classes of the Pious Privateer who are more
circumspect. They show their proclivities at the tail end of
their book marks ; by wearing the cross outside their persons;
by their bowing before mass houses; and their attendance
sometimes at popish funerals, popish bazaars, and popish
masses ; by their absurd pretensions to apostolical succession
and half-way sacrament; and by their hostility to, and contempt
of, dissenters, though now modified through policy; by their
silence in denouncing popery as an apostaey, and by calling
that impious which only exposes infamy. Others, again, are
like snakes in the grass ; like Jesuits, their sympathy is with
everything popish, and was it not that they can forward the
work of perversion, and secure the fleece more successfully
where they are, they would become papists to-morrow. They
pass for Evangelicals, but there is very little of Evangelicalism
about them. A truly Evangelical man could scarcely exist
amongst them, for they would soon manage to have him sent
to Jericho, or some other place, if it were in their power.
They say they are no ritualists, and yet they hold to the
very central doctrine of ritualism, that of the Real Presence,
and if it was not that a close watch is kept up on these
movements just now, they would very soon show that a Real
Presence means a real priesthood, an apostolical succession, an
altar, a confessional, and all the other &c. of popery. r lhese
men are in fact nothing more than formalists and hypocrites;


they have such wonderful love as to give Judas their warmest
embrace; so intensely liberal as to throw over our rich
inheritance into the popish managery, thinking to gratify his
insatiate maw and change the nature of the beast; they are so
charitable that they can cover the wolf with the wool of the
lamb, and the fox with the feathers of a dove; they can
respect the Romish Church as a branch, but not rotten branch,
having some errors, but by no means being apostate; they
regard a true knowledge of God by conversion as enthusiasm,
or perhaps as a different way of looking at truth, and those
passages of Scripture which speak of being born again,
renewed, brought nigh by the blood of Christ, and your
conscience sprinkled with the Atonement, &c., as only terms
of accommodation, having reference to the Jewish Church.
This class of ecclesiastics are exceedingly shy of the
dissenting ministry ; the urgency of the times, and a sense of
self-protection operate in such a way as that they would allow
them to be thrown in to their scales as make weights. But to
recognise them as co-partners in the ministry, would it not be
an infringement of canonical law and episcopal sacrilege,
contrary to all calico and prayer-book order. Nevertheless, there
is a thawing of the ice, and we may hope a better day is coming.
The above address is to the Pious Privateer clergy. I shall
now say a few words to the laity.
THE LAY PIOUS PRIVATEERS, OR NEUTRALS.
The lay privateers, as might be expected, walk pretty much
in the same steps as their clergy. There are, of course,
exceptions. Taking them, however, as a body, they are of the
world, lovers of plsasure more than God, formalists who deny
the power, cold, stiff, and steady church goers, who would be
ready to shoot you if you called them Baptised Heathen : and
yet if you denominated them as holy brethren, the sanctified
in Jesus Christ, the elect sheep of his flock; they would tell
you they did not believe in cant, and that they were no
hypocrites. There are thousands attending these churches
that care very little about any religion. They would as soon
have Romanism as any other ism, so long as their privileges
were not molested. They are profoundly ignorant of both
Popish and Protestant principles, and think it no matter
what a man believes so long as he acts up to it. That it is
all the same, whether it be tares or wheat you grow, so long
as you thresh it well; their religion is whatever will pay best;
they care not a straw whether the Gospel sinks or swims ;


122 THE LAY PIOUS PRIVATEERS; OR NEUTRALS.
they would sell Christ and his truth over again, if it stood m
the way of their ambition, gain, or pleasure. The ball room,
the theatre, and race course is their Trinity; the fashions,
vanity, and show is their study : they go to church to see and
to be seen, to ease conscience, or gratify habit and keep up
character; they patronise public and charitable and philan-
thropic enterprises, and sometimes make excellent speeches on
the necessity of increased exertion in the cause of benevolence.
They support bazaars, and some of them attend public tea
meetings and Sunday schools. They subscribe largely to the
building of churches, and would as soon patronise a Popish,
monastery or bazaar under the idea of liberality as any
evangelical work. Many of these men live under the dominion
of their passions, are gamblers, and worldly and political
schemers—whitewashed hypocrites. Their eyes stand out
with fat; they have more than their hearts can wish ; their
strength is firm, they are not plagued as other men, they die
easy in carnal security: like Papists, they imagine fine sounds,
and colors and sacraments, transform and beautify the heart;
they take great delight to draw near to God with beautiful
words of the litany, saying, “ Thou art the King of glory,
O Christ; heaven and earth are full of the majesty
of thy glory;” and their back is no sooner turned when
the devil has the pre-eminence in all their thoughts and actions ;
like papists, they are mere outer court worshippers, without
their zeal, self-denial, mortification, and sincerity, having not
their hearts sprinkled, nor spiritual life, or holiness. Such
characters as these are the easy prey of Jesuits, whom they
often select to pull their string and do their dirty work in the
way of slander and political intrigue; their representative men
are Mr. Be-not-righteous-over-much, Mr. Time-server, Mr.
Hope-well, Mr. Good-heart, Mr. Sober-piety, Mr. Time-for-
all-things, Mr. Worldly-wiseman, &c.
Having now considered the principles and practices of the
Pious Privateers, it may not be amiss to refer to another class
of the same tribe, who occupy, not only some of the pulpits of
the establishment, but also those of dissenters. Indeed, they
more properly belong to sceptics, but as they are recognised as
brethren of the broad church, I shall address a few lines to
them under head of the
PATERNAL LOVE AND NO WRATHITES.
The paternal love scheme is only another phase of infidelity.
To make it plausible, they misrepresent the Scriptural view of


the atonement by exhibiting the Creator as a vindictive judge,
not willing to show mercy till his justice and wrath were
satisfied in the death of his Son ; whereas the justice of God is
only benevolence in another form, and by which he maintains
his righteousness and the general good of the universe at large,
for justice and judgment are the habitation of his throne.
Anger, wrath, and vengeance are not in God as in man—
passions of malignity, but are manifested in Deity by a
judicial disapprobation, or punishment for benevolent purposes.
Even human governments are more for order and public good
than for vengeance; for as accountability is essential for
intelligent creatures, law is indispensable to the right
government of mind, and rewards and punishments are
indispensable to the moral influence of law, to annex conditions
which are never to be realised, would be to set forth the form
of government without the power.
That the Lord was not made placable by intercession is
evident from St. John, who declares God so loved the world as
to give his only begotten Son, &c. God was in Christ reconciling
the world to himself—exhibiting himself in such a manner as to
show his regard to righteousuess and unchangeable holiness:
All the attributes of the Almighty are blended together, and
they that look at him as a Father, irrespective of his kingly
character, take a perverted view, and only see him through their
own imagination. It is in the atonement that the paternal rela«
tionshipis most perfectly seen,not shrouded by the regal, but the
majesty of the one, rendered attractive by the benignity of the
other, we behold the just God and Saviour. As St. John says,
the just God justifying all that believe in Christ. Justice,
truth, and holiness are the safe guard of love. For as the
planets reflect the glory of the sun, so do the divine attributes
reflect the glory of deity, justice, righteousness, truth, and
holiness, and all the glorious perfections of the Almighty are
all kept in their proper place, and guided (if I might so speak)
in their centrepetal and centrefugal forces by the central power
of love, which causes them all to work harmoniously for the
glory of God, and the good of all. It is said emphatically that
God is love, but not so of any other attribute. In the bible
redemption God does not change his character, neither does
Christ take the part of the sinner against God, but admits the
evil and danger, and provides for it by standing in the sinners
place, giving his blood as a ransom, by which he reveals a God
of mercy, who is willing to receive penitent sinners, and treat
them as if they had never sinned. The proper view of bible
redemption therefore is not that God could not show mercy till


vengeance were taken on the innocent, but that the hindrance of
law might be taken away in order that he might show mercy.
In the paternal love and no wrath scheme, it is asserted that
the obedience of Christ was the sacrifice, and that this
obedience constituted the atonement; that the blood of Christ
is of no more value than any other blood; that it is through
his perfect obedience and goodness that we obtain pardon of
sin for the past, and are sanctified by his example in the
practice of virtue, gradually drawn to God from beholding him
wholly as a father.
By this one-sided view of Deity as exclusively a God of
love, the beauty and magnificence of his character is defaced ;
the propitiatory and vicarious nature of the sacrifice of Christ
is done away with, and he simply becomes a teacher, an
example, and a martyr. Men are supposed to be won from
their vicious courses by the exhibition of the Divine
complacency; all wrath, justice, righteousness, holiness,
eternal hell, are all abolished. God is a Father, and no king
regulates his affairs in this world, irrespective of all his other
dominions, without respect to law, order, or truth ; thus,
according to this doctrine, we cannot say with St. John that
we are justified by his blood, and saved from wrath; that we
have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, or
that being justified freely by his grace through the redemption
that is in Christ, whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood—Rom. hi.; to declare his
righteousness for the same, &c. If we are not exposed by
nature to wrath and danger and the curse of the law, what
have we to be redeemed from ? And if Christ did not lay
down his life for our life, and suffer in our place, how can it
be said Christ is a just God and Saviour. Or that he is the
propitiation for our sin, and if there is no wrath in God, what
means the words—“ The wicked shall be turned into hell
with all the nations that forget God.” “ Where the fire is
not quenched and the worm dieth not.” “ Verily, verily, I
say unto thee fear not him who can only destroy the body,
but fear him who can destroy both body and soul in hell.”
(See Gospel by Matthew). “ For the wrath of God is
revealed against all unrighteousness, &c.” “Tribulation,
anguish, and woe to all that doeth evil to the Jew first and
also to the Gentile.” (See Roman Ist and 2nd chapters.)
Man has two passions—hope and fear. The Gospel appeals
to both. How presumptuous then to separate what God has
put together.
This is an old and dangerous heresy now gaining ground


in some of the churches, and the more so as it comes so near
the Gospel, and being- couched in language and phraseology
so similar to that of Evangelical that a man might teach it
clandestinely for years and not be discovered. Nor is it so
much by what they preach as by what they don't preach, that
you may know them, for such men never preach Christ
crucified, the wisdom of God and the righteousness of God,
regeneration and sanctification by the application of the
atonement to the heart, but on the contrary a cold, lifeless
morality, the necessity of virtue and good works, all of which
is congenial to the natural man, and interferes not with his
worldly spirit. Such men never can have a true peace,
assurance, or power, for the Holy Spirit don't witness to
anything but the truth. I warn you, my friends, against this
doctrine and the men that preach it. They are generally
popularity hunters, or metaphysical speculators ; nor should
their nice manners, their suasive and social qualities prevent
their exposure, for by these attractions they can more
effectually deceive the simple; such men are enemies to the
cross of Christ, and subverters of the faith of the Gospel. To
admit such men as these into the church, and patronise them
with a gift, is churchism as broad as the devil could wish it.
Pont’us Pilate gave Christ a true verdict, and yet gave him up
to be crucified. These gentlemen give Christ all the titles of
his Godhead, and yet hand him over to their philosophy to be
robbed of his propitiatory and vicarious sacrifice. They have
not the open honesty to declare what they mean, and their
piety is vacillating, halting, and worldly. They cannot make
an open, bold witness for Christ, neither in holiness nor
spirituality of life - t and thus they may be justly classed with
the Pious Privateer, who would rob the Gospel of everything
saving and the Christian life of all its peculiarity.
THE RATIONALIST.
The infidelity of the present day does not manifest itself in
open denial of everything sacred m divine truth, nor in
licentiousness or immorality of life ; on the contrary, it shelters
itself under the mask of virtue, brotherhood, philanthropy,
benevolence, &c. The name sceptic, infidel, atheist, &c.,
being changed for the milder cognomen of rationalist,
secularist, spiritualist, transcendentalist, &c. These learned
gentlemen not being able to submit their reason to the word
of inspiration, nibble at its tail end, but like the viper and the
file find it too hard for their philosophic digestion, seeking to


establish a wisdom and a righteousness of their own instead of
submitting to that of God. They have been permitted to
walk in their own delusions, like wandering stars, to whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.
These philosophers so called require mathematical certainty
forsooth ; that is, they want to be compelled to believe, whether
they will or no. There is not sufficient proof, say they, that
the Bible is of Divine authority, and yet these same gentlemen
can believe in a thousand things more incomprehensible and
without one half of the evidence that the Bible has. But I
think 1 could give them a clue to the secret of their unbelief;
as for instance let the four words atonement, faith,
regeneration, and damnation be expunged from the Bible,
and I venture to say there would not be such a book
in the universe with them, nor would you ever hear of the ten
thousand quibbles and objections that are made against it, all
of which have been answered a thousand times over. It is
admitted, by those who are competent to judge of such matters,
that there is more evidence of the truth of Scripture than
there is of the statements in any other book whatever, and to
deny the mass of evidence that can be brought to bear upon
the subject, constitutes a man not only an unbeliever, but a
rebel. These words, atonement, faith, &c., explain the secret
of their hostility, for although there is great diversity of
opinion in respect to the various systems of philosophy, yet in
this they all agree to a man, viz., that Jesus Christ and his
work of salvation on the cross was a grand mistake. Some do
not vulgarly say, away with such a system from the earth, but
politely fritter it into a myth, or a spiritual fog, probably
produced by the atmosphere of their own opium or cigar. It
is not any wonder that, under these and perhaps more inspiring
influences, they feel their soul is a revelation to itself, and
want no other. These vast minded men who talk of the
distances, the eternities, the immensities, the great bell of the
universe,sensationalphilosophy, ideal philosophy, transcendental
philosophy, surely they ought to take out a patent and let us
know which of the philosophical Gods is to have the
pre-eminence, for since the time of Porphery, Shaftesbury,
Voltaire, &c., down to the latest bubble, they have not settled
on any one theological system that could stand the gaze of
common sense for twenty-four hours—like a battlement of
clouds which passes away to give place to a new development,
they throw down everything and build up nothing. One class
of philosophers will say God is nature, another that he has no
nature. The Pantheist says God is at hand in everything;


the Rationalist says he is afar off, and don't trouble himself
about earthly affairs. One will say the world is the effect of
natural laws without any lawgiver ; another insists that the
world sprung from a fire mist, from the concatenation of atoms
advanced into a progressive development from the monkey to
the man. Some believe that an ever-changing faith is more
beautiful than a fixed one; and others believe that all nations
have their religion, and that all are alike good. One class
will tell you your own consciousness is God, and therefore that
you ought to worship yourself. Some believe that the pollution
of man by nature is only accidental, and does not belong to
the race, and that evil is only good in another form; others,
again, declare that a sense of beauty, or of self-interest, is
sufficient without bible teaching. One says miracles are
impossible, that God cannot hear prayer, and that the
prophecies are all impositions; another says the Scriptures
contradict our moral sensations, that as God is the author of
our moral nature, so must his revealed will harmonise with it.
There is another class of philosophers so extremely spiritualised
beyond ordinary humanity, that I suppose they must live upon
otto of roses, ambrosia, and nectar—Transcendentalists they
call them. These gentlemen have got so far above St. Paul,
that they look down with contempt upon the poor Apostle, as
being altogether too selfish a mortal for their imitation; they
would do virtue on account of its own value, and not for
reward in another world—generous souls they are ; but what
proof do they give of their disinterestedness ? St. Paul suffered
the loss of all things, yea, of life itself, because he thought the
Gospel would bless the world. What, may I ask, has your
Gospel and that of other speculators cost you ? How many
souls has it raised up from the lowest wretchedness, and caused
them to rejoice whilst living, and triumph when dying ? How
many benevolent institutions, philanthropic enterprises, and
charitable asylums has infidelity raised up ? What has your
various philosophic systems cost you? The ambition of
immortalising yourselves by a new addition of an old saw;
the glory of standing on a higher dunghill and crowing a
little louder than your predecessors. May I enquire has your
consciousness ever looked inward and considered your intense
insignificance; by what measure do you measure yourself;
have you ever considered the majesty and purity of the moral
law; how it goes through all the ramifications of your nature,
showing itself to be as high above man as the light of the sun
is above that of the glow-worm; does your denial of moral
evil make it the less, and if you cannot account for the disease^


is it wise to cavil with God about the remedy ; if the bible
represents moral evil black, does not nature and experience
make it still more so; can you tell what part of the world is
not polluted with moral, physical, and natural evil ? To talk
of a sense of beauty and self-interest being sufficient to guide
man and control his passions, is to talk of the chaff withstanding
the hurricane.
What if you had no revelation from God at all, then should
there not be a thousand times more cause to doubt there was
such a being; but on the supposition that the bible is a
revelation of God, is it not reasonable to submit to its teachings,
although in some things it may be above our comprehension ?
How is it that, if you cannot believe the Christian verities, you
can credit a thousand things more incredible ? How is it you
can believe that Christ and the Apostles conspired to deceive
the world for the sake of having themselves put to death ; that
the Christian nations are deceived, and led to embrace a life of
the utmost purity for a vain conceit; that the Almighty is
unable to stop the wheels of nature, and perform a miracle,
although omnipotent; that the fooleries, absurdities, and
nonsense that compose the creeds of the heathen nations are
to be put on a level with the Word of God, and that the
fulfilment of prophecy is only the effect of blind chance ? These
and a thousand other incredible things you are obliged to
believe to get rid of the Scriptures. Is not reason a slippery
plank to walk on when the sun is in your eyes? What has
reason done for the world in its best state without revelation,
and what is it doing now for the heathen nations ? How is it
that thousands of the best and most learned men have seen
nothing contrary to reason in the Scriptures ? Are sceptics,
the only men who know the proper use of reason, and are
not duped by priestcraft ? How is it that reason gives such
contradictory evidence; can you account for a man professing
to be guided by reason denying the being of a God, a great
first cause, and believing that the world made itself? Do
not men’s fancy passions and imagination often run away with
their proper judgment and reason ?
Your moral consciousness, you say, contradicts the testimony
of revelation. How then do you account for the sense of sin
and wrath in the human bosom, and the universal practice of
Sacrifice throughout the world in all ages; and does it not
appear very odd, if the Almighty is only our loving Father,
that we his creatures should be served out with broken
constitutions, with storms, tempests, earthquakes, war, &c.,
and left morally destitute, our best deeds being (without his


grace) splendid sins—a most dilapidated virtue, the more
pitiable not to know it ?
To view Bible redemption as only having reference to this
world, instead of an exhibition of God’s divine attributes and
perfections before the universe, is great littleness of mind. He
that is first offended has a right to dictate the terms of
reconciliation. To pardon sin without respect to law is to.
spread confusion through the universe. To plan salvation that
can honor law and maintain the integrity of his throne in
unchangeable righteousness, at the same time showing love,
mercy, and compassion unparalleled, is wisdom in the highest,
incomprehensible to all but to the Almighty himself.
Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the
world. He that believeth shall be saved ; he that believeth
not shall be damned. These words will be the rise and fall of
this lower world to all eternity; according to the eternal
wisdom of God these words cut off all atheists, deists, Jews,
Unitarians, Socinians, Pantheists, socialists, spiritualists, and
all others who, having heard the Gospel, reject the atonement,
the blood of Christ for the remission of their sins, and herein
consists their condemnation; not that they are sinners, but in
the rejection of God’s remedy, preferring darkness to light and
their own righteousness to Christ’s. They must stand before
their Judge in their moral deformity and nakedness, refusing
mercy through a Redeemer, they stand obnoxious to God’s
justice and fiery wrath, which shall devour the adversary.
Unbelievers may be divided into three classes, viz., atheists,
rationalists, and spiritualists. First, in reference to atheists,
though incredible it may appear, there are some even in the
present day, who deny the existence of a first Supreme Being;
but as there are comparatively few of this character, and as it
would be useless to reason with fools or madmen, I shall
take no notice of such, for the man who can look at the heavens
above, the earth beneath, the flowers, birds, and the
constitution of his own body and mind, and can come to the
conclusion that they all formed themselves by chance, or some
other force of nature, must indeed be fit company for the ass
or the maniac.
Second, the rationalists are those who ignore everything
supernatural in the Bible, who reduce everything, the Infinite
himself, to their own standard of reason. There have been
many learned men of this class: Lord Shaftesbury, Hume,
Voltaire, &c. In England and Germany they are very
numerous. There are many shades of opinion amongst them,
but they all agree in the denial of the atonement. There is


another class of rationalists in France and England, who
would, under the pretence of liberty, equality, fraternity, &c.,.
revolutionise the world. They would abolish law, order,,
marriage, property, and religion, and bring in a state of
things destructive of everything good. John Owen’s pets,
pothouse politicians, sensuality, and selfishness their guiding
star, and death an eternal sleep, their refuge. They call for
courtesy and toleration, that they may spread their net and
drag down to hell as many as they can catch, men who on>
their part would violate our holiest feelings, traduce the
Saviour, and laugh at everything sacred in heaven and earth;
such are the men who profess to be guided by reason
forsooth I
Third, the spiritualists are a more respectable and moral
class of men. They aim at virtue, and talk about a more
earnest religion, of benevolence, philanthropy, &c. They live
in the cloudy regions of metaphysical dreams and Utopian
chimeras. They look at the Scriptures through a glass
of their own manufacture, and would make myths of
the miracles and prophecies. They are ever on the stretch for
some new development in hopes of finding the unknown God,
One introduces the science of geology, another produces his
own consciousness, and a third brings his mathematical
reckoner to prove that Moses told a falsehood, when he spoke
to the children of Israel before the tent door, &c., all of which
has been proved upon a little Biblical investigation to be
mares' nests , and shows us what a pretty state of things we
are coming to when such gentlemen as hold these views are
recognised bishopsof the English church,and cannot be expelled.
Another of these would be philosophers. Professor Newman,
tells us he was seven years seeking for truth and could not
find it, and was certain nobody else could. Poor man, I could
bring him to hundreds who have found it in twenty-four hours,
and some in one hour; but then they were men who did not
dictate to God, and say thou shalt not reveal thyself to me
in this way; they did not bring down omnipotence and his
plans to their reason, but submitted their reason to them.
They were common sense men who heard of a book called
the bible; a book acknowledged by the Christian churches in all
ages to be divine; a book that has stood the severest test of
criticism. They read and find such a wonderful adaptation of
its truths to their state, condition, and feelings, that conviction
of its truth, and their sinfulness and danger take the place of
self-complacency; and seeing it proclaimed that salvation
through a crucified Saviour may be obtained by repentance


towards God and faith in Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit
promised, to help our infirmities, they fly to the Lamb of
God, who taketh away the sin of the world, and find rest and
peace. They walk securely, joyfully, and gloriously on earth
to a better home above, whilst the poor speculator remains in
the mists of his own imagination a gigantic groper looking for
the sun whilst it shines around him. Puffed up in his vain
mind, he knows everything but that which is most essential—
himself, sin, the law, his destiny, his God; so besotted is he,
that even at the expense of common sense and soul preservation,
he rushes upon the thick bosses of God’s buckler, and so,
like a fool, he lives and dies. So much for reason without
revelation!
Spiritualism ! There is scarcely a thing divine that Satan
does not raise up a spurious imitation of. The spirituality of
the New Testament consists of the contemplation of heavenly
objects in assimilation to Christ, in emptiness of self-pride and
vanity and worldly cankering cares, and in a constant zeal for
the advancement of his kingdom; but the spirituality ot these
men consists of arrogance and presumptions curiosity. Like
Satan, they would stand on the side of the north and proclaim
themselves Gods too, and drive the Eternal from his throne,
thinking they could make a better world than that in which
they live.
These are times in which churches have need to be on their
guard against impostors, when the very elect are deceived.
Times when men study Christianity as a science, preach its
doctrines as a magpie, and disseminate their infidel speculations
as Jesuits, who are as unscrupulous of oaths and subscriptions,
as they are destitute of honour and truth ; and who play with
a fire that will consume them to all eternity.
THE BABYLONIAL PROTESTANT MINISTRY.
The Babylonial Protestant Ministry are the first-born of the
Scarlet Lady—the Ultramontane high-church party. They
are the boldest and most audacious of all the Pope’s fugle-rnen.
.They profess to be from Oxford, but I rather think they are
from Belial’s College. However that may be, they certainly
do not conceal their colours. They openly avow what they
mean, and are not ashamed nor afraid to wear the broad stamp
of the harlot across their foreheads; they say what they mean
and glory in their shame. It had been better, in my opinion,
had these gentlemen not been interfered with, as they have
been at home lately; but to have given them a little more


sway, and then by a coup de main get rid of them bodily.
Bat now they can just as successfully carry out their designs
Tinder the appearance of an outward conformity; the real evil
being not so much in the outward demonstration, as in the
principles that give rise to them.
These ecclesiastical freebooters rob the church of its religion,
the state of its allegiance, and the bible of its truth. Standing
midway between Protestantism and Popery, they are doing
the work of perversion more effectually than if they were
within the precincts of the Papal fabric. Apostolical Succession,
Baptismal Regeneration, and Sacramental Efficacy is their
istock-in-trade, out of which they make sacerdotal capital; and
being able to draw to any amount out of the Pope's warehouse;
•they would exchange their traditionary fables tor our common
sense, liberty, intelligence, and the word of God. For the
light of faith they give you candle light; for the water of life
a sham sacrifice; and for the true spiritual worship and
knowledge of God they teach a cabalistic salvation, bannerism,
or the Gospel made easy, by the camera obscura of wax lights,
holy oil, incense, and the shuffiiug of other holy trifles. These
are the honourable gentlemen who say the reformation was a
great mistake; who acknowledge Rome to be a true church ;
who make a sacrifice of our Lord’s Supper; and would
introduce confession and the whole paraphernalia of a popish
ritual if they dared. They are highly educated and intellectual,
know the Greek and Latin languages; their professed object
is to promote a higher state of spiritual life, a more
•earnest Christianity, for which purpose they come out with
marchings and counter-marchings, with flags and coloured
drapery, and by charging their people to make a good
bold stand up declaration of their baptismal vows, &c.,
they hope to bring the dead to life, and put Satan
to flight. But we must not forget that with all these
professions and performances, there is not a Bible principle or
a saving truth but what they would sacrifice to their episcopal
and sacerdotal pretensions. They would patronise all the old
wives' fables and legends of Popery, put the Gospel into
swaddling clothes, and teach the veriest trash for sacred truth,
and put tradition in the place of Holy Scripture.
These learned gropers come out as angels of light, and are
patronised and upheld simply because of the entire Scriptural
ignorance and spiritual blindness of the professing Christians.
Sacramental efficacy ! How dare you talk about sacramental
efficacy when your perfidious conduct and hypocrisy are
overturning the very foundations of morality, and causing the


nation to drift into downright infidelity and scepticism ? How
dare you point to apostolical succession, when there is not the
remotest approach to apostolical preaching or practice in your
proceedings. Was not Elymas, the sorcerer, an honest man
compared with you ? for he would have sold the Holy Ghost
if he could have bought him; but you retain your living by
betraying the hand that gives you bread. Judas sold his
master, but repented, and threw down the price of blood ; but
you hold the fleece in spite of honor, truth, and the protest of
your church’s articles, and your own oaths and subscriptions.
Under the idea of exalting Christ, you are exalting yourselves,
with one hand embracing and giving him the kiss of peace,
whilst with the other perverting his Gospel, and sticking him
under the fifth rib. You may well be called sacrificers, for
there is not an honorable principle between God and man but
what you are violating. I do not think there is a particle of
Protestant blood in your veins, for none but Jesuits of the
blackest coat who are capable of any monstrosity for the sake of
the church could act as you do. St. Paul was a high churchman
when he went about slaughtering the saints. Alexander, the
coppersmith, was a high churchman, when he said our craft is
in danger, and though meek you now are, if times were changed
and you had the power, you would soon again repeat the doings
of Laud. St. Paul was first converted and then called to preach
the Gospel. Know ye not that the call of a parent’s last
resource for an imbecile son is not the call of God, neither is
the call of a rich patron, nor of ambition. The Lord don’t
send the spiritually lame, blind, and halt to perform for others
what they most require themselves. The apostle showed his
credentials by pureness, by knowledge, by the power of
righteousness on the right hand and the left. By what do
you show them ? By perjury, priestly arrogance, superstition,
and unwarranted pretensions.
St. Paul was a steward of the mysteries of the hidden wisdom
of God, now made manifest to the saints, the wisdom of the
knowledge of God as beheld in the face of Jesus Christ. Of
what mysteries are you the stewards? The mysteries of
confession, of sacramental legerdemain, of communion table
manceuvering, of holy smoke and candlelight.
You class Dissenters with Socinians, and thereby show your
undistinguished bigotry and ignorance of what truth is,
forgetting that if it were not for Dissenters you would not be
at the present time even respectable formalists. You pray for
a union of the English, Romish, and Eastern churches: what
an edifying spectacle to see hundreds of millions all linked


together, gagged and manacled, marching on in their slavish
integrity, headed by one of the greatest political and religious
dupes this world has ever beheld. You say the Reformation
was a mistake. In what respect was it a mistake ? Was the
destruction of monkish.pauperism, bigotry, tyranny, oppression,
superstition, and licentious nunneries a mistake? Was the
destruction of the most diabolical of hell’s contrivances, the
Inquisition, a mistake ? Was the spread of education, science
and art, and the glorious light of an open Bible a mistake ?
Was it unnecessary to put a stop to the sale of indulgences,
every sin having its price, under the authority of a Pope, done
in the name of the Holy Trinity? Could infamy go farther?
Ye be witness against yourselves, that these things you would
approve and be accomplices of those who slay the people of
God, and bring bondage, darkness, and death again upon the
world.
The above address is to the Babylonial clergy, but allow me
now to say a few words to the Babylonial laity.
BABYLONIAL LAITY.
You may think, my brethren, that the above address is
entirely too sharp, uncharitable, and severe; but I would have
you to remember that a false teacher is the worst enemy of
man, for he not only destroys the foundation of your present
happiness, but that also of your eternal hopes. There is less
excuse for these men than even for Popish priests, who are
bound up in a strait jacket to look one way. It is not charity
therefore to allow thousands of souls to be deluded to hell for
the sake of sparing the feelings of a few. Now I would say to
you, my brethren, be no longer children, tossed about by men
who lie in wait to deceive you, who under fail; pretensions
would enslave you body and soul, and drag you down to the
lowest servility and bondage, that they might glory in your
flesh, tie you to their ceremonial car, and make a clerical
exhibition of you. Ho not let it be said you have need that
one teach you the first principles, for he is a babe who is
unskilful in the word, and knoweth not wholesome food from
puff cakes. Baptismal vows, lighted candles, banners, acolytes,
&c., may be harmless things enough in themselves, but when
they take the place of Christ, of faith, of love, and
righteousness in the Holy Ghost, they become poisonous, and
ought to be repudiated with all such teachers as love the form of
religion but deny its power.
There are none so dispassionate as those who know not the


Gospel. They think they can afford to be cool because they
have never felt its value nor its power; sceptics and nominal
Christians cry out for gentle treatment because they do not wish
to be awoke out of their death slumber. But truth must be
asserted, for truth is omnipotent and must prevail.
Babylonial laymen, I am ashamed of you. I call you
Babylonial because you are not only on the road to Babylon,
the great seat of spiritual fornication, but you are now in
her, and so are all who, like you, partake of her incantations
and enchantments, and mix them up with the pure water of
life. lam aware there may be some well meaning mistaken
men amongst you; but is not every fanatic sincere ? Was not
John Owen sincere when he gave up a great portion of his
property to carry out his plans to upset the world ? And was
not Dominick sincere when he invented the inquisition ? And
were not the Flagallents sincere when they half whipped
themselves to death? Sincerity, therefore, is no proof to
others either of truth or falsehood. The Gospel, and tho
Gospel alone, is our salvation, and not the figments and
speculations and ceremonies of foolish men.
EVANGELICAL CLERGY.
What I mean by Evangelical Ministers are men whose
Christian experience has put them above the beggarly elements,
old wives fables, children's playthings, and first principles;
who know the proper time, place, and value of ceremony and
church order; whose faith is not made manifest by candle
light; whose Gospel call is not temporal expediency; and whose
love of God and man is not of nature, but grace. Men who
do not feed the sheep with a ritualistic crust, nor lift up out
of the miry clay with baptismal quackery ; who do not plaster
over the guilty conscience with the untempered mortar of a
sacramental spell, nor sooth into a death slumber those who
are seeking light; who do not preach Christ by genuflections,
marchings, taper lights, and banners, &c., nor throw the holy
revelation into chancery by tradition.
I speak of men who are saved by the Gospel, and not of
hoping, halting, limping, speculating, doubting believers; of
men whose life and ministrations give no uncertain sound, as
it is only such who can properly teach others, and are called
of God; not that I mean such characters are free from
imperfection and infirmity, both spiritual and physical, but
that they are men of true hearts, sound principles, and loyal to
Christ; their spots are not those of the world. Such men


alone know the value of a pure Gospel, and how to defend it
from earthly admixtures. They (like the Apostles) lead on
their flocks from faith to faith, exhibiting the promises of God,
which are all yea and amen in Christ, comprehending with all
Saints the height and length and breadth of the love of God,
which passeth knowledge, and are changed into the same
image from glory to glory.
They are men who do not live in a nutshell; they are not
narrow, exclusive, bigoted, nor sectarian ; but can participate
in the glorious work of salvation in every denomination. They
are not too high to mix up with Christ’s brethren and
sympathise with his work, nor ashamed of his cross. They
know how to divide the word of truth, and handle their
spiritual armour.
To such men as these, whether they be conformists or
nonconformists, I would presume to say a few words in stirring
up your pure minds by way of remembrance. And first, to
those gentlemen who are in the establishment, whose situation
is peculiar and critical, I would say, when the bonds of men
and the bonds of Christ pull different ways, I think your safest
way would be to let go the former, otherwise you must find it
difficult to keep your conscience as the noon-day clear, and all
your converse be sincere. Nevertheless, to let the lump be
without salt might not be in accordance with the wisdom that
is from above, and would only hasten her down the rapids. You
have need of what St. Paul had, much prayer and evangelical
unity. Under all circumstances, make up your mind for
trouble, opposition, slander, and abuse; for woe to those whom
all men speak well of: you cannot serve two masters.
Remember that rotten wood shines bright; that a man may
do what is called good works and not have charity; but he
cannot have charity and not have good works. Remember
that the depth of a true contrition is not always in proportion
to the amount of iniquity committed against God, but according
to the light of the Holy Spirit in applying the law to the
conscience; and remember that a true repentance has no need
to be repeated, because if it be true, the evil is given up and
repudiated; remember that a heart broken sigh, a tear, or a
good desire, is worth, in the sight of God, all the litanies and
beautiful prayers in the universe unuttered by the soul, and
that you might read and say prayers to all eternity and not
utter one word of prayer; remember that a true faith will
justify, sanctify, glorify; that it will bring full assurance,
perfect love, cast out all fear, triumph over the law, sin, death,
and hell, and unite you to Christ and make you one with God


for ever ; recollect that good works and a holy heart must go
together to be acceptable to God, that an action is either good
or bad in his sight according to the motive with which it is
performed, and any reprobate can do what is called charity ;
remember that a Christian’s recreation is to do the will of his
master; that the joy of a true believer is not that of the
world ; do not be all things to all men, unless your motive is
to win souls to Christ; remember it is easier to stand the
curse than the laugh; and don’t forget that this is an age of
sport, when regeneration and jollification go together; let not
your charity to one be your hatred to hundreds ; remember we
often allow our charity to be blind, when to see would require
self-denial, and the taking up of the cross; true charity
seeketh not her own, that is, lays down its own interest for
others welfare; doth not behave itself unseemly; the most
unseemly and disorderly thing in the Lord’s sight is a cold,
frozen heart, earthly affections, and formal worship ; beareth,
hopeth, and enduretb all things, that is, of a personal nature,
but what child cries not out when it sees its mother stabbed ;
is not easily provoked; gives blessing for cursing ; is not
puffed up, because it has nothing of its own, and boasts in the
righteousness of another; remember that charity carries a
sharp blade, the sword of the spirit, which penetrates the
heart, and is a discerner of the thoughts and imaginations, &e.
Remember that Satan has his revivals, and does much
business these times as an angel of light; that his revivals
begin and end in smoke ; that Satan does not cast out Satan*
A revival of forms, ceremonies, repetition of creeds, banners,
and candle light, is only a washing of the blackamoor white,
ending in a deeper dip into the miry clay.
Remember that all such manoeuvering is only devil’s dust to
keep men from the real work of conversion and salvation;
remember that a bishop may be as much a ritualist, who only
reads according to the laws of the church, as a man who, in
spite of public opinion, carries out his taper light folly.
Remember to take warning against the paternal all love salvo,
that God has more worlds than one to govern, that the Gospel
scheme is a defence of the righteousness of God, and that the
Gospel cannot be taken from nor added to without ruin.
Remember, if Christ did not shed his blood for our persons and
bear our punishment, then the Gospel is a sham, hell a
bugbear, and the Almighty changeable and weak, just such an
one as ourselves. Recollect if we are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus, it is not a bastard faith, but saving


faith—saving so far as to be free from all condemnation, so
that sudden death would be sudden glory.
Let not the expectation of a gift come between you and a
single eye to Christ. Don’t patronise card playing, billiard
playing, gambling, or theatricals. Beware of a spiritualism
without the spirit; carry not the mark of the followers of the
beast on your persons. Remember there is no two Gospels, one
for the rich and one for the poor ; one for the moral and another
for the immoral.
Beware of pharisees, formalists, rationalists, &c., who are all
cousins german to one parent, the assertion of man's
righteousness, and denial of that of the Almighty. Remember
that men who are well paid for talking will never be at a loss
for words to make their doctrine smooth and plausible and
acceptable to the carnal mind ; remember that the Lord has
his envoys extraordinary, his scouts and sharp shooters, and
although some of their courses, like the comets, may appear
erratic and ominous to the safety of others, yet their
movements are directed and overruled for the good and
edification of the whole body in love; remember to be spoken
well of by some is the surest sign of your unfaithfulness to
Christ, and that slander is the epidemic of Hobart Town ;
remember to raise the fallen, support the weak, rebuke
hypocrisy, and when you have done your best, remember that
a it is not by might nor by power, but my spirit/’ saith the
Lord.
Remember that time is short, the enemy is in your camp,
that peace with Rome is worse than war, that they will ever
cry out for toleration and equal rights, till they get the power
to burn Protestants ; remember that you may be within three
years of the Millenium; recollect that Christ is King, the
Lord ruleth, and heaven and earth and hell are subject to his
sway, look to the glory that eye hath not seen, and remember
that you shall reign by and bye as kings, and shine as stars for
ever; that you shall rule the nations, judge angels, go in and
out through the gates of the city, and inherit all things, the
universe; that you shall behold the King in his beauty, the
beatific vision with the enraptured host of God’s elect, and
sing the new song.
Remember that a time will come when you shall stand where
Paul, Moses, and the highest archangel in glory now stands,
and when they shall be proportionately higher still, for as the
finite can never come up to the infinite, the same progress of


infinite felicity, knowledge, and glory will continue to all
eternity. May it be your happy lot. Fare you well, my
beloved brethren.
1
Burst, ye emerald gates, and bring
To my raptured vision,
All the ecstatic joys that spring
Round the bright Elysium,
Lo ! we lift our longing eyes ;
Break, ye intervening skies ;
Sons ef righteousness, arise ;
Open the gates of Paradise.
11.
Floods of everlasting light
Freely flash before Him ;
Myriads with supreme delight
Constantly adore Him ;
Angel trumps resound His fame,
Lutes of lucid gold proclaim
All the honois of His name,
Heaven echoing the theme.
Pour and twenty elders rise
From their princely station ;
Shout his glorious victories,
Sing His great salvation :
Cast their crowns before His throne,
Cry in reverential tone—
“ Glory be to God alone !
Holy, holy, holy One 1”
Hark ! the thrilling symphonies
Seem, methinks, to seize us ;
Join we, too, the holy lays—
Jesus, Jesus, Jesus,
Sweetest sound in seraph’s song,
Sweetest note on mortal’s tongue,
Sweetest carol ever sung ;
Jesus, Jesus, flow along.
EVANGELICAL LAITY.
Having addressed the Evangelical Clergy, it may not be
amiss to suggest a few things also to the Laity ; and, in the
first place, don’t imagine that a knowledge of theological
subjects is exclusively the privilege of the clergy. It is the
duty of all, so far as their mental capacity and opportunity will
allow, to know the doctrines of salvation; for by this you not
only keep yourselves in the truth, and detect heresy and the
spurious adulterations of deceivers, but you will be able to
withstand Antichrist and edify one another; for be assured
these are perilous times when the very elect may be deceived.
Therefore take heed to yourselves and the Gospel, of which the
Holy Spirit hath made you guardians and defenders. Recollect
the church is the pillar and ground of truth, able to try the
spirits and prove all things.
I need not say love, honour, and respect your ministers, for
this you are always willing to do; but see that you do it on a
proper basis, that is, if they hold in an unmutilated Gospel; if
they manifest superior humility, faith, and love; and are an
example of zeal and unworldliness. In these respects let them
have as much pre-eminence as they wish, but remember that
pastors are not masters, much less lords and despots. Whilst
you acknowledge the dignity of the ministerial office don't
forget your own. If they have the rule over you mind it must
be in the Lord, and as those who watch for your soul and not


for your pocket. In the Lord all are one—clergy and laity are
men-made distinctions; therefore, as priests of the living temple
handle the vessels of the Lord, the temporal arrangements and
■ordinances of his house with decency and order.
As co-workers and witnesses of Christ be bold and courageous
as well as meek and lowly ; be no trimmers, nor halters, nor
worldly wisemen; but if the Lord be God, follow him. As
stewards of the mysteries of God’s hidden wisdom show forth
your faith in holiness, benevolence, and truth. Be subject to
each other, for unity and order sake, and do not be taking
offence at every trifle Do not be narrow, sectarian, or bigoted.
If you are personally attached to a body, let not }■ our soul be
bound; recollect the Christian is the freest man in the world,
free from all that he may serve all. Sects differ on earth, but
in heaven they are all one. If, therefore, you believe in the
communion of saints, let go your petty narrowness and
sympathise with all that Christ has sympathy with, and think
not of being more acceptable to God by making a party
Shebboleth of a shadow or a doctrine that is not essential. Do
not think that the most intellectual preachers are always the
most profitable, for the plainest truths preached in the simplest
manner, brought home by the Holy Spirit and put into action
is that in which true edification consists. Nor is it the
knowledge of literature, nor the labours of study, that makes
an efficient minister so much as the light of the Holy
Spirit and the labour of prayer. Neither imagine that
the constant repetition of the Gospel is the cause of its
non-success, The little effect of the Gospel lies in the want
of spiritual power in those that preach it, and of f aith in them
that hear it. The proof of this is the success of men of love
and the Holy Spirit in places, where those of an opposite
character have laboured for years comparatively useless. If
our Lord himself did not convert many, the Holy Spirit was
not poured out till he was offered up, when greater works,
according to his promise, were to be accomplished. The
Gospel may be frustrated in various ways, as well by earthly
figments as improper men. It may be preached mechanically,
speculatively, scientifically, theoretically, fraudulently, con-
tentiously, hypocritically, emblamatically, and prospectively.
It may be preached as the good news, without knowing or
feeling anything about the terrors of the Lord. But it is he
alone who preaches practically, experimentally, and from love,
that is the true preacher. For who is sufficient to bear such
responsibility, and to wear out his body and soul in such a
work as this, battling against unbelief, the mistakes of a


formal people, and an infidel world, but he that is sustained
by love and faith, and the earnest prayers of a congregation ?
To ministers influenced by other motives, the preaching of the
Gospel is comparatively light work; a lawyer at the bar feels
only for his own reputation. Therefore, my brethren, attribute
not the want of success of God’s saving plan of mercy to its
oft repetition, nor to Calvinian secret councils, nor anything
else but to its perversion and our own unfaithfulness, for He
willeth not the death of a sinner, but that all should repent.
Do not condemn those who do not work in the same line of
things with yourselves, as all are not called to the same office,
and if a brother does what he can, an angel can do no more.
Bunyan did a work shut up in prison that has been useful to
thousands. There are many who to others may appear to ha
doing nothing, who have fulfilled the Lord’s will according to
their circumstances, capabilities, and light—judge not therefore
according to appearance unless you see evil fruit, and then you
may condemn the tre*.
There is a point in the administration of the Lord’s
providence to which I draw your attention, for it is of great
importance to observe, namely, that when the Almighty
clearly and plainly shows us that we are in error, and we still
continue to follow the same course, whether it be relative to
salvation or the extension of his kingdom, I say if we still
persevere, notwithstanding his clear repeated warnings to the
contrary, then will he give us up to believe a lie, and so order
his providence towards us as to confirm us in our delusion; and
whilst we think we may be doing great things for his cause
we are only encompassing ourselves with sparks of our owu
kindling, and we shall lie down in sorrow. This principle you
will see carried out both in the old and new Testaments. The
Jews and Roman Catholics illustrate it, nor is it confined to
them, but applies to his own church also in her works and
labours, very much of which, I fear, shall be treated as stubble.
This is a serious consideration, and may account for much
that is mysterious in the state of the world and the church.
For judgment I am come into the world, saith our Lord, that
they who see might not see. For this cause, says St. Paul,
shall they be given up to strong delusion to believe a lie, who
obey not the truth, but take pleasure in unrighteousness.
And now in respect to the spirit of the times in which we
live allow me to say a word or two, and let it not be thought
I advocate a gloomy, morose, and repulsive religion; for if
the Christian only considers his own security and blessedness,
there is no one who ought to be so happy—nevertheless, as


the apostle says, afflictions are not joyous but grievous, and as
the life of many a Christian is but one of affliction, their path
is more to suffer the will of God than to rejoice. This be as
it may, he is but a selfish soul who looks to his own
enjoyments and forgets the spiritual desolation and misery of
others. Is it not to be feared there is very little of this kind
of feeling just now? Private prayer, meditation, fasting,
self-examination, spirituality of mind, and self-denial, have
become very unfashionable; and in the same proportion
conversions decline, shallow piety prevails and death beds
unvictorous and untriumphant.
The manners of the French as well as their fashions have
deeply impregnated the present generation. Having
exchanged our common sense for ribbons and saucer bonnets
—Popish sanctity and frivolity being imported largely into
the English church has also tainted Dissenters, insomuch that
there is scarcely any perceptible difference between the one
and the other, either as regards fashion, amusement, business,
or religion—all go swimmingly along on the broad grin, and
appear to think a jolly man the very perfection of beauty.
The consequence of this is that many doubt whether there is
such a thing as true piety at all, and think themselves as much
regenerated as those who profess it. They see our worst part
that is our outside; but they know nothing of our inward
struggle against sin, vanity, and the love of the world. They
see our infirmities and other spots, but they know not our
devotion to Christ, our self-sacrificing love and benevolence
and our ten thousand acts of charity, and constant spirit of
praise and prayer. Thus our frivolous spirit (put on it may
be for fear of being singular) nullifies our character and
creates an infidel effect, and prevents any serious impressions
on those who are watching our example. True Christian joy
is deep, lasting, solid, serious, cheerful, hopeful, peaceful
happy. But the joy of the world is frothy, transitory,
deceitful, hypocritical. Therefore remember the words of
the apostle, “be sober, be vigilant/’ &c. The land of
levity and of laughter ought to be an example to us just now,
for think not that the French are sinners above all sinners
but unless we repent we shall likewise be visited. The absence
of religious, profitable and edifying conversation in our private
intercourse and convivial meetings is another source of
religious decay, and proves anything but that our affections
are on things above, or that we count all things as dross for
the knowledge of Christ, or that we are not ashamed of the
cross, and that the mouth speaketh from the abundance of the


heart. The Christian who can pass a whole night in frivolous
chit chat, without one word about religious experience, the
signal works of providence, the love of the Saviour, the
meaning of certain scriptures, prophecies, and doctrines, and
the ten thousand affairs of Christ's kingdom, gives, in my
opinion, sad evidence that his affections are not where they
ought to be. If the fear of hypocrisy prevent religious
conversation, then why not throw off its profession altogether?
“ Thou savourest of things of earth and not of heaven/’ may
be said to too many.
How much more profitable, edifying, and encouraging,,
would it be to have a little spiritual talk, sacred music,
or a good book, than shuffling dominoes, and distracting
your brains with chess. Music, gardening, and the sciences
are a recreation to some, and a labour to others.
Cricket may be a good exercise for youths, and is certainly a
great improvement on bull-baiting, cock-fighting, and pugilism.
But to see a whole city coming out> gentle and simple, lay
and clerical, young and old, to watch this kind of sport, is a
very easy way to be pleased, and speaks well for the simplicity
of the present generation. On the whole there is reason tor
encouragement ; as there are two sides to every question, and
as it is not prudent to look exclusively at either, a glance now
at the signs of the times may be useful; for although the
heathen world are still in idolatry, and infidelity prevails, yet
on the whole the dark empire of Satan is breaking up; the
nations are opening their arms to receive the truth; the bible
is circulating through places where it would have been death
at one time to read it; the gospel can be preached now
in France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Rome, in China, Madagascar,
&c.; missionaries are encompassing the earth; despotisms,
spiritual and temporal, are getting broken up; France, the
bulwark of Popery, and slayer of Protestant blood, is crashed
beneath the feet of the tyrant and oppressor; nor could the
whole world prevent it, such is the irresistible force of God's
decree when he, for sin, roots up and chastizes a nation. This
loud knock at the door of other countries ought to be heard.
German Rationalists take warning! Infidels take heed!
Ritualists, Popish, and English! there is a God that ruleth
in the earth and who will not be mocked.
But again these are times of great Christian enterprises, of
gigantic donations, benevolent contributions. Ministers of
grace, angels of mercy, and nurses of charity go into the jaws
of death to help the wounded and the dying. These are
earnest times when the power of long-established delusions is


giving way, when the days of national churches are numbered,
when universal education is being legislated for, and the
teetotal question is entertained by the government; when men
are wakening up to the enormous outrage on common sense
and civilization of the system of war, and the ridiculous
impositions in the administration of law, medicine, and
divinity.
There are asylums for every class of misery—upwards of 200
places as refuges for distress ; boys’ homes, ragged schools,
town and bush tract distributors, &c. There never was so
much private benevolence, public decency,, and order ; all this
and a thousand times more is the effect of the Gospel ;
therefore let us gird up the loins of our mind, and hope on to
the end. Should we not provoke one another to love and good
works ? If John the Baptist was the greatest of the prophets,
and the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he,
should not believers aim at being spiritual Noahs, Daniels,
Elijahs, and Sampsons ? Is it not written that in the New
Dispensation they shall do exploits ; one shall chase a thousand
and two put ten thousand to flights What were the doings
of the prophets but temporal illustrations of what his church
should do spiritually? If Sampson slew ten thousand with the
jaw bone of an ass, is it not to show that we may slay our
ten thousands with the sharp threshing instrument, the
Gospel? If rams’ horns threw down the walls of Jericho, are
we not to pull down the ramparts of Popish idolatry by the
trumpet of truth; and if a little stone from the brook
penetrated the Goliah’s head, are we not so to handle our
armour as to be able with the sword of the Spirit to pierce the
vitals of infidelity, formality, and hypocrisy, and swamp the
whole of the devil’s territory, demolishing kingdoms, subduing
nations, levelling mountains, bringing the spiritually dead to
life, causing the desert to blossom as the rose, and the lame,
deaf, and blind to leap for joy, and ten thousand captives to
loose their chains.
’W ithout Christ appropriating faith, you cannot be saved,
and without faith in God’s omnipotence, you cannot do a good
thing, for “ without faith it is impossible to please God.” It
was by faith that Luther confronted and baffled, the Pope and
Council at Woims, declaring that if every tile on its houses
were so many devils, he would go ; and it was by faith and the
Word of God that he struck such a mighty blow on the
apostasy as brought about the Reformation.
It was by faith that John Wesley gave up his emoluments
avid ease in the English church, and made the world his parish


and three silver spoons his fortune, whose labors weie enormous,
and whom millions will bless to all eternity.
It was by faith that Mr. Fletcher with his pen controverisally
cudgelled his enemies, defended the truth, and supported the
evangelicals. It was by faith also that he preached the Gospel
so powerfully to his reckless nephew as to make him tremble
and drop the pistol he presented at him, demanding his life or
his money.
It is by faith that Mr. Muller, of Bristol, now receives
thousands of pounds from all parts of Christendom to carry on
his orphanages and schools, without asking any one in
particular, but simply telling the Lord he requires such an
amount for such a purpose, and advertising the same in the
papers.
It would fill volumes to tell of the heroes of faith, of men
who broke the chains of slavery, reformed prisons, went
amongst savages, stopped the mouths of scoffers, turned aside
the arms of the aliens, received their dying children back to
life, out of their own nothingness waxed, valiant in fight, and
were brought off more than conquerors through him that loved
them. Have faith, therefore, for we wrestle not with flesh
and blood, but against principalities and powers, spiritual
wickedness in high places, &c.
CONCLUSION,
In conclusion, now I trust it will be seen from the whole
tenor of this work that the Gospel is the mysterious wisdom of
God, that it is unique and perfect, that it stands alone; there
is nothing like it in the universe; that it cannot be interfered
with; that it is God’s plan for saving men, from the foundation,
of the world ; that it is a manifestation of the righteousness of
God; that Judaism was its shell; that Christ is the only one
eternal High Priest; that there never was any other, the
Jewish priests being temporary and figurative; that the
Gospel is so simple that a child may understand it, and find
salvation, and yet so deep that the proudest philosopher cannct
penetrate it;, that only the weary, the burthened, and the lost
shall know it; that it is practical and not speculative, a thing
of power, and not merely of form.
Having also seen that all the six denominations of
Protestants, viz,, the English church, the Presbyterian, the
Wesleyan, Independents, Baptists, and Quakers hold this
Gospel in its doctrinal integrity; that it is the policy of Popery
and her myrmidons to magnify Protestant nonessential


differences, that she may catch them with her web of pretended
infallibility ; that the Romish church by mixing up her human
wisdom with the divine has abolished the truth, frustrated the
Gospel, and cut herself off from all spiritual connection with
Christ; that the Pope usurps the place of Christ, the priest
and sacraments that of the Holy Ghost, and tradition that of
the Word of God; that she puts what she calls the church
between the sinner and Christ, that the Holy Spirit won’t
witness to falsehood, nor apply to the heart anything but truth ;
that the Romish church neither know nor expect his influence
in conversion, and to be without the Holy Spirit is to be in
darkness, bondage, and spiritual death. Mofeover, having
seen that there can be no pardon or justification of a sinner
before God but by faith alone in Christ, because faith clothes
the sinner with God’s righteousness, and implants holiness
and love and power in the heart; that there never was nor
ever will be any other way, that it alone illustrates and
exemplifies the gospel; that there can be no good works on
any other basis; that the Popish church has become a moral
wreck by deviating from it; and having also seen that the
English church has been more anxious to secure the fleece
than to practically carry out her articles of salvation; that the
difference between the English church, Protestants, and Roman
Catholics is more nominal than real, more political than
religious, more in theory than practice; that although they
have cast off the creed of Pius IY., and with it ignorance,
intolerance, despotism,, superstition, and idolatry, yet
notwithstanding they are as a whole dead formalists, an
unregenerate mass, inconsistent and renegade concerning
their faith, and do not preach or practice their own principles,,
and that this accounts for their oneness of spirit and sympathy
with Romanism, and their contempt for Dissenters and all
who would warn them of their folly—regarding, as they do,
all such persons as unnecessary alarmists, or crotchety,,
uncharitable bigots. Having seen also that the Church of
England is like a boiling cauldron, her men of truth and
articles of truth beset by audacious incendiaries, bent on her
ruin, and that the source of their power is not in themselves
but in making Protestants the dupes of their delusions ; and
that the probable result may be that England will get a
scourging, and that each party will take their sides, when the
spiritual and united church of the Lord may come forth as a
giant refreshed with new wine, when Evangelical doctrine
and holiness will convince all heterodox medlers, worldly-wise
and infidel speculators that God’s plan shall stand, and the


gates of hell shall not prevail against his church. And,
finally, having seen that apostolical succession is a chimera of
the imagination, that those apostolical swans lay no golden
eggs, that if they were themselves regenerated they would
know more about it in others, and not deceive nor be deceived,
1 now conclude with the satisfaction of having performed,
without fear or partiality, an unpleasant duty ; and to Him
who governs all things I leave the result, knowing well that
it He bless no man can curse, and if He does not, vain is the
help of men. That it may lead thousands to light and
salvation, is the prayer, aim, and end of a
PRIEST OF THE LIVING TEMPLE.
Printed by Jambs Courtney Pratt, Hobart Town, Tasmania.


TAFf
tyguo
F 14-B^G




