

The Study Book
for
Christian Eudeavourers
3d each
Compiled by
The South Australian
Christian Endeavour Union


Contents
Page.
Study 1. The Christian Endeavourer and
Personal Living 3
Study 2. The Christian Endeavourer and the
Church 5
Study 3. The Christian Endeavourer and
Social Issues 7
Study 4. The Christian Endeavourer Perform-
ing His Tasks 10


Preface
This booklet has been prepared as the ’'Study Book” for the Mount
Barker Christian Endeavour Camp. In it consideration is given to the
vital principles of Christian Endeavour. The four studies presented are-
based on the topics discussed by the world’s leaders of C.E. at the Tenth
World’s Christian Endeavour Convention breakfast table conferences in
’’Melbourne 1938.”
We are indebted to the following experienced Christian Endeavourers
for the compiling of these studies: Rev. E. H. Watson, L.Th., Pastor
F. Cornelius, Rev. J. J. Kilmartin, Pastor W. F. Nankivell, 8.A., 8.D.,
Rev. J. Eric Tregilgas, L.Th., Pastor G. T. Fitzgerald, and Pastors F.
Hollams and L, J. Samuels.
A well-known author stated that his purpose in writing books was to
make something happen. Such is definitely the aim of those who prepared
the present studies. They are confident that the topics will be prayerfully
and carefully considered, and freely and frankly discussed, thus enabling
God to work wonderfully. It is earnestly desired that through the Holy
Spirit’s presence and power, the studies will be a means of greatly glorify-
ing God, completely enthroning Christ, soundly converting sinners, spiri-
tually enriching Christians, and more efficiently equipping them "for service
for Christ and the Church.”
Sincerely yours in C.E. bonds,
F. CORNELIUS,
President South Australian C.E. Union,




STUDY 1:
The Christian Endeavourer and Personal
Living
Macmurray says; "Unless we can discover a Christianity which is clear
enough to be a beacon for the future, and sharp enough to cut a way for
us through the tangled confusion of the present, we shall be blind guides
and fireside warriors.”
The tremendous need of the day is a vital Christianity which works.
C.E. emphasizes this. "Trusting in the Lord Jesus Christ for strength
1 will strive to do,” etc.
1. CE. DEMANDS A VITAL EXPERIENCE WITH CHRIST.
This must commence with a new birth. Trusting means first trusting
for Salvation. There has been a "half-baked” Christianity which has sought
to eliminate the evangelical and has emphasized only the moral ideals of
the Christian. Cf., Young Ruler, Mark 10: 17-22.
The message of Christianity is not moral reformation but spiritual
regeneration, John 3: 3. Christ was not merely a model for men Co
imitate but a Saviour who delivers from bondage Mark 2; 1-7;
Gal. 4: 1-5; Rom. 8: 15. The agent is the Holy Spirit. John 16: 7,8;
John 3: 5-8.
The regenerated life then becomes a Christ-filled life, Gal. 3: 20;
2 Cor. 5: 17; Col. 1; 27.
Paul often uses the striking phrase "in Christ” (see Ephesians). Christ
is the sphere in which the redeemed live and move and have their being,
Phil. I: 21.
If a man is in vital communion with Christ his life will be radiant with
love of Christ. He will not only pray well, but pay well. He will not only
talk of love outside the home but will take love into the home.
Weatherhead says: "My opinion is that in Britain in the twentieth
century, one of the greatest enemies of Christianity is a religion called
Christianity which is a pale imitation of the real thing.” Notice how the
early Christians lived. The pagans said, "These folk astonish us. They
haven’t money, culture, or prestige, yet they have learned the secret of the
mastery of the art of living. Because of this they captured an Empire
for Christ.
Therefore a Christian should examine himself and see whether he is
enjoying this vital experience, 1 Cor. 13: 5; Gal. 5: 22, 23.
2. C.E. DEMANDS PERSONAL LOYALTY TO CHRIST.
When Jesus was on earth, His followers derived inspiration from His
presence. After His death their fellowship continued with Him in a more
wonderful way. Religion was not a memory of a friend that was gone,
the carrying out of those principles which He had taught. It was a direct
contact with an unseen but living personality. Acts 18; 9-10; Gal. 2: 20;
1 Peter 1: 8.


Their Christianity was marked by a deep personal devotion to the
Lord Jesus Christ. It must be the same for us.
The Madras Conference in 1939 stated the following:
''We reaffirm the fact of Christ in experience that with the acceptance
of Jesus Christ as Saviour is involved also the duty and privilege of personal
evangelism; the objective being that every Christian in every Church should
be a witness to the faith he has found.
This loyalty is expressed in words and deeds, Luke 11: 28; John 15: 15;
Acts 1: 8.
(a) Witnessing by Word of Mouth.
Great need for personal witness by word of mouth. Rom. 10: 9.
On© of the signs of reduced witness is a reduction in confession by
word of mouth. Paul, Rom. 10; 14; 1 Cor. 9: 16.
(b) Witnessing by Deeds.
Every Christian must be a full-time worker. Every deed should speak
of Christ, sport, social life, home life, business life. Note Acts 9: 39;
Titus 2: 11, 12. Salvation is but first step. We must go on to build Christian
character and this is a lifetime job. Tremendous need in modern world
for good men and women. Think of Dr. Grenfell, Dr. Schweitzer, Kagawa,
and others.
John 13; 1-15 expresses our thought "Service with thankfulness,
rendered in the true spirit of humility and love, is life’s real greatness.”
Let us remember that the home is the training ground for service for
Christ. Furthermore, the purpose of all witnessing is to bring men to
Christ. Therefore, personal witness is a necessity in the work of the
extension of Christ’s Kingdom, Mark 16; 15; Matt. 28: 19.
3. C.E. DEMANS A DAILY QUIET TIME.
One of the weaknesses of average Christian life is lack of prayer and
Bible study. Note: Acts 17: 10, 11; Eph. 6: 17; Eph. 6; 18; Phil. 4; 6;
Matt. 6: 5-15. Apostles put prayer before social service or even preaching,
Acts 6: 2-4; Acts 2: 46, 47; Acts 4: 23, 24; 12; 5.
Results of Praying. Luke 3; 21; Acts 1: 14; 2; 1; 8: 15.
Victory and conversions come after prayer, Acts 16: 25; cf.,
2 Kings 19; 14, 15, 35.
If any programme is to be successful in individual life or corporate
life, prayer and Bible reading are essential. Cults have arisen because of
lack of knowledge of Scriptures. "Hide God’s Word in your heart.”
Acts 17: 11; 1 Thess. 2; 13; John 15; 16; 2 Tim. 2: 15.
"The Bible is the chosen meeting place of the Spirit of God and the
mind of man. God speaks there as nowhere else.”
Question: How should personal allegiance to Christ be expressed in
the home, in business, among friends, on the playing field?


STUDY 2:
The Christian Endeavourer and the
Church
1. WHAT IS THE CHURCH?
It is not a building, but a band of men and women pledged to a cause.
It is centred not in stones, but in souls. It is not stain glass windows,
anthems, sermons. 1 Tim. 3: 15.
1. It is a fellowship of people. The Church is a union of those who
love for the service of those in need. Sharing an ideal and being united
by the powerful ties of Christian belief.
2. It is an assembly or congregation of people, "called out by God"
to be His followers and workers.
3. It is a centre of corporate worship. Heb. 10: 25; Psalm 96: 6.
4. It is a workshop for those who love God and who seek to reveal
Him to the world.
5. It is a laboratory which demonstrates:
(a) Saving power of Christ. Heb. 7: 25.
(b) That cleanliness in thought, word, deed goal of Christian
living. John 15: 3; 1 Cor. 6: 11.
(c) That Christian home is bulwark of Christian nation.
(d) That peace among nations possible.
(e) That way of love works. 1 Cor. 13:8.
2. WHAT IS CHURCH’S TASK?
1. She must help those in her fellowship by means, worship, holy
communion, preaching.
(a) Bring deeper sense reality, nearness of God, Acts 17: 28, in
worship by Scripture, prayers, hymns. Express life, vision,
love, purpose.
(b) In holy communion. Opportunity confess Christ. Renew
pledge of loyalty to Christ.
(c) In preaching. Instruct us, relate us to active programme
of service.
2. Proclaim Gospel to whole world. Mark 16: 15.
3. Inspire and sustain missionary activity. Church not intended to be
provincial but universal in its redemptive effort. "God so loved the world,"
John 3: 16. "Go ye into all the world,” Mark 16: 15.


3. WHAT IS OUR PART IN THE CHURCH’S TASK?
Fourfold in our life, home, church, and community.
A. Life.
1. Personal Consecration.
(a) Dedicating of our lives to Christ and the Church.
(b) Reconsideration what loyalty to Christ means in every rela-
tionship of life.
(c) Facing conflicts with courage and determination.
2. Discovering Reality of God through more earnest effort to do
His will.
(a) By constant, earnest, reverent study of Bible. Acts 17: 11.
(b) Prayer makes eternal realities both prominent and dominant.
(c) Experiencing the strengthening and vitalizing power of
prayer. Fellowship with other workers. Eph. 2: 19, 20.
Praying souls become prevailing saints.
3. Challenging others to surrender their lives to Christ.
(a) By example holy living, conduct. 1 Peter I: 15, 16.
(b) Revealing satisfying experiences of our Christian life.
(c) Sharing with others joys of Christ’s fellowship.
B. Home. Co-operating to make our Home Christian.
(a) Creating genuine co-operative fellowship. Strong help
weaker. Gal. 6: 2.
(b) Developing cultural and aesthetic interests reading, art,
music, profitable leisure rime.
(c) Sharing experiences, religious life, in family worship. Culti-
vating appreciation of Church and its work.
C. Church. Seek to intensify the spiritual life of Church.
(a) By making services vital. Result young people give them-
selves unreservedly to task of winning world for God.
(b) Improve and increase teaching ministry of the Church.
(c) Study local church denomination and general church history
and achievements.
D. Community. Seeking to meet needs of human life in the community,
nation, world.
(a) By making a survey of spiritual resources of community,
(b) By developing co-operative programme for all young people.
(c) By facing the major issues of our national life.


STUDY 3:
The Christian Endeavourer and
Social Issues
1. A GENERAL SURVEY OF OUR RELATIONSHIP TO SOCIAL
ISSUES.
1. Are our critics justified in saying that Christian Endeavourers are
•divorced from social issues?
2. Did the programme of the Tenth World C.E. Convention leave
any room for such a criticism?
3. Would it not be true to say that the whole impact of the convention
was calculated to impress the unity of life?
4. Might we not say that the convention programme was a full-orbed
programme which began with the individual and his relationship to God
but led on to a clear vision of the Christian’s relationship to his fellows
and responsibility to the whole social order in which our fellows must
spend their life?
It seems to us that no word could be more clear and definite as to
the relationship of Christian Endeavourers to social issues than those
•expressed in the ’'Study Theme” notes, and we desire to quote a few
clauses therefrom, since they reveal to us the thought of our honoured
world leaders of C.E, Let us quote from those notes:
(a) "Now we look with critical eyes on the whole list of social
sins and allow them to become to us a series of challenges
calling us to do our most valiant Christian service.”
'(b) "It should be said that the past ten years . . . have seen a
tremendous and significant enlargement of Christian Endea-
vourers’ emphasis upon the social responsibilities which all
Christians bear toward all other human beings. . .
(c) The Christian has a twofold task —to develop a character
that grows more Christlike from day to day, and to join
with other good citizens in building a social order that is
true to the spirit and teaching of Jesus.”
(d) The Christian must be as much concerned about building a
Christian civilization as he is about saving his own soul.
Salvation for the individual is NOT possible without this.”
5. Does not the above teaching square with Christ’s conception of
■the Christian’s place in the world? He says we are "the salt of the earth.”
What does salt do? We are "the lights of the world.”
6. Does not Paul suggest that Christians are to be a redemptive force
in society. See Eph. 5: 16 and Phil. 3: 20 (Moffat’s translation).
7. Can we not agree that while by the grace of God many have
become Christians in spite of evil environment, as a rule evil conditions do
make it difficult for people to become Christians, and difficult to remain
Christian. If so, is it not a part of our task to destroy those conditions
that impede the Gospel and destroy souls, for whom Christ died?


2. WHAT SHOULD BE THE CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOURER’S
ATTITUDE TO GAMBLING?
What is gambling? It is the "transference of property on the basis:
of chance.” God never meant property to be transferred that way, because
the work of the reason, the will, and the conscience is suspended in such
an act. Hugh Price Hughes declared that every gambler is a fool or a
scoundrel, or both. What have you to say to that? "No single good
social effect can be traced to gambling.” Do you agree? Canon Peter
Green says that gambling has seven social evils: (1) It reduces the national
output among all classes of workers, because it is responsible for wasted time,,
bad work, spoilt material, and friction in the workshop. (2) The results of
gambling impose a heavy burden on the whole trading community,
(3) Betting is beyond all comparison the most fruitful source of crime,
(4) With its twin evil, drunkenness, it is the cause of untold misery and
suffering to wives and children, (5) It corrupts every sport it touches,
(6) It is the source of violent crime. (7) It is the cause of much demoraliza-
tion and corruption among the police. We often hear, "All life is a
gamble.” Is this true? What is the difference between risking money in a
bet and risking money in business? Is it ever right to take risks? Some-
say, "Life insurance is a gamble.” That is not so, is it? How does
gambling stand in the light of the Ten Commandments?
This section is based largely on "Gambling Why Not?” Price one
penny at Epworth Book Depot.
3. WHAT SHOULD BE OUR ATTITUDE TO THE LIQUOR
TRAFFIC?
1. Total abstinence is the only safe attitude toward intoxicating liquor.
Why? Drinks containing alcohol are more likely to create than to
quench thirst. It is well known among drinkers that one drink, instead
of satisfying, usually creates a desire for more.
2. Why is drinking a frequent cause of sickness and accidents?
3. Professor Harvey Sutton describes alcohol as "a third-rate food,
a second-rate drug, a first-rate poison, and not a true stimulant.” What
does he mean?
4. Intoxicating drinks destroy efficiency. Every test scientists have
made has shown that alcohol produces fatigue, rather than strength. Work
is wastefully done, and mistakes in skilled work more frequent. It is for
this reason that athletes refrain from drinking liquors when training for
and taking part in games and feats that call for endurance.
5. Alcohol does not keep out the cold. Arctic explorers have banned
alcohol on their journeys rather than risk the lives of their parties.
6. Drink spoils sport and good fellowship. Is this statement true?
Carelessness, neglect, waste, poverty, gluttony, riotous behaviour, and crime
are all aided by alcohol.
7. Many of the prisoners of our gaols have been sent there through
drink.
8. Most of the little neglected children in our charitable homes have
careless, drinking parents. Many thousands of well-to-do people have
come to poverty through drink. Nearly all tke street brawls result
from drink.


9. Should Parliament further restrict the hours when alcohol is sold?
10. How can we get Parliament to prohibit the drink traffic?
11. Should we give more definite teaching on total abstinence in our
vday and Sunday schools? Can we help the Band of Hope people in
their efforts?
We suggest that "Ten Simple Lessons on Alcohol” be used in the
study of this section. Price threepence at Band of Hope office.
4. WHAT SHALL OUR ATTITUDE BE TO ECONOMIC
QUESTIONS.
1. Shall we leave the social and economic order to non*Christians?
2. To what does the Christian look for a basis of a new order? He
looks for nothing less than God’s order, the kingdom of God, does he not?
The kingdom of God was Jesus’ answer to the world’s ills. That kingdom
confronted the whole of the life of sinful man with God’s redemptive offer
and demand. It was offered both to the individual and the collective will.
The whole life, national and individual, was to come under a new redemptive
sway. What is meaning of the Lord’s Prayer?
3. Are we right in proclaiming social security against illness, old
age, unemployment?
4. Are we right in condeming economic inequalities, the profit motive,
and excessive wealth? Are we right in urging that the coming new order
be built upon co-operation rather than competiiton? Are we right in
opposing any policy or act savouring of racial, class, or national arrogance?
"Christians have no right to demand complete certainly before they act.
They can acquire light on issues which are still dark, not by passively waiting
for light to be given, but by acting fearlessly on such light as they already
possess.” Is this right?


STUDY 4:
The Christian Endeavourer Performing
His Task
1. THE TASK OF A CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOURER.
1. The first task of the Christian Endeavourer is to realize that he or'
she has a task to perform. That the movement came into being to meet
a need in the Church. That need created the task, and the task can only
be comprehended as we study the circumstances of the birth of the
organization, carefully interpret the meaning and spirit of the original
pledge, along with its stated object.
2. A statement by Knight Chaplin: In his book, entitled "Francis
E. Clark,” he says: "What the movement is rests upon the ideal that Dr..
Clark saw in 1881, and developed with growing clearness throughout the
years. Dr. Clark would desire that any story of his life should set forth
the ideals and aims of Christian Endeavour. These are:
"Personal devotion to the Lord Jesus Christ and confession of
His name.
"Covenant relationship with Christ, embodied in a pledge, a distin-
guishing feature of Christian Endeavour.
"Training in religious service through the work of the committees,,
definite standards of service, and a definite commitment to them.
"Loyalty to the local church and denomination as expressed in.
the pledge.
"Cultivation of the devotional life through Bible study, prayer, and
meditation in the home.
"Generous giving to Christian work.
"Christian citizenship and participation in work to make our communi-
ties better places to live in, and to help bring in the kingdom of God.
"The promotion of peace and goodwill among all the nations of
the earth.”
"Dr. Clark’s original thought in Christian Endeavour was to make
the society a training school for church workers.”
3. A summary of the foregoing: The purpose of the C.E. was and is
for: Spiritual development, Christian fellowship, training for service, and
to ensure loyalty to the local church.
N. 8.: This discussion is not dealing with unions, but individual societies
and members.
2. A CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOURER PERFORMING HIS TASK.
1. Spiritual Development: Our personal relationship to Christ. As
an active member you have accepted Christ as Saviour and Lord. N. 8.:
The word "Lord.” Have also been recipient of the Holy Spirit through
obedience. Acts 5: 32. The Holy Spirit is now your guide, but remember
He can only guide you in proportion to your surrender. The means of
guidance will principally be through three sources.


The Bible: It is God’s lamp for guidance in Christian living, and
'is adequate to meet all needs. 2 Tim. 3: 16, 17.
Communion through Prayer: Prayer is the Christian’s connection to
the source of all wisdom and spiritual power. Prove it by using it.
The Experience of Others: Experience is the best teacher. Seek the
counsel and advice of those who are older and more developed in Christian
■ experience.
Question: Does the Holy Spirit lead in opposition to the Word?
2. Christian Fellowship: The providing for young people the oppor-
tunity for Christian fellowship and social intercourse is a part of the
C.E. task. Man is a social as well as a spiritual being. He' must have
fellowship and social intercourse. Therefore, to provide it under Christian
supervision is a wise and necessary thing.
Our companions play a large part in the formation of our character.
They exert a strong influence upon our wills and our actions. From them
we usually choose our life’s partner. The C.E. society should not be a
matrimonial agency, yet it should encourage and provide opportunities to
choose their friends from its ranks.
Question: What should be the guiding principles for an Endeavourer
in the choice of their companions, and particularly a life partner?
3. Training for Service: The Church provides the opportunity for
service, and the Christian Endeavour society trains and provides the workers.
The Church that has a C.E. society should never be short of workers.
The ''taking part” is to meet that need, by encouraging to serve; by
accustoming a person to the sound of his own voice, and by the giving of
the opportunity of "taking part” amongst those who are of similar desire,
and therefore should be sympathetic and uncritical.
Witnessing: Every Endeavourer should be a witnesser, not by preach-
ing but by living. This should be in the home, shop, office, or the factory.
Remember, your life is an epistle that is being read by your workmates.
That your actions speak more clearly than your words, and that those who
would not listen to your preaching will be influenced by your life. What
you are counts more to them than what you say.
Question: Can you suggest ways which will encourage the less active
to take a bigger part?
4. Making the Community a Better Place: Man the divine instrument
for this. We dare not sit down and idly wait for some special call or
manifestation of divine power. The Christian’s duty is to make the
world happier for others. Spread sunshine with flowers, smiles, and cups
of cold water. Attack the evils of the day with vigour. They load the dice
against Christian living. Fight the betting shop, the hotel bar, and other
similar things. Make full use of the ballot box.
Recognize the second part of Christ’s First Commandment. Luke 10: 27.
Question: Who is my neighbour, and what can I do to help him?
11


5. The Part Played by the Committees: The matter of the committees
must be controlled by local conditions.
Their purpose is to ensure that help needed shall be given to the
society and the church.
Carefully select your conveners. Do not choose those who are most
popular unless they are best fitted for the office.
Put every member on a special committee, but emphasize that every
member should be working (when the opportunity offers) for the benefit
of each and every committee, for the society is the body of which members
and committees are the working agents.
Question: Do you think it is advisable to change committee con-
veners yearly?
6. The Motto and the Pledge: The C.E. motto and pledge have been
arranged to aid the society and its individual member to accomplish its
purpose. They constitute a challenge to a high standard of Christian
living. They enjoin faithful observance to the things that make possible
the reaching of this high ideal. They place the emphasis upon relation-
ship to Christ, and faithfulness to the local church. Only as we recognize
the challenge shall we understand the "task” of Endeavour, and only as
we faithfully observe our pledge shall we "perform” it.
Question: In oj-der to perform the task of Endeavour, what must I do?
(See Rom. 12: 1.)
12
