

UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
WAR LECTURES
No. 5.
THE DUTIES
OF THE NON-COMBATANT
BY
THE HON. SIR WILLIAM IRVINE, LL.D.
NIETZSCHE AND THE
PRESENT GERMAN SPIRIT
BY
DR. J. McKLLLAR STELWART.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
Propy Ltd.,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY. ADELAIDE, BRISBANE.


UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
WAR LECTURES.
ARRANGEMENTS have been made with the University Authorities,
and with the Lecturers, to publish the complete text of each might’s
Lectures in booklet form.
There are many thousands who would like to hear the lectures
but are debarred by circumstances from that privilege, and it is for them
mainly that the lectures will be published. But those who have heard
them will also like to have the lectures in print for reference, and for
passing on to their friends.
%
The complete course, with dates of delivery, is as follows. The
list is subject to possible variation, of which due notice will be given in
the papers.
Tuesday, June 15.—PROFESSOR TUCKER—“British and German Ideals/'
PROFESSOR SCOTT--“The Nature of the Issue/'
Tuesday, June 29.—PROFESSOR WALLACE-" Recent Impressions of
Britain in War Time.” F. W. EGGLESTON— 4 8 The Significance of
the Empire/’ ARCHIBALD T. STRONG, M.A.—‘Australia and
the War.”
Wednesday, July 14.—PROFESSOR OSBORNE—" Germany’s Intellectual
Strength and Weakness.” R. R. GARRAN, C.M.G.—“ Trade and
the War.”
Wednesday, July 28. - PROFESSOR HARRISON MOORE—“ International
Relations and International Law/’ MAURICE BLACKBURN,
M.A.—‘ ‘ Socialism and the War.”
Tuesday, August 10.—SIR WILLIAM IRVINE—“The Duties of a Non-
Combatant.” DR. McKELLAR STEWART— ‘ Nietzsche and the
Modern German Spirit.”
Tuesday, August 24.—COLONEL HUBERT FOSTER, R.E., Director of
Military Science in the University of Sydney—" Strategy on the
Western Front.”
Wednesday, September B.—PROFESSOR MASSON—“ Chemistry and the
War.” PROFESSOR BERRY—"Remoter Aspects of the War.”
PROFESSOR LABY—"The Dominions and the War.”
EACH NIGHTS LECTURES IN ONE PAMPHLET.


THE DUTIES
OF THE NON-COMBATANT.
Lecture delivered in the &&a
on August 1 Oth 1915,
THE HON. SIR WILLIAM IRVINE, LLD.
WHEN it was first proposed to me that I should address
this meeting, the subject suggested for the address
was The Economics of the War. It seemed to me
that that very name would offer a rather forbidding aspect
to a good many people, and besides I want to say a
few words upon some subjects that may not strictly be said
to come within the term Economics, even in its widest
significance. Therefore the title was enlarged to the
Duties of the Non-Combatant. I gladly accepted that title,
and it was not until afterwards that I recognised that it
implied a very much wider range than I had any intention
of covering.
In the first place, the word “non-combatant” seems
to carry a kind of suggestion that it has something
to do with international law, and with all respect
to my friend, the Professor of International Law, who is
present, I think that the whole subject of international
law has become lately one of more or less antiquarian in-
terest. Ido not intend to trench upon his domain, in any
way at all. Nor do I for one moment intend, either by
advice or suggestion, to say anything about those manifold
activities which are being exercised throughout the whole
of this community, and very successfully exercised, in
109


the mitigation of the awful sufferings which this war has
caused. Great work is being done, and splendidly done, done
very largely by the efforts of women, to whom all honour
be given. My object is a much more modest one. I want
to-night to draw your attention to two or three of what
seem to me to be the directions in which a peculiar duty
rests upon those who from age or otherwise are unable to
take the post of honour and danger at the front.
Now, when I say to you that perhaps the main duty of
those who cannot fight ■ is assiduously, industriously, and
honestly to apply themselves to their ordinary vocations in
life, the reply will seem a very disappointing one. When
I add to that, as a further recommendation, that
they practice in their ordinary life, in as high a degrees
as possible, the virtue of thrift and economy, I shall seem
to you to have reached the very acme of the commonplace.
I shall have a word or two to say on the subject of economy,
both public and private, at a later part of my address.
Meantime I may be permitted to point out one or two direc-
tions in which it seems to me that even those who are busily
engaged in their ordinary life may do much to aid the
prosecution of this war, to alleviate its sufferings, to moder-
ate some of the worst results which may follow from it, or,
in other words, to do their duty as far as is possible for
those who cannot, as I say, go to the front.
Now, the war, I am afraid, is going to be a long
war, and when I say I am afraid of this, I say so because
I suppose the ■ first thought that rises in the' minds
of all of us is the desire for an early peace, an early
cessation of the conflict which has not only upset our
civilised ideas but has filled the world with horrors such
as we have not known for generations,—perhaps, indeed,
at any time. But I think that there is not one amongst us
here, and I venture to think there is not one man or woman
who can call himself a Briton in any part of the world, who
desires this war to end before it can end with the attain-
ment of an honourable and secure peace—peace which will
not only drive back to its haunts that diabolic force that has
disturbed humanity, but which will establish for all time,
not a cessation of warfare, because that is impossible, but at


all events a preservation of those rights of humanity which
will make warfare a matter in which civilised peoples can
engage.
Now, if the war is going to be a long one it becomes
necessary for all of us to apply our minds as to how the
wastage of war may be lessened. We have sent already to
the front, I believe, over 70,000 of our young men. There
are 40,000 more who are going. That is a fine
record for a country which is for the first time
engaged in the serious duties of nations; but it is only
a part, and I believe a small part, of the duty which we
shall yet have to perform. We have before us a long
struggle, and it will take, it may be, years before it is com-
pleted, and like every other part of the Empire to which
we belong, and our Allies who have so nobly fought with us
in the same cause, —for all of us, the great problem now is
how we shall so organise ourselves, not merely from a
purely military standpoint, but in very way possible; how
we may brace up our sinews in order to be able, not only
to strike a strong, determined blow at the enemy, but to
maintain the full force and effect of that blow for as long
as may be necessary to crush him.
I cannot help thinking that our present mode of choos-
ing those who are to go and sacrifice, it may be, their lives
on our account, is not only an illogical one, but is not a
good one or a convenient one. The most precious asset that
we possess is the young life of our country. All our pros-
perity, all our wealth, everything that we enjoy here is
really nothing compared with that asset; and, above all
things, it is necessary that we should not squander it. Now
the haphazard method in which hitherto our forces have
been chosen, simply by accidental selection, if continued in-
discriminately for a long time, will ultimately bleed our
people of the very best strength and blood which they have.
Now, as you know, there is going to be instituted what
is known as a War Census. In a few days an
actual commencement will be made in taking that cen-
sus. The registration of the mankind of Australia
is a huge task. It is a task which, if it were to be


carried through by officials, according to the methods of
officialdom, might be done very accurately, but probably
would arrive at a successful termination some years after
the war is over and done with. For the purpose for which
it is wanted it can only be effected by the earnest and con-
certed assistance of the whole people of the Commonwealth
of Australia. And this is the first point in which, it seems
to me, those non-combatants who are seeking for useful
work to do may find an outlet for their energy. I recently
put before the University of Melbourne, in addressing a
meeting of students, a proposition. I invited them to offer
their services for one kind of work in connection with the
census; namely, for a proportion of the clerical work to
be done in the classification and organisation of the returns.
The response to that invitation was a magnificent one. It
was one which I think awoke a responsive echo in the
minds of thousands of people in this community. Unfor-
tunately, for reasons which I am now not going to criticise
or to cavil at, it was found impossible by the authorities to
avail themselves of that particularly generous offer, made
not only by the students of the University, but by many
of the heads, professors and lecturers, too. But I feel con-
fident that neither the leaders of the University, nor the
students, will allow that for one moment to damp their
ardour if they find other opportunities in which they can
help. This registration of the mankind of Australia, if
it is to be effective at all, must be taken out and completed
within about as many weeks as it would take the ordinary
departmental officials years to take it out. In order to
enable that to be done it will necessitate in every district
and every part of Australia concerted and organised volun-
tary effort for the purpose of bringing these returns to
every household, seeing that they are properly filled in, and
returning them to the Department, which will examine
them. I believe that any work of that kind can be best
done if the organisation is confined to comparatively small
districts, and if those who are working together have some
knowledge of the people amongst whom they work. I
have already suggested in other places in Victoria the
formation of small local committees. That will have to be


done in every part of Australia in connection with it, and it
will have to be done very quickly.
For this, you should have a small district, and a per-
fectly defined district, for each committee, so that there
may be no overlapping. You should also have some person
or persons connected with the committee in some official
capacity, either as president or secretary, who occupy some
recognised official position. Primarily, I think in the country
places, at all events, some of the municipal authorities would
be found the most convenient for this purpose. However
that may be, there will have to be someone in charge of
these committees, and the central organising body will be
the joint committee of both Houses of Parliament known as
the War Committee.
When this preliminary work has been done, it will, I
believe, be possible within a few weeks to determine those
on whom the call to serve their country should first fall.
That is the first step. Other steps may follow, but lam
not going further on that subject to-night.
Now let us take a totally different thing. I wish
to draw your attention to one of the great pro-
blems before us now, a very great problem, one
that is present in all our minds—What are we
going to do with our returned soldiers? You remember,
many of you, as I do so well, the enthusiasm with which we
received those whom we sent to South Africa, and who
returned wounded or unwounded to our midst, the way in
which they were feted, the magnificent receptions with
which they were met, the enthusiastic and flattering
speeches that greeted them on every occasion—and the
complete oblivion into which they were soon allowed to
sink. Now that, above all things, is what must not hap-
pen again in Australia. I have met some of those men
who fought for the Empire and for us in South Africa,
who had themselves had their hopes raised by the
enthusiastic welcome they received here, and who
afterwards found all those promises that were made
to them so much empty breath, and have been
wandering about in search of employment here and else-
where ever since. They found that instead of their posi


tions being bettered by their acting as men and coming for-
ward to fight for their country, they would have been
better off if they had never gone at all. I feel
convinced that the people of this country are determined
not to allow that to happen again. The only question is,
how are we going to prevent it, how are we going to deal
with them? In a number of cases employers have pro-
mised to keep their positions open for the men who come
back to us, and I have no doubt that in a large majority of
eases employers will honour that promise, but there are
many cases where the men were not in employment, and
many cases in which they did not go away with the
pledge of re-employment. In cases of this kind when the
men return, employment will have to be found for them.
Now that is a very difficult task. In the first place you
must remember that, in the most enthusiastic and romantic
period of life, they have had an experience of the most excit-
ing kind which humanity has to offer. They are taken out of
their bearings, and they are thrown back upon us with their
minds necessarily in a state anything but suited to settle
down immediately to the ordinary business of life. That
is the material you have to deal with, and it will mean not
only work, when that can be provided, but it will mean a
watchful interest in them after they have got positions
secured for them.
The formation of the committees that I suggest would be
useful for this purpose,—they would, I believe, be found to
be the best means, under proper guidance, also to enable
the people to do what I believe the whole of the people of
Australia want to do, to give these young men, after the
magnificent service they have rendered to us, not merely a
place in the honour and esteem of their countrymen, but
that social and industrial position to which they will be
justly entitled.
Now we shall also have amongst these, I fear, numbers
ef men partially incapacitated from carrying on the ordin-
ary vocations of life, for whom special provision will have
to be made. It is quite true that they will get pensions,
larger or smaller, according to the degree of incapacity
which their wounds may cause them, but surely the very


small pensions which these men will get, are not sufficient,
either as a reward or as a future provision to meet the
necessities of the case. They are merely such provision
as will keep these people from starvation.
It has been one of the blots of our system, that those
who return after fighting the battles of the empire
have generally become a sort of driftwood on the stream of
society. Instead of that, when we are sending out all our
best young men, the strongest, most courageous and high-
spirited men, it should be our duty when they return—and
I am sure it will be our desire and interest—to recognise
the fact that these are the men upon whom the future life
of Australia will, in large measure, depend.
Again, it would be quite out of place in such an address
as I am giving to-night for me to attempt to enter into any
details as to the mode in which people may assist those who
come back crippled or blind or otherwise incapacitated from
earning their living in the ordinary way; but a day or two
ago a distinguished medical man living in Melbourne, who
does not desire his name to be mentioned, gave me a most
interesting synopsis of the kind of work which is being
done for these people in Germany, in Austria and in France
at the present moment. I will not read it, it is too long,
but I can give you one or two leading features out of it.
It is headed, “Provision for the Care and Education of
Wounded and Mutilated as made in Germany, Austria and
France.” Societies under the administration of the mili-
tary authorities are created, and their duties are to attend
to the gratuitous provision of artificial limbs and other
necessities, the re-education of crippled soldiers in work
that will enable them to earn a livelihood, to secure proper
employment for the crippled soldiers, to help crippled men
who wish to learn a trade that is easily mastered, and to
supply them free of cost with food, lodgings, massage, etc.
It goes on to describe the work that was done in Austria
by an old soldier who had lost his arm, his right arm, and
who had for many years taught himself to use the other to
the best effect. He had created a very thorough system,
and availed himself to the very highest degree of the


remaining power which he had left to him. And he now
in 1914 started a hospital for one-armed men in Vienna.
A similar hospital has been started in Heidelberg in Ger-
many. These schools are a great assistance in enabling
one-armed men to establish themselves in daily life because
they are taught methodically and systematically at once to
use their remaining arm in a way which it might take them
years to find out for themselves. They are also trained so
effectively as to be able to earn a living as typewriters,
labourers, farm hands, and in various other ways.
Now with regard to these matters, do not allow your-
selves to think that they can be done by the Government.
They can not be done by the Government. If they are
done by the Government, they will be slowly done and badly
done. And it is only by the people co-operating and forming
themselves into associations, such as the local committees
that I have suggested, and by co-operating through some
common source of information, that the work can be effec-
tively done.
Now I said I would say something about economy, and
after all, economy is one of the chief duties at the present
time of those who are unable to fight. Do not despise the
simple doctrine of economy in connection with the war.
Has it not struck you as amazing that after a year’s war,
after a year in which Australia as an integral part of the
British Empire is engaged, ay, and deeply engaged, when
its own sons in their thousands are fighting at the front,
that we here in Australia are going on living our ordinary
lives, spending money almost as readily as ever we did,
that we are importing and consuming just as large quan-
tities of goods as we have done in the most prosperous
times of our existence, without apparently the slightest
thought for the future before us, or the necessities of that
future, or of the urgent necessity upon us to make some
provision with regard to our own individual finance as well
as the finance of the States of the Commonwealth? It
almost suggests that the people of this country have not
yet fully realised that we are at war at all, though the fact
has been brought home to so many thousands of homes in
Australia. The amazing thing is that the people still go on


living their lives practically in the same way as they
always have done. I shall have to say a word or two
to-night, if time will permit of it, upon the public economy
of Australia at the present time. But, after all, remember
this!—that even that slatternly disorder, that unmeasured
wastefulness which characterises the finance of the govern-
ments of Australia, both Federal and State, at the present
time, as I shall show you, is, after all, but an exaggerated
reflex of the extravagant way in which the people of Aus-
tralia themselves are living at home. As long as you have
people who have little regard for the future, who do not see
the dangers that lie for them financially in the future, who
are willing, notwithstanding the awful struggle in which
we are immersed, to go on enjoying all the luxuries which
they have enjoyed in the most prosperous period of their
existence—how can you expect legislatures and governments
to do otherwise than follow their example ?
Public finance is a thing which may seem to some of
you to be about as remote as possible from the subject of
this lecture, the duties of a noncombatant. Well, I want
to tell you to-night that it is just about as closely allied to
the most important of those duties as it can be. Parlia-
ments and governments, no matter if they see they are
going wrong, though they may know that they are spend-
ing money wastefully, cannot—and I am telling you now
the result of a pretty long experience, in which I have had
a personal share—they cannot adopt economic and proper
methods of public finance unless the people as a body are
determined to support them in it. What I now want to say
is due to the fact that I am endeavouring to engage your
interest, and the interest of the people outside Parliament,
so that they may appreciate in some degree, at all events,
the evils and the perils of the present financial position in
which we are placed.
Now, I shall ask your attention, for the few moments
that are left to me, for a few figures. They shall be very
few indeed, and shall be as simple as possible. They will
carry their own lesson with them. I will give these figures
to show you the rate at which the public expenditure of the
people of Australia in various departments has been leap


ing up. I will take the period of the last five years, or
rather of the five years ending a year ago. I want to leave
the war out of it altogether for obvious reasons. These five
years cover the period commencing the financial year of
1908-9, to the end of the financial year 1913-14, that is
to the 31st July, 1914, which, as you know, was just before
the war. I leave out the whole war period for the obvious
reason that war necessarily means enormously increased
expenditure, and at present it is rather difficult to separate
those expenses that the war has rendered necessary from
some of those that are ordinary expenses. Now, in all
these comparisons I may say the first criticism which is
always levelled against a comparison of the public finances
of some years ago and the public expenditure of to-day, is
that the people of Australia have had great benefits given
to them which they did not enjoy before. It is always said
at once, no matter what figures you bring forward, “Oh,
but all our expenditure has increased very much. We have
had to build all our fleet; we have had to make a new army;
then, again, do not forget that we have given great sums
in old age pensions that were not given before.”
Now, in order to see the extent to which the ordinary
expenditure has increased in that five years, I have
left out of both sides of this comparison the whole
of the defence expenditure and the whole expendi-
ture on old age pensions, and the figures that I am now
going to give you are the mere figures representing the
expenditure of Australia in carrying on its ordinary house-
hold, its ordinary functions of government, the manage-
ment of its own departments both in the Federation and
the States. lam taking these figures from the last edition
of Mr. Knibbs’ Year Book, and I am giving you the totals
only. The total expenditure five years ago, 1908-9, both
in the States and the Federation, was £38,439,000 per
annum. The total expenditure of the same kind and the
same class in 1913-14 was £57,489,000 a year, an increase
of just about 49 per cent. Now, in five years that is a
perfectly appalling result. It is true that the population
of Australia in these five years has increased by a small
percentage—l forget exactly the percentage—but in five


years that percentage is very small indeed. It might bring
the 49 per cent, down to 44 or 45 per cent. So that you
have the plain facts there. During these years, eliminat-
ing all the huge additional expenditure which was created
during these years by the new defence scheme which we
had to create, by the vast sums which we have been giving
away in old age pensions to poor people, cutting out all
these things, I say, the ordinary expenditure of this
country in all its departments has gone up by a little over
£19,000,000 a year. These figures bring us up to July,
1914. Since the war we have, of course, had to raise by
taxation and by borrowing enormous sums of money, and
we shall have to raise more. Nobody wants to check
the raising of moneys that are necessary for that
purpose; but, in addition to all that, when we find ourselves
faced with the necessity of finding additional enormous
sums of money, instead of curtailing our ordinary expendi-
ture—as we very easily might—that ordinary expenditure
has gone on increasing by leaps and bounds even since the
war began.
Australia has for many years past subsisted very
largely on borrowed money. It is true that that borrowed
money has been expended for the most part on reproductive
works, and it is returning fairly rich results, but the source
from which that money was borrowed is now practically
stopped. We cannot borrow money from England. The
immense annual flow of borrowed moneys that came in to
us and enabled us to support our people in employment,
very largely providing employment for thousands of people
is at an end. Since the war commenced, we have had to
borrow for our own warlike purposes £18,000,000 at
first from the Imperial Government, and subsequently
£6,500,000. That, of course, was very necessary,
and we were very lucky, indeed, to be able to
borrow; but we are now having to borrow another
£20,000,000, not from the Imperial Government, but within
Australia. Now, it may be all very well to borrow within
Australia. It has certain advantages. Some people think
that it is a very good thing altogether to borrow the moneys
you want within the country. Well, I have my doubts of


it. In the first place, remember this—that the great bulk
of the money which you borrow within the country, just as
the great bulk of the money which you take out of the
taxpayer’s pocket by direct taxation, is taken directly from
the funds which enable the industrial activities of this
country to be carried on. There are, however, some people
in this country—a good many people, I fear—who think
that in what they call wealth there exists a limitless well,
out of which they can draw endless buckets, and they can
do that without in any way injuring themselves —that no
matter how great the expenditure grows, you have always
an object that you can go on taxing indefinitely. When you
find foolish people of that description pressing their views
at this particular time, then it is necessary to point out that
their folly becomes suicidal and mischievous. The idea that
you can go on indefinitely taking the resources of a country,
especially the resources of a country like Australia, where
more than in any other country in the world, as I
should think, of its size, the wealth of the community
consists of the working capital of the community } is not
only ignorant but dangerous. There is no man who
has the slightest vestige, I will not say of acquaintance
with political economy, but of ordinary common sense, who
will not say that by going beyond a certain point in taxa-
tion you are actually filing down the main spring of enter-
prise. In local borrowing, you are to some extent doing
the same thing, because you are weakening those sources
which new supply the various agencies and channels through
which a current of fructifying capital spreads itself
throughout the length and breadth of the country, supply-
ing money to farmers, to orchardists, to mechanics, to
manufacturers, to all forms of industry; you are drawing
away, I say, the flood that irrigates and fertilises the whole
life of this Commonwealth. Therefore, either in borrow-
ing or in taxation within the community, you are doing a
thing which, if you carry it beyond a certain point, will
ultimately recoil with tenfold force upon some of those
people who are at the present moment urging it most
vigorously.
In addition to those large sums of money which we have


borrowed, we have adopted a practice which we may be,
and, I trust, shall be, able to carry through successfully
and without a risk of loss, but which in all communities
into which it has been brought has, as far as the lessons
of history show, ever been beset with great dangers and
perils, and sometimes has ended in disaster. I mean the
practically unlimited issue of paper money. Now I re-
member that when that paper money proposal was first
made here, some of us pointed out the dangers unless there
was a fixed limit. Ido not for one moment say that there
is now any danger, provided the people of this country are
awake to what is in front of them, awake to the necessity
of bracing themselves both in public and in private to
economise in every way, to strengthen their powers of re-
sistance, to set their household in order. If they are pre-
pared to do that and insist on their public bodies doing
it, then I say we shall be able to get out of peril without
disaster. The first thing is that you should know exactly
what has taken place. The note issue was first of all esti-
mated to be about 15 millions. It is at the pre-
sent moment 34 millions. In order to complete
our own obligations to the States to whom we have
promised the larger part of it, to enable them to carry on
their public works, that note issue will have mounted up to
some 45 or 46 millions sterling at the end of this year.
Mr. Fisher says that this will be the limit. I certainly
hope so. The people of this country should know what
they are doing. It is not alone their government, their
politicians that are treading this path—they themselves
are entering, and have entered, and gone a long way upon,
a road which all history shows to be beset with pitfalls and
dangers and possibilities of disaster. We have gone a long
way upon that road. The people of this country must
make up their minds that we shall not go further along
that dangerous path. Now if our power of borrowing is
limited, and if the issue of paper money is to be
checked, it is evident that we must retrench our expendi-
ture, and if we do not retrench our expenditure now, then
we shall be faced with the question in its acutest form, for,
in that case, we shall have to cut down our expenditure
later on, when we shall probably be confronted with


the problem of unemployment throughout Australia
in its most aggravated form, when we shall have thousands
of people in this community who have been taught to be-
lieve that it is the absolute duty of the Government to find
them employment at full wages, all clamouring to that
Government to find, through taxation, the money that will
enable that to be done. You will then have all the elements
of by far the most serious and disastrous crisis which the
people of this country have ever faced.
Now, I say, do not let us wait till that time comes. The
National Parliament of Australia has a duty towards the
whole of the people which it cannot shirk, and that is to
take a lead, and a firm, strong lead, in bringing the finances
of this country back into such a rational condition as may
enable us to get out of the dangers in which we now are.
Now, just one word: remember, this finance question
is not a mere question of this war; it is not a mere financial
question of how we are going to carry on this war effec-
tively to victory. There are prospects which are going to
open out before Australia at the termination of this war
which no country of its size in the world has ever known.
When this terrible conflict ends in a victorious peace, as
I believe it will sooner or later, Australia’s share of the
fruits of that victory will be no mean one. We shall enjoy
these, if we show we are worthy of them. We are now
showing we are worthy of them as far as fighting is con-
cerned ; but we must also show that we shall be able to
undertake the financial responsibilities required, and to
supply the requisite financial control and power. If we
show this, then I say that the heritage which we shall enter
upon will not merely be the privilege of developing this
immense continent, but it will include a controlling interest
in all the islands and archipelagoes of the Southern Pacific
Ocean. How are we to fit ourselves for this task unless
we, as a people, now make up our minds that we are going


to brace up our sinews for the great work, to conserve our
national energy and wealth ? And let me assure you that
if we are to succeed to that inheritance, one of the first
duties of every non-combatant in this community will be to
do his part in bringing back the national finances of Aus-
tralia to a footing of strength and security.




NIETZSCHE AND THE
PRESENT GERMAN SPIRIT.
Lecture delivered at the Masonic Hall , Melbourne ,
on August lOth, 19/5, by
Dr. J. McKELLAR STEWART.
TOWARDS the close of his philosophic career, Nietzsche
wrote, “In Vienna, in St. Petersburg, in Stockholm,
in Copenhagen, in Paris, and New York—l have
been discovered everywhere; I have not yet been discovered
in Europe’s flatland—Germany.” The present generation
of Germans has atoned for the sin of its fathers in this
respect. Not only has it “discovered” Nietzsche; it has also
extolled and exalted him as its prophet, an honour which
he would certainly not have coveted. Copies of his chief
works have been circulated in hundreds of thousands.
Gerhart Hauptmann informed us last year that “Thus
Spake Zarathustra” finds a place in every cultured German
soldier’s knapsack. Friedrich Paulsen, late Professor of
Philosophy in Berlin, admits that “young Germany wel-
comes Nietzsche as a revelation,” and that “the nation reads
and intoxicates itself with his writings.” Bemhardi, who
may be taken as the mouthpiece of the dominating political
and military party in the Empire, has inscribed on the
title-page of “Germany and the Next War” one of
Nietzsche’s aphorisms—“ War and courage have done
greater things than love of one’s neighbours. Not your
pity, but your bravery has hitherto saved the unfortunate.”
Indeed, the whole of this book is little more than an adapta-
tion of Nietzschean ideas pressed into service to furnish a


justification of Prussian policy. Prussianised Germany, in
short, greets the thought of this philosopher with the feel-
ing, this is bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh.
I shall not attempt to demonstrate that Nietzsche has,
in any degree, created the spirit which feeds upon him,
nor shall I consider the question whether he has consciously
set himself the task of expressing and philosophically justi-
fying the nation’s spiritual development. Confronted by the
fact that he supplies palatable mental and moral food to
the people, I shall attempt to discover what there is in his
philosophy which makes it acceptable, which stimulates the
Prussian spirit, and furnishes a psychological sinew of war.
We may be led to see that Germany’s leaders might bolster
up the lust for dominion which on her part is the primary
motive to the present conflict, and support the ruthless
methods by which she is prosecuting this war, by carefully
selected and skilfully adapted texts from the philosophy of
the “Will-to-power.” The interpretation which Germany
is giving to these texts may be a wrong one, but it is a
perfectly natural one, one to which Nietzsche lays himself
open.
In the first place, it should be noted that Nietzsche pre-
sents us with no rounded-off system of philosophy. His
physical ill-health and his defective eyesight prevented any
sustained effort on his part. He, therefore, adopted the
form of the polished aphorism and the detached paragraph
to express flashes of insight. His plan was to note down
during his solitary walks the main ideas that coursed
through his mind, and to spend the evening in casting and
polishing the expression of those ideas. His avowed
ambition is “to say in ten sentences what everyone else says
in a book, what everyone else does say in a book.”
With characteristic self-esteem, but nevertheless perfect
sincerity, he tells his readers, “Aphorism and the sentence,
in which I, as foremost among the Germans, am master,
are the forms of eternity.” This form of expression mili-
tates against anything like a connected system. Further,
acquaintance with his personal life quickly reveals that his
mind was continually being swept by tempests of violent
love and hate. He lived in whirls of ecstatic admiration


or revolt. We shall not expect to find, in the product
of a mind which is under the stress of such conflicting
currents of feeling, the measured judgment and the cri-
tical justice which we are accustomed to look for in a
philosopher. This difficulty is emphasised when it is
remembered that he was consumed by a boundless egotism
which carried him again and again to the borders of
megalomania, and which, in the end, developed into a state
of incurable madness. Where, for example, could one find
a more superb expression of consuming egotism than in this
utterance: “To lay bare to you, friends, my inmost heart:
if there were gods, how should I bear it not to be a god?
Therefore, there are no gods.” Or when he announces in
the preface to his latest volume, “This book belongs to the
select few. Perhaps even none of them yet live. It is only
the day after to-morrow that belongs to me. Some are
born posthumously. . , . Well, then, these are my
readers, my true readers, my predestined readers; of what
account are the rest? The rest are merely mankind. One
must be superior to mankind in force, in loftiness of soul
—in contempt.”
Through unbalanced statement, fierce invective, bitter
controversy, and exaggerated self-appreciation, however,
it is possible to penetrate to certain thoughts which
form the ground-work of this fantastic structure.
Nietzsche claims, above all, to be the herald of a new era
in the ethical life of the human race. In this connection
his thought follows two lines—one negative, the other posi-
tive. In the first, the destructive portion of his thought,
he enters upon a savage criticism of existing morality.
He “flung himself with all the impetuosity of his tempera-
ment into the analysis and history of the moral sentiments,
and gloried in stripping man of every ideal glamour and
dragging to light the animal impulses and selfish motives
to which a cynical naturalism reduces human feeling and
action.” It cannot be helped, he cries, the sentiment of
surrender, of sacrifice for one’s neighbour and all self-
renunciation, morality must be mercilessly called to
account and brought to judgment. The virtues which are
customarily regarded as the very tissue of the moral life—


truth, justice, honesty, mercy, sympathy, toleration—are
criticised and condemned —on what grounds we shall
presently see. Having convinced himself that the trans-
ition which, in human life, has taken place from instinct
and impulse to rational will is a huge blunder, and
having rid himself of the incubus of generally recognised
moral restraints, he proceeds to his constructive ethics. He
boldly proclaims himself an immoralist. His habit of
exaggerated expression may easily mislead us here.
Nietzsche regards himself as an immoralist only in the
sense that he refuses to be judged by existing moral
standards. It is not his intention to reject standards
of morality. He has no wish to sink back into the life of
mere brute impulse. On the contrary, he desires to lift
himself, and such as he, above the level at which customary
moral criteria need to be applied. When he conceives a
life “beyond good and evil,” what he has in view is a life
beyond good and evil as currentl defined. Certainly he
makes Zarathustra proclaim, “Break in pieces, break in
pieces the old tables: there is an ancient delusion called
good and evilbut he also calls upon his followers to be
creators of new standards of good and evil. They have
their own set of beatitudes: —“Ye have heard how in old
times it was said, ‘Blessed are the meek, for they shall in-
herit the earth;’ but I say unto you, ‘Blessed are the
valiant, for they shall make the earth their throne.’ And
ye have heard men say, ‘Blessed are the poor in spirit;’ but
I say unto you, ‘Blessed are the great in soul and the free
in spirit, for they shall enter into Valhalla.’ And ye have
heard men say, ‘Blessed are the peacemakers;’ but I say
unto you, ‘Blessed are the warmakers, for they shall be
called, if not the children of Jahveh, the children of Odin,
who is greater than Jahveh.” He removes the old criteria,
only to substitute new ones conceived to be forged by the
free spirit—valour, untrammelled freedom, power to
prosecute successful war.
On what grounds, it is naturally asked, does Nietzsche
condemn existing moral standards and current moral valua-
tions? In the first place, he insists on the relativity of
moral values. “In all valuation,” he tells us, “there is a


definite purpose; the preservation of an individual, a com-
munity, a race, a state, a belief, or a culture.” The
morality of any period is binding only in so far as it serves
the purposes of that period. It is relative to time, to
race, to circumstances. Habits of truthfulness, sentiments
of generosity and mercy, the love of justice—these are
temporary conventions either deliberately or unconsciously
designed to fulfil a definite purpose. The distinction be-
tween good and evil, the basis upon which such virtues are
praised or blamed, is not an ultimate distinction. It is an
arbitrary, or, at least, an artificial one. “Good and evil
which would be everlasting—it does not exist. All is in
flux. Everything good is the evil of yore which has been
rendered serviceable.” Again, “My leading doctrine is
this: there are no moral phenomena, but only a moral
interpretation of phenomena. The origin of this interpreta-
tion itself lies beyond the pale of morality.” Actions in
themselves are neither good nor evil: only thinking makes
them so.
In the particular system of morality which expressed
the life of his time, Nietzsche discovered that the end which
the virtues were calculated to subserve was the preserva-
tion of the equilibrium of existing society. All the so-
called virtues are preservative measures. They are means
skilfully, cunningly devised for the continuance of stagnant
life. They minister to the comfort of those who have no
other or higher desire than to exist, of those who act upon
the supposition of the truth of Schopenhauer’s doctrine of
“The Will to Live.” They subserve “the universal green-
grazing happiness of the herd.” They guarantee “the con-
temptible species of well-being dreamt of by shop-keepers,
Christians, cows, women, Englishmen, and other demo-
crats.” They are preservative measures for “mediocre
people,” for “sufferers,” and for “the lowly.” The whole
of the morality of Europe, he contends, is based upon the
values which are useful to “the herd.” “The qualities and
tendencies which are praised: peacefulness, equity, modesty,
chastity, honesty, rectitude, pity, helpfulness, con-
scientiousness, simplicity, mildness, justice, generosity
. . . freedom from envy, good nature, industry”—are


praised because they tend to preserve one type of man in
a stable and harmonious form of society.
But, it may be urged, is not humanity, as organised in
society, an end which it is right that we should serve, and
are not the virtues the practice of which renders the social
Structure more stable and harmonious thereby justified?
Do we not regard service devoted to the Common Good as
our most essential constituent of the highest ethical life?
Does not the best self find its own in all men’s good? To
these questions Nietzsche’s reply is unambiguously nega-
tive ; he completely reverses such a view of the moral life.
Humanity in itself, and, more particularly, humanity as at
present organised, is entirely unworthy of service. “There
are only three respects,” he writes, “in which the masses
appear to me to deserve a glance—first, as blurred copies
of great men, executed on bad paper and from wom-out
plates; secondly, as opposition to the great; and lastly, as
instruments for the great; for the rest, let them go to the
devil and to statistics.” Far from being an end in itself,
humanity is a means, a scaffolding, to a higher, select, race.
“The essence of a good and healthy aristocracy is that it
should not regard itself as a function either of the throne
or the community, but as the sense and ultimate justifica-
tion of the whole —that it should, therefore, accept with a
good conscience the sacrifice of innumerable men, who,
its sake, must be depressed and reduced to incomplete men,
slaves, and instruments. Its fundamental belief must be
precisely that society has a right to exist for its own
sake, but only as a foundation and scaffolding, by means of
which a select class of beings may elevate themselves to
their higher duties, and in general to a higher existence.”
Such a view is equally opposed to the spirit of Kant and
to that of Hegel. Kant’s maxim, “So act as to treat
humanity, whether in thine own person or in that of every
other, in every case as an end, never as a means,” falls
under Nietzsche’s condemnation, because it acknowledges
the value of every man as an end in himself. And Hegel’s
doctrine of the State as “ an absolutely complete ethical
organisation, the be-all and of everyone’s educa-
tion,” is likewise condemned, because Hegel, with whatever


measure of success, at least attempted to preserve to the
individual members of the State a certain independence
as free critics of it. Indeed, the idea of devotion to the
State on the part of great individuals is utterly repugnant
to Nietzsche’s mind. It matters not whether it be the most
advanced form of democracy or the extreme Prussian mili-
tarist State; in any form, the State is simply a corpora-
tion invented to do what the individual has not the courage
to do; it subserves the ends of the masses. It is sig-
nificant, however, that Nietzsche qualifies his scornful
criticism in the case of the military State. “The military
State,” he says, “is the last means of adhering to the great
tradition of the past ; or, when it has been lost, of reviving
it. By means of it the superior or strong man is pre-
served.”
Nietzsche’s final criticism of current morality is that it
devitalizes men. The more dangerous a quality seems to
the herd the more completely it is condemned. Everything
which tends to disturb the equilibrium of society or to rouse
it from its stagnation is branded as evil. The strong
passions, the powerful instincts of the exceptional man
have this effect. They are dangerous; they tend to shatter
the levelling conventions which are customarily regarded
as moral laws; consequently they fall under the ban of
existing morality. “Instead of making use of and econo-
mising the great sources of passion, those torrents of the
soul, which are often so dangerous, overwhelming and
impetuous, morality—this most short-sighted and most cor-
rupted of mental attitudes—would fain make them
It is in this connection that Nietzsche makes his vehement
and very significant denunciation of the Christian ethic.
He sees the perfect efflorescence of Christian virtue in
anaemic mediaeval asceticism, and can find in Christian
morality only systematic suppression of life’s elemental
forces. It is the refuge of the enslaved and the oppressed.
It has served only “ to shatter the strong, to spoil great
hopes, to cast suspicion on the delight in beauty, to break
down everything autonomous, manly, conquering and im-
perious into uncertainty, distress of conscience, and self-
destruction . . . until at last a dwarfed, almost ludicrous
species has been produced, a gregarious animal, something


obliging, sickly, mediocre—the European of the present
day.” It has preserved that which should have perished,
namely, the bungled, the botched, the anaemic type of man.
Hence, with supreme egotism, bordering on insanity,
Nietzsche affirms: u I pronounce my sentence, I condemn
Christianity. • . . I call it the one great curse, the one
great intrinsic depravity, the one great instinct of revenge,
for which no expedient is sufficiently poisonous, secret,
subterranean, mean: l call it the one immortal blemish
of mankind.”
This attitude of revolt against the accepted laws of
the moral life, although it has rarely taken such an exag-
gerated form, is not an uncommon one. Indeed, the reformer
almost invariably feels himself to a greater or less extent
opposed to the laws and customs of his age. He frequently
has to attack and overcome the inertia of a traditional
system which may have spent its vital force, and under the
deadening control of which men are ignobly content to
persist in the status quo, perfunctorily discharging a series
of duties which have lost all living significance. From this
point of view one is prepared, after stripping off the exag-
geration and coarse abuse which disfigure it, to find much
valuable criticism in Nietzsche’s attack upon the morality
current in his time. The important thing, however, is to
know what the negative critic is to substitute for the system
which he attempts to undermine. This is the more impor-
tant in the case before us because of the thorough-goingness
of the destructive criticism. We are thus led to a considera-
tion of the positive and most characteristic features of
Nietzsche’s thought.
His constructive thought is perhaps best grasped by
reference to the metaphysics of Schopenhauer. Schopen-
hauer had found in the irrational Will-to-live the ultimate
reality behind all appearance. Man and animal alike have
been launched upon life by the force of a blind irrational
pressure, and are impelled to continue in life by an inner
urgency. For man life is a huge unintelligible mistake;
man should, therefore, if possible, renounce life. This he
attempts to do through the cultivation of self-denying vir-
tues and a Bhuddistic eradication of desires which have


their source in the irrational Will-to-live. Nietzsche appears
to have accepted in his youth this doctrine of Schopen-
hauer’s. But he soon found himself at variance with his
master. He made a notable advance upon Schopenhauer’s
position when he affirmed that; at the heart of reality is
not the “Will-to-live,” but the “‘Will-to-power”
Macht.) “Only where there is life there is will; not Will-
to-live, however, but Will-to-power.” “A living thing seeks
above all, to discharge its strength—life itself is
Macht. Self-preservation is only one of the indirect and
most frequent results thereof.” Man is thus called upon to
say “yea” to life. The ethics of self-denial and renuncia-
tion which Schopenhauer’s metaphysic implied must yield
to an ethic of a more robust type; it must be life-
furthering, not life-denying. The ideal man is he who
“affirms the world out of a sheer sense of overflowing life.”
Into the self-content and stagnation of decadent humanity
the individual in whom the Will-to-power is free comes with
disturbing effect. “ Let us acknowledge, unpre judicedly,”
says Nietzsche in a review of the history of morals, “how
every higher civilisation hitherto has originated. Men with
a still natural nature, barbarians in every sense of the
word, men of prey, still in possession of unbroken strength
of will and desire for power, threw themselves upon weaker,
more moral, more peaceful races, or upon old mellow civili-
sations in which the fundamental vital force was flickering
out in brilliant fireworks of wit and depravity.” These are
the higher men; they are the creators of new values, the
incarnation of the new ethic. This “noble” type of man
“regards himself as a determiner of values; he does not
require to be approved of; he passes the judgment: ‘What is
injurious to me is injurious in itself;’ he knows that it
is he himself only who confers honour on things; he is a
creator of values. He honours whatever he recognises in
himself; such morality is self-glorification. In the fore-
ground there is the feeling of plenitude, or power which
seeks to overflow, the happiness of high tension, the con-
sciousness of a wealth which would fain give and
bestow . . .” Such powerful men rise above the level
on which ordinary moral judgments are relevant. The
test of their superiority is this: Canst thou give thyself thine


evil and thy good* and suspend thy will over thee as a
law? Canst thou be thine own Judge and the avenger of
thine- own law? The value of a man lies in the quantum
of power and fulness of his will, and the power of" a will is
to be tested by the amount of resistance it can offer, the
fierceness of attack it can make, the amount of pain and
torture it can, endure and know how to turn to its own
advantage. Further, supreme dominating- egoism is an
essential quality of the noble, the distinguished man.
“Egoism belongs to the essence of the distinguished soul: I
mean by that the immovable belief that to a being such as
Sve are/ other beings must naturally be in subjection and
have to sacrifice themselves.” The noble soul has the right
to dominate because it has the power. Far from feeling
himself under any obligation to use his power for the well-
being of the masses, he will call upon them to minister to
his desire for more power, or he will bestow by subdual his
power upon them. He will loftily accept their sacrifices;
he will contemplate with stony indifference the sufferings
of the weak and the sorrows of the failures. He will resist
all sentimental weakness. For him “life is essentially
appropriation, injury, conquest of the strange and weak,
suppression, severity, obtrusion of his own forms, incor-
poration, and at the least, putting it most mildly,
exploitation.” He will worship power in every form—the
necessitating power of the overmastering brute instinct or
the unchastened passion; the power of the unbending will
which destroys every obstacle, animate or inanimate, in its
progress to its end; the power of the flashing intellect
capable of creating strong and original ideas. The truth
of any idea is to be determined by its enhancement of the
feeling of power; the goodness of any action is to be gauged
by its contribution to the expansion of power, of vitality,
of dominion.
Life is wrongly described as a struggle for existence.
It is a struggle for power, and every instinctive impulse
plays its part in the struggle. This process culminates in
the emergence of the super-men, the higher race, beings
rich in vitality, with an overflowing plenitude of procreative
fructifying power. These are the rightful masters, the
by the masses, if for no other reason than that they fit


subduers of mankind. They ‘“separate themselves by ages
of war and subdual from the; beings in whom the opposite
of their exalted, proud disposition displays itself; they
despise them.” Thus there evolves a splendid aristocracy
of “intellect, beauty, courage, felicity and power, scornfully
smiling, exuberantly vital.” The evolution of this aris-
tocracy is the meaning of thee world. The human race is
but the scaffolding on which tthe super-men can devise their
higher mode of existence.
In the earlier stages of Ms thought Nietzsche appears
to have contemplated the super-man as a single individual,
who is approached in the personality of Napoleon, or
Frederick the Great, or Csesar Borgia. But the super-man
gradually passes into the form of a super-species—good
Europeans—a species yet to emerge. He calls upon men
of like mind with himself to labour, to discipline and sacri-
fice themselves, with a view to the production of this higher
super-national race. He becomes an advocate of Eugenics,
inculcating the doctrine of legislation for the future race
rather than for the present individual. “He turns also, to
Education, not of the masses, but of the few picked men,
for great and lasting work—the aristocracy of good Euro-
peans, the higher men, who shall be bridges to the super-
men—men self-disciplined, obedient, faithful; men of a
good courage and_a burning hope. So shall heroism come
back into honour, and an age shall arise ‘which will carry
heroism into the domain of knowledge and wage wars on
behalf of ideas and their consequences/ ”
AIL this concerning the super-men is nebulous, but one
fact stands out clearly. The human race divides itself into
two groups—the millions whom Nietzsche contemptuously
terms “the herd,” and the super-men and their begetters.
There are two corresponding forms of morality. “In a
tour,” says Nietzsche, “through the many finer and coarser
moralities which have hitherto prevailed or still prevail
on the earth, I have found certain traits recurring regularly
together, and connected with one another, until finally two
primary types revealed themselves to me, and a radical
distinction was brought to light. There is master-morality
and slave-morality.” Slave-morality finds its expression in
the .Christian virtues. These virtues should be practised


mankind for service to, and in the last resort for subdual
and exploitation by, the higher men. Master-morality is
summed up in the precept; Live dangerously. “To demand
of strength that it should not manifest itself as strength,
that it should not be a will for overcoming, for
overthrowing, for mastery, a thirst for enemies and struggle
and triumphs, is as absurd as to demand of weakness that
it should become strength. Live dangerously! Build your
cities on Vesuvius! Launch your ships on uncharted
seas! Live at war with your equals and with yourselves!
Be robbers and conquerors, ye enlightened ones, so long as
ye cannot be rulers and possessors.”
The two forms of morality are They do not
supplement each other. Nietzsche is not pleading here
for a morality which all men may practise, a morality
in which the laws shall be vitalised by the power
of those instincts and emotions which lie at the basis of
human character; nor is he advocating the organisation and
spiritualization of these root forces of instinct and emotion
under the control of reason. He holds firmly before his
mind two contrasted kinds —ascetic, life-negating, or Chris-
tian morality, and the onrushing power of unfettered,
unchastened instinct. I have no hesitation in affirming
that this contrast cannot be maintained without deserting
in one case or the other the ethical point of view altogether.
Indeed, the contrast transforms itself in Nietzsche’s own
hands from a contrast between a lower and a higher form
of morality into that between an ethical life and one which
is non-ethical. In releasing the life of the higher man from
all generally recognised ethical controls Nietzsche is in
reality dehumanizing him, de-moralizing him. Milton’s
words about the wicked wizard and his magic draught are
applicable here;—
“Soon as the potion works, their human countenance,
The express resemblance of the gods, is changed
Into some brutish form of wolf or bear,
Or ounce, or tiger, hog, or bearded goat,
All other parts remaining as they were;
And they, so perfect is their misery,
Not once perceive their foul disfigurement,
But boast themselves more comely than before.”


It was not Nietzsche’s intemtion to present such an ideal;
he desired this power to be regarded as spiritual. But there
is no doubt that this is the fotrm which his ideal assumes.
It is implicit in his reiteratedl appeal for the unrestricted
play of instinct. It has been rightly urged that human life
becomes possible only when thte break with instinct as such
is made; when the necessitatkon of instinct gives place to
the “guidance and control of instinct by a self-conscious
being, in the interests of some larger and more satisfying
end.” Thus, while ostensibly lifting his super-man above
the masses whom he professes to despise, Nietzsche is,
from the moral point of view, dragging him down to a
lower level—that of unrelieved animalism. The ethical
life is degraded into “physiological prosperity.” This is so
in spite of much which Nietzsche says to the contrary, as,
for example, when he calls to the disciples of Zarathustra,
“All beings hitherto created something beyond themselves;
and will ye be the ebb of this great flood, and rather return
to the animal than overcome and surpass man ?” But the
degradation is certain. The super-men, in “enjoying liberty
from social restraint,” to use his own words, “revert to the
beast of prey’s innocence of conscience, and become rejoic-
ing monsters. ... Deep in the nature of all these noble
races there lurks unmistakably the beast of prey, the blond
beast, lustfully roving in search of booty and victory.” Man
is thus “translated back into nature” with a vengeance, into
that non-ethical nature which Huxley argued is opposed to
what is ethically best* to human goodness and virtue.
We have now before us the general features of
Nietzsche’s teaching concerning morals. It remains for us to
consider, very briefly, how this morality or a—morality has
embodied itself in the spirit which has overwhelmed modem
Germany, that of Prussian militarism. It would be foolish
to assert that this is the only spirit operative in the Ger-
many of to-day. The human soil in which the virtues of
mercy, generosity, truth, justice, honesty grow and fructify
is there in abundance, as I, for one, who have lived in
Germany, can testify. There are still, it may safely be said,
currents broad and deep of that national life and culture
which found points of concentration in Kant and Goethe.
But these streams have become sadly polluted by the pre


dominance of Prussian influence. The history of the
growth of the German Empire is the history of the expand-
ing domination of Prussia. The empire has been welded
together by the force which Prussia has been able to exert,
and its international position has been secured largely by
the exercise of that same force. This militarist aristocracy
has organised the life of the people in a system “complete,
consequent, well thought-out, harmonious,” in every detail,
a system which, so far as organisation is concerned, compels
the admiration of the world. The Constitution is such that
the executive power lies in the hands of Prussia, and, in the
last resort, of the ruling Kaiser and those whom he appoints
to office in Berlin. Government is of the people, by the
Prussian State, for the Prussian State; and for this State,
and, therefore, indirectly for the German people, whom it
has exploited, “the cult of forcible expansion is the central
and dominating ideal.”
The point of contact between Nietzsche and Prussianized
Germany is then, surely, obvious. Let this virile nation,
glorying in the sense of its power, choose to regard itself
as the super-State; let it interpret power to mean ruthless
material force and boundless subdual, and it will find much*
in Nietzsche’s doctrine to fortify its spirit and stimulate
its lust for dominion. It may be frankly recognised that
Nietzsche was an unsparing critic of the militarist State,
and that his contempt for German was supreme.
But the darts of criticism do’ not strike home when they are
aimed against a Kaiser and a Junkerdom armoured in an
abnormal self-regarding sentiment. Besides, it is easy to
pass by criticism when one finds in the critic’s teaching
much that seems to provide a philosophical justification for
the pursuit of one’s ideal. The doctrine of the super-man
interprets itself for Germany in the super-State, “exalted
as something separate from the mind and conscience of
its citizens, a non-moral predatory organism seeking only
strength superior to that of other States.” This super-
state, freed from the control of those moral laws which
express and regulate the relations between individuals,
creates its own forms of conduct in diplomacy and war.
These laws have their sole justification in the fact that they
permit of the expansion of the nation’s power. Belgium’s


neutrality would be recognised, only so long as the need for
the successful conduct of the war, which means for Germany
“world dominion or downfall,” is met. Germany had
the power to “hack its way Ith rough Belgiumlet it do so.
If you go carefully through the official replies which Ger-
many has made to America’s protests against her piratical
methods of conducting warfare, you will find that in every
instance the final appeal is t® necessity. The actions taken,
whether j ustifiable or not from the point of view of accepted
international law, were necessary for Germany’s success in
the conflict. Have we not here a striking translation into
action of Nietzsche’s teaching that the “Will-to-power”
knows no law except that which it itself creates? And
when we allow our thoughts to dwell on the sinking of the
Lusitania, the killing of babies in unfortified towns, the
officially-countenanced ravishing of womanhood in Belgium,
the orutal and barbarous methods of conducting warfare
which Germany has devised, shall we not say that Nietzsche
was prophetic of this super-State when he pictured “the
blond beast, lustfully roving in search of victory and booty,
a rejoicing monster which goes on its way after a hideous
sequence of murder, conflagration, violation, torture” ? For
Germany’s sake, and in the interests of modern civilisation,
the power of this super-State must be broken.




JUST PUBUSHED.
PRICE one: shilling.
Companion Volume to “Soldier, my Soldier!”
THE
CLEAR CALL
BY
DOROTHY FRANCES McCRAE.
“SOLDIER, MY SOLDIER !” has been one of the most
popular books of verse published in recent years in Australia
and “THE CLEAR CALL ” has all the qualities which have
made that book so successful.
With Pictorial Cover designed by Walter Seed.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
PROPY. LTD.,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


How the War Affects Australia.
NOW READY, AT ALL BOOKSELLERS.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Archibald : n ongs
Articles on the War.
(Reprinted from the Melbourne Herald)
ENTITLED
AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR
Among the articles in the book are “ Why Germany Made War, ”
“ World-Power or Downfall ?’ ’ ‘‘Our Dangers and Duties/’ “The
Worker and Germany,” “Our Stake in the War,” “Facts to be
Faced,” “Australia’s Deadly Danger,” “The Agony of Belgium,”
“Self and the State,” “Women and the War,” “The Case for
France,” “An American View of Germany,” “The War and
Socialism,” “Ourselves and the Empire,” “Naturalisation and
Treason,” “ Australia and Sea Power,” etc., etc.
ORDER NOW from your Bookseller or from
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO
PROPY. LTD.
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane.
B. R. Gowan & Co., Printers, ‘492 Collins Street, Melbourne.
