

The
London Irish Rifles
(18th Battalion London Regiment T.F.)
Hon. Colonel
Field Marshal H.R.H. THE DUKE OF CONNAUGHT,
K.G., K.T., K.P.
A brief History of the Regiment
and of its work at the Front
NOVEMBER, 1915


The
London Irish Rifles
The First Battalion is in France*
The Second Battalion is in Essex
ready to proceed overseas.
The Third Battalion is in winter
quarters in Surrey.
Recruits are urgently wanted for the
Third Battalion to which falls the
duty of providing drafts for the
First and Second Battalions.


THE LONDON IRISH RIFLES.
Its History.
THERE is something fine about the very name—
London Irish ! London is the great rallying
point of the whole vast Empire, the symbol of its
unity and the very centre of its power. Imperial
Rome never wielded one tenth of the power of
Imperial London. The sorrows of Ireland are
centuries old, but she has never hesitated to give of
her very best when the Empire called for it. Welling-
ton of Waterloo, Roberts of Kandahar, Kitchener of
Khartoum, and Lord Charles Beresford are sons of
Erin. The London Irish belong to Ireland and to
the Metropolis—one of the many links between them
—and both may be proud of the regiment.
The London Irish Rifles is certainly one of the
most famous of the London Territorial Battalions and
its high reputation, gained during the work of more
than half a century, is being splendidly upheld. Its
history dates from December, 1859, when a Public
Meeting of Irish nobles and gentlemen was held in
London under the Chairmanship of the Marquess of
Donegal. In those days the entente cordiale was a


thing undreamed of; we feared the French and looked
with anxiety at the narrow strip of sea which separated
us and at the revolution in sea travelling which the
use of steam was then causing; the danger of a
sudden landing on our south coast was much discussed
and volunteer corps were formed with a view to
dealing with any sudden emergency. The Irishmen
in London came forward with tremendous enthusiasm;
in fact, so vigorous were their feelings that at the
first meeting the noble Chairman had to warn them
against the use of heated language! Amid great
enthusiasm he announced that he had the previous day
enlisted as a recruit a man who, though somewhat
advanced in years, was still young and vigorous in
mind —to wit Lord Palmerston, Prime Minister of
England. The famous Samuel Lover was present
at this meeting and made a speech ; he served in the
Corps as an “ effective.”
In 1861 the London Irish Rifles figured among the
Volunteer Corps which were reviewed at Wimbledon;
this review forms an interesting link with the past,
for the Duke of Wellington was one of the Generals
present.
In 1883 the command of the Regiment passed to
Colonel James Ward, C. 8., V.D., who was followed
in succession by Colonel Sir Howland Roberts, Bart.,
V.D., Colonel H. A. Pakenham (late of the Grenadier
Guards and now Commanding Officer of a Battalion
of the Royal Irish Rifles) and Colonel E. G. Concanon,
D. 5.0., T.D., under whose leadership the Ist Battalion
2


of the London Irish Rifles joined the Expeditionary
Force in France many months ago.
The London Irish Rifles are proud in having had
His Royal Highness the Duke of Connaught as their
Honorary Colonel since 1872.
Some famous men have donned the uniform of
the London Irish Rifles. Lord Palmerston and Mr.
Samuel Lover have already been mentioned ; in more
recent times Sir F. Carruthers Gould, the famous
cartoonist, was a Major; Colonel Sir Robert Inglis,
the present Chairman of the London Stock Exchange
and donor of the Rifle Club premises attached to
same, was at one time the second in command of
the Battalion.
In the South African War, when one of the L.I.R.
won the V.C., it furnished the second largest con-
tingent of any volunteer unit for the famous C.1.V., a
service Company for the Royal Irish Rifles, and men
for the Middlesex Yeomanry. When the great War
burst upon us last year its men leapt to arms and
signed the Imperial Service obligation almost to a
man. Within a few days after the declaration of war
the first Battalion was at full strength. A second
Battalion was recruited inside of four days.
Ax Work in France.
When the first Battalion arrived in France in
March, 1915, it was inspected by Sir John French,
who commented favourably upon its bearing and
3


appearance; his good opinion has since then been amply
justified by the splendid work which it has done.
Three Riflemen have been awarded the D.C.M. for
distinguished conduct in the field. The Military
Cross was awarded to Captain and Adjutant Hamihon
for conspicuous gallantry at Loos and Maroc.
The London Irish have been in the thick of it, in
the trenches or in the attack, ever since they went out.
They have had their share of the grave and the gay,
the tear and the smile, but their spirit has never left
them. They took their Irish pipers out to France
with them. On one occasion the London Irish were
ordered to hold on in an exceptionally difficult place at
La Bassee. Beside them were the Irish Guards and
the King’s Royal Rifle Corps. The London Irishmen
were tired, having been long in action, but they
settled grimly to their task. Suddenly there rose up
from the trenches the familiar strains of “ St.
Patrick’s Day,” given with vigour by the pipers. A
new spirit entered into the men and a roar of cheers
went down the line. Presently the “ Minstrel Boy ”
was played and the rifle fire was redoubled. The
German trenches were only seventy yards away and
they could hear the music and the cheers.
On one occasion our telephone linesman happened
to find two live cables on the ground in the rear of
our trenches. No one happened to know to whom
they belonged or whence they came; rumour had it
that the generating station was somewhere in the
German lines. Without asking leave from the
4


German authorities, our linesmen promptly fitted
wires and carried them to the Battalion Headquarters,
the Dressing Station, Officers’ Dug-outs, etc. Lamps
were found in the deserted houses of a village just
behind, and for many weeks a first-class electric
installation was in full working order, with power
“ milked ” from Germany.
The London Irish at Loos.
“You have performed one of the finest actions of
the war ” was the message sent to them after the last
big advance. On account of the assistance they
gave in the battle of Loos, this name will be a word
of proud memory in the records of the London Irish.
For some of the nights before the famous 25th of
September, they had been employed in the difficult
task of digging trenches in advance of our regular
first-line. On the night of September 24th they
received their orders and marched out to take up
their allotted positions. “ What a sight! ” writes
one of the men, “ almost pitch dark, as light near the
firing line must not be —just a few glimmers here and
there to mark cross-roads, and those are lanterns,
mostly on the ground in charge of one or more
soldiers, according to the importance of the posts
whose job it is to control the traffic. Now and
again a more or less lurid illumination comes from
the star shells that are used between the trenches;
while searchlights sweep across the sky. Artillery
5


flashes continuously and the roar of the guns is added
to the crash and rattle of the traffic on the roads.”
At a point in the march the Brigadier General was
standing to see them go by. He shook hands with
every officer and told the men that he was expecting
great things of them on the morrow.
At about midnight the trenches were reached in
pouring rain and the men settled down to the long
hours of waiting until the moment to advance arrived;
and the infernal racket of the bombardment went on
over their heads. “ It’s all right,” said an N.C.0.,
“ I’ve arranged with the Bodies’ Orderly Sergeant
for the show to finish in five minutes.” Sure enough,
it did, and then it was time for the gas to be turned
on —much to the satisfaction of our men. The wind
was slightly in our favour, and the gas drifted off
towards the German lines.
“ Irish—up and over ! ” came the order at 6.30 a.m.
Over they went, by platoons, with a half minute
interval between each. In spite of the terrible fire
which was opened upon them, they formed up in four
splendid lines before they charged for their objective.
Some bright spirits had taken a football with them!
The German second-line trenches were the objective
for the London Irish. They reached them, captured
them and set to work to reorganise them in a very
short space of time. They did their allotted task
magnificently, and were able to beat back the tre-
mendous counter-attack which the Germans launched
against them. It was for this that they were so
6


warmly commended in the words above quoted. At
the Front they are called “the lucky Irish.”
Men Wanted.
“ We want Men ” is now the cry of the London
Irish. Men to fill up the gaps and to maintain the
splendid traditions of the regiment. This fact is
being proclaimed by thousands of emerald-green
posters. No one in London can fail to see them. In
Tubes, on carts, in shop-windows, they stare you in
the face. A great Hotel in Piccadilly wore a string
of them like a belt round its waist. Londoners have
heard the Irish pipes skirling through their streets.
On the morning after the last Zeppelin raid, they
marched through the damaged area with green ribbons
streaming; their music is strangely moving, and they
made a tremendous stir in the huge crowds. It was
courage and defiance that they proclaimed— not fear.
It was a pity the Kaiser lived so far away, that
morning !
Recruits have joined from all parts of the World ;
a man was attested recently who had come straight
over from helping General Botha to turn the Germans
out of South West Africa. Other men from Canada,
Australia, India, West Coast of Africa, the U.S.A.
and from Japan have crossed the seas in order to join
the London Irish Rifles. A recruit who was enlisted
in September, 1914, is now a Captain in the Scots
Guards.
7


Former members, living abroad and at home, too
old for active service, have sent gifts to their friends
in the trenches. One man in China shipped a case of
useful articles, “ smokes,” etc., with a covering note
in which he said that he knew that the London Irish
Rifles would be well to the fore. He was right.
They were. They are. They will be.
The London Irish Rifles are the 18th Battalion of
the London Regiment (Territorial). Their Head-
quarters are at the Duke of York’s, Sloane Square,
S.W., where recruits are seen every day (Sundays
included) between 9 a.m. and 9 p.m. Recruits can,
however, be attested at any recruiting office.
You have one more week in which you are allowed
free choice of Regiment. Unless you make up your
mind to enlist here and now, no guarantee can be
given you that you will be allowed to join the London
Irish Rifles and share with them the honour they
have already won and the honours they are going to
win.
Women’s Priming Society, ! t . iLicl< Stae:. P ccmi '.y.
8


“ In peace there’s nothing so becomes a man
As modest stillness and humility;
But when the blast of war blows in our ears.
Then imitate the action of the tiger;
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard favour’d rage:
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;
Let it pry through the portage of the head,
Like the brass cannon ; let the brow o’erwhelm it,
As fearfully as doth a galled rock
O'erhang and jutty his confounded base,
Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean.
Now set the teeth, and stretch the nostril wide ;
Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
To his full height!—On, on, you nobless English,
Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof ! ”
King Henry V.


WANTED.
To send out to the men of the London
Irish Rifles who are in the trenches
in Flanders, a large bale containing
Socks, Cigarettes & Sweets
There is urgent need of socks.
Will friends of the London Irish unite
in this Christmas Present, and send
in their gifts by December 10th to —
The Officer Commanding,
London Irish Rifles,
Duke of York’s Headquarters,
Sloane Square,
London, S.W.,
they will then be packed in one big
bale and sent out.
