

1 "l[ l^^pp^l
H. ?Beard


THE LITTLE
BROWN HORSE
H. A. BEARD
This is the story of an Australian
horse which, soon after being caught
and brought in from the Bush and
trained in the way that is described
by a writer with knowledge, became
the companion and pet of a little
Australian girl. On her back Nellie
rode to school, and by and by very
dashingly won a race against other
boys and girls at their sports: the little
horse also, of course, entered into the
everyday life of the happy outdoor
families described in the story, and
played a most interesting part when her
mistress was lost in the Bush. The
pony?s name is Nylie, which is the
native Australian word for ? nice little
lady ? ?a description which very well
fits a delightful pony which will surely
come to be a favourite with every
reader. The story is full of interest
and fun with plenty of excitement, as,
for instance, when the Bush fire is
fought, and when Nellie, who has
wandered off the track, is sought and
found.
Printed in Great Britain
2 - net


1


1
(
I
1
I
(
�
1
i
i
(
�
i
;]
c
I'


The Little Brown Horse


BhACKIE & SON LIMITED
50 Old Bailey, LONDON
17 Stanhope Street, Glasgow
BLACKIE & SON (INDIA) LIMITED
Warwick House, Fort Street, Bombay
BLACKIE & SON (CANADA) LIMITED
Toronto




C U IB J
E 725
A GREAT OCCASION
Page 109
Frontispiece


The
Little Brown Horse
H. ALLEN BEARD
Illustrated by Radclife Wilson
BLACKIE & SON LIMITED
LONDON AND GLASGOW


The Sceptre Library ?Boys
In the Grip of the Barren Lands. Norman
Blake.
The Mystery of the Mine. George Richmond.
For the Old School. F. Coombe.
Marooned on Australia. Ernest Favenc.
Will of the Dales. R. Stead.
The Last Voyage of the ? Jane Anne
William Rainey.
A Waiting Game. Jeffrey Havilton.
The Riddle of Randley School. Alfred Judd.
The Little Brown Horse. H. A. Beard.
Edgar the Ready. W. P. Shervill.
Sturdy and Strong. G. A. Henty.
In the Days of Drake. J. S. Fletcher.
Among Chinese Pirates. W. C. Metcalfe.
Across the Cameroons. Charles Gilson.
Hal Hungerford. J. R. Hutchinson.
Printed in Great Britain by Blackie & Son, Ltd., Glasgow


Page
9
- 16
23
- 28
- 41
- 48
- 54
62
- 74
- * * - 83
92
102
112
- 122
- 132
- 143
Contents
CHA t P - t Page
I. In the Bush 9
11. A Bushman?s Camp x 5
111. Bush Comforts 2 t,
IV. Getting Ready 2 g
V. Preparing the Trap 4I
VI. Caught ------- - 4 g
VII. A Holiday for Henry ----- 54
VIII. The Picnic ------- 62
IX. Nylie?s Home
X. School Again g 3
XI. Nellie?s Birthday Party ----- 92
XII. More Fun at the Party IQ2
XIII. Nellie?s Great Escape - - - . 112
XIV. In Danger of Fire 122
XV. The Bush Fire 132
XVI. A Night in the Burning Bush - - - 143
XVII. Rain -


Page
- 163
- 172
- 183
- 195
- 203
Facing
page
XVIII. Nylie?s Race
XIX. Lost in the Bush
XX. The Search -
XXI. Found -
XXII. Conclusion -
Illustrations
Frontispiece
A Great Occasion
Henry Holds on
An Ordeal for Nylie -


To my dear little Cohbers in the
great Australian Bush;
and to all nice children
everywhere


? Nylie ?, the name of the Little Brown
Horse, is the native Australian word for
? little lady ?


THE
LITTLE BROWN HORSE
CHAPTER I
In the Bush
Little Brown Horse was very happy.
Although long past her first birthday?indeed,
half-way towards her second?she had been
able to roam in the Bush all the time.
She still had her mother near to her, and
there were many horse friends too. They
formed a group, or mob, which kept together
at all times.
In the Bush there were many other groups.
Sometimes they mixed, but nearly always they
kept to their own friends.
Some of them were really big horses. Others
amongst them were quite small. This kind were
called Brumbies ?, and were nearly wild.


Men caught them and used them, for they were
very good to ride. Unless the rider was very
heavy, they could travel fast and for very long
distances.
Little Brown Horse was as big as a full-
grown brumby, though she was not nearly full-
grown.
She was very happy because of her friends,
and because the morning was most lovely. The
hottest weather had gone, the place to which
they came each night was close to water, and
there were nice green plants to eat.
Soon they would travel to a place where nice
grasses grew.
They had all taken a good drink from the
little lake, and were slowly eating as they
walked along the way they knew so well.
There was plenty to eat, though they had
to search for it. But they grew strong with the
exercise.
There were other animals in the Bush.
Quite a lot of stray cows were there. These,
too, were slowly walking and eating.
The birds were singing merrily, and the sun
was shining brightly as he got higher and
higher in the perfectly blue sky. Insects were


buzzing and humming, and everything seemed
glad and peaceful.
Suddenly a sentinel bird gave a strange sharp
cry, and at once the horse Slim Legs stood
perfectly still. Then he slowly turned to look
up the little hill.
He stood with head erect, ears forward, and
his sharp bright eyes fixed on a certain spot.
Most of his companions kept on dowm the hill,
feeding as they went. One or two of them stood
still, and looked towards Slim Legs, who was
now the last one of all. Soon he made a tiny
noise, and, turning around, he trotted down the
hill for a few yards. Again he stopped and
looked back, standing just as he had done
before. Then he gave a kind of snort and
galloped away down the hill. The others all
quickly followed, and did not stop until they
were right around the end of the lake. When
they came to the trees well over on the other
side, they stopped in the shelter they found
there, and peered across the water. Cows and
other horses all followed, so that in less than
two minutes there was not an animal to be seen
on the near side of the lake.
What had caused this sudden rush?


It was soon to be known, for presently a
little company of men came riding down the
slope and stopped at the side of the lake.
Without getting off their horses, they allowed
them to walk down into the water. Each one
of the horses eagerly drank its fill of the clear,
cool water. Whilst they were so enjoying them-
selves, their masters began to look around and
to talk.
? You were right, Tom,? said one. He was
a fine big young man who sat straight up on
his horse, keeping quite still, though his horse
was moving about and trying to reach some
green feed which was growing at the edge of
the water.
? Of course I was right,? replied the man
who was called Tom. ? Do you think I?d have
told you there were some real good horses here
if I hadn?t seen them? I tell you, I was around
here two nights ago just as it was getting dark.
I started the brumbies trotting off, and then I
came on a bunch with some real good stuff
among ?em. They left their drinking before I
got near, but I got a sight of ?em with the last
bit of sun shining full on. I tell you, Joe, they
looked pretty. And there they are, on the other


side. Not in that first lot. See that black
brumby, the one under that paper-bark tree
with the big knob in the middle. Well, count
the fourth to the left from him. I?ll bet all the
tea in China that is old Pat Reilly?s ? White
Star ?. Remember, she got away from that new
man of his two years or more since.?
? I do,? said Joe, ? but I never saw her, so
I can?t say whether it is she or no. She cer-
tainly has a white star on the front of her face.
A good star too.?
? That?s not White Star, Tom. Not on your
life,? said another man, who appeared to be
the oldest one there.
He pulled his horse up from its drinking,
and rode a little way along the edge of the lake,
so as to get a view from a better angle. ? Not
on your life,? he repeated, when he came back
to the others.
? Oh!? said Tom, ? and what makes you so
sure as that, Harvey??
? Think I don?t know White Star?? answered
Harvey. ? I?d know her in a thousand. Didn?t
I lose two weeks? wages when she beat Sudden
End two or three years ago! I was dead sure
Sudden End was winning, when that White


The Little Brown Horse
Star come a? shining in front of the whole mob.
It was sudden end to my wages, anyhow.?
The men all laughed merrily at Harvey; but
Tom would not let him off without a reason.
Wait a bit, he said. ? Just tell us, Harvey,
v hat difference there is between the mare over
the lake and the WTiite Star you know.?
? Well ? replied Harvey slowly, ? I?m not
sure I can tell you that. But anyhow, the white
star on the White Star I know was sort of clean
cut, nearly straight lines, you know. She had
a sharp face and clean limbs and all that sort
of thing. Not like that rough thing over there.
What?s the matter, Tom??
? 0h | { �W Oh! Ha! Ha! Ha!? laughed
Tom. Hold me up, somebody. That proves
it, Harvey. You know a lot about horses, I
reckon. Oh! Oh! Oh! Ha! Ha! Ha! And did
he think to find that a horse in the Bush would
always keep as smooth as when she was clipped
and groomed regular? Did he expect a fine
racehorse to keep its marks clear and clean,
when the hair of it was growing over the marks
every day? Go and get a job in a grocer?s shop,
Haney, and leave horses to the boys. Anyway,
that?s White Star, all right; and that little one


is hers too, or I?m a Dutchman. And boys,
that little thing?s mine in less than a week, or
my name?s not Tom Banks. George Tompkins
wants a real nice pony for his little girl to ride
to school on, and he?s ready to pay a good price.?
? How will you get her, Uncle?? asked a boy
of about fourteen, who was amongst the riders.
? I won?t tell you now, Henry, but I?ll show
you. You can come with me this afternoon and
we?ll start the job. Come on, boys.?
The men pulled their reins and, following
Tom, were soon away. Henry, who, though
young, was a good rider, kept close to the man
whom he had called Uncle.


CHAPTER II
A Bushman?s Camp
? Well, Henry, here we are. There is the
place where we stood this morning, and over
the lake is the tree where we saw the horses.
I think we will pull over the little hill and put
up our camp just out of sight of this drinking-
place. If those horses see much of us we shall
see very little of them. They will soon move
on.?
Do you think they come here every day,
Uncle?? asked the boy.
He had not been in the country very long.
His father had only lately died, and his mother
had been dead for several years. Now Tom
had promised to take care of Henry, and was
doing his best to teach him all he could of the
ways of the Bush.
They were not riding now.
Henry?s uncle was driving a big heavy cart,
called a dray in Australia. It had two big
16 (E 725 >


wheels with iron tyres about five inches wide.
It was pulled by a very big horse, and Tom?s
riding-horse was following behind the dray.
He was fastened with a thick rope which was
just long enough to allow him to walk easily
without being too far from the dray.
The quiet horse which Henry had ridden
was not there. The dray was filled with a great
number of strange things.
There was a long trough, big enough for a
man to take a bath in it. That was the feeding-
trough for the horses. No real man of the
Bush would make a camp without thinking of
the needs of his horses, even before he thought
of his own needs. Inside the dray there were
several bags of feed, tightly packed with the
best of chaff, bran and oats. There were cook-
ing-vessels, black and strange-looking. Some
of these were just big tins with the tops cut
off, and with wire for handles. There w T ere
axes, a big hammer, a saw and W?edges and a
coil of strong wire, and then some clean sacks
for making beds.
Henry, who was perched right on the top of
this strange cargo, had never been camping
before. He was very impatient to know how
(1724) 2


beds could be made out of sacks. He wondered
where his uncle would find bedsteads.
? Just wait, my boy,? Uncle Tom had said.
? I don?t mind boys asking questions, unless
they?re silly questions. Ask about anything you
don?t know. You get to learn that way. But
you know, Henry boy, some things are easier
to show how, than to tell how, and this is one
of them. We?ll be making our beds very soon,
and you will see how it?s done. Then you?ll
never forget.?
So Tom drove his horse up the little hill, and
towards a rather clear spot on the other side.
? This will do finely,? he said, when he had
pulled up his horse. ? It might have been made
for our purpose. Those six trees will make a
good shady yard for the horses. The two of
them close together to hold up the feed trough,
and some saplings tied around the others for
a yard. Our camp will do just here. No
branches to fall on us in the night and a good
shade in the heat of the day from that big tree
north of us. Well be all right here and not far
from the water. Now, Henry boy, hop down
and tie Jimmy to a tree, while I unload and
take Nugget out.?


Henry was very eager to be useful, and in the
next hour he did many helpful things under the
direction of his uncle.
First the dray was unloaded and pulled to
a place where it would have shade during most
of the day. Tom was very careful about the
wheels, for he said: ? Once your wheels are
gone, your dray is as good as finished.?
Then the big horse was taken out of
the shafts, and the harness carefully covered
up.
? Now, Henry, you can take Nugget and
Jimmy down for a drink. Be sure to keep
Jimmy?s rope in your hand. He won?t try any
tricks while he knows he?s tied; but I wouldn?t
trust him if he finds a loose rope. Nugget?s
no trouble.?
Henry was delighted to do this little job.
He loved horses, and could ride a quiet one
very well. But it seemed to him a great thing
to have control of a big horse like Nugget, and
at the same time to be leading the horse which
his uncle valued so much.
Henry admired his uncle above all men;
and so he tried to do things just in the way
he saw them done by him. He was always


pleased when he was asked to do something
which his uncle usually did for himself.
? Youngster,? yelled Uncle Tom, when
Henry was about half-way down to the lake,
? keep your eyes open for dead wood as you
come back. We?ll have a fire soon, and then
some tea.?
The horses were watered, and coming back.
Henry saw a large dead branch near to his
track. It was almost half a tree, and much of it
was white and brittle. Just the stuff for a
quick fire. The boy saw a chance to do some-
thing really smart. He would take back some
of this w T ood. So he guided the horses in the
direction of the tree and prepared to gather
some dry pieces.
But how could he manage? He had a rope
in each hand. He thought for a moment, and
then he had a bright idea. He tied the two
ropes together, and held them in his left hand.
Then he took hold of a nice thick branch and
pulled at it. It was stronger than he had ex-
pected; but he tried again, harder this time.
It bent a little and then broke with a noise like
a gun.
So sudden was the breaking, and so hard


had Henry been pulling, that he fell violently
to the ground. He hit his forehead on a big
rough branch in front and, worst of all, he gave
the ropes a great tug. Such things made no
difference to old Nugget, but not so with
Jimmy. He was of a more nervous kind at any
time, so that, what with the sudden noise and
then the big tug, and, worst of all, the broken
branch springing up and hitting him on the
side of his head, he was very much disturbed.
He reared up, pulled back, and tried hard to
get away. Henry was very much afraid. The
rearing horse looked like a great wild animal,
and he feared that it would crush him beneath
its big iron-shod front feet. But he held on to
the rope.
He dropped the wood and held on with both
hands. Somewhere, miles away it seemed, he
could hear his uncle?s voice.
? I?m coming, boy. Whoa there, Jimmy.
Steady now.? But Jimmy still reared and
tugged, until it seemed to Henry that his arms
would be tom out.
Then just as he felt that he must give up,
the animal was still, and he saw his uncle stand-
ing by the head of the horse. He was gently


coaxing it and rubbing the animal?s soft nose.
? You held on well, boy. I didn?t think a
little chap like you could hold Jimmy without
a bit in his mouth. Ah, you young rascal, I
can see why, now. You tied the ropes together.
Well now, that?s a new one, but it?s a good
thing you did it. If Nugget hadn?t helped, I?m
afraid Jimmy would have cleared off. He is
easily frightened.
? Now listen, Henry; I know you were
to help by doing two things at once.
But don?t ever forget this: When you?re look-
ing after horses, look after horses and let every-
thing else wait. You?ll find it will be the quickest
way in the end.?
Uncle Tom took charge of the horses and
led them back to the camping-place. Jimmy
was quiet now, and as for Nugget, nothing
seemed to make any difference to him. He was
well-fed and contented, strong and able to do
all that was asked of him. He was just the same
whether he was being taken out of his harness
at night or starting out in the morning. He
never seemed to get really tired, and he obeyed
every order in the same steady way.


CHAPTER 111
Bush Comforts
Henry stayed behind for a few minutes to
get a good big armful of wood. When he came
up with it, he was surprised to see what a lot
his uncle had done in a short time. The feed
trough was up, firmly fastened with ropes to
two trees. A number of tall young trees had
been cut down and their tops chopped off.
These had been tied with wire to the trees, and
together they made a good strong horse-yard.
Uncle Tom had put the horses inside and was
busy fastening the last pole in such a way that
it could quickly be taken out. This was to be
a gate. Then together they put feed in the
trough, and at once the horses began to eat.
? Now they are set,? said Uncle Tom, ? and
we?ll look after ourselves. Henry, can you see
where I cut those young saplings down? See
the heap of green branches? You?ll find a
straight piece and two forked ones. I think I


leaned them against a tree when I cut them off.?
Henry hurried off, and when he brought
them in he found his uncle digging a hole. He
had another one dug a few feet away.
Taking the forked sticks, he placed one in
each hole and rammed the soil back until they
were firm. The straight piece was placed across
the two forks about four feet from the ground.
Then he set Henry to work lighting a fire with
dry leaves and the wood he had carried. Whilst
this was being done, Uncle Tom got a mattock
and cleared up every bit of growth in a circle
several yards around the fire.
? For,? said he, ? we must take no risk of
starting a Bush fire. If everybody who made
a camp fire in the Bush would spend ten minutes
doing this sort of thing, there would be thou-
sands of pounds saved every year in good trees.
Yes, and many good crops and farm places
saved. Never forget to do this, Henry, even
if you?re dead tired. It saves time in the end.?
This seemed to be one of Uncle Tom?s favourite
sayings, though in anything he did he never
seemed to waste much time.
In a few minutes he had water boiling in a
round tin called a billy, and in a very short


time tea was ready. As they were anxious to
do other things before darkness set in, they did
no cooking that night. They sat on boxes
before the fire, eating buttered toast and drink-
ing their tea.
Henry soon began, once more, to ask ques-
tions. Whilst toasting a second piece of bread
he asked: ? Uncle, do you think you will be
able to catch that little browm horse??
? Well, now, young fellow, it isn?t safe to be
too sure of anything in the Bush. But if that
filly will only keep around these parts long
enough, I think it?s a pretty certain thing.
Anyway, we?ll have a good try.?
? Uncle Tom, can you keep a Bush horse for
yourself if you manage to catch one??
?No, not really, Henry. There?s a law about
that sort of thing, I?m not sure how it goes.
But there?s a sort of rule amongst men in the
Bush, if a horse is branded, of course it belongs
to the owner of the brand, and any young one
belongs to the branded mother it is running
with. People aren?t so particular about a horse
that is not branded, though I think you have
to report if you catch one. This little brown
fellow really belongs to a man I know. He


told me that the mare would be no more use
to him, now she had ? gone Bush He said,
if I caught her I could do what I liked with her.
I don?t badly want her, but I can get a fair
price for the little brown one. But come along,
sonny, if you want a bed to-night. You can
eat that toast as you walk along. We?re going
over to that thick timber to get some straight
poles.?
Taking a final drink of the tea, Tom picked
up his axe and strode off. Henry had almost
to run to keep by his uncle?s side.
They soon returned, carrying between them
four poles, each one over seven feet in length,
and a number of shorter ones. They made a
second journey and brought some longer poles
for the tent. Uncle Tom showed how much
he was used to the work by the speed with
which he put up the tent.
? Now,? he said, turning to Henry, ? now
you shall see how we make a bed with sacks.?
He took two sacks, and in the bottom comers
of each he made a slit about six inches long.
Through each slit he put the end of a pole,
passing it down the bag and allowing it to stick
out about six inches. Then he pulled the open


ends of the sacks down, until one was pulled
over the other in the middle. Then he did
the same with two other sacks and poles. Now
he drove a shorter pole into the ground, near
the back, on one side of the tent. Then another
short pole facing it, about six feet away. He
next drove in two pieces, in such a way that
they crossed the first one about three feet from
the ground, and tied them securely where they
joined. This made the head of the bed. Two
cross-pieces driven in and tied to the second
post made the foot of the bed.
? Now lift,? said Uncle Tom, taking hold of
the two ends of the poles he had threaded
through the bags. Henry took the other ends,
and they lifted them up. They placed the ends
of the poles on the cross-pieces and there the
bed swung, well above the ground.
? There you are, boy,? said Uncle Tom.
?You can jump in that and it won?t let you
down. Now for the other one.?
Some partly filled chaff bags, a couple of
good blankets, and in a few moments Henry
was away in the land of dreams.


CHAPTER IV
Getting Ready-
Little Brown Horse woke up, and seemed
about to rise to her feet.
Finding that it was still dark, she just drew
up her front legs until her feet were under her
nose, and she was ready to spring right up in a
moment.
Then she looked around. She saw that
everything was as it should be, so she kept
quite still. Soon her eyes slowly closed and
her head gently drooped, as though she was
again sleeping. Yet she could see, although it
was still very early in the morning and quite
dark.
Horses, like many other animals, can see
quite well at night.
Besides it was not really pitch dark.
One more hour must pass before the sun
would rise, to shine through the trees like a
big red ball of fire. There was no moon to give


light, but the stars shone. In the clear air of
Australia they shine very, very brightly.
So that it was not really, truly dark, and even
boys and girls would have been able to see
many things to please them. Their eyes are
also very sharp, though not so sharp as those of
Little Brown Horse.
But there were no boys and girls out in the
Bush so very early in the morning. Boys and
girls love their nice warm bed ?yes, early in
the morning. They do not love their beds so
much at night, when mother tells them it is bed-
time.
Why did Little Brown Horse wake up at that
time?
Only a few minutes before, there had been
deep silence in the Bush. The animals which
are always found there were all asleep, some
lying down and some of them standing up. But
all were asleep.
As the night air had become cooler even the
insects had ceased their buzzing noises. Also,
during the night the wind had died down.
There had been no sounds from the trees for
a long, long time. And then, just about an hour
before dawn, there came the tiniest of breezes.


It seemed as though the breeze knew all
about the rising of the sun in the east, and was
going out to meet him. With the breeze, every-
thing else seemed to stir. The leaves moved
a little, insects murmured, a bird gave a little
chip-chip, and another one sleepily answered.
Big horse White Legs lifted his nose from the
tree it was touching; an old cow under a big
tree started to chew, and, as we noticed, Little
Brown Horse drew up her front legs and looked
around.
It seemed as though kind Mother Nature had
said to them all: ? Wake up, my children.
Soon it will be day, and you must all be ready
for your daily duties.?
Then once again all was still.
Soon it seemed that all things in the Bush
could be seen more plainly. Giant trees seemed
to grow out of the blackness. Those close at
hand began to show their branches instead of
being big masses of shadow. Another bird
called out. A cow stood up and at once began
to eat the tops of the bushes.
Then came a noise like someone shaking a
very big rug.
What was that? A horse who had been lying


on a patch of loose sand had got up, and was
shaking himself to loosen the grains of sand from
his coat.
In a few moments the Bush was fully alive.
Birds began to call to each other and to fly
from tree to tree. Some of them were already
busy, catching the still sleepy flies.
The horses began to work their way slowly
down the gentle slope.
At the bottom of the little hill there could
be seen, shining through the trees, a long narrow
lake. One would have thought it was a river
but for the fact that both ends could be seen.
Rough tracks led down from many directions to
the water.
The cows were now on their way down.
They did not take the same path as the horses.
They always kept a little distance away, and
were careful to drink at another place. Horses
always drive the cows away unless there is a
very rich supply of food. The mob to which
Little Brown Horse belonged was the last to
move down the hill. There was big horse White
Legs and fat horse Long Mane. Then Slim
Legs and a fine black horse who still owned the
name of Captain. He had been a riding-horse,


and had been turned into the Bush for a rest.
He carried his owner?s mark on his shoulder,
and some day Mr. Briant would come to catch
him.
Then there was the mother of Little Brown
Horse, who could be picked out by a white
mark on the front of her face. Besides these,
there were the brumbies.
The leader of the mob was Slim Legs. He
had been in the Bush for many years. No one
had been able to catch him, because he was an
escaped horse and knew the ways of men, as
well as the tricks of the Bush.
Henry was the very last to awake.
He had been very cosy in the bed which he
had helped to make. He had stirred once
while it was still dark, but almost at once he
had fallen asleep again. When he really woke
up, it was quite light and the other bed was
empty.
He could hear the sound of an axe. Someone
not far away was chopping trees. Nearer
could be heard the sound of a crackling fire.
There was a fine smell of bacon and coffee,
which quickly brought Henry out of bed.
He looked around and felt just a little bit


E 72-5
HENRY HOLDS ON
Page 21




ashamed. His uncle?s watch was hanging from
the centre pole of the tent, swinging gently as
it merrily ticked. The fingers pointed to eight
o?clock. Henry had meant to be out early.
Uncle Tom had said that he would be out before
six, and Henry had secretly made up his mind
to wake in time to be out at least as early as his
uncle. And now it was eight o?clock and the
sun shining brightly, Uncle out and away, the
fire lighted and coffee made. He hoped that
his uncle had not eaten breakfast alone. That
would be a disgrace.
Henry at once started to dress. He had
noticed that many things had been done whilst
he was sleeping. Inside the tent there were
se\eral boxes which had been emptied of the
useful things they had carried, and were now
standing upon blocks of w T ood. One now served
as a bedside table to hold lamp, matches and
books on top, and boots beneath. Another
was now a bookshelf, for his companion was a
great reader. He spoke of always getting early
to bed and reading until he felt sleepy. A third
box had been placed ready for Henry?s own use.
He found some of his clothing on it and his
boots inside. He made up his mind, as he
(E 725) 3


dressed, to try to imitate his guardian in keeping
things tidy. In fact, it seemed to him a good
idea to try to follow his uncle in most of his
ways and habits. Henry was getting to be very
fond of this man who knew so many things
and who seemed to do everything in the best
way.
Outside of the tent there were other changes.
The tent was tightened up and rubbish cleared
away. A kind of stand had been made with a
few pieces of wood, and on it was lodged a half
spirit tin, cut comer ways. This contained
water, and in a notch cut into the nearest tree
were placed soap and nail-bmsh. By the side
of this was a nail on which hung a towel. Another
towel was spread over a bush to dry, showing
that someone had washed before setting to work.
At once starting on the idea of doing things
in the way his uncle worked, Henry stripped off
his shirt and plunged into the water. Hands,
face, and head too, were covered with soap,
and well and quickly rubbed. Then, putting
his face well down, Henry threw water right
over his head. Again and again he did it, until,
when he raised his head, he was quite out of
breath.


As he groped for the towel, he heard a voice
close to him saying merrily:
? Well done, young fellow, well done! You?ll
be bright and good for anything now. So
hurry up, boy, and let?s have a meal. Gee, but
I?m hungry.?
? Haven?t you had yours, Uncle?? asked the
boy, between his panting and scrubbing.
? No, sonny, I like to do a bit towards earning
it first, if I can.?
? Oh, gee, I couldn?t do that! I want mine as
soon as I wake?l?m sure I couldn?t work before
breakfast.?
?You will, some day. Wait till you?ve been
camping a few years. You?ll find there are
many jobs to be done before eating. Fire-
lighting and cooking and?if you forget it at
night?wood to cut first. Then what about the
poor horses? Don?t you think they want some-
thing? They can?t help themselves to water and
food.?
Oh, Uncle,? said Henry in surprise, ? have
you taken them to water, and fed them, before
I woke? I?m sorry, I meant to do that, and I
never thought about it until now.?
Never mind, boy, but hurry and let?s


eat. Sit on that box. See, we have a table
now.?
? How have you managed that?? Henry
asked, as he sat down. He was filled with
wonder as he saw more and more of the Bush-
man?s ways.
? Just the cart seat on tw T o boxes. The table-
cloth is a piece of oilcloth I always carry rolled
up. It is easy to keep the table clean that way,
and we might as well be clean as live like pigs.
It is no more trouble. Just a thought now and
then does it. Here you are, bacon and eggs,
bread. You can pour the coffee, only don?t
shake it up.?
Both were now too busy for talking; but
soon Henry started again with his questions.
? Uncle, do you think those horses will come
back to the drinking-pool??
? Yes, old fellow,? was the reply. ? What?s
more, I?ve seen them this morning. The wind
was blowing aw T ay from them, so I just went
quietly over the hill and had a peep, soon after
sunrise.?
? Was the little brown horse there?? asked
Henry.
? She was. If you?ve finished, we?ll clean up,


and then start getting something ready for our
trap. Just wait while I make a cigarette.?
He was already busy with tobacco and papers,
and he caught Henry watching his quick move-
ments. As he reached over to light his cigarette
at the fire, he said:
? I suppose you?re like the rest of the boys.
Think it a great thing to be able to smoke, and
hope for the time when you dare do it yourself,
like a man.?
Henry did not quite know wdiat to say. If
he must be truthful, something like that was
in his mind.
? Oh, I don?t know,? he said, rather confused.
Well, sonny, here is good advice from a
smoker. Don?t start smoking until the day
you are twenty-one years old. You will be
better in every way. Clean, healthy, and strong.
Come on.? He rose, picked up his axe and
other tools, and, to Henry?s joy, gave him a
lighter axe. They walked on to the place where
the poles had been cut.
Tom first of all cut down a number of sap-
lings. They were young trees about five or
six inches thick and with straight wood in them
about twice as high as a man.


With one stroke to each, he cut off the tops.
He then showed Henry how to lop off the thin
branches from the straight poles. This had
to be done the right way, so that he did not
cut his legs instead of the wood. Then Henry
was left to lop off tops and side branches from
all the saplings which had been cut down.
Before lunch-time the boy was very tired
indeed. He could scarcely lift up the axe for
the blow. But he bravely stuck to the work
until his uncle, who had been carefully watching,
called him to go and put the billy on the fire.
He thought a change was good for the boy and
he meant to stop for lunch a little earlier, to
give him a good rest. By this time there was
quite a heap of poles. The man had cut down a
big tree, and had sawn it into three lengths of
six or seven feet, when Henry wxnt to see to
the fire, Tom had started with a big hammer and
iron wedges, to split up these pieces. They
were more than two feet thick. After lunch,
Henry was told to sit on a log near the fallen
tree, so that he could rest and notice how trees
could be split into square posts.
Uncle Tom thought it was now his turn to
ask questions.


? How many posts do you think we can get
out of this log??
? I don?t know,? replied Henry. ? I suppose
you can split it into two, and then split the
pieces again. That would be four. Perhaps
more, if you don?t have to make them right
square.?
? Four, you think. Well, just watch for a
time.?
He drove in another wedge where the log
had begun to crack. Then, as the first wedge
got loose, he put it in farther down. Driving
the wedges in and following the crack down, he
quickly caused the log to break into two pieces.
This was the hardest part, for when he turned
one of the pieces over, his second wedge split
it clean down. Again and again he split them
?sometimes with one good blow of the axe ?
and in a very short time he had twelve posts.
Then he went on to the other logs.
? Uncle,? said Henry, who seemed easily able
to find new ideas, ? wouldn?t it be easier to
chop down small trees and use them for posts??
? No,? was the reply. ? They take too much
finding, and you only get one from each. See
what a heap we?ll have soon.?


By the end of the day, two big trees had been
split into posts and there seemed to be enough.
Henry slept well that night. He nearly fell
asleep at the table after dinner. His uncle did
the whole of the work of cleaning up, and
advised Henry to go to bed.


CHAPTER V
Preparing the Trap
Henry awoke bright and early. He was out
of the tent just in time to take the horses down
for a drink. This time he was careful not to
startle Jimmy. He left the firewood until later
and was able to collect a good heap of dry
branches while his unde was carrying water
for their own use. When breakfast was over
and cleaned up, they sat for a little while talking.
Tom said that the first work was to cart the
posts and saplings, but he thought it best to wait
awhile.
? For,? said he, ? the horses will wander
away presently, and it is better that they don?t
see what we are doing.?
? Uncle,? asked Henry, ? why is it that you
don?t ride out and rope the horses you want?
I mean, as we see the cowboys doing in the
pictures.?
? For the best of reasons, sonny. Neither a


cowboy nor a Bushman would do much good
with a rope amongst these trees. Besides, if
it came to a run, I reckon those half-wild animals
would make a better show in the Bush than ours
would.?
? Why do you call yourself a Bushman,
Uncle? In our schoolbooks a Bushman is a
little black man living in central Africa.?
? Well, I?m not a little black man,? laughed
Uncle Tom, ? so I suppose we call a man a
good Bushman when he knows the ways of
the Bush. Come to think of it, I suppose it is
called the Bush because the trees and the under-
growth grow so close together. Anyway, we
had better get along. Horse and dray this
morning.?
The task of making a trap to catch the horses
was very much more simple than one would
expect.
The plan was to put up a fence in such a
way that it would not be easily noticed by the
horses. This fence would go well out into the
water around the place where the horses came to
drink. Then the man and the boy would wait
in hiding until some of the animals were inside,
when a strong wire would be stretched across


the entrance, and the horses would be caught.
The hard thing would be to get them to go
inside. Of course, this is the same with all
traps. They can be well made and well baited,
but after all is done no one can catch a thing
unless it chooses to go into the trap. You can
prove this with a mousetrap.
The poles and posts were all carted during
that morning, and after lunch Uncle Tom took
his shovel and started to make holes for the
posts. In some places he was able to use a
tree instead of a post.
He was very careful not to disturb the ground
and the bushes near the place where the animals
went down to the water.
? For,? he said, ? these horses get very
cunning in the Bush. They seem to know when
there is danger about, even if they can?t see
anything strange.
? We are very lucky this time,? he continued.
? The bushes come out on both sides of the
track leading to the water. We can put our
comer post behind them, and the next post
on either side can be a tree.? This w r as done,
and then he pulled off boots and socks and rolled
up his trousers over his knees.


He had now to go right out into the water.
He put up two lines of posts leading well away
from the bank, and by this time he was up to
his waist in water. Then he put a number of
posts to join the other lines. He had bored a
hole in each one near the top, and he put the
posts well down so that only a very little showed
above the water.
It was very difficult to dig holes in the bottom
of the lake, for they would keep on filling in.
But patience won in the end, and well before
dark all of the posts were in and a strong wire
was threaded through the holes.
? That will do for to-day,? he said as he
waded out. ? The horses are not far aw r ay, so
we will be off. Besides, I?ve had enough of
these wet clothes. You drive Nugget home, and
I will push on with Jimmy.?
He untied the horse and sprang upon his back,
and when Henry got to the camp he found his
uncle dressed in dry clothing and just lighting
the fire.
The next day they set out as early as they
dared, and in a few hours the rest of the posts
were in and the poles fastened to them. Henry
had been able to help in the work. He liked it


better than watching, as he had had to do
yesterday.
? That is what I call a good yard,? said Uncle
Tom, when all was finished. ? Now for the
gate.?
? Why, Uncle,? asked Henry, ? do you mean
to put up a gate? That will take a long time.?
? No, boy, not a proper gate, just a good
strong wire. Watch now.?
He took some of the wire and made it very
fast to one of the posts behind a bush. Then
he took his shovel and made a little trench in
the ground from one post to the other, across
the opening.
The little trench was only two inches deep;
no more than those made by your father w T hen
he is setting a row of seeds in the garden. In
the bottom of the trench he carefully placed the
wire, leaving plenty of it to pass round the
second gate-post. Then he filled up the trench
again and tried to make it look just as it was
before.
? Now, Henry,? he said at last, ? all is ready.
To bed early to-night. In the morning we must
be up before daylight.?
They indeed rose very early.


Henry had an apple to eat, and they set off
for the gate. ? Now, not a word, nor any other
sound,? he was warned. ? Sit well behind these
bushes and wait and watch.?
They had a long time to wait; but at last the
horses moved. It seemed at first that the mob
they wanted would not get down until there
were too many others around, but quite suddenly
Slim Legs seemed to think it was time to be
drinking. So he came at a good pace towards
the opening.
Many of the smaller horses made haste to
get out of his way, and several of his own mob
followed him.
Slim Legs was just about to enter, when he
stopped in his tracks and with a strange snort
galloped into the Bush. White Star and
all those who had not entered followed his
lead and were soon well away. The daughter
of White Star looked around and, seeing what
was happening, she also dashed back.
She was too late. Uncle Tom pulled up the
wire with one mighty snatch and wrapped it
tightly around the post. Henry could keep
still no longer; he jumped up and threw his
hat into the air.


? Hurrah!? he shouted at the top of his
voice. ?We have her, we have her!?
His uncle was busy. He was quickly putting
up a second wire to make the gate more secure.


CHAPTER VI
Caught
Little Brown Horse was truly caught. Besides
her there were four brumbies, the horse called
Captain, and the one we have already named
White Legs.
The next task for the Bushman was to
separate them. He decided to keep them all,
if he could do so. He could break in the
brumbies and sell them for several pounds.
This would not be hard for him to do. Although
the brumbies are half wild, if they are rightly
treated they very soon become obedient to a
good master, and are very useful. Tom said
that he knew of quite a lot of men who would
buy them. It is often more difficult to train
the other horses caught in this way. Some
of them turn out to be what are called ? out-
laws ?. They have learned bad habits under
a master who did not understand the right way
to treat horses. Then they have broken away


and taken to the Bush, or have been turned out
because they were useless.
Some horses are born in the Bush, their
mothers being trained horses running wild.
Some of these are quite easy to break in and
train, for they do not know the bad habits.
Tom thought that both the little brown horse
and White Legs would be like this. Captain
would be easy to get, and his owner would be
glad to have him again without the trouble of
catching him.
Tom decided to separate the brumbies
from the rest and then leave them until the
last.
So he lost no time in getting the two bigger
ones and the little brown horse into a comer,
and then with the help of Henry he ran a strong
wire across. This left them in a three-sided
yard with plenty of water and some Bush
land.
? Now,? said Uncle Tom, ? I will try to get
Captain. Lucky I know his name, for I can
talk to him. Henry, will you go to the camp
to fetch some bran. Empty the wash bowi,
and bring it half full. Whilst you are gone I
will tighten up the fence.?
(E 725)


Henry was quick to come back, and then he
stood near the fence to watch. His uncle was
very patient, but Captain was not ready to be
caught.
Once, the Bushman got very near. He was
talking very softly all the time, and holding the
bowl of bran before him. He moved so slowly
that the closest watcher could hardly have seen
his feet move. He slid his left foot forward
an inch at a time until it was a few inches in
front of the other one. Then his right foot
began to move. Inch by inch he came nearer.
Captain sniffed, with his head up and his ears
forward. He knew the bran was there and he
wanted it. But he had seen this trick before,
and had an idea that the man had a rope hidden
somewhere. He moved away and it all had to
be done again.
The man followed him, and when a few yards
away he crept on again inch by inch.
The next time Captain was right in the comer
made by the fences. Tom thought he was
safe this time; but one of the other horses
called, and Captain stuck his ears back and,
rearing up, swung round and dashed off as hard
as he could gallop.


? Very well,? said Tom, ? we?ll try another
way. Bring that small coil of wire, Henry.?
He fastened one end of the wire to the far
fence, about ten yards from the comer. He
then hid a length of it in the ground and made
Henry hold the other end outside the other
fence.
? Now I will try,? he said, ? to get Captain
back to this corner. If he comes alone over the
wire, you pull up the wire and twist it around
the nearest post or tree.?
This was done easily. Then the Bushman
came up behind and took the wire. He gently
went forward with it, and Captain, seeing that
he was shut up in a very narrow strip of space
and unable to turn round, stood perfectly still.
Tom came up with bran and rope and Captain
was a captive. He did not mind very much,
for he had the bran. Besides, this strange man
was gently patting him and talking just as his
own master did.
? Good old fellow,? the man was saying.
? He?s a beauty, then. You like bran, don?t
you, old fellow? We?ll be able to use you, old
boy. Good old Captain!?
Slowly, as Captain ate up the bran, his ears


came forward in a friendly way; and by the
time he had finished, he was quite ready to
look upon the man as a friend.
Tom led him back and fastened him to a
tree. Then he started to catch the other horses.
These caused much more trouble, but early in
the afternoon they were both ready to give in.
Little Brown Horse was worked into a second
corner and then fastened in a small space and
left to become more quiet. She was very much
afraid, and kept on rearing up.
When she found that nothing really bad was
happening, she became quieter; but she kept
very close to the fence.
Uncle Tom fetched more bran and put some
into the bowl. He then pushed it under the
fence where the little horse could get it. Then
he got another tin, and did the same for White
Legs. White Legs went straight to his share.
He must have been used to bran at one time.
? Now,? said Uncle Tom, ? we?ll just leave
them. They are safe and will take no harm.
You can go to the camp and light a fire. Have
the billy boiling in an hour. I am going to
fetch Mr. Tompkins to see what we have
caught.?


In much less than hour he was back at the
camp, but he was alone.
? He will be here early in the morning,? he
sang out as he jumped from his horse. ? Come
along, we?ll water and feed the horses. After
that we?ll have tea. Then another look at the
captives, and off to bed.?


CHAPTER VII
A Holiday for Henry
Henry had a strange dream that night
He thought that he was riding on the back
of a big black and white cow. He was holding
on to the horns, and the cow was dashing
towards a lake as wide almost as the sea. They
seemed to be driving in front of them a great
mob of sheep as big as elephants. But most
of the sheep had hind-parts like horses, with
white legs. One of them was just the colour of
Little Brown Horse.
They dashed down a hill between two fences
set close together. At the bottom, the sheep-
like horses turned aside, and Henry?s cow
stopped still at the edge of the water. Henry
flew over the head of the cow and went right
into the middle of the lake. He felt the water
splashing over his forehead, and put up his
hands. His hands caught the hand of someone
else, and he sat straight up in bed.


His uncle was by the side of his bed and had
been sprinkling his face with water to waken
him. It was still dark.
A lighted lamp was hanging from the pole
of the tent. This was only the second time
that Henry had seen the inside of the tent
by lamplight. He always had been asleep
before it was really dark and slept until the
daylight came.
?Is anything the matter?? he asked. He
was still very sleepy and did not remember about
the plan made last night.
? Nothing, boy, excepting that breakfast is
ready.?
? Oh! but, Uncle,? he replied, ?we have
not been in bed long.?
? Well, my boy, you may sleep as long as
you like. But don?t forget that Mr. Tompkins
is coming to look at the horses. He won?t be
very long, so I?m going to eat while I have the
chance. Stay if you like. It doesn?t matter.?
But Henry was already out of bed. The
mention of the horses had worked like magic.
He was wide awake now.
He drove away the last wish for sleep by a
real good splash in the wash bowl.


As they had breakfast he told his uncle all
about the strange dream. Uncle Tom laughed
so much that he could not hold his cup of
coffee still, and he spilled part of it on his
other hand. This made him jump up and he
then spilled what was left.
It was now Henry?s turn to laugh, and they
each tried to beat the other. They were like
two boys together for a time. In the midst
of a hearty laugh from Uncle Tom they heard a
voice quite close.
?You two boys seem to be enjoying things,?
said the voice.
Three people rode up to the camp. Henry
and his uncle had not heard them until one of
them spoke. It was now nearly light and Henry
could see that one of the riders was a man
about the same age as his uncle.
The second was a boy, a few years older
than Henry. The third one was the most
interesting. He was a black man. No one
could have been sure of his age; he might have
been thirty or fifty years old. His hair was
curly and thick, his face was shining and looked
very cheerful. His teeth were as white as
snow. He had no hat on his head. His clothing


was just like a white man?s, but very much
patched.
? Good day, Mr. Tompkins; hello George,
?lo Jacky,? said Uncle Tom in one breath.
? Good day, Tom,? answered the three,
almost together.
? Didn?t know you had a son,? said the older
man. ? Anyhow, you sound happy. What?s the
joke??
? Only a bit of fun about a dream my nephew
had,? was the reply. ? Have some coffee, all of
you??
? Not for me,? said Mr. Tompkins, ? though
I dare say the boys won?t say no.?
He jumped down, and leaving his horse with
the reins hanging he walked over to a box and
sat down.
The boy George did the same. He sat near
Henry with his coffee, and the two were soon
busy talking.
The black man, called Jacky, tied his horse
to a tree. Then he poured some coffee into a
tin he carried, and walked away to sit on the
stump of a tree.
? I?ll just clear up, and we?ll go down,? said
Uncle Tom. ? She?s a fine little thing. Just


suit you, I think. If not, say so. I don?t mind.
I can sell her easily.?
In a very short time they were all at the place
where the horses were shut in.
Mr. Tompkins was very pleased indeed as
soon as he saw Little Brown Horse. She did
not look so wild to-day, though she put her
head up proudly as much as to tell them that
though she was caught she was not conquered.
? She?ll do,? said Mr. Tompkins. ?We
won?t go any nearer. It will only disturb her.
We?ll let Jacky have a day with her. He?s a
wonder with Bush horses. I?ll have a couple of
those brumbies, if you can spare them. Yes;
the little brown fellow is real good. Jacky
seems pleased too.?
? What think, Jacky?? he called out to the
black man. The black was at the other side,
looking very closely at Little Brown Horse.
He came nearer to the others. ? Him good
fellow pony,? said Jacky, showing his teeth in
a big grin. ? Him plenty good fellow. Him
Nylie.?
Mr. Tompkins laughed loudly, and they all
joined him. ? That is great praise from Jacky,?
he said. ? Him Nylie. He means?a nice


woman?a lady. That shall be her name, all
right. Come along, boys; leave Jacky to do as
he likes. He won?t work his tricks whilst we
are here. Jacky, bring um Nylie; Nellie ride
him; see??
? Um,? grunted Jacky. ? Um, Nellie, Nylie.
Ah! he! he!? He was very pleased with him-
self and with everybody. Mr. Tompkins knew
he would do his best with the horse for Nellie?s
sake, for he did always whatever he could to
please her. Nellie was the little daughter of
Mr. Tompkins, on whose farm he w r orked.
Jacky had brought a sackful of straps, ropes,
and tiny parts of a horse?s harness. When the
others turned away he was looking in the Bush
for a long thin pole. No one could know just
what he would do, but those who knew him
were sure that he would bring home a quiet
obedient horse instead of the one which still
seemed half wild.
? Henry,? said Uncle Tom, as they left,
? take George along to the camp with you.
Ask him to show you his way of tying a horse
rope. He knows a very good way.?
When the boys had gone a little way in front,
Tom turned to Mr. Tompkins.


? I sent them ahead,? he said, ? because I
wanted to speak to you quietly.?
? I guessed it,? said his friend. ?Is there
anything wrong??
? No,? replied Tom. ? I am just worried a
little about that boy. That?s all. It?s like this,?
he said. ? Henry?s father was killed in an
accident a few months ago. His mother was
my sister; she died when Henry was only six.
I promised to look after him if help was needed.
He has two uncles in England, and they thought
it a good thing to send him to me. They sent
a letter with him, asking me to make a man of
him.
? I like the boy. He is clean and honest and
truthful, but I am in the Bush most of the time.
I don?t like to settle down anywhere for long,
and that is no good for the boy. If I could get
work for him in a good home on a good farm,
I should be happy. One like yours. He could
come with me in the good weather.?
After a little talk, the men made a plan for
Henry to go for a few days? holiday at Mr.
Tompkins?s farm. Then, if he was willing,
perhaps work would be found for him. It
might happen that he and George would get


on well together, and in that case, Mr. Tompkins
said, there was plenty of work in which he could
help George.
When the men got to the tent, they told the
boys that Henry was to go along home with
them.
? That?s fine,? said George, who had already
begun to like the younger boy. But at first
Henry did not like the thought of leaving his
uncle.
? Oh! just a change for you,? said Tom.
?You don?t think that I?m turning my pal out
altogether, do you? Go along, boy, you will
enjoy it. There?s lots to see, and a fine set of
boys and girls around there.?.
And so after lunch they returned together,
and in about half an hour came to the farm.


CHAPTER VIII
The Picnic
The children had not come from school when
the three got home.
George and his father took Henry straight
into the house to meet Mrs. Tompkins. He
had been a little bit afraid, but the moment he
saw George?s mother, all fear left him. He had
expected to meet a big woman with a loud
voice, but he saw a neat lady coming forward
with a smile to shake hands.
She did not keep him there for many minutes.
Knowing what boys like to do, she said:
? George, take your friend along and show
him round the place, and I will get that room
ready next to yours.?
The two boys did not go very far that day.
There was on the farm a fine engine. It was
nearly new, for George?s father was now doing
well, and had sold the old engine and bought
a better one.


George managed to start it, and they were
still talking about the fine parts of it and the
nice way it worked, when the school children
came rushing into the shed. They were very
excited, and George had to stop the engine
before he could hear them. For they all wanted
to speak at once.
They had great news.
There was a holiday from school next day.
While they were making plans about spending
the day, their father came in.
? Now, George,? he said, ? hop around and
do what you can to-night. Cut the feed for
to-night and to-morrow. See there is plenty of
fire-wood. Do anything you can to save time
in the morning. You?ll take Betty and the big
cart and go to White Gum Point. Mother will
pack up some food, and you can pile in all the
youngsters who can go with you.?
In the morning there was a great deal of
rushing around. In spite of this, before nine
o?clock they were all ready. There were two
boxes of food, and a clean petrol tin full of
cups, plates, knives and spoons. The boxes
had lids nailed on, and could be used as extra
seats.


As soon as these were put right, the children
climbed in. There was Bob, aged eleven, with
his fat red face; and Joe and Joan, the twins,
aged nine; and little Nellie, aged seven. Then
there were four children from the next farm:
Cyril Smith, who was the same age as Bob;
Cynthia, just eight, who must sit next to Nellie;
then Edith, nearly thirteen, who had a great
task keeping her little four-year-old brother,
Alfred, from getting into trouble every moment
of his life.
Just as they were about to start, there was a
loud coo-ee, and two boys, who had come
more than two miles for a day?s holiday, came
running up.
? Jump up,? called out Mr. Tompkins,
? and go with them. There?s plenty to eat,
I?m sure. I?m going past your place soon, and
I can tell them where you are.?
So off they went.
Old Betty was a good steady horse, but they
all thought she was far too slow for a picnic.
All the same, they got there at last, and quite
safely. George said that he liked a faster horse,
but he knew it was better to have one that was
steady when there were little ones there.


White Gum Point was a real good place for
a picnic. There was a hill, with white gum-trees
on the top of it, and with smaller trees all the
way down to a nice flat piece of land at the
bottom.
This flat place had the river on two sides
of it, for the river bent round just at this
place.
It was easy to tell how the place got its name.
The best part about the river was that it was
not at all swift in its flow, and it was never
deep.
Quite small children were safe there, for at
the sides the water was very shallow. Even in
the middle the bigger children could easily
stand in the water, though it was deep enough
for good swimming. Nearly all of them could
swim well, and most of them were in the river
before George had taken the harness off Betty
and put her feed under a shady tree.
There were some wide spreading bushes which
touched the ground nearly all around and with
good shelter under them. These were always
used for dressing-rooms, and the children left
their clothing there. Most of them had come
with their bathing-suits under their clothes, so
(E 725 ) 5


that they were in the water almost as soon as
they jumped from the cart.
They played games in the water. Then
George and Henry joined them. They made
up a new game which they all liked very much.
They got together all the children who could
float on the water. Then one by one they were
given a sudden push on their feet by the big
boys, and they shot along the top of the water
for long distances.
They soon made the game better. They got
one of their number to stand where each one
stopped, so that they could tell who went
farthest.
Then two stood in the water facing each
other. They held their hands together, high
up, making a bridge. The next to float was
now pushed, to see if he could be shot right
through the bridge. There was a great shout
when it was done, and everybody wanted to
try. But George and Henry were at last both
tired of this hard work.
They made for the flat land and played leap-
frog to get dry; and when they were dry they
played at leap-frog in the water and got all wet
again.


It was now nearly lunch-time. It was really
too early, but they were all feeling hungry.
So George called them to play another game
to get dry, and he lit a fire in a safe place. Two
of the boys unpacked the cups and took the
tin down to a clear place for some nice clean
water. Soon it was standing on stones, with a
big fire roaring around it.
What a lunch, to be sure!
George made tea, just the way the children
liked it. It was not too strong even for the little
ones. It was nice and sweet, and he had poured
it off the tea-leaves into a good big milk-can
which was already half full of milk.
Then there was a great stack of sandwiches.
They were not all alike. Some were made with
Mrs. Tompkins?s potted meat, and everybody
liked them; some were made with chopped
lettuce and eggs, some were of tomatoes, and
some had inside them a mixture which set
them all guessing. They could count four
things, but George was quite sure that they
could not tell all that was in those sand-
wiches.
And then the sweets! A big square fruit cake
all cut up ready. Mrs. Tompkins had been


keeping this for Nellie?s birthday party, but
she said that she could make another one.
Then, last of all, as though Mrs. Tompkins
had been afraid lest she had not packed enough,
there was a tin of mixed biscuits. None of them
could find any room for the biscuits, so George
and Henry decided that they should not be
touched until all were in the cart and on the
way home.
After lunch they all lay around on the hill-
side or in shady places near the water. They
had always been told how unsafe it is to bathe
soon after a meal, but they were going to play
rounders and other games.
So the time flew along; but all good things
come to an end at last.
It was time to return, and as George had
said, when the time came all were tired.
There was not much to do now. Betty was
soon ready, and the cart pulled on to the track.
They rode home in a different way. In the
morning they had all wished to sit up on seats.
Now the little ones nearly all wanted to lie on
the bottom of the cart.
There was scarcely room for everybody,
but they managed to tuck all in safely.


Edith sat in a comer of the cart and hugged
Alfred to her. He went to sleep at once.
George asked Henry to drive, and he then
took Nellie on his knee and placed her little
friend Cynthia on the seat between Henry and
himself. The twins lay right out under the
seat, and the bigger boys filled in as well as
they could squeeze, sitting on the cart bottom.
Going this way, they held each other in.
They were so snug that it was possible to sleep
in a sitting position, even though the way was
a little rough.
? Who wants a biscuit?? said George, as
they started off. All took a couple, but some of
them went to sleep without eating them.
Little Nellie?s head gradually drooped and
soon her whole weight was on George?s arm.
He did not mind a bit. He was very fond of
Nellie. Indeed, everyone was fond of her. She
was a pretty little girl, with very light hair and
a sunny smile. Her father called her ? his little
bit of sunshine Then she would give him
a smile and slowly climb on his knee and put
her head on his shoulder.
?I?m afraid we spoil her,? he would say.
? I don?t think so, Father,? would be the


answer of Mrs. Tompkins. ? She is still obedient
and good. She just likes to be loved.?
It would soon be Nellie?s birthday, and all
in the house were keeping a surprise in store
for her. All had given a little towards a real
nice present, and Father was going to pay what
was needed to make it up.
Home at last, and not quite dark.
Mr. and Mrs. Tompkins heard the sound of
the cart coming, and were outside when they
got there.
All the children awoke when the cart stopped,
and Bob started a cheer.
? Had a good time, all of you?? asked Mother.
? I can tell that you have. Now tea?s ready,
and you may all have it together. Then we?ll
drive the Smiths and the other boys home,
shall we, Father??
? I guess you?re tired, George; but listen.
All the jobs are done. Get some tea, and I?ll
put Betty up. Then I?ll harness Champion,
and you can take these kiddies home a bit
quicker. How will that suit??
? Good, Dad,? was George?s reply. ? Come
on, Henry.?
The children were almost as noisy now over


their tea as they had been during the day;
but all had a good meal. They had finished,
and George was just ready to make a start on
the journey to the homes of the other children,
when there was another bit of excitement.
The dog began it.
He started to bark furiously. He knew all
these children, and he remembered all the
horses he knew. He never troubled to bark if
it was not necessary. But now he was barking
very loudly.
? Hello!? said Mr. Tompkins, ? a stranger
coming.?
He went out to look in the direction of the
main gate, and laughed.
? Be quiet, you silly fellow,? he said to the
dog. ? Don?t you know Jacky now? Mother,
here?s Jacky back. I guess he?ll want a meal.
? Hello, Jacky,? he went on, ? how did you
manage?? It was dark now, and Mr. Tompkins
could not just see who was with Jacky. He had
known him by his white horse and by the way
he sat.
? Brought um Nylie, Boss,? said Jacky. His
white teeth could be seen even in the dark as
he grinned.


? You?ve got her with you?? asked Mr.
Tompkins in surprise. ? Did you have much
trouble, Jacky??
? None trouble, Boss,? said Jacky, ? just
keep um trying. Him all right now. Him good
fellow horse, Boss.?
The black man always said ? him ? even
though he w r as talking of a lady. ? Better put
her in that little horse yard,? said Mr. Tomp-
kins. ? Then some tea in your own tent. What
will you give the little horse??
? All right, Boss. Make good feed Nylie.?
Mr. Tompkins knew that Jacky would attend
to the little brown horse, and also see to his
own before he would himself think of eating.
Nor would Jacky care for him to try to help.
So he went into the house and told them that
Jacky had brought home a new horse. He
made a motion to George and Henry, so that
they would not say much before Nellie. But
she herself asked him about it. ?Is that the
little Bush horse come, Daddy?? she asked;
? the one which Jacky went to teach? He told
me that he had to teach one. May we go to
see it now??
? Oh, yes, Daddy,? joined in the others,


? let us see it.? They were always very glad
to know any new horses. For they were all
fond of the animals.
? It?s too dark now,? said Father. ? You
must get up early in the morning.? And with
that they had to be content. None of them was
really sorry, however. They were all pleased
to get to bed.


CHAPTER IX
Nylie?s Home
Next morning they were all up bright and
early.
It was Saturday and, of course, there was no
school.
It was the thought of the new horse wdiich
brought them out early. As soon as they could,
they were out and they met their father just
coming into the house. He had been up for a
long time.
? Daddy, can we see the new horse?? asked
Bob, always the first to say what was wanted.
? I don?t know whether you can go yet,?
Mr. Tompkins replied, as he looked at his
watch.
? Oh, I can spare ten minutes,? he went on.
? Come along.? They followed him at once,
and he went through the farm buildings to a
small fenced yard. There, at the far end, was
Little Brown Horse, now with a changed name.


The children were delighted. Bob and Joe
both wanted a ride at once. Joan, as usual,
wanted to do the same as Joe.
? Oh,? said little Nellie, ? isn?t she a beauty!?
? Don?t go too near,? said their father. ? I
wouldn?t trust her yet, she has only just been
broken. She may have a temper for all I know,
though Jacky has such a way with them. I
never saw one of his yet that wasn?t all right
from the start. I don?t know how he does it.?
? Daddy,? asked Nellie, taking his hand,
? may I stroke her nose? With you holding her,
Daddy??
? I think we had better leave her now, pet,?
he replied. ? Come along, time?s up. Another
day. Now, don?t you children get hanging
around until I tell you.?
? What?s her name, Dad?? asked Bob.
? Nylie, son. Jacky named her.?
? What a funny name,? he replied. ? I don?t
like it.?
? It?s a nice name,? Nellie put in. ? Good-
bye, Nylie.? She waved her hand as they left,
and as though the little brown horse understood,
she trotted to the near side of the yard and with
head forward watched them as far as she could


on their way back home. It looked well for the
future. There were many things to do to-day.
Every day most of the boys and girls who
live on farms have their little tasks to do.
They have long journeys to school, starting
sometimes an hour or more before school-time;
but even then, before it is time to go, many
of these children are able to do a lot of helpful
things.
They can feed calves, pigs, cats and dogs.
They can turn the handle of the milk separator
as the cream is taken from the milk, or help
to cool the milk if milk is sent away. Some of
them pump water, get wood for the fires, or
see to the water for the hens* chickens and
ducks. Some of them feed the hens and chickens
without help. Some of them get up in time to
fetch the cows, and even help to milk. There
are many, many useful things a willing boy or
girl can do before going to school, and after
they get home.
These children of Mr. and Mrs. Tompkins
were quite good at doing their tasks. While
still very young they were shown how to do
things for themselves, and as they grew older
they were expected to do things for each other.


To-day, the two little girls helped Mother as
usual, whilst Bob and Joe had a little task to
do for their father. It was very simple. There
were some sacks full of dried pea-pods. The
boys had to put some of the dried pods into
another sack and tie it up. Then they had to
beat it with a stick and shake it backwards and
forwards. When they thought it was ready,
they had to open the sack and empty the whole
lot on to a big cloth in the shed. After this,
they got a small bellows and blew away the
loose, broken-up pods and collected the seed
peas.
Mr. Tompkins had saved this work for the
boys. He said that they could do it just as well
as a man. He knew just how long it should
take them. He told them that as soon as they
had done it well, they could play for the rest
of the day. Of course they would have their
little jobs to do at night.
The boys made great fun of this work, but
they did it thoroughly, for they knew that if it
was not done well their father would make
them do it over again.
Henry was busy to-day. He was seeing the
farm and at the same time helping in the work.


George had called him before it was light.
The cows had to be milked and the milk
taken to meet the truck which took it to town.
All this before seven o?clock in the morning,
and the journey was three miles.
Henry had never learned to milk cows, but
he got on well with horses. He rode well, and
was a careful driver for one so young.
He was given the job of carrying in the feed,
and letting the cows in and out of the cow-shed.
He fastened up the cows and carried the milk
to put through the machine used for cooling it.
Then he got ready the horse and cart. When
everything was ready he went with George to
take the milk.
When they got back it was nearly time for
breakfast. The children were waiting and all
talking about the new horse. They asked Henry
if he had seen her. They were very much sur-
prised to find that he 1 had seen her several times
when she was in the Bush. Little by little Bob,
by his questions, got out of Henry the story of
how she was caught. He w r as careful not to
tell them why it had been caught, for George
had warned him to keep that a secret.
The boys were greatly excited when he told


them all about the way she got into the trap,
and how she ran about seeking a way to get out.
Nellie said she was sorry they had caught her
at all. ?I think I should like her to stay in the
Bush with her mother and all her friends,? she
said.
? Get out, silly,? said Bob; ?we shouldn?t
have her then. Would you like us to let her go??
Breakfast was ready then, so no more was
said for a little time.
The farmer was carting some clover hay to-
day, and Henry was given the duty of driving.
When the two horses had been put in, the
two men and the boys drove in the big cart to
the paddock, or field, where the hay was standing
in great heaps. Mr. Tompkins stayed in the
cart with Henry, and as the others lifted up the
hay on their long hay forks, he placed it in the
right place on the cart.
? If you watch me,? he said to Henry, ? you
will find how to do the work. It is very impor-
tant, and harder to do it right than most people
think.?
He could not say much at one time, for they
were lifting up the hay from both sides as


quickly as they could. ? Notice,? he said, a
few words at a time, ? I start at the corners,
after the bottom of the cart is filled. In this
way we can build up to a great height and it
won?t fall off as soon as we move on.?
He truly made a big load to be carried on the
wooden frame which had been fixed on the cart.
As Henry rose higher and higher ?stepping up
as the load got bigger ?he began to wonder if
he would be able to ride on the top.
Presently, when there was enough on the
cart, they threw ropes over it and made them
fast. Then they took it to the big barn and built
it up in the same way. They were making a
very big stack inside the barn.
On the way home George and his father had
pointed out to Henry all the good things on the
farm. He saw the crops and the paddocks, or
fields, where the rich grasses grew. The cows
were there. They were all eating and seemed to
be very happy. Later on, Henry noticed that
many of them lay down as though they were
soon filled. He saw the stream which ran right
through the farm, and he saw the garden patch
quite near to the house.
As they went for their second load, they saw


Jacky on his white horse, with Nylie by his side.
Nylie had on a bridle and was led by a stout
rope.
Although she at times seemed to be trying to
get back or to go a different way, yet she seemed
to be obedient most of the time.
? Jacky is taking his pony for exercise,? said
Mr. Tompkins; ? I suppose we will see him in
the big paddock when we get down there.
Take no notice of him, or at any rate don?t let
him know you are watching him. He works
best when left alone.? What he said was quite
true.
There, in a big, flat, open paddock, Jacky?s
horse was trotting and galloping, turning and
doing all the things a horse has to do. And all
the time Nylie was held close up. Sometimes
they turned towards her, and sometimes away.
Each time she was made to do the right thing,
and gently made to do it again and again until
she found out the right way and did it herself.
Then at last, Jacky jumped down; after
quietly petting the little brown horse, he gently
changed the saddle to her back. He had tried
it yesterday, but even now she did not like it.
Patiently he worked with her, until at last he
(E725J 6


managed to get on her back and rode her
around the paddock several times. Then he
gave her a long rest, and later in the day he
rode her again. By the time the hay carting was
done and it was milking-time, he had done his
work and Nylie was fit to be ridden.
He told his master that in a week or two she
would be gentle enough for any child. It
would do no harm if she were not used for a
little time, as she was very young. Jacky him-
self would keep her fit.
Mr. Tompkins was very glad, for Nellie?s
birthday was getting close. George and Henry
were both tired when tea-time came, but Henry
had been very happy. As to-morrow was
Sunday, he hoped to go along to his uncle?s
camp. Mrs. Tompkins said that she would send
a nice fruit pie to the Bushman.
? For,? said she, ? these men have very few
changes in their food when they live in a
camp.?
After tea, it was soon bed-time, and then the
busy farm was still and peaceful once more.


CHAPTER X
School Again
It was Monday morning, and the children
were getting ready to go to school once more.
As we have seen, there were many things to
be done before school. Not only were our
friends busy with their little duties, but so
also were the children in most of the homes all
around.
By eight o?clock all these things were done
and breakfast was over.
The children who went to the school had
many ways of getting there. Indeed, children
all over Australia do the same things.
Those who live not more than a mile or two
away can walk. Some children are known who
walk as much as four miles to school, and then
walk back after school. Their legs must become
very strong. Others are more fortunate. Their
parents are able to let them have the use of a
horse.


In some places the roads and tracks are
hard, and the boys and girls are able to ride
bicycles. Some of them like this better than
riding a horse. Of course, some of those who
have a horse wish for a bicycle; just as some of
those with bicycles would like a horse better.
Sometimes two, or even three, ride on one
horse.
Then there are parts of the country where
quite a large number of children are many
miles from the nearest school. They live too
far apart from each other for a school to be
built near enough for all of them. The men who
rule the schools pay for a motor to go along the
nearest good road. The children get to places
along this road, and are picked up every morning.
They are also taken back to the same places after
school.
It is great fun riding in these motor-cars.
They are really motor-trucks, with the part
behind the driver nicely made for the chil-
dren.
There are long seats, and a good top to
keep out the rain and to keep the hot sun from
shining on their heads. The top part of the
sides is often covered with netting, so that even


little children will not fall out. This also makes
the inside nice and airy.
Then there is a door at the back which can
be securely fastened. Sometimes there are
steps to help in getting in; but the children
do not mind if there are no steps, they can
easily get in and out.
The drivers have to be very careful, but
most of them soon get to be fond of the boys
and girls. They then take more care than ever,
for they would do anything rather than have
any harm come to those in their charge.
During the journey they go past farms,
across railways, up and down hills, and across
big stretches of level country. The boys and
girls sometimes sing as they go, or they play
games, such as guessing what will pass them
next. Some put down the number of every
motor-car which passes, others, who are close
friends, will get together and talk all the way.
Of course, these children get to know every-
thing about each other, and about the farms
on which they live.
On this day someone told of the beautiful
little horse which had come to the Tompkins?s
farm, so that before they got to school they


were all ready to ask about it the moment they
saw Bob and the rest of the family.
Bob came up just as the school motor got
there. A long way behind was old Betty,
trotting along in her usual quiet way. Betty was
quite used to this work, and nothing on earth
could move her beyond the same steady trot.
On her back rode Joan in front, while behind
her, and holding the reins under her arms, sat
Joe. He was in charge of Betty and thought
that he was driving her and guiding her. Really,
though, Betty was doing it all, and it did not
matter much what Joe did with the reins.
Betty started from home and just went to school.
Behind Joe was Nellie, holding on to his coat,
so that there were three on the broad back of
Betty. More than once they had stopped when
they had caught up with a late scholar who was
walking. Then Betty carried four.
But she did not care if they loaded her from
her neck to her tail. She would have carried
them all as long as she could go the same way
at the same pace.
Bob had to tell as much as he knew of Nylie?s
story, as the boys and girls got around him in
the playground.


The children were quite used to hearing of
horses being caught; but they were nearly all
brumbies. It was not very often that anyone
caught a real horse which proved to be any
good. Besides, all of them knew Jacky, and they
had been told how clever he was at training
horses, so they were ready to hear about it.
? Bob,? called out Tom Shepherd, ? what are
you going to do with the brumby??
?It isn?t a brumby,? said Bob quickly. ?We
don?t have brumbies at our place.?
? Don?t you?? put in Billy Spencer; ? what
do you call that thing you ride, anyway??
? Oh, that?s different,? Bob said rather
sulkily. He had forgotten his Charlie. ? Any-
how, I mean not now. We?ve had Charlie
always. Besides, he?s no more a brumby than
your Spark.?
? But, Bob,? Tom Shepherd asked again,
? what will you do with it? Billy says it isn?t big
enough to ride to school, so George can?t ride it.?
? Daddy says it will grow,? said Nellie, who
had come along with the others in time to hear
the last remark. ? And oh! Tom, she is a real
beauty. You ought to see her. I wish I could
ride her when she?s ready.?


Further talk was stopped by the teacher
coming out of his house. He blew the first
whistle, and walked towards the school door.
This gave them five minutes before falling in
to march into school.
A rush was made towards a group of shady
trees. These had been left standing a little way
from the school buildings.
In this group could be seen many places
where horses had been standing. Those who
had horses quickly tied them to trees which
they had used before. There were feeders
nailed in front of most of the animals, but the
horses were not fed now. There was never any
time for this before lessons.
The boys and one girl hastily took off their
horses? bridles; and those who had one took
off the saddle. Some had no more than a bag
fastened with a broad strap and with pieces of
rope for stirrups. But all were taken off, and
the horses left tied to the trees. Then the
children carried the harness and small bags of
feed away to a shelter. They took their own
lunch parcels and hung them on the pegs with
their hats.
In less than five minutes they were all ready.


The second whistle blew, and they formed up
into two lines. After a short drill they turned
and marched into school.
At play-time?which was always long enough
for this ?the bigger boys carried a large bucket
of water to each horse. Then the children fed
their own horses.
The teacher was a kind man, and he always
thought about the horses. From his place in
the school he could see them at any time. On
a very hot day he would often send out two
boys to give each horse an extra pail of water.
The school had a well of lovely cool water.
Though it was a great depth, the pump worked
so well that even the small children could use
it.
When midday came the scholars took their
lunches to any place they wished around the
school. Some went to the shelter shed and some
liked the trees better. They each had their own
cup and there was plenty of good water. That
is always the first thing to be thought of when
a school is started in Australia.
Lunch was soon over and then the rest of the
hour was given to games.
Very soon after starting lessons again, the


day seemed to end. Then a rush was made for
horses, bicycles or motor; and in almost no
time the school yard was empty.
Another day was done.
There was always lots of fun on the way
home. Sometimes those who were going the
same way home would try to get up a race.
This was never very exciting, for the children
would have a sharp little pony, like Bob, or else
a slow old horse who always believed in safety
first, such as old Betty.
Games could be played, however. There was
a game of hide-and-seek on horse-back. They
would get an old fruit-tin or something like
that, and whilst all the others would turn their
horses away, one would ride into the bush and
hide the tin. Many good places could be found
this way, for being higher, when on the back
of a horse, a girl or boy could place the can
in the fork of a tree as high as they could reach.
This would be hard for the others to find,
for it could not be seen, so they would get sticks
and poke at every likely place until it was found,
either by feeling it or by hearing the sound
when the stick touched it.
One day it could not be found. Even the girl


who hid it couldn?t find it, though she was
sure of the tree fork where it was placed. After
a time, a boy climbed from his horse?s back into
the tree, and then he was able to tell them that
the tree trunk was hollow. The can must have
fallen right down the inside to the roots of the
tree.
Another day, a boy made his horse stand still
right under a tree. He then threw the can to a
high fork which he could never have reached.
Of course, no one could have found that one.
Many of them had to get home in a short
time, so that they could not play for very long.
When they forgot about the time, something
would make them remember, and then the
horses had to be made to hurry.
Even the old horses would do this; for
nearly all horses try to go much faster on the
way home than they do when going out.
Nothing, however, would make old Betty hurry.
I suppose she thought that her supper was quite
safe, and that if she got home too early she
might have other work to do.
Do you believe that horses do think?
I do.


CHAPTER XI
Nellie?s Birthday Party
The little brown horse, Nylie, was doing well.
Under the special care of Jacky, she was not
only learning to do all things which a young
horse was expected to do. She was looking
even better than when she was caught.
Henry?s uncle had been to look at her. Henry
had now gone back with him into the Bush,
and was learning the tricks his uncle used in
dealing with the brumbies he had caught. One
by one he was training them and selling them.
When Uncle Tom saw Nylie again he was
very pleased. ? Why, Mr. Tompkins,? he said,
? she is even better than I thought. What a
lovely colour. I think her coat is darker brown
now. Do you??
? I?m sure it is,? said Mr. Tompkins. ? Look
at the shine on it, too. Jacky has been treating
her well. I would like to know what he puts
in the feed to make the coats of horses so glossy.


When I ask him he just says: ? Brush hard,
boss. Good fellow, brush.? ?
? That?s right,? laughed Tom. ? There is
nothing better than a good brushing for a
horse. Some people say it is as good as another
meal for them. But they want real good food
too, and plenty of good water.?
? Well, Nylie gets all that. Besides, she gets
plenty of exercise. Notice how she follows the
black fellow around. She is getting so tame that
any of the children can go near her, and she
lets them pet her. I don?t allow it, though,
unless someone else is there. Still, I do think
the little brown fellow likes being here, and she
looks for the children coming.?
? Do they ride her yet, Mr. Tompkins??
? Not yet, Tom; Jacky rides her just enough.
She is young yet. We are having a children?s
party here in a few weeks? time, and we plan
to let some of them try her then. What about
coming and bringing that young Henry back
to us? It is getting near winter. I think we had
better have him here during the wet weather.
Three weeks to-day, I think. You will come,
then??
? Very well, Mr. Tompkins. Then I shall


go up-country for four or five months. When
I come back, we?ll talk about Henry.?
So it was arranged, and very quickly the time
passed. Nellie was to have a big birthday party
this year, because when her birthday came last
year she was very ill.
For weeks she had been in the hospital, and
they did not think that she would recover.
After a very anxious time she began to get
well, and soon was as strong as ever. That
was one reason why so much was thought of
her, besides the fact that she was so lovable.
When she had said something about missing
her birthday party, her father had made a
promise. ? Never mind, dearie,? he had said,
? if the good Lord spares you and us, you shall
have a fine birthday party next time. Then you
will be eight, and we?ll have all the children we
can find.?
As the day drew near, Mrs. Tompkins became
very busy. She was making nice things for days
before, and she had a big girl come in to help
her. She asked Father to do several things in
order to make room for all.
? It will most likely be a fine day,? she said;
? the rains will not come for a week or more yet.


So I think we will have tea under these shady
wattle trees. Will you get a nice open place
cleared and fix up a long table and two forms?
Then we will tack white paper all over instead
of cloths, and there will be room for over thirty
children.?
? Thirty,? said Mr. Tompkins, in surprise.
? Where will you get thirty children from??
? From Mr. Jones?s school,? w r as the reply.
? I?ve asked him for a list of all his scholars.
There are thirty-five. Though some of them
live a long way from us, I have asked them all.?
? How will they get here, my dear?? was his
next question.
? That?s arranged,? she said. ?Joe Ball
takes them to school every day in the week,
so I?ve asked him to bring them on the Saturday.
He says he can run right down to the gate, and
he won?t take a penny for the trip, either.?
? Stout fella,? said Mr. Tompkins. ?Of
course his own two children will come??
?Yes,? answered Mrs. Tompkins, ? and his
wife.?
? That?s great. I suppose I must look after
the games before tea.?
? Yes, and afterwards. That is, if you haven?t


forgotten how to play.? Mr. Tompkins laughed
as he strode away. He busied himself with the
table and forms, and soon everything was ready.
The great day was here at last.
Everything was done that could be done to
make the place look nice and fresh. The yards
had been cleared up; and before midday all
work was done excepting the evening milking
and feeding. This must be done every day,
whatever may be on.
Just after one o?clock Joe shouted
? Here they come!?
? They ? turned out to be just two children
on one horse. The horse was led away, and
Mrs. Tompkins took charge of the children. A
small paddock at the side of the house had
been cleaned up for games, and Mr. Tompkins
had been kind enough to put some clean logs
about, ready for anyone who wished to sit down.
The first comers were hardly welcomed
before the sound of a motor horn was heard,
and soon the school bus was seen coming
straight down the track. By the side of it was
Billy Spencer on Spark. He was trying his
hardest to get to the house in front of the
motor. Owing to the looseness of the track,


the brumby won, and there was such a shout!
The jolly motor driver helped the cheering by
sounding on his horn some notes just like
? Cock-a-doodle-doo
This so pleased everybody that he did it
several times.
Then Mrs. Tompkins greeted Mrs. Ball, who
had come with her husband, and when the bus
door was unfastened the children all came
tumbling out like bees coming out of a hive
when someone hits it with a stick.
Others were coming, and for a time all was
confusion.
Mr. Tompkins came to the rescue at that
moment. ? Come on, kiddies!? he shouted, and
his big voice was heard above all the din.
? Come on for a game in the paddock.?
He led the way, and for an hour there was
a merry time. Some of the boys liked cricket
best. A place was found for them well away,
so that they could not hurt the others. Mr.
Tompkins had made a list of games, and at
once started one of them.
First, they had a game where one of their
number turned his back to the rest. They
stood in a line behind him and tried to move
( E 725 ) ?


backwards a step at a time without being seen
when the boy suddenly turned. You will all
know this game.
Then they played at other games; but sooner
or later they had to play the old favourite game
of rounders.
This seemed to be looked for always. Nothing
would please the boys and girls but that Mr.
Tompkins should lead one side, and George
the other. In choosing sides they all w r anted
to get on the side of Mr. Tompkins, big Mr.
Tompkins.
However, when it came to playing the game,
they found that George could do much better
than his father. It was true that the big man
could hit the ball very hard. Indeed, he once
knocked it right over the top of the house, and
everybody yelled; but George was very much
faster in running, and could get many more
rounders. Still, the play was very even, and
George?s side had only one more than his
father?s when there came a call from the house.
? Now then, Father, get the boys and girls
to their seats.? Again there was a din, and
almost endless confusion.
Each had his or her own special friends and


they wished to sit by them. Mr. Tompkins
tried in vain to suit them all.
He was almost ready to give up when Mrs.
Tompkins came up in haste. ? Now come
along,? she said. ? Never mind where you sit.
You get along there, and you two girls go over
the other side.?
Almost at once everybody was seated, and the
tea was brought on.
Such a tea, too.
There is no need to try to tell what there was
for tea. Let us say that Mrs. Tompkins knew
just what children liked best of the things which
were good for them. She therefore tried to
please them all. She did it, too.
For a little time there was scarcely a word
said, for all were very busy. The hard playing
had made each one very hungry, and the
children of the Bush nearly always come to the
table ready for a good meal. The open-air
life makes them so.
For a time the plates and dishes were emptied
almost as fast as they could be filled and placed
on the table. Then the task of keeping them
filled became a little easier, and at last when
Mrs. Tompkins walked all round the table


she could not find one which needed filling up.
? Come, children,? she said merrily, ? get
a good tea. It is a long time before bed-time.?
? Oh! Mrs. Tompkins,? said one of the bigger
girls facing her, ? you have given us too many
nice things. I think w r e all have had more than
enough.?
? Well, I do hope you?ve enjoyed the tea.
That is all I want,? said Mrs. Tompkins.
? Three cheers for Mrs. Tompkins,? sang out
Billy Spencer.
The cheer was taken up heartily, and then
three more were called. This time it was for
Mr. Tompkins.
? Free cheers for Nellie?s birfday!? called
out Mrs. Ball?s little girl. I think that her
mother must have told her to say it, for she
was very young.
Everybody laughed; but the cheers were just
as loud as the other cheers.
? Mr. Tompkins,? asked Bobby Green, when
they were quiet once more, ? what shall we
play at now??
? Nothing for a time, sonny,? he replied;
? that is, nothing for me. You youngsters can
rest for a time, and then find a game for your-


selves. I will be busy for half an hour or so.
Milking-time, you know, and the cows don?t
keep birthdays.?
This made them laugh again. Mr. Tompkins
was so merry that the children laughed at nearly
all he said.
? Will you come after milking, Mr. Tomp-
kins??
Several of them asked the question at the
same time.
? I suppose so,? he said, as he walked away.
? Mr. Tompkins!? again called out Billy
Spencer.
? Hello!? he replied, and turned around to
see who called.
? Will you have some horse games, Mr.
Tompkins?? he asked.
? Oh! yes, do, Mr. Tompkins,? joined in
several of them.
? I don?t know about that,? he said. ? I?d
rather you played horse games at home. We
don?t want anyone hurt.?
? We won?t get hurt, Mr. Tompkins, let?s.?
? Wait a while and we?ll think about it,? he
said, and went into the milking-shed.


CHAPTER XII
More Fun at the Party
The guests went away very pleased. They
felt sure, by the tone of Mr. Tompkins?s voice,
that he would do as they wished.
They played in a half-hearted way until he
came back. Some of them played at catching a
ball, and some of them found a swing in a
tree. A sudden yell from one of their number
told them of his return. They all flocked round
him.
? Can we, Mr. Tompkins?? they asked. He
knew what they meant.
? Well, all get in a line,? he commanded.
? Now, how many of you came on horses?
Stand forward.?
?Ten of you. But there were only seven
horses. Oh, I know,? he went on, ? some
carried two. Well, the youngest of those w 7 ho
rode two on one horse, stand back. That?s
better, seven with seven horses.


? Now,? he said, ? how many of you kiddies
in the back row can ride? What! every one of
you.?
It was true; every hand had gone up. Mr.
Tompkins scratched his head. This was a big
puzzle. How could he amuse thirty children
with seven horses?
He had a quick idea.
?You youngsters with horses,? he said,
speaking to those who still stood in the front
row. ? Will you all be willing to lend your
horses after you have a go??
?Yes, Mr. Tompkins,? they everyone replied.
? Good. Now ? ?he called out ?? Mrs.
Tompkins, please get some paper and put down
all their names. Put down these seven first and
leave room after each name for two columns.
? Put our Bob down next and then one of the
twins. Which is the elder? Better have you
first, Joan, I suppose.
? Now you can get your horses. Bring their
bridles and saddles but don?t put them on.
Bob, you can get your Charlie; and Joe, get
Betty.?
Then he called George and told him to ask
Henry and his uncle to come to him as soon


as they had finished tea in the house. These
two had come only a few minutes before. They
came out now with Mr. Ball, the motor driver.
? That?s good,? said Mr. Tompkins. ? I
want all of you to help in a horse game. How
are you, Tom??
? Fine,? replied the Bushman. ? What?s on,
boss??
? You?re timekeeper,? he said. ? Got your
watch? Good. Reckon the fastest time, and the
second from when I say ? go ? to the time when
they fasten up the horses. George, you and
Henry stand in that clear space with about ten
yards of string. Mr. Ball, you go over in that
far comer and see they do things right there.
But first of all, I want some of you to take nine
boxes over to Mr. Ball?s comer. They are to
help the kiddies if they have trouble in mounting.
Give them plenty of room and put them in a
straight line. Here come the horses.?
He made the children tie up their horses to
the fence. Then they carried the bridles and
what answered for saddles to the boxes, and
each placed them on a box.
? Now,? he said, ? listen carefully. Stand
in a line here. When I say ?go ?, you go and


untie your horses, get them any way you like
to the box with your harness on; dress your
horse, and jump on his back. Then you ride
across to George and Henry. They will let the
string lie on the ground. Go round them and
back to these trees. Unsaddle and take off the
bridle, and tie up your horse with a rope. The
fastest one of all the lot gets a prize. Ready?
p)
go!
Oh! how the nine did go!
None of them had any trouble with the ropes.
They had unfastened horses too often for that.
But two of the horses thought that it was going-
home time, and they tried to turn for the gate-
way. Five others went willingly and were led with
the ropes. The eighth one tried to turn back
after a few yards, and lost his little master some
time. The ninth one to unfasten his horse
saw six of his fellows well in front of him, so he
lightly leapt on to the fence and sprang on to
the bare back of his horse. He easily guided him
and quickly passed the others.
The eighth one, seeing this, followed the
good example. His horse was small, so that he
managed to scramble on to his back without
the help of a fence. The two got to their boxes


together, but neither of them was first in the
next length. Some of those who had walked were
not far behind, and made up time in saddling.
Quite a number of them had just to throw a
padded bag on their horse?s back and fasten a
strap. Bridles were quickly put on. It was a
wild race over the string. Seven of them were
within a yard of each other. And so on to the
trees.
It took only a moment to throw off the har-
ness; and the first to hold up his hand was Billy
Spencer.
No one was much surprised. He was a big
boy and well used to his horse. When he was
declared the first of this lot, he went straight to
his little horse and patted him on the neck; and
the horse seemed to understand.
There were three lots altogether, making
twenty-seven riders. Of course, some of the
later ones were much slower, for they were not
quite so much practised as the owners of the
horses.
But they had learned some things by watching
the others. All of them used the fence and rode
the first stretch. Some of the horses could not
be guided by strange hands without the help of


a bridle, but most of them knew what was
wanted right away.
At the finish, to the surprise of all the children,
little Elsie Walters was found to be the winner.
Though she was one of the bus children and
never came to school on a horse, she had been
the fastest of them all.
? Well,? said Mrs. Ball, who lived near the
child, ?lam not a bit surprised. Elsie is quick
at everything. She can do many things in the
house and on the farm as well as her mother or
father can do them.?
The prize was a brand new bridle. Mr.
Tompkins had been saving it for another pur-
pose, but when he had the idea for the race, he
had thought what a nice prize it would be. It
was small and just the thing to suit a pony such
as some of the children rode to school.
? Come along, Elsie!? he called out. ? Mrs.
Tompkins will give you the prize. But what
can you do with it? I believe you are one of the
bus children. You can?t use a bridle on the bus,
and it is too small for your father?s horses.?
? It is just what I needed,? said the little girl,
as she took the prize from Mrs. Tompkins?s
hands. ? Thank you very, very much.?


? Do you ride much, my dear?? asked that
lady.
? Quite a lot, Mrs. Tompkins,? she answered.
? I have a nice white pony of my own, and a
good saddle. But the only bridle I can use is
really too big; it is badly worn too.?
? But you don?t ride to school?? said Mr.
Tompkins.
? No, Mr. Tompkins,? she said, ? because
the bus comes so near to our own gate. But
every morning and night I fetch the cows up,
and I ride Melba every time. She stands quite
still when I jump off to open the gates, and
then she goes through and waits while I close
them.?
? That is a good pony,? Mr. Tompkins said.
? Now I know why you won the race. You and
your pony do things to save time. Well done,
girlie.?
The children were now ready for something
else to amuse them. First of all they each were
served with some fresh lemon drink. Then Mr.
Tompkins called George aside, and he took
Henry towards the horse yard.
In a few minutes they came back. With them
was Jacky, the black man. He was leading


Nylie, who had on a small saddle and bridle.
? Now, boys and girls, listen to me,? said
Mr. Tompkins, as the children pushed for-
ward to see the little horse they had talked
about so much. ? This is Nellie?s birthday,?
he went on. ? You all came to-day to make her
happy, and you have been happy yourselves.
Now this little horse, which is called Nylie, is
to be a present to Nellie from her mother and
father, and from her brothers and sisters.
Don?t you think it is a nice present??
They all cheered. After they were quiet,
Nellie?s father went on: ? We are giving her a
big party to-day because last year she missed
her birthday party when she was so ill. But
there is another reason why we are giving her
this pony for a present. It is because, when
we lost the pony which Bob used to ride,
she let him have Charlie, and has ridden behind
Joan and Joe without ever being sulky. Nellie,
this little Nylie is for you.?
?For me, Daddy?? said little Nellie, full of
wonder. ? Can I ride her??
?Yes, sweetheart,? said her father. He
stooped down, lifted her in his strong arms,
and placed her in the saddle.


Nylie scarcely felt her weight, and was at
once ready to trot off with her. Nellie took the
reins, and sat right for a good ride. But her
father did not feel very safe about it. Although
Nellie was a good rider, he was afraid of the
speed which he felt sure the little horse could
show. So he gave the rein he held to the black
man, who stood near.
? Here, Jacky,? he said, ? you try her out.
Be safe, now.?
? Too right, Boss,? said Jacky, and off they
went. At first it was a sharp walk; but when
they got to the other side of the paddock,
Jacky started to run, still holding to one side of
the bridle. They passed the crowd at a good
pace, and went over to the other side. Then
Jacky said to the horse, ? Steady now,? and he
let her go.
She got a little faster, but though this time
they passed very much quicker, it was still a
safe pace.
? Do you think you can keep her like that??
Mr. Tompkins called out as they went on.
Nellie?s hair was flying up, and she felt the
wind rushing past her ears, but she was en-
joying it very much.


She nodded her head and kept on. Jacky
walked over and spoke to the master.
? Him all right,? he said. ? Him like urn
Nellie.?
That was enough for Mr. Tompkins. He
could trust Jacky to know. If Jacky believed
Nellie was safe, then she was safe.
Nellie pulled up next time, and lightly
jumped off. She stood at her horse?s head and
stroked her soft nose. Nylie put her head down
and gently pushed against Nellie?s arm. They
were friends for ever.
Nellie was never selfish. So now she asked
that Bob, Joe and Joan should each have a ride.
After that, she let two of her close school
friends ride; and might have asked the whole
school in turns if there had been time enough.
All good things come to an end, and so did
Nellie?s party.
The ? bus ? was ready, the horses were
brought up, and the bikes were fetched out.
A few minutes later the place was so quiet that
one might have thought the clock had stopped.


CHAPTER XIII
Nellie?s Great Escape
Nellie found riding to school to be much
nicer now.
The first day she went on Nylie?s back, Mr.
Tompkins sent her big brother with her.
He was still just a little bit afraid that Nylie
might make up her mind to go much faster
than he wished Nellie to ride. He knew that
the little brown horse had the power to go at
a very great speed if she wished.
No one had seen her go really fast yet, be-
cause Jacky had kept her back. He said that
she w?as too young to race, and that if they
rode her gently she would grow strong. One
day she would be able to run very, very fast.
George rode a big working horse, and he kept
a hand on one rein of Nellie?s little horse. Nylie
did not like this. Nor did Nellie like it very
much.
? George,? she said, ? I will promise not to


let Nylie race if you will let me have her my-
self.?
? I would, Nellie,? replied George, ? but
Father told me that I must do it. Anyway, little
sister, I don?t think I shall have to come with
you again.?
? Oh, I like you to come, George,? she said,
? but I don?t think you need hold Nylie. She
behaves ever so well; don?t you, Nylie dear??
She patted the horse?s neck, and Nylie seemed
to try to go a little quicker. She must have
been trying to do just a little better for her
little mistress.
? No! steady, Nylie,? whispered Nellie.
Nylie had been taught what was meant by
? steady ?, so she quietly settled dow r n. Nellie
patted her again. They were going to be great
friends. Even George could tell that.
Bob was keeping level with his big brother
and Nellie. He would have liked a race be-
tween Nylie and his Charlie. Some day soon,
he meant that Nellie should try. He did not
like this idea of going slow. He believed that
horses were meant to race along at all times,
always to get there as soon as possible.
? Oh, George!? said Nellie a few minutes
( E 725)


later. ?We are not very kind. We?ve forgotten
all about Joan and Joe with poor old Betty.
They are right back, and must be ever so far
round the bend in the track. Can you see
them??
George stood up in his stirrups, but he could
see nothing of the others.
? I think we should wait,? said Nellie.
? Oh, rot,? said Bob, ? I never wait. I?m
off,? and he dashed forward. Charlie had been
waiting for this, so the pair w T ere soon at school.
Presently Betty came along in her steady
way, bearing the twins. She did not go a little
bit faster than usual, although the weight on her
back was less than before. Others could race
if they wished, Betty would just ? get there ?.
Her pace suited the twins. They did not
mind being left behind, so long as they were
left together. If one of them had been on
Nylie, it would have been different. Then the
other one would have wished for a faster horse.
As it was, they two and Betty were all right.
?You needn?t have waited, Nellie,? said
Joan. ? Need she, Joe??
? No,? said Joe; ?we were coming quite
fast.?


He always agreed with what Joan said.
? Get on, Nellie,? continued Joan. ? We?ll
catch you.?
They all laughed at the idea of old Betty
catching Nylie. Joan and Joe had never been
late for school, though they were never in time
for games before starting. They and Betty always
seemed to get there just in time. They were
not a bit jealous of Nellie, with her lovely pony.
They were quite happy on their own quiet old
horse.
If they always kept so contented, I am
sure they would grow up to be very happy
people.
George turned back when they got in sight
of the school. He again reminded Nellie to be
very careful and not to race, then he left her to
do what she could do as well as anyone could?
that is, to tie up her pony and see that it had
everything needed.
For a long time Nylie was admired by all.
Then ?like all things?as people got used to
seeing her, she caused no more stir than other
ponies.
Day by day the same things happened.
After a time, when her father had ceased to


worry about her, she would sometimes have a
race with Bob on Charlie, or with others who
had fast ponies.
Nylie won so easily every time that she did
not seem to be going really fast. But even that
lost its interest. Nellie was never asked to
race them. She more often was holding Nylie
steady, so as to keep level with the others.
Then came a day when Nylie?s great speed
was put to the test, and it proved to be a great
blessing.
The teacher of the school would sometimes
use one of the boys or girls to help him. Like
all schools, however careful they might be,
there would come a day when a cupboard
needed to be put straight, or, perhaps, books
would require to be sorted out.
One afternoon, when he was without the
monitor, the teacher chose Nellie to take out of
the bottom shelf all the books. She had to
leave out all the tom ones; then dust the others
and put them back straight. When school was
let out, the task was not finished.
? Would you mind, Nellie,? said the teacher,
? if you stayed behind for a few minutes to
finish it? Then I can lock the cupboard. You


have a fast horse and will catch up to the
others.?
? No, sir,? said Nellie. ? I would like to
finish.?
She was very much pleased to be asked, and
she took great care to do the work well. It
took a little longer than they thought. When
she got outside the school, there was not another
child to be seen anywhere.
She untied Nylie and gave her a drink. Then
she fastened up everything and started for home.
She got well along the Bush track before she
saw anyone. Then she met a man on a dark
horse. She had never been afraid of anyone in
the Bush, for all true Bushmen are polite to
ladies and kind to all little girls. But for some
reason she did not like the look of this man.
She decided to take to the Bush.
She was just pulling Nylie over to the left,
when the man called to her.
? Hey, missie,? he called, ? can you tell me
where I am??
Nellie had been taught to be polite to all who
spoke to her, so she pulled up.
Yes, sir,? she said. ? You are near Pun-
gup.?


? I never heard of that place,? said the man.
He rode up close to her. ? I want to get to
Woolooroo,? he'went on.
? Oh, sir!? laughed Nellie, ? you are miles
from Woolooroo.?
? I thought so,? he said. ? That?s a fine
horse you are on.?
? Yes, sir,? said Nellie, beginning to feel
afraid.
? But don?t you think my black one is
better??
? I don?t know,? said Nellie, ? but I must
go; I?m late. You go along this track to the
road by the school, sir, then to the left. There?s
a finger-post on the road. Good night, sir.?
She tried to start Nylie on, but the man
sprang from his horse and took hold of her
bridle.
? Yes,? he said, ? I think you are right.
Your brown horse is much better than mine.
It?s branded though, I see. Never mind. Your
brand is D3T. It could easily be made into my
brand, OSD. Don?t you think so, little miss??
? But that isn?t your brand,? bravely said
little Nellie.
She had a second look at the black horse.


It had seemed to her before that she knew it.
? No,? she said, ? you?ve stolen that horse.
It is my uncle?s brand it has on it.?
The man laughed loudly.
? Never mind, my beauty,? he said. ? You
shall take back your uncle his precious black.
We?re going to change horses. I?m in a big
hurry, and your horse will go farther than this
one. But we?ll change saddles. Yours would
hardly fit me.?
He turned to take the saddle from the black,
but he did not know Nylie.
She had been standing perfectly still; but
the moment he had let go of her head she
reared up at him and knocked him back to the
other horse. Then she sprang forward. Nellie
lost her seat for the moment, then she picked
up the reins.
? Go, my sweet,? she whispered, and bent
over the horse?s neck. She did not look behind,
but she knew the man had jumped on to his
horse and was coming after her. She also knew
that the black was her uncle?s best horse. She
hoped that it was tired. If it had come from
its home that day, it had come twenty miles.
Nylie ran fast this time. She had to get a


good lead, for there would be a gate to open.
When she reached the gate, she had left the
man more than a hundred yards away. Still,
he was coming as hard as he could.
Nellie sprang off, unfastened and swung
open the gate. Then she pulled Nylie through
and slammed the gate back right in the face
of the black horse. The horse reared up and
swung round. The man had to hold on to the
gate to prevent himself from falling to the
ground.
Nellie was safe now, for the man dared not
follow her farther.
? All right, my beauty,? he shouted after
her. ? You tell about me, and I?ll get you one
day.? Then he rode off almost as quickly as
he came.
Nylie raced down the track and did not
slacken speed until they were safe in the yard.
Then Nellie slid to the ground, almost fainting.
? What?s this, young lady?? asked her father,
who had seen them come. ? Didn?t I tell you
not to race? Has Nylie been too much for you??
he asked more kindly. ? We?ll have to put you
back on Betty, I?m afraid. I have never felt
really safe about it.?


? No, no, Daddy,? almost sobbed Nellie,
?it isn?t that. Dear Nylie has saved my life,
I think.?
As soon as she could, she told some of the
story. Mr. Tompkins did not wait for more.
He called all whom he could see, and they got
horses and took a near cut to try to catch the
man. However, he had gone, and was never
seen around again. Nor did Nellie?s uncle get
back his horse. They found afterwards that
the man was running away after doing some
wicked things.
You may be sure that Nylie was loved more
than ever from this day.


CHAPTER XIV
In Danger of Fire
Truly, summer had come again. There had
been no rain now for more than two months,
and every day seemed to be hotter than the
last.
Two or three days during one week the
teacher had to send the children home early.
After lunch, the schoolroom was too hot. His
rules told him that when it got hot beyond a
certain point he must close the school.
None of the children seemed to mind leaving
their lessons, and they went home just as
merrily as they did on cool days.
One day teacher had the boys carry the desks
out to a shady place. It was much nicer there,
until a hot wind came. The wind blew all the
papers about, and turned over the pages of the
books before the class was ready.
They thought it great fun, but the teacher
was not as pleased as they were. He did not have


the desks out again. He said that it was too
much trouble.
When they got up on Saturday morning
during this hottest week, there seemed to be a
mist all around. Father said there was a Bush
fire a few miles away. Until he knew which
way the wind would blow, he would not allow
them to go out for the picnic which had been
arranged.
? I want you all where I can see you,? he
said. ?If the fire spreads, I don?t want to have
to come hunting for you, to see if you are safe.
You had better have your picnic down amongst
our own trees. You can go near the little
stream.?
This stream was only a little trickle now, but
it was better than nothing at all. After all their
work was done they went there, each one
carrying some of the food.
In spite of all, the children had a jolly
day. They could not bathe, but they walked
about in the tiny stream. Later on they built
a dam, and so made the water wider and
deeper.
When they had been playing for a good long
time, Bob had an idea.


? I say, let?s build a castle,? he said.
? How can we build a castle without sand,
silly?? was Joe?s reply.
? I know,? Bob said. ? The soil on this side
of the stream has a lot of sand in it. I heard
Daddy telling Mr. Smith about it one day.
You press some of it in your hands. See how
it will stay the shape you put it.?
? I know what, Bob,? said Nellie, who had
been thinking about Bob?s idea. ? Let?s fill
this little square tin to make bricks. Then we
can build the bricks up into a castle.?
?Yes, let?s,? agreed Joan; and so they
started.
Joan and Joe made bricks on a piece of
board, and Bob told Nellie just how to build
them up.
These children could not often get to the
seaside. It was too far away. So they enjoyed
the game all the more. When they had made a
building which looked something like a castle,
they made a moat all round it.
Then they dug with their hands, and with
small pieces of wood, until the water from
the stream was brought along to fill the
moat.


When they got home at night, they found
their father very much worried.
He was looking towards the part of the
horizon where the smoke seemed to be thickest.
No one could see anything besides smoke
amongst the trees; but Father kept his gaze
that way.
? If the wind changes to-night we?ll get the
fire this way to-morrow,? he said.
During the night Nellie awoke. For a long
time she could not get to sleep again, because
the night was so hot. She went to the open
window to look out and to try if there were any
cool breezes blowing. The sky was red over
the part where last night so much smoke could
be seen.
Nellie thought that she could see flames
too. And then she could not be sure whether
her eyes were playing tricks, for there were no
flames to be seen. The next minute she felt
sure that she could see trees burning. They
were so far away, however, that she could not
be certain, but she was sure that the fire was
drawing nearer.
Joan slept through it all. Neither heat nor
thoughts of fire disturbed her. Nellie could


hear the boys moving about in their beds on
the veranda. They did not seem to be resting
very well.
Presently Nellie went to sleep again, and did
not awake until the sun was well up in the
sky.
It was not seven o?clock yet and Sunday
morning. She could hear a great deal of hurry-
ing about, so she got up to see what was the
matter.
Through the window she could now plainly
see trees burning. The fire had come over
the distant hill in the night and was much
nearer. She awoke Joan, and then quickly
dressed.
When she went into the kitchen she found
her mother very busy. She was packing food
into sacks.
? Hurry and get breakfast, girls,? said Mrs.
Tompkins. ?We may have to leave the house
quickly. Daddy says that he thinks the wind
will change, and blow this way before lunch.
He can save the buildings and the house, but
he wants us away and safe.?
? Where can we go, Mum?? said Joan. She
went to look through the kitchen window.


?Oh, Nellie, look!? she called. ? Daddy is
setting fire to the grass outside. Why is he
doing that??
? They are lighting it while they can keep
near. They can put it out when they wish,?
said their mother. ?They will bum towards
the big fire so that when the fire gets here it
will have nothing to bum. It will then go
round us.?
? Is that what they call a fire-break?? asked
Nellie. She had never been really near a big
Bush fire.
? Yes, my dear,? replied Mother. ? It makes
a place safe, unless sparks fly across. Daddy
thinks we had better go to White Gum Point.
There are not many trees there which will bum,
and the sand is nearly clear. Besides, there is
always the water to get into, if the fire does
come too near.?
Before they had finished breakfast Mr. Tomp-
kins came in. ?I think you had better go,? he
said, ? whilst you have plenty of time. George
and Henry can go with you, and then George
can bring back the horses. We may need them
to follow you.?
? Father,? asked Joan, ? why are you send-


ing us away? Are you afraid the house will
catch fire??
? No, dearie,? replied Father. ? I don?t
think it will be as bad as that. We are fairly
clear around the house and sheds. Though I?m
afraid it will not be possible to save the dry feed
in the big paddocks. We have driven the cows
down to the little stream, so that they can get
what water there is. No, I?m not afraid of the
house, though the fire is sure now to get right
round us. It will then be much too hot for
Mother and you children. You?ll be better
down at the river. If it gets too bad, we will
come too. We are going over to Jenkins?s place.
The fire must be near him too, now.?
The saddle horses and Betty with the spring-
cart were brought round, and they prepared to
g�-
The food was piled in the cart, along with a
number of valuable things which Mrs. Tomp-
kins did not wish to leave.
Mr. Tompkins had been talking to Mr.
Smith at the next farm. He had told Mr.
Smith what they thought of doing, and he said
it was a real good idea. He would try to get
Mrs. Smith to do the same with their children.


He, too, thought it would not be very nice for
them to stay in the house if the fire swept
around. Then the men could get together to
fight the fire.
Just as the Tompkins family were making a
start, they saw the Smiths and some other
people coming in a cart. These other people
already had the fire on their Bush land.
You should know that nearly every farm has
some Bush land. It is land which is not very
good. It is too sandy to grow crops, but big
trees and hundreds of bushes cover it. The
trees are saved for burning in the big fireplaces
which these homes have. They cannot get coal
to bum. They burn nothing but wood.
During the hot months the Bush gets very
dry. Branches of trees die and drop off. Dead
leaves from the trees lie all amongst the bushes,
and a single spark would set them alight.
Everyone who lives at these farms in the
Bush knows of the great danger of a spark. If
they are away from home and have to light a
fire, they are most careful about the way it is
done.
First they clear away all rubbish and dead
leaves. Every stalk of dead grass is carefully
( E 725) 9


moved. Then when there is a good big space
of earth or sand to be seen the fire is lighted.
Then they watch it whilst it is burning, to see
that no sparks fly on to the uncleared part.
When the fire is done with it is just as carefully
put out. Partly burned wood is stamped out
or pushed into the ground. Then sand or earth
is thrown over the hot cinders.
Not all people are so careful. On holidays
and on Sundays, people sometimes go along
the roads and turn into the Bush land for a
picnic. Some of them, who do not know of the
danger of fire, will just light a fire and leave it
when they have finished with it. They go away
and forget it, but very often just a little flame
will creep up a piece of wood and light another
piece. The dry leaves and grass get alight, and
soon the fire goes rushing along, burning Bush
land and good trees. Perhaps very good crops
and even the farmhouses get burned up, and
the poor farmers lose all they have.
Many farmers every year waste days and days
putting out fires which they did not light.
They get together and, with green branches
and wet bags, fight the fire.
They beat it out whenever they can.


But sometimes it is too big and too hot.
They can then do nothing. By lighting little
fires here and there to meet the big fire, they
try to turn the fire away. For even a big fire
cannot go on if the dry leaves and branches
have already been burned.
Mrs. Tompkins and her family said good-bye
to Father and left him doing the very things
we have been talking about.


CHAPTER XV
The Bush Fire
Mr. Tompkins could do nothing to protect
the crops in the fields. They would all burn if
a spark got near them. He had ploughed up
strips of land all around them. He said they
were safe unless a spark came on the wind
when the fire got nearer.
It was very much nearer now. It was on the
Jenkins?s farm, and the heat could be felt where
Mr. Tompkins was working. Now he and
Jacky and the other man hurried across to help
the other farmers.
Men were coming from all around to meet
the fire in the place where was the most danger.
Up to this time, only real Bush land had been
burning, but now the middle part of the fire
had come to that part of the Bush where a large
number of farms were.
The men quickly decided to try to save each
of the homes in turn. And, of course, they


made for the place where the fire was nearest.
It was now so hot that they could see tree
after tree get alight. Even perfectly green trees
caught, and the leaves could be heard making
a sharp hissing sound as the fire took them.
Dry branches cracked like guns being let off,
and the flames leaped up the bark on the trunk
of every new tree which caught fire. The brush-
wood under and around the trees caught alight
so fast that it seemed like the tide coming in
on the seashore. Only that it never went back,
like the sea.
The men saw one certain man there, and
they at onoe looked to him as to a leader. He
was a very big man, with a very strong and
firm voice. Everyone seemed to be quite used
to obeying that voice. His name was Mr.
Henty. He was not a farmer. Mr. Henty
quickly divided the twenty men into two groups.
Eight of them had shovels. The other twelve
he called beaters, and he again made two lots
of them. The first six took up wet bags, or they
broke off big green branches of trees. He called
these ? Number one beaters ?.
? Now, boys, hop in there,? he said, pointing
to a part where the fire w T as trying to eat up a


row of fence posts. ? Number two beaters
stand ready. Shovels over here. You four first.
Number one shovels, follow up. Throw sand
on the posts, after the beaters.?
Mr. Henty looked at the watch he was hold-
ing.
? Number two beaters, change over. Come
out, Number one,? he yelled. ? Now then,
Bill, come on here. No sense in stopping there.
Rest yourself, man. Shovels, change over. Hop
along there.?
So he kept them on. As more men came
along he added them to each lot in turn.
By giving them only a few minutes each, he
rested them and saved them from becoming
faint with the heat and dense smoke.
One of the men who came was sent for two
big tins of water. They also found two clean
fruit tins and used them for mugs. When
the water came he sent the man back to find
two other tins at the farm, and to bring more
water.
? Now,? he said to the man, ? keep on
fetching water. Always leave two tins with
water while you fetch more. When you?ve
brought ten tins you can tell me. Then you


can get warm at the fire while some other
carries water.?
It was quite surprising how much work could
be done like this. They would beat out the fire
in one place and then rush to another. Then
Mr. Henty would call one back. A flame had
broken out again, and just in time one man, or
sometimes tw r o, could stop it the second time.
A tree just started would have the fire beaten
down and sand thrown over the red part.
Although it would often start up again, yet by
keeping at it they would at last extinguish it
altogether.
After what seemed only a few minutes, but
was really more than an hour and a half, Mr.
Jenkins?s farm was said to be safe. The Bush
land would burn for days, but his fences were
safe, because all along was burned and black.
Nearly all of the fence posts were saved,
although they were as black as soot.
The fire had gone round two sides of the
farm and was attacking the next block.
Here it was treated in the same way and as
quickly was turned aside.
Then a cheer arose for Mr. Henty. He had
from somewhere got a packet of tea, and the


men saw him put over a red-hot log a clean
petrol tin full of water.
When men are on this work they dearly love
tea. So they cheered Mr. Henty.
? It?s not so hot now, boys,? he said. ? All
carry on together for a while. I?ll be back
soon.?
He went towards the nearest farm and
presently came back with more than a quart of
milk and a big packet of sugar.
? Come away, Number two gang,? he said.
The water was already boiling. He dashed
about half of the tea in and a lot of sugar.
Then he stirred it well with a stick and took
the tin from the fire.
In about three minutes he called out:
? Change over, everybody. Number ones
come on for a drink. Milk for all of you??
Without waiting for an answer, he threw in
half the milk and pitched fruit tins to the two
nearest.
? Better have half a tin each,? he said, ? until
we see how far it goes.?
He put on another tinful of water and in a
few minutes, when the water was just warm, he
placed it beside the first one.


? I think we had best mix it,? he said. ? It?s
too hot and a bit on the strong side.?
They poured the mixture from one tin to the
other several times, and added more sugar.
? That?s better,? said the next man to drink.
? A fellow can get a drink now.?
Soon they changed, and in time all had
managed to get a drink. There was no time to
think of food to-day. But now a new danger
arose.
The fire had found a lovely place to play.
There was a long stretch where last year some-
one had cut down a lot of trees. These trees
had been very fine ones and had stood nearly
in a row amongst the other trees.
The dead tops had lain hidden amongst the
scrub. But the fire had found them. There was
now a long line of fire right below Mr. Smith?s
low fence.
? Come on, boys!? yelled Mr. Henty, and
he himself broke down a green branch. ? Bill,
you keep the two Browns with you and stay
here. Whistle if it?s beating you. Whistle hard,
and when I answer, wave your arm as many
times as the number of helpers you want. Come
on, boys. We can?t save that part, but we may


be able to stop it getting on to Tompkins?s
place.?
Some of them were half-way there, but all
ran as hard as their tired legs would go.
They went to work in lots once more, but the
fire was too hot for them to do much.
Mr. Henty worked harder than any. He was
fresh and he was very fond of Mr. Tompkins.
So that, although he had done all he could to
help the others, he tried to do more than ever
now.
Once it seemed they had stopped the mad rush
of the fire. Then a burning tree fell over a track
and started another fire farther out. In the
midst of the rushing, someone told Mr. Henty
that Bill was whistling.
Mr. Henty could not hear for himself, because
the fire was making so much noise where he was.
? I should think he is,? said he when he had
looked. ? Look at that fire over there. We
must send some of you. He says six. We can?t
spare any really, but you three go. Come back
if you can,? and he dashed in again.
? I?m sorry, Tompkins,? he said, ? but I?m
afraid for that dry crop of yours over there.
? We daren?t go in between the fire and the


crop. No man could stand the heat. I see
you?ve ploughed a break. That may help us.
It?s sparks, though, that I?m afraid of. One
would be enough.?
They tried their hardest, but it was in vain.
A sudden breeze sprang up and quickly died
dow r n again, but it carried dozens of sparks, and
in a few seconds the whole crop was a big sheet
of flame.
Mr. Henty sighed as he threw his beater into
the fire. ? Let her go, boys!? he shouted. ? We
can do no more. Just put out these fence posts
and then all sit down for five minutes. The
fire will stop on the other side; won?t it, Mr.
Tompkins??
? Yes,? he replied. ? There?s ploughed land,
and then my little stream. I?ve put the cows
down there. It?s going merrily up yonder,
though.?
He pointed to where the six men could be
seen working hard.
?We can?t help it,? said Mr. Henty. ? You
must rest awhile. It will pay in the end. Two
more minutes.?
Most of the men were lying flat on the
blackened ground. All were still panting.


When the time was up, they were called and
at once rose. They moved off in a body to help
their fellows. These were called off to rest
and some of the others took their places. Then
they started again as before. They pushed the
fire aside little by little and saved most of Mr.
Smith?s fencing. After that they saved all the
fences around Mr. Tompkins?s place.
That gentleman had lost a great deal when
his crop burned up. He would later have
to buy feed in bags to make up for the
loss.
? Now,? said Mr. Henty at last, ? we can
do no more. Your places are safe, and the fire
will not come back this way. It is worse than
ever farther on, however. Where are your wives
and children, men??
? Mine have gone with the Tompkins to
White Gum Point,? said Mr. Smith.
? And mine,? said two others.
? Good idea,? Mr. Henty replied. ? It?s
been a bit too hot down here to-day. I say,
though, the fire looks like working that way.
The wind has changed again.?
? I was just looking,? said Mr. Tompkins
anxiously. ? I can see my boy is back in the


yard with some horses. Coming, Smith?? The
two made off at a run.
The two men whose families were gone that
way rushed back home to get horses. They
were never able to get to White Gum Point,
however, for the fire gained by their delay.
Mr. Tompkins and his neighbour found
George and Henry very much worried. They
had been watching the fire fight, and wished to
go to help. But Father?s orders had been very
straight. They were to stay in the yard, unless
in danger. Then they must do the best they
could. He felt sure they would be able to save
themselves. And he wanted them and the
horses ready if they were needed.
The boys had also seen the fire turn towards
the valley. Would they be able to get back or
would they have to leave the women and
children alone all night?
As the minutes went on, they had almost
decided that one of them should race on and
leave the other with the horses.
Then they saw Father and Mr. Smith coming.
Jump on Bonnie, George!? shouted Mr.
Tompkins. ? She?ll carry me too. Henry, take
Charlie, and Mr. Smith can have Nylie. You?re


a bit heavy, Smith, but it?s the best we can do.
Nurse her until you need her. Come on.?
He opened the gate and let them out. Then
he sprang up behind George, and they were off.
All was well for a time. They were now
almost behind the fire. Soon they would have
to ride down a track where the fire would be
beside them. Then, if they were in time they
would get in front of it, and cross the Bush
before it.
Would they be in time?
There was no other way. They must either
brave the fire or stay behind and leave the
women and children till morning.
Not one of them had a thought of choosing.
For them there was only one thing to do.
They must go right on.
? There?ll be no coming back this w T ay,? said
Mr. Smith. ?In another hour this will all be
burning.?


CHAPTER XVI
A Night in the Burning Bush
There was no time to spare if they were to
get through before the whole Bush, through
which they must pass, was alight.
Bonnie was much slower than the other
horses, and she also had a double weight to
carry. The extra weight did not trouble her
much. She was a strong horse.
She managed to keep well up to the others,
because Nylie was so much afraid of the fire.
She kept trying to get into the Bush on the side
which was farthest away from it. The smoke
troubled her too, and every time she acted at
all badly Captain imitated her. Bonnie kept
bravely on. She knew that her master would
never ask her to do anything she ought not to
do. Nylie had not yet learned this.
By the time the party reached the wide track
they found that the fire was all along one side


of it. This displeased the young horses more
than ever, but by keeping well in the Bush on
the other side, they at last managed to get along
very well.
The worst part was when they had to leave
the wide track and take a narrow one through
the trees. This track was a mile long and already
some trees were burning.
At this point Mr. Tompkins jumped off
Bonnie?s back.
?Mr. Smith,? he said, ?I am heavier than
you, but I think you had better get up behind
George. I will take Nylie. It is giving her
extra work, but she knows me better. I may be
able to sooth her.?
He mounted her and spoke gentle words to
her.
? Come, my little beauty,? he said, ? it will
soon be over. Get up, girl.?
Nylie saw fire ahead, and she did not like it.
She remembered the first time she had seen
this red stuff which ran over the bushes. One
morning early, when she was tiny, she had
seen the bushes turn red in this way, and she
had gone up to smell it, in spite of her mother s
warning neigh. The red stuff called fire had


2 .'' \� **~
. ,WM J
E 725
AN ORDEAL FOR NYLIE
Page 145


.


bitten her nose and one foot. She did not trust
it now.
Mr. Tompkins told the others to go on and
he led her for a little distance. He then took a
cloth he carried and tied it around her head
so that she could not see the fire. Then he forced
her onwards, and kept her going with kind words,
gently whispered to her.
Once they had got through the burning part,
he took off the cloth. When Nylie found all the
fire was behind her, she wanted to go like the
wind. Mr. Tompkins soon overtook the others
and passed them easily.
? I?ll keep going now,? he called back to
them. ? Keep right on; we are clear of the
fire.?
Very soon they arrived at the Point, and
they found the women and children very much
afraid. Some of them had been up to the top
of the hill often to look at the burning country.
They were all feeling quite sure that their farms
would be burned out.
You may guess how pleased they were to see
the men and to hear that most of their property
was safe.
? Are you taking us back now?? asked Nellie.
(E 725) 10


Nylie was pushing her nose into Nellie?s
shoulder, and seemed to be telling her of the
awful ride they had just had.
? No, dearie,? Mr. Tompkins replied; ? I?m
afraid there is no going back to-night.?
? Well, where shall we all sleep, Daddy??
asked Joan.
? Little ones in the cart, with any mothers
who can get in,? he said. ? The rest must
just lie down on this sandy place. One thing,
it won?t be cold. We have plenty of blankets.?
They all laughed at this, and they prepared
to make the best of it.
? Gee,? said Mr. Tompkins, ? I want some-
thing to eat. I?ve had nothing but half a fruit
tin of tea since breakfast, and it is nearly dark
now.?
They soon brought out food for the men and
the two boys. Then they got water for them to
drink.
? I should like a cup of tea,? said Mr. Smith,
? but I?m not going to light a fire. I?ve seen
enough fires for one day.?
After eating, they looked out for a safe place
for the horses. The fire was sure to come right
up. If not to-night, it would do so to-morrow


Then they prepared to sleep. There was no
need to keep awake. It was dark now, and
they had no lamp. The men said they would
watch in turns.
Mr. Tompkins took the first watch. He went
right up the hill and sat there. There was
nothing to do and he sat with his back to a
tree. He was thinking ?not about his loss, but
about the way to prevent the same trouble
another year.
He nearly fell asleep several times. Nothing
at all happened before midnight. Then he called
Mr. Smith.
The fire came up nearer before daylight, but
it was much slower. Fires do not bum so
fiercely in the night as in the daytime. During
the day the trees get hot and easily catch fire.
In the night they are much cooler, and often
the fire dies right down.
This one did not die down at all. It just
did not travel so quickly, but it was ready for
the hot hours of the next day.
When they all awoke, some of the children
at once asked about the fire. So did the mothers.
One or two of the younger children did not
quite understand where they were. They had


forgotten all about the events of yesterday,
and were still sleepily wondering how they got
down by the side of the water.
They had to spend that day the best way
they could. Certainly they could not get home.
They had enough food, and the mothers and
fathers helped to amuse the children. Often
the men would climb the hill to look out.
Just after midday, the fire blazed up more
fiercely than ever. It was sure to come near to
them now.
And very quickly it did come. The women
began to get very much afraid, and to wonder
what would become of them all. Mr. Tompkins
did the very best he could to calm them, but
even he felt worried.
The air was now very hot indeed. As the
fire drew nearer, they all went back towards
the water. They knew that that was the only
safe place. Even there, the heat was as much
as the children could bear.
Mr. Tompkins said that he thought he had
made a mistake about the trees around the river
not catching fire. He was very much afraid
they would do so after all. They were much
drier than he had thought.


And so it turned out to be.
As they stood near the edge of the water
they could now hear the crackling of the burning
trees, and this made the children huddle closer
to their parents. The wives of the two men
who had been unable to get through last night
were the most worried. Besides their own
danger, they were all the time troubled with the
awful thought that all was not well with their
missing loved ones.
The other men tried their best to comfort
them, but they would not be comforted. About
two o?clock a sudden breeze fanned the fire
into fury. A thousand red tongues licked at the
trees all around, and with a mighty roar the
whole line of trees and bushes around the edge
of the water, on the side where they were,
blazed up.
? Into the water!? shouted Mr. Tompkins.
They had been prepared for this, so that they
all knew what to do.
All of them had taken off their boots and
stockings. Indeed, most of the children seldom
wore such things. The carts had been moved
to a safe place just in the water, and now Mr.
Tompkins and George rushed to bring the


poor frightened horses down too. They were
only just in time, for as they got them away the
bushes where they had been tied took fire. No
one could then have faced the heat.
Nylie was terribly afraid. She seemed to
hate fire more than anything else. She reared
up again and again, and it took all the skill of
Mr. Tompkins to control her. However, when
she got down to the water and heard Nellie?s
voice, she became quite still. Nellie was able
always to soothe her.
It was not nice to have to stand in the water
for a long time, but it had to be done. For
over two hours they were unable to leave it.
Before that time was past the parents told the
children to start a game in the water. They
might even have a swim if they wished. They
could take off most of their garments, and the
rest would not matter. After a time some of
them did so, and in spite of the fire they were
soon enjoying the fun.
The mothers suffered the most, for they had
to stand with the water up to their knees for
such a long time that they became stiff with
the cold. Even warm water is not good if one
has to remain in it for a long time.


At last the fire began to die down and a move
was made.
The children were called out, and helped to
get dry and comfortable, and soon Mr, Smith
set out to find if it would be wise for them to
try to get home that night.
He was a long while away. Before he returned,
the sun had set, and it was nearly dark. He said
that he thought they might be able to get home
if they waited about two more hours. They
would have to go most carefully because of
falling branches.
They waited a long time before it was thought
to be safe to move.
It was nearly midnight when they did start.
Most of the children were so tired that they
could not keep awake. The carts were packed
as tightly as could be. George drove the first
and Henry followed closely.
The men rode on Charlie and Nylie. They
had to choose a new track to miss fallen and
burning branches. Sometimes they had to jump
down and drag a big branch away.
At other times they would stand watching a
hanging branch which was all red and looked
ready to drop. Then Mr. Tompkins would get


one cart quickly past the danger point. Then
after watching for a little time, the other would
dash past.
After a little while the children got so used
to it that they took it to be fun. They cheered
from time to time as they were able to do these
clever things. The sleeping ones woke up and
joined in.
They are very brave, these Bush boys and
girls. A big tree, all ablaze, would fall. There
was a yell of delight. Even the youngest Smith
clapped its hands at the sight of the flying
shower of red sparks.
It would have been a very beautiful sight to
see, if there had been no danger.
Many, many trees stood out with red glowing
branches or fiery stumps. Some looked like
giant Christmas trees with big candle flames all
over them. Although the heat was still very
great, there was now very little smoke. They
could not have gone home if the smoke had not
died down.
At last, tired, thirsty and black, they came
to their homes. Homes with bare fields, burned
and black trees all around, and a lot of hard
work to do in order to repair the damage.


And all this because, probably, some careless
person had dropped a lighted match miles
away; or had not put out a fire when he had
used it.


CHAPTER XVII
Rain
? Oh, Nellie, come and look!? shouted Joan,
one day a few weeks after the fire.
? What is it, Joan?? Nellie asked, before she
came up to her sister. ? A snake??
? No,? Joan replied; ? but come and look at
this funny thing growing.?
? Oh, how strange,? said Nellie. It was
something green which had only lately sprung
up, perhaps during last night. It was one of
the first green things to be seen in the Bush
since the fire.
Everywhere was still black and desolate;
and only this one strange green thing could
be seen. It was like a bent green stalk a few
inches high, and from the top of it came a bunch
of very flat green fingers. The ends of the
fingers were not yet out of the ground. They
could see where the sandy ground was broken
up by the little plant forcing itself through.


? What is it?? Nellie asked again.
? I don?t know,? said Joan. ? We?ll ask
Joe, he?s coming.?
The boys raced up, and Bob was able to
name the plant. ? It?s a young palm,? he said.
? They always come up quickly after a fire.
Dad told me so. We shall find some bigger
ones. You know the palms which poison the
cows if they eat them. It?s one of those. A
Zamia palm. Gives cows rickets and sometimes
they die.?
Bob was very important now, with his handy
knowledge.
The children wandered on. Truly the Bush
looked sadly wasted, all the beauty had gone.
All was black and bare. They did not stay to
play. They chose the cleanest parts they could
find, so as to get to their friends? house still
looking fresh.
They had a good time. Many of their friends
were there. But after tea they missed the jolly
fun they had at Nellie?s birthday. There seemed
to be no one there who could start any nice
games. All the same, the boys and girls them-
selves made good fun.
Many of the children were talking of a


visit of one of the men who lived near by.
He was trying to get all of their parents to
decide to have, once again, a flower show and
sports.
It was many years since the last. He, and
others, wished it to start again, and be held
every year. He had said that they would have a
number of classes in both show and sports for
the school children.
? I?m going in it,? said little Bert Briggs.
He was only seven, but he was always talking
of what he would do when he was a farmer.
?I?ll beat your carrots, Bert,? said Tom
Bowler.
? Why, you?ve no garden,? said Bert. ? Will
you get some of your father?s??
?No fear,? was the reply. ? 1 can start a
garden now, and then beat your bits of carrots.?
? Anyway, Tom, I can beat you in the sports,
run, jump, or bike.? This from George Thomp-
son, who, though the smallest in his class, was
one of the best at games. That is, excepting
horse games. He was not so good with a pony,
because his father could not let him have a
pony. He had a good bike and could use it
well.


? Shall you enter Nylie in the ponies, Nellie??
asked Billy Spencer.
? I don?t know, Billy,? Nellie answered. ? I?d
like to, but perhaps Daddy won?t like it.?
? I wish I could ride her,? said Billy. ?Do
you think your father would lend her, if you
don?t enter??
? Perhaps he would. Your father could ask
him.?
? Would you lend her, Nellie?? was the next
question.
? Yes, I think so, Billy,? Nellie answered
rather doubtfully.
She was kind-hearted enough to wish to
please anyone, and yet she would not like
to see another riding her lovely Nylie to
victory.
Before they parted they had planned seed
beds, gardens, races and prizes, and they went
home fully prepared to start to-morrow getting
ready.
But to-morrow had another tale to tell. The
summer was not yet over, and in Australia the
winter is about the only time when anyone can
do gardening, unless he has plenty of means of
watering?especially to start a garden?for the


ground is so hard that anyone would want a
pick-axe to break it up.
The rains were late this year. They were
wanted badly. It was now over four months
since a single drop fell, and then it had been
only a light shower.
Some days the clouds came over so thick
and so fast that everybody would be talking
about the coming rain. But at night it would
clear again and next day there would not be a
cloud to be seen. But during one afternoon
the teacher said to the children:
? We shall close school in good time to-day,
and I want you all to get home as quickly as
you can. I think we shall have rain presently.
So get home sharp.?
When they got out of school there seemed
to be no doubt. Dark, heavy clouds were
rolling along. Some of them seemed to be so
near that one felt that they could be touched,
if one climbed a good big tree. Some of the
darkest clouds had heavy lines straight across
them. Others, a little farther away, had lighter
lines from below them which seemed to come
right down to the trees.
Mr. Ball bundled the bus children in and


quickly fastened the door. Then, with a roar,
the bus was off.
Quickly the horses were saddled, and all
made off towards home.
Nylie tried to get ahead at once, but Nellie
held her back.
? You get on, Bob,? she begged. ? I?ll stay
with Joe and Joan.?
? No, you go too, Nellie,? said Joan. ? We?ll
get there before the rain. Besides, if we don?t,
there?s no need for you to get wet too. Go
along.?
? Well, I?ll go slowly if I can,? replied Nellie.
But Nylie was off.
?I?ll leave the gate open for the last one to
close,? sang out Bob, over his shoulder. He
urged Charlie to make the best time he could.
Even Betty needed no coaxing to-day. All
of the horses seemed to know what was
coming.
Nellie held in Nylie for a good while; but
after she had drawn away from Betty with the
twins, she gradually let her go her own pace.
Nylie stretched out her limbs and did the best
she could. She almost got to the pace she
found when the man was following them. Soon


she dashed through the open gate, and was
ready for the last long dash.
Then Nellie did a noble thing. She could
hear the rain in the trees a mile away. It was
getting gradually louder. But she turned her
horse and went back to the open gate. Soon
Betty ran up with her double load.
? Keep going, you two,? shouted Nellie, as
she jumped off. They kept on, and as Nellie
again mounted they were fifty yards ahead,
Nylie sprang forward, and long before the
others reached home she caught up with them.
At the same instant the rain caught them.
It came with a sound like a thousand whips.
It was a deluge. In five seconds they were all
wet to the skin.
However, they did not care much; they
were going home. They rushed into the shed,
on the iron roof of which the rain sounded like
all the kettledrums in the world being beaten
together.
? Leave the horses to me, and rush into the
house.?
It was their father who spoke.
Bob was home and dry; but streams of water
ran from the clothing of the three others and


made six little streams which quickly joined
into a river right across the kitchen.
In the kitchen was a roaring fire. Hot water
was there in plenty, and in the bathroom their
clean and dry clothes.
? Now, girls, both of you into the bathroom.
Hurry, so that Joe can come. Joe, you had
better hop into your bedroom. Throw your
wet clothes out and wrap this big towel all
around you. Then come to the fire and wait
for the girls. Bob, you can start tea.?
She had to shout to make them hear her
over the sound of the rain. The smell of the
hot food worked a spell.
After a time they forgot the storm. Or, at
any rate, they forgot that it had been unpleasant.
In fact, everybody seemed happy. Father,
George, and Henry came in for tea, and after-
wards they were all jolly.
They were glad to have the rain. It was
badly needed and they hoped for many hours
of it. It rained all night, and in the morning
they could see pools and long streams all about
the land.
? No work or school this morning,? said
Mr. Tompkins, ?if at all to-day. You must
(B 725) It


all amuse yourselves in the best way you can.?
With that, he went into another room to make
up his accounts, and was seen no more until
he was called for dinner.
George and Henry went into what was called
the tool shed. They spent many hours there
now. They werermaking something, but would
not tell what it was.
? A mouth organ to go by steam,? Mr.
Tompkins laughed.


CHAPTER XVIII
Nylie?s Race
The sports were on.
The foot races for girls and the one for boys
had been run. There had been high jumping
and long jumping, and obstacle races. But you
have seen these so many times that we shall
not tell about them.
The boys who had bicycles had a good race.
A man on a horse took them all to a point
two miles away. There was a good road from
this point to the showground. So he got them
all ready, and took their ages. They went from
eight years to fourteen years old.
The youngest w~as started, then the others
went in the order of their ages. The man
allowed each one two seconds? start for every
month they were younger than the next. They
had to ride to the showground and twice round
the clear course.
Someone watched for them coming, and the


way was cleared. The timing must have been
nearly right, for they were very near together
as they went around the course. The little
fellow was in front, and how the people did
cheer him.
? Get on, Georgie!? yelled his friends.
? Go it, little ?un!? shouted men all around
the ground.
The others could not catch him. But Aubrey
Bent, the oldest boy, got to the course when
the others were half-way round for the first
time. My! how he did ride. He had his head
right over his handle-bars, and his legs were
going at a great speed.
He knew how to ride, did this boy. His
toes were well on the pedals, and as his feet
came up his ankles gave to them. No stiff
footwork for this boy.
He was gaining, that could be seen as they
finished the first time. He was getting nearer
to the last boy. Georgie was still in front, nor
could the next one overtake him. Now, as they
got near the top end again, Aubrey was up to
the middle of the group. He had four in front
of him, and as they passed the half-way he
passed two of them. Soon he was level with


the second boy, who had not got a scrap nearer
to Georgie.
A cheer broke from all as Aubrey passed the
second boy; it was now just a race between
Aubrey and Georgie. Aubrey was much the
stronger, and of course faster. It all depended
on whether there was time enough for him to
beat the little fellow before Georgie passed the
winning-post.
? Get on, Georgie!?
? Go it, Aubrey!?
These two cries were taken up all around the
ground. They cheered, they yelled, they called,
and for a few seconds no one could tell how
the race would end. Little by little Aubrey
crept up, but the winning-post was very near.
It was still very doubtful whether he could
catch the little boy. Another burst of cheering
made Georgie try to do just a little better, but
he found that he could not do any more. Indeed
he was beginning to tire. He could not have
gone round a third time. Now he could see
his father near the winning-post waving him on:
but at the same instant he could see a wheel
at the side of his own. Then out of the corner
of his eye he could see something white beside


him. He knew that another boy was riding
level with him.
But, anyhow, here is the winning-post. Are
they dead level, or has Georgie still a little lead?
Alas, no, with a final dash Aubrey has won
by a few inches only.
The greeting for Georgie, as he nearly fell
from his machine, could not have been greater
had he won. It had been a great race. Many
said afterwards that it was the great event of
the show and sports. Everyone rejoiced that
there was to be a second prize, for during the
final dash a visitor had said:
? Whoever comes second in this great race
shall have a prize as nearly equal as can be to
the first. He will have earned it, and I shall be
happy to buy it.?
He sought out the head man of the sports
and gave his name. Afterwards, Georgie received
a new cycle bag, full of tools.
It was now time for the horses.
First of all there was a flag race. Flags on
long poles were put in a cask or barrel. Farther
on, there was an empty cask. A little to the
left, and quite level with these, there were more
casks and flags.


At the word ? go ?, two riders started their
ponies. They rode to the flags, picked one out,
and dashed off to put it in the empty cask.
Then they turned quickly round and fetched
another flag to put into the cask, and so on,
until all the flags were in the second cask.
Then they quickly rode to a point. The one
who did this in the shortest time was the winner.
Then others tried, until it was found who in
the whole lot had been the quickest. Even the
boys and girls had one of these contests, and
some of them did it in less time than the men.
Then the men had a race something like the
one which so pleased the boys and girls at
Nellie?s birthday party. There was only a
little difference. The men had to light a
cigarette and keep it alight. Also they had to
drink a glass of water.
The men seemed to like this race, and it was
very hard to say who was the best.
At last came the event for which many were
looking. This was a real race on ponies or
horses for all children of school age. No one
was allowed to ride if they had ever won a
riding prize at any sports. Neither could any
horse run who had ever won a race.


Quite a large number had given in their
names. There was Billy Spencer on the pony
of which he was so proud, although he wished
that he might have ridden Nylie. Then Elsie
Walters on her little white pony. It could be
seen that she had the bridle she had won at the
party. There was Bob on Charlie, and quite
a lot of fine-looking brumbies. Then a big boy
on a fine grey pony, and lastly Nellie on her
beloved Nylie.
Nylie wanted to start at once, but the chil-
dren had all to listen to their orders. These
men were not much afraid for the children,
but they wanted them to take every care.
There were two jumps. Neither of them was
very high, and the fences they had to jump
were made of matting which would not hurt
if they touched them. These children often
had to jump their horses when they were riding,
so the men thought this would be a good test for
them.
And now, after several tries, they were all off
together.
It was soon thought that half of the horses
had no chance at all. The grey pony carrying
the big boy at once dashed ahead, and some of


the smaller ones were left a long way behind.
Nylie was amongst the last, for a time. All
around, people had been talking about her. It
was the first time she had been seen by most of
them. Also, it was the first time that Nylie had
seen a crowd of people, and she did not like
crowds. She did not like the noise. A few
minutes before, she had been quite happy. She
had been tied to a tree in the Bush some dis-
tance away from the crowd. There was a nice
pool, and Nellie came to her a number of times.
Nellie stroked her soft nose and said sweet
words to her.
If Nellie had not now been on her back, she
would have tried to get away. This fright
about the people, and Nellie?s fear of getting
over the mark before others, had kept them
back.
Some of the people who had said what a fine
pony she was, had also said that she couldn?t
win.
? That little girl of Tompkins?s,? they said,
? will hold her back at the jumps. I would like
to see her run with a good rider.?
But they did not really know Nellie. Neither
did they really know Nylie. Least of all, very


few knew Nellie and Nylie together. Nellie
was really a good rider. She sat on the back of
her pony and rode her just as though she had
grown there. These two knew each other and
loved each other, as horses and humans some-
times do. So when at last Nylie knew by Nellie?s
soft whispering to her that Nellie really wished
her to beat these other horses, she put her
lovely head forward and made a great effort.
By this time several of the brumbies and
Bob?s Charlie were well ahead and nearing the
first jump. The grey pony was not doing so
well now. Nylie quickly reached him and the
slower horses. Bob and the brumbies were over
the fence, and going well along the level ground.
As Nylie neared the jump, Nellie helped her,
and without a trace of fear they were over with
inches to spare.
Those who had been talking about her just
before joined in the cheer, as the crowd showed
what they thought of a good jump.
? She?s all right, after all,? said one.
? I thought she would be,? said another, who
had only just changed his mind.
Now Nyiie stretched herself to catch up.
They had lost a good deal, but Nylie showed


up the best of them all. Charlie was doing very
well with the leaders. He was not far from the
front now. They started the second round with
Nylie close on the heels of the mob. Nellie
knew too much to try to get in on the near side.
So she pulled Nylie quite clear of the whole
lot and urged her on.
When they got to the jump again, there were
only five to the front, and Nylie was one of
them. The others were one by one losing
ground.
Over they went, very near together. Not one
of them touched. These Bush children could
ride.
Now there was a long flat race, and Nylie
was third.
Bob?s Charlie was second and very soon they
were running side by side.
? Go, Nylie,? Nellie called, and with a great
effort the little brown horse pushed forward.
For a few moments they were side by side and
then, as the crowd yelled and yelled again,
Nylie passed the other, and almost at once
passed ako the winning-post.
Nylie and Nellie had won their first race.


CHAPTER XIX
Lost in the Bush
Nellie,? called out Mrs. Tompkins, ? will
you come here??
It was summer again, and the holidays were
on. The children were playing in one of the
sheds. Nellie came running to her mother.
Yes, Mother, she said. ?Do you want
me??
t ? Yes > my dear,? Mrs. Tompkins replied.
I w r ant you to get your pony and go along to
Mrs. Turner s house for me. I promised to
call on her this afternoon. Now I find that I
have a visitor coming, so I cannot go. Tell
Mrs. Turner I am very sorry, and I will come
next week. If she asks you to stay for lunch
with Mary, you may do so. Change your frock,
dear. Mary ahvays looks nice, you know.?
Nellie was soon ready, and then she w r ent to
her mother.
Mother, she said, as it is such a beau-


tiful day, may I walk instead of riding? I can
go the Bush way and be there in less than an
hour. It is not much after nine o?clock now.?
? Certainly you may, Nellie, if you wish.
But don?t you think you had better keep to the
road? Are you sure of the Bush track??
? Of course I am, Mother,? laughed Nellie.
? How could I miss it??
? Well, be very careful, my dear. Keep your
eyes open all the time. Shall I send one of the
boys with you??
? No, indeed,? said Nellie. ? I should be
laughed at for ever. Fancy a Bush girl afraid
of losing her way!?
Nellie was growing a big girl now. She was
very useful; she did errands well, and could
help a great deal at home.
She was nearly ten and looked older than
that. Her mother and father always felt that
they could trust her to go anywhere. Also, her
teacher said how attentive she was to her lessons
at school. She was beginning to work for a
scholarship examination and was expected to
do well. So that, after all, Mrs. Tompkins was
not really afraid of her getting lost, but, like
all mothers, she meant to take every care.


Nellie got to Mrs. Turner?s house and
stayed to lunch; she and Mary had much to
talk about, and Mary had many things to show
Nellie. About four o?clock Mrs. Turner
brought a little pot of tea and some buttered
scones.
? Nellie > m Y dear,? she said, ? I would be
glad for you to stay and have tea with us all,
but I think your mother will be anxious if you
are not back soon after six. You and Mary can
have a little tea together. This is Mary?s own
little tea set. In half an hour you had better
start. Mary may go with you to the upper road.
Then you must hurry along.?
? Thank you, Mrs. Turner,? said Nellie,
? but I don?t intend going by the road. I can
easily find my way through the Bush. I came
that way this morning.?
My dear child?through the Bush?? said
Mrs. Turner in surprise. ? Really, Nellie, I
don t think you should. Night may catch you,
and then you will be lost.?
Mother lets me, said Nellie. i( I know the
way ever so well.?
? Well > child, start as soon as you can. Mary
may go a little way; but come back, Mary,


before you lose sight of the farm altogether.
I?m sure you can?t guide Nellie.?
Nellie did as Mrs. Turner advised her. She
started almost at once. But she and Mary
walked very slowly, and stayed just a minute
to talk before they parted. Then Nellie went
on alone, thinking of all she had seen and about
what they had said.
? It?s time I reached the old cow track,? she
said to herself at last. ? I suppose I have been
dawdling along.?
She went on for ten minutes longer, then
stood still.
? The sun is setting in a funny place,? she
said. ?I?ve been going too much to the right.?
She turned towards the sun and walked on
again. She went on for a long time, but she
came to nothing she had ever seen before. So
she turned a little farther to the setting sun.
The next time she stopped the sun went down
behind the trees and she began to be alarmed.
In half an hour it would be dark. She called
out, but heard no reply. She turned yet more,
and then did the worst thing she could. She
began to run. But she was travelling in a curve
and was fast going away from home.


Every moment it grew darker and darker.
Soon she could scarcely see the tree trunks,
and stumbled over bushes and sticks. She
now stood still and stared around in helpless
despair.
She was lost in the Bush!
She tried to think how long it would be before
the moon came up. She thought it would be
very late. Then she began to cry.
Presently, however, like the brave girl she
really was, she stopped crying.
That won?t do you any good, Nellie Tomp-
kins, she told herself. ? Not unless someone
can hear you.?
Then she had an idea. She knelt down be-
side a big tree and said her prayers. She felt
better then.
She tried to think what was the best thing
to do. The night was very warm, and she knew
that her father would very soon be out to look
for her. When he knew. But how could he
know just where she was?
She wondered what really was the best thing
to do. She could do either of two things.
She could sit still and wait for help coming.
Or she could walk about in the hope of coming


to something she had seen before; something
which might point the way. She could not get
any more lost than she was now.
But then, she could not see well enough to
be able to say that one tree was different from
another. The stars were bright, and she could
find her way about; but after a little wandering
she felt sure that the other way was best. She
found a fallen tree with a clean smooth trunk,
and she sat on it.
Presently she thought she heard someone
calling. It seemed miles away. She did not
answer. She turned in the direction from
which the sound had seemed to come, and
listened with her hands to her ears.
In this way she could hear many sounds not
noticed before. Soon the same sound came
again. No! no one was calling her. It was just
the mournful cry of a frog.
Then there must be water not far away. If it
was a stream, then by following it she might come
to the stream which ran through their land.
She jumped to her feet, and started off in the
direction of the sound. But though she walked
for fully half an hour, there was nothing but
Bush. The same endless Bush.
(E 725) 12


It was unlikely that there was a house or a
hut for miles in any direction. Once she saw a
light through the trees and at once began to walk
towards it. She thought it might be a house.
After a long time she gave that up, too. It
proved to be a star low enough down to shine
through the lower branches of the trees. Then
the moon came up. She was surprised to find
that it came up in quite a new place. She
stopped to think about that.
Of course, she must have been going wrong
all the time.
At home the moon rose on the left if you
were going towards the house from the road,
and now it was rising on her right. Yes, she
must have been going away all the time.
Well, she could soon put that right.
She turned right round and went back. If
a person finds he has been going wrong all the
time, he has only to go back the same way, and
he will then be where he wants to be.
Of course! Isn?t that so?
It may seem so, but somehow it never works
out like that in the Bush. I suppose that is
because it is so difficult to travel in a straight
line.


Nellie hurried now, and she kept in what
was nearly a straight line. She could see now,
and she kept the moon always on her left. If
she had to go round a big tree or a thick part
of the Bush, she at once looked at the moon
and got back into the right line.
This was the right thing to do, and she
should have done it when the sun was shining.
Then, as she knew the way to go, she would
not have been lost.
It was too late for that now. If she kept on
long enough in that way she would have passed
her home two miles away on her left hand. Of
course she did not know this, and so kept
straight on.
She walked so long that at last, when the
moon was high in the sky, she could walk no
farther. She sank down beneath a big tree and
rested her back against it. It was a bit rough,
but that did not matter.
? Oh, Mother dear,? she sobbed, ? where
are you? Daddy, come and find me!?
She cried herself to sleep.
When she awoke, she was cold and cramped.
Her head had slipped down the side of the
tree, and she had been resting with her face on


the top of a root which stuck up above the
ground.
Her face was sore, and when she put her
hand to it she could feel the pattern of the bark
on her face.
She must have slept very soundly. Day was
just breaking. Some of the birds were starting
to flit about. There was a w*agtail perched on
a tiny twig above her. He darted down to pick
up an insect and then flew back again. He
twitted gaily. Nellie spoke to him.
? Little Willie Wagtail,? she said, ? you are
just like a Willie where I live. Go and tell my
daddy I?m here. Tell him to bring my Nylie.
My Nylie has a Willie Wagtail who rides on
her back when she is grazing. Tell that Willie
to send my Nylie for me.?
She got up; she w?as very cold. Although
the night had been rather warm, she had been
asleep without a covering. She was also very
hungry.
She started off in the same line she had been
taking last night. For a long time after the sun
rose, she forgot to notice the line of the shadows.
She ate some leaves off a tree, but they made
her mouth dry and, after a few minutes, burned


her throat. Then she found a well-known kind
which did not burn. She ate quite a lot of these
leaves. They were hard and brittle, but they
took away the sharpest pains of hunger.
Through the trees she saw something white
and straight. It was a long way off and looked
like the iron top of a house. As she got nearer,
however, she found it was only a tree which
had died standing up, and had lost its bark. In
this sunny land trees go white when this happens.
Soon she had to sit down again. She could
not go so far now, for she wanted something to
eat and drink.
She kept on in this way all the day.
When the sun began to sink again she was
still wandering.
She had seen no tracks at all, and had heard
no voices. Many times she had shouted. Her
long, clear ? Coo-00-ee ? had brought no
reply.
To-night, before dark, she found a hollow
log. It lay in a sheltered place, and one side
was broken away. Close to the broken side was
a big tree trunk. She cleared out all the dirt
and poked around with a long stick. She did
not want to have a snake for company.


Then she hunted around for she-oak leaves.
They are like pine needles. She found some
and carried as many as she could and piled
them on the bottom of the log.
When night came, she said her prayers and
crept into the log. Surely she would be found
early to-morrow.
She was soon asleep, for she was very, very
weary. She dreamed that her mother was lost
and that her father had sent to town for a
thousand policemen to pull down all the trees
in the Bush.


CHAPTER XX
The Search
? Mother, where?s Nellie?? asked Mr. Tomp-
kins as he came in from his ploughing.
It was getting towards dark. Mr. Tompkins
had kept on a little later than usual so as to
finish the piece he was ploughing. He saw his
wife outside the door. She was looking anxiously
up the track.
? I?m looking to see if she?s coming, Dad,?
said Mrs. Tompkins. ? I sent her to Mrs.
Turner?s, and I told her she could stay for
lunch if Mary or her mother asked her. But
it is past time she was back.?
? How did she go?? was the next question.
? I see Nylie is here.?
? She walked,? said his wife.
? What!? almost shouted Mr. Tompkins.
? Walked, and alone??
?Yes, Daddy. She begged me to let her go
through the Bush. Of course, I expected her


to start back soon after lunch. She knows the
way well.?
? Give the children their tea!? called our Mr.
Tompkins as he started to walk up the track.
?I?m going to meet her. If I?m not back in
half an hour, have George saddle up all the
horses and be ready. I won?t walk far. If I
don?t meet her quickly, I shall come back for
horses.?
George had a cup of tea, then he took some-
thing in his hand to eat as he got the horses
ready. Henry followed him.
By the time the children had their tea, their
father was back again. It w T as now dark.
Mrs. Tompkins rushed to the door when she
heard footsteps. She saw he was alone.
? Oh, Dad, you didn?t meet her. You don?t
think she is staying at Mrs. Turner?s for the
night??
? No, my dear. Not unless you told her to
stay. The child has missed her way and is in
the Bush. Wrap up a parcel of food, quickly,
and give me her w r arm coat. God knows, the
dear child may need both before we find her.?
? Where will you go, and who is going?? Mrs.
Tompkins asked.


? First to the Turner?s house, and George
and Henry can come with me,? he said. ?We
can try both ways and meet there.?
? Do you think I could come, too?? asked
the mother. ? I feel I must do something.?
? No, dear,? he replied, as he kissed her
before going out, ? you must stay here. We
want a warm fire and other comforts when we
return. I hope we won?t be long. Don?t fret,
there?s a good little woman.?
Mr. Tompkins took Nylie. He said that
perhaps she might do more towards finding
Nellie than any of them could.
When they got to the place on the road where
the Bush track came out, Mr. Tompkins turned
to the boys.
? You two push on by the road,? he said.
?You will have much farther to go than I
shall. Don?t miss any chances, and meet me
at Turner?s house. I shall look about a bit,
so if you are there first, stay until I come. I
hope I?ll find the way. There is very little
track to follow. Good-bye.?
He pushed Nylie along as fast as she could
go in the dark. Every few minutes he called out.
For a time he could hear the boys. They were


also calling into the Bush through which the
road ran.
A full hour had passed before they met at
the house; George and Henry had been there
twenty minutes.
Not only were their friends alarmed, but
when Mr. Tompkins got there he found Mr.
Turner and his son Douglas with their horses
saddled. Also, the news was being spread around
and men on horses were coming in from the
nearer farms. The women were passing the
news along, so that others would come soon.
? Yes,? Mrs. Turner was saying, ? the dear
child went by the Bush way. My Mary went a
little way with her. I didn?t like her going that
at all. Mary, tell Mr. Tompkins just where
you left Nellie.?
Just by that old twisted tree. Do you know
it??
Mr. Tompkins nodded, and Mary went on:
? I know she started on the right track, Mr.
Tompkins, for I turned, and we both waved.?
? George, you and Henry race back,? said
Mr. Tompkins. ? Get all the men you can,
and start coming through the Bush from our
end, until we meet. You will spread out in a


line, as we shall. The men will know what to do.
Ask any who can?t come to-night to meet near
our place at daybreak. That is in case we don?t
find her to-night. You know, boys, we can?t
do very much in the dark.?
George was starting.
? One thing more, George!? his father called.
? Jacky is away until late. Tell Mother to bid
Jacky go to bed when he comes, and be ready
early in the morning. He will do most for
us in the daytime, when he can see tracks.?
The men rode into the Bush, and when they
came to the twisted tree they spread out, and
went forward in a line.
There was a space between them all, just
enough to allow them to see each other. They
kept calling, and often waited to listen; but
they heard nothing.
When they had got through to the far road,
they moved on a little and went back. Then
they moved farther still and went again to the
road. This took them a long time.
When they got through a second time, they
found quite a number of men waiting with
George. These had heard them and thought
it best to wait there.


They made a very wide line now.
Quite a number of the fresh men had lamps
with them. These lamps are closed in and are
used for outdoor work.
The men with lamps mixed with those who
had no lamps. In this way several could see
from the light of one.
Some said that they could see better without
lamps, as the light only dazzled their eyes.
They searched right through and came back
again. But no trace of the child could be seen.
At last Mr. Tompkins stopped. They had
again reached the road. ? Boys,? he said,
?we can do little more in the dark. Will you
all go home and come back at daybreak? I
will ride around in a big circle and keep on
shouting. I may get an answer.?
?I?m afraid you are right,? said one of the
men, ? but won?t you rest too, Mr. Tompkins?
You will then be more fit to-morrow.?
? Rest?? said Mr. Tompkins, ? with my child
wandering about in this Bush? Nay, lad, if I
don?t find her I?ll keep trying until I meet you
to-morrow. Good night all. Get what sleep
you can. I?m very grateful to you.?
He turned and rode back into the Bush.


" Tompkins!? called out a friend, ? have a
lamp. It might help.?
He rode back to them.
? I think I will. If it doesn?t help me, it
might be seen by the child.?
He took the lighted lamp and rode back with
it hanging low. He rode in every direction he
could. He stopped often, shouting and waving
the lamp about. Then he would listen for a
long time, and call out again and again.
But he heard no sound from Nellie.
Daybreak found him trying to get back to
the place where the men would meet. He
himself was not sure of the way. As the sky
got a little lighter, he turned to the left. Soon
afterwards he saw the men waiting.
? Any sign of her?? he was asked.
? None at all,? he slowly answered. He was
very tired and sad.
Jacky was there with George. Mrs. Tompkins
had sent some food and some steaming coffee.
Mr. Tompkins got off his horse and took some
of it.
He felt better after this. He changed horses,
and sent Nylie home to rest. ?We will let Jacky
try now,? he said. Jacky had already been


looking around. He came back to them looking
very puzzled.
? That looks bad for us,? said one of the
oldest men there. ? Jacky is one of the best
trackers in these parts. I?ve seen him pick up
a track when not one of us could see a single
mark. But see, he just doesn?t know how to
begin here.?
? No,? replied his friend; ? I?m afraid he?ll
have to go farther out to do any good. There
have been too many of us around.?
? Well, Jacky, any good?? asked Mr. Tomp-
kins, as Jacky rode up to them.
? Him no fella good,? replied Jacky, in his
strange way of speaking English. ? Too much
horse, walk um all Bush.?
? Here comes the Trooper,? said Mr. Tomp-
kins. He looked towards a group of horsemen
coming along the road. Amongst them could
be seen one in the uniform of the Mounted
Police. ? We?ll hear what he has to say before
we do any more. Well, Mr. Johns, how did you
get to know of our trouble??
? Easy enough, Mr. Tompkins. I called in
at Davy?s last night. About bedtime somebody
phoned a special message about your girl being


in the Bush. I might tell you that the message
was relayed all around.
? As we were fifteen miles away, I could see
no sense in coming then. We just arranged a
meet for four o?clock this morning and went to
bed at once. And here we are. You?ve been
hunting all night. There?s no need to ask.
No luck, I suppose??
? No, Johns,? said Mr. Tompkins. ? I?m
glad you?ve come. \ou take charge. \ou?ve
done a lot of this work.?
? 0.K., Mr. Tompkins. We?ve got plenty of
men, I see. Tell me all you know, and what
you?ve done.?
When he had heard the story he looked around
at the big group of men and boys.
? Well, boys,? he said, ? it?s no use going
over the ground you?ve been over. You?ve
made so many tracks you would have trampled
the child to death if she had been lying there.
There are over fifty of you and more coming.
Mr. Tompkins, you?ve got Jacky there. If he
can?t find a track, it?s no use my looking. Will
you go with him to that tree the little Turner
girl told you about. Then let Jacky go his own
way and you follow him. I think he?ll lead


you to her sooner or later. Porter, I reckon
you know as much as anybody about the Bush.
You pick five good men and go right east.
Get well away, and then split up into twos.
See my idea? The child may have gone far.
You go far too. You picked men won?t get lost.
? Smith, Jenkins, and you other fellows who
live near her, you know all tracks between here
and the school on the right of the road. Well,
just go along, and one of you take each track as
far as you think necessary.
? She may have found a track this morning,
and one of you might meet her coming home.
Go for about an hour, and then come back
here. You can all make a start. Wait a moment,
though. Here comes the child?s mother. We?ll
hear what she has to say. Good day, Mrs.
Tompkins.?
Mrs. Tompkins went to talk to her husband.
Then he told them all that he could not allow
her to go into the Bush as she wished, but she
would be in this place, and would have coffee
ready for any who came back at any time after
eleven o?clock.
? Righto, off you go,? sang out Trooper
Johns, ? but all go round by the road to start


with. I want no more tracks where Jacky is
going to work. We?ll give him a chance, if we
can.?
When the three sections had started, the
Trooper sent about half of those who were left
on a long journey along the road. They were
to go four or five miles beyond Mrs. Turner?s
house. Then they had to turn into a narrow
road which led to a far distant township.
They were told to go along that road for
about two miles. They would then be right
at the back of that great portion of the Bush
they were searching. Their orders were that
they should separate and come right through
the Bush. They would try to get back to the
place where they had all met.
? For,? said Trooper Johns, ? if the girlie
has turned right round she might come to that
road. If she is sensible, she will not leave any
road she comes to. You might find her on that
road. If not, we shall have men in every part
of the Bush. She will be pretty clever to dodge
the lot of us. Come on, men. The rest of you
come with me. Hello! who are these??
Three men were walking towards them, and
one of them put up his hand to stay the riders.
( E 725 ) 13


? Listen, Trooper,? one of them said, ? we
have lent our horses to young fellows who
wanted to help. What can we do on foot??
? Nothing at all, old chap,? he replied.
? This is a job for horses. You can?t do anything
walking.?
? Don?t you be so cocksure, old son,? said
another of the men. ?I?m pretty near fifty,
but I can walk my twenty-five miles any day. I
can find ten men or more without horses. Some
of them are coming. Give us a section, and we?ll
spread out so that we can keep each other in
sight, then we can go through and through.
We?ll do a lot in a day, and perhaps see some
things you and your horsemen will miss.?
? Better go and hoe your spuds, boss,?
laughed the Trooper, and started to ride away.
? All right,? said the first speaker. ? Then
we?ll w r ork our own way. But I don?t mind
telling you this: if all the mob you have would
work this way, you could cover every yard of
the Bush between the three roads in a day.?
The riders w T ere drawing away, and the man
in uniform waved his hand in a mocking way
and cantered along, laughing merrily.


CHAPTER XXI
Found
As Mr. Tompkins rode by the side of Jacky,
be felt very much more hopeful. Just before
daybreak he had felt how hopeless was his task.
Now that the Bush was again grown over after
the big fire, everything looked different. The
last time he had come this way, he seemed to
know every tree. But many old landmarks had
been burnt right out. Others had taken on quite
a new shape, owing to new branches shooting
out to fill gaps where big limbs had fallen. All
the scrub was fresh and green.
In fact, it seemed to be a new Bush. No
wonder, he thought, that one could so easily
be lost. Whichever way one turned, the view
was almost the same.
They got to the twisted tree and stopped.
Then Jacky got busy. He left Mr. Tompkins
by the tree, and he took a big circle round.
All the time his keen eyes were searching every-


thing for signs. Presently with a peculiar grunt
he rode forward, still keeping a good pace.
This part was easy, although his companion
could not see a track or sign of any kind. The
tracker just led in the way Mr. Tompkins was
already sure of.
When they came to the horse-tracks of the
searchers, even the black man could do nothing.
So he pulled right away until they found clear
ground, then he repeated his former actions.
In his second circle he suddenly stopped and
leaped from his horse. His joyful grunt brought
his master quickly to him.
The ground was too firm to take the mark
of a light footstep, but Jacky was looking at a
small anthill. The ants were busy repairing
damage as well as they could. In the very centre
the tiny heap of twigs was pressed down and
showed the mark of a small foot. And the toe
pointed directly away from home. Other signs
were quickly found. A few broken tops of a
shrub called a Blackboy. These had been taken
and, as Bush people often do, broken bit by bit
and scattered about. A long whiplike branch,
hanging low, had been broken. After being used
to waft away the flies, it had been dropped.


Jacky picked it up and silently handed it to
Nellie?s father. To him it seemed like the call
of ? hot ? in a game of hide-and-seek.
But all these signs led back more than once
to the same place, or near it. The lost one had
been making circles. Then Jacky had to try a
new place.
He found many new signs. Some half-eaten
leaves; the core of a small apple which she had
carried from Mrs. Turner?s house. He was
even able to point out her sleeping-place.
This was all very interesting, but it took a long
time to follow all these wanderings. Sunset
found them once again, after following a much
larger circle, near to a place they had seen very
early in the day.
? Jacky,? said Mr. Tompkins, ? in a few
minutes it will be dark. You have done your
best, but even you can?t see in the dark. I?m
going for Nylie, and we will go beyond the place
we got to last time. The child is out there
somewhere. I knocked the bark off a tree, so
I can find the place again. You rest awhile.?
When they got to the meeting-place, they
found most of the men coming in. Not one
had seen the slightest sign.


When Mr. Tompkins told them how near
they had been to success, the Trooper was
silent for about half a minute. Then he said:
? Mr. Tompkins, you?ve done about thirty-
six hours? hard work. Leave it to us for a while
and take a rest. Boys, we?ll try another way.
Can we get two or three motor trucks? I mean,
some good enough to go through that Bush.?
Yes, they could get three very quickly.
So it was decided to make some arrangements
for their horses, and be back at that place in
an hour. Each one was to try to get a storm
lamp.
In good time the motors were loaded. Each
carried twenty or more men. There was more
noise in the Bush that night than had ever been
heard there before.
They found the place, and by the light of
the motors they were formed into a long line.
Then, lighting their lamps, they started to move
forward. Each man kept just so far from his
neighbour as to allow them to see all the ground
between them. The line was nearly half a mile
long. It was a pretty sight to see so many
lamps waving among the bushes. But they
had not come to see pretty sights. They started


on their way. They had not gone many yards
before a man on horseback was heard behind
them.
It was Mr. Tompkins on Nylie?s back.
He had not been to bed. Instead, he had had
a bath and a hot meal. Then, in fresh clothing,
he had started out again. He said he was quite
fresh now.
He was so sure that Nellie was beyond this
point that he could not wait for the others.
He rode past them and then started his search
in a place farther on. He went in the same
direction as they were going. After a little
time, when the lights were well behind, Nylie
wanted to turn back again. Her master had
great trouble to make her go the right way. He
had never known her to be so obstinate. But
he conquered her at last and went on for over
a mile. Several times she tried to turn home-
wards.
? Nylie, my girl,? he said, after one very bad
turn, ? it?s no use. You must go my way.
You?ve been home all day. Now you must
work. I think I?ll get a stick.?
He bent over and broke off a thin branch.
As they were going back, how r ever, he did


not have to use it. Nylie wanted to go too fast.
He had to hold her back now.
They met the men with the lamps. After
calling out to each other the men turned and
moved along to another strip of Bush. They
slowly followed Mr. Tompkins. He forced
Nylie to take him to trees and bushes he wished
to examine. She wanted to go straight on.
Then, to his surprise, she tried to turn again
when he wanted to go forward. Of course, he
won, though he nearly had to use his stick.
He went farther than the starting-line before
returning. When he did so, he could see the
lights in the distance and could hear the men
as they called out from time to time. He rode
towards them. Nylie went willingly until just
before they met. Then she tried to turn again.
?You are not going home, my girl. Come
over. Oh! you don?t want to go back, eh?
You want to go to the right. All right, we?ll
go. But there?s nothing there; it?s all clear
land. Only one fallen tree. Here! what?s that??
Some of the men with lamps were getting
very near, and he could see quite well.
In between a hollow log and a big tree some-
thing was huddled up.


He leaped from his horse, and rushed to the
tree three yards in front of the nearest man.
He pulled at the bundle. It was Nellie.
Nellie, dreaming of a lost mother and of police-
men who were rooting up trees by the score!
He gathered her in his arms. He could not
speak; but as he kissed her again and again
the tears flowed freely down his face.
? Oh, Daddy!? she said, ? you?re hurting me.
Have they found Mother? What are all these
men doing with their lamps? Oh, I know, I
was lost, wasn?t I??
Any reply was drowned by the shouts of the
men; they were giving the signal which was
to tell all of their success.
As Mr. Tompkins gently placed Nellie on
Nylie?s back, he remembered how the little
brown horse had become obstinate each time
they neared one certain spot.
He gently stroked her nose.
? Why, old girl, I believe you knew all the
time, and I tried to beat you away from your
little mistress, didn?t I? Ah! we men can be
too clever.?
As they turned towards the trucks, he walking
by the side of Nylie, and holding Nellie firmly


in her seat, the motors gave out the best joy-
peal they could:
? Cock-a-doodle-doo-000-000-000-oo.?
The men did all they could to make Nellie
comfortable. Some of them wanted to take off
their coats to make cushions. But the driver
of the biggest motor truck had some good rugs
and clean bags. They wrapped her up, and
made the big corner seat nice and snug. When
her father sat beside her, she put her hands in
his, and with her head on his breast, she w r as
soon fast asleep. His strong arm around her
made her feel that all was well. She could not
be lost any more.
In a very short time the people at home heard
the noise which meant joyful tidings to them all.
The three motor horns were again doing their
very best:
? Cock-a-doodle-do-00-00-00-00-00-00-00-oo
00-oooo.?


CHAPTER XXII
Conclusion
? Plenty of mail to-day, Mrs. Tompkins.?
Henry jumped off his horse and gave up a
bundle of letters and papers.
Mrs. Tompkins sorted them out. She put
aside those addressed to her husband, and one
for a man who worked for them. The papers
she put into another heap.
This left two home letters for herself, and an
official-looking one in a long envelope.
This was addressed to Nellie Tompkins.
? I think I know what that contains,? she
said excitedly; ? but I?ll let her open it herself.
She will be here in a few minutes.?
Bob arrived first. He was a big fellow now,
and was happy in the thought that soon he
would be able to leave school altogether. He
saw the envelope at once and snatched it up.
? Now, Bob!? called out his mother, ? you
are not to open that letter. I?ve left it for Nellie
to open.?


? I know what it is, Mother!? he declared.
? Never mind, let her find out. You?d like
to, if it belonged to you. You could have had
one if you had tried.?
Bob had to be content with looking at it and
turning it over and over. He very badly wanted
to read the message it contained. He even held
it up to the window pane, in the hope that the
light shining through would make it possible
to be read through the envelope. But the
paper was too good for that.
He had not long to wait.
In a very few minutes he heard Nylie?s light
steps with Betty?s firm tread closely following.
Once again Nellie had waited for Joan and Joe.
As she rode into the yard, she looked no
worse for her adventure of last year. Indeed,
after a long sleep that night, she had seemed
to be no worse in any way.
She was now well on the way towards her
twelfth birthday, and besides making a fine-
looking girl, she was said to be the most clever
scholar in the school. For more than a year
she had been working very hard. This had
not harmed her in any way, for her fine open-
air life had helped her to keep fit for anything.


? Nellie, hurry, it?s come!? yelled Bob, as
Nellie jumped down.
He was waving the long envelope above his
head.
Nellie was tempted to rush to the house and
leave everything. However, she had the true
spirit of those who love horses. She turned
back to Nylie and led her into the shed. She
hastily took off saddle and bridle and hung
them up. Then she made Nylie drink before
turning her into the horse yard, where the
feeders were already filled.
Then only did she run to open the envelope.
It w T as just what they all expected, although
Nellie had often said she was sure she had not
passed the exam. Yes, sure enough, it was that.
Nellie had earned the right to go to a big school.
There were three to choose from, but they
were all a long way from the farm. The nearest
school was in a town nearly a hundred miles
away.
Of course, over tea there was nothing else
talked of. When Father and the boys came in
it all had to be repeated. They were all so
excited that their tea took second place in their
thoughts. For a time they had forgotten that


it meant little Nellie being away from home.
She had been thinking about it quite a lot.
? You know, Daddy,? she said at last, ? I?m
ever so glad that I have succeeded. But, really,
I don?t want to go. I wish they would give me
books instead. I would work just as hard here,
and I would be with you all.?
? Yes, my dear,? replied her father, ? I
quite understand that; and so does Mother.
But I?m afraid we shall all have to put our
feelings away for a time. You have a chance
to go to a real good school, and though I know
you would work here, I also know that you
can?t possibly do without the help you wall get
there.
? Then there are the girls you will meet.
Also, you will see other places, and other ways.
It will do you good in every way. When you
come back, and also during holidays, you will
enjoy home all the more.?
? But it will cost you a lot of money, won?t
it?? she asked.
? Yes, a fair bit,? he said. ? The school fees
and all that are paid for you; but, of course,
we must find a lodging for you.
? And then,? he continued, pinching her


cheek, ? I suppose you?ll want a copper or two
to spend now and then. Never mind, lassie.
We haven?t been doing very well lately, but
we?ll manage that, somehow.?
When the children were in bed, the mother
and father had to talk of many things. There
was new clothing to be bought, and many other
things to be provided. Then a trip must be
made to the town where was the chosen school.
A very careful inspection must be made of
homes where it might be possible for Nellie to
board.
The country people are as careful about
having clean, healthy living-places as are those
who live in towns. Perhaps they are some-
times more careful.
?Yes,? said Mother at length, ? I can see
it is going to be difficult. But you?ll find a way.
Of that I am certain, my dear. We shall all
have to make our sacrifices for Nellie?s sake.?
? There is only one way to help,? said her
husband slowly; ? you will perhaps be sur-
prised. In many ways it is a good thing. I?ve
had a number of people wishing to buy Nylie.
Now, when Nellie is away, I shall not want
others to ride her, and John Wilson would give


me enough to pay Nellie?s expenses the first
year.?
It was a shock at first. But after a time the
idea seemed good. Especially when Mr. Wilson
wrote up to say that his own little girl was
going to Nellie?s new rchool. He added that
as they lived within five miles of the school,
he would be very pleased if they could make
arrangements for Nellie to live with them.
And so it was arranged.
To-day, Mr. Wilson had come. He had a
nice car and would soon be going back, taking
Nellie and her belongings with him.
He had brought a man with him who would
ride Nylie down in easy stages.
The gentlemen were now together arranging
money matters.
Nellie stole out, and went to the horse yard.
She put her arms around Nylie?s lovely neck
and drew her head down.
? Good-bye, dear Nylie,? said Nellie, ? but
only for a few days. We are not to be parted
after all, and I shall ride you often.?
Nylie snuggled her nose into Nellie?s shoulder.
Little Brown Horse w T as very happy.




M
BZbtht
N CCPtj
/


THE
CHILDREN?S LIBRARY
A series of books for younger
readers. Illustrated in colour
Green Elf and Golden Elf.
Agnes G. Herbertson.
Tales of Sunny Row. S. M.
Williams.
The Troubles of Tatters. Mrs.
Tahvin Morris.
Castle Dune and Other Stories.
The Adventures of Jacky
Brown-Coat. Annette Joelson.
Jinny and Her Friends. Herbert
Birrell.
The Adventures of Mr. Good-
enough. S. M. Williams.
The Cat, the Dog, and the Dor-
mouse. Alice Hall.
The Magic Circle. Ethel Corkey.
Godmother?s Garden. Xetta
Syrett.
Dowti the Snow Stairs. Alice
Corkran.
Lucy-Mary. Agnes Grozier Her-
bertson.
Tinkler Johnny, Agnes Grozier
Herbertson.
Pasha the Pom. Sir James
Frazer, 0.M., F.R.S., and Lady
Frazer. Illustrated by H. M.
Brock.
The Exciting Family. M. D.
Hillyard. A delightful fantasy
quaintly illustrated in colour.
BLACKIE & SOX LIMITED


BLACKIE?S BOOKS
FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
? In the selection of subject matter, in the
high quality of illustrations, and in their binding
and decoration, the gift books issued by this
house are unsurpassed.?
?Nottingham Guardian.
? The house of Blackie has always been
famous for the fine production and enterprise
of its books for children.? ?British Weekly.
?A house which thoroughly understands the
demands of the younger reading public.?
? Scotsman.
? The firm shows a remarkable understanding
of the child mind, and maintains a consistently
high standard in catering for it.?? Truth.
u Among publishers of books for the young,
no name inspires greater confidence than that
of Blackie & Son.? ?Daily Mail.
? For the very youngest no better picture-
books could be got than those published by
Messrs. Blackie.? ?Liverpool Daily Post.
