

r
\
(PRINTED B Y REQUE S T .)
THE
I 1
)
i
)
)
)
)
>
)
“TRUTH,’’
f ow
Foe which the Gold Medal was
Awarded lo HENRY B. BLANCHE.
AT THE LATE
INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION,
MELBOURNE, 1879-80,
E. Burton &Co., Printers, 100 Elizabeth St., Melbourne,




(FEINTED BY BEQUEST.)
T s: IB
“TRUTH,”
FOR WHICH THE
6«ES MEIII
Was Awarded to
HENEY B. BLANCHE.
AT THE LATE
INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION,
MELBOURNE, 1879-80.
ryf/y


PREFACE.
This Essay was written, at the age of twenty, in competition
for prizes offered at the late Intercolonial Juvenile Exhibition,
held in Melbourne. 1879—80.' The prizes (8) being the gift of
Mr. and Mrs. E.W. Cole (of Cole’s Book Arcade), the text
which heads the Essay was chosen by Mr. Cole; who also
laid down the conditions under which it should be written.
As stated in the Exhibition Prize-List, it was “ to be a plainly
written Essay, shewing the immense value to humanity of the
proper and constant exercise of man’s intellectual faculties,
and the actual loss and consequent sin of not exercising them.”
There were about forty Essays sent in, this one obtaining
the First Prize ; viz.: a handsome gold medal, valued at £lO
(and intrinsically worth that amount).
It must be allowed by all, that the judges of these Essays
were competent to perform such an undertaking.
They were, Messrs. Alexander Morrison, M.A., L.L.D., (Prin-
cipal of the Scotch College) ; David Blair ; E. E. Morris, M.A.;
and George Bell.
On page 9, alluding to the importance of possessing a
sound mind in a sound body, I have asserted that “ Young
people of the present day have abundant opportunities for
improvement, in all that will make them good citizens, a credit
to themselves and to their country. This is particularly the
case in Victoria,” &c. I may now add, that the very success-
ful career of our cricketers is a striking proof of their well-
trained muscular development. My own case, too, may serve
to illustrate my subject. The duties I have in this Essay
recommended to others, I have, to a great extent, practised
myself, and can therefore bear testimony as to their practical
effects. I trust, therefore, it will not be thought egotism on
my part if, to enforce my arguments by shewing what other
young people may do for themselves, I mention that, while
fulfilling the arduous duties of a mercantile clerk, I have, by
improving my leisure hours, secured already advantages to
myself, both physically and mentally. As an Artillery Volun-
teer, at the first Naval and Military Sports, (in 1878) I was
first among 32 competitors in a one-mile walking match
(marching order); am now a “Marksman,” and have passed Non-
Commissioned Officers’ examination in Military Engineering;
having previously, (in 1879) passed the Non-Com, Officers’
examination in Artillery; and, at the same time, one entitling
me to the rank of Subaltern Officer. In connection with the
late Intercolonial Exhibition, by obtaining two “ First Prizes”
for original drawings, as well as the Prize Medal for this Essay,
amounting, in money and medals, to £15 —1 have been so for-
tunate as to become the highest prize winner at the Exhibition.
I regard these matters, however, as comparative trifles;
sufficient only to show me that I am on the right track, in the
all-important pursuit of TRUTH.
Brunswick, Sept., 1880, HENRY B. BLANCHE,


“A KNOWLEDGE OF TRUTH, IS BEST FOR HUMAN WELFARE,
THEREFORE, —
TO OBSERVE, ENQUIRE, READ, AND THINK, IN ORDER TO FIND
TRUTH, IS THE HIGHEST DUTY OF MAN.”
It was once asked, by the dignitary presiding in a
High Court of Justice, “ What is Truth ? ” He who
asked this question of the prisoner standing at his
bar, (after hearing the charges against him,) absolved
that prisoner of any guilt whatever; washing his
hands, in public testimony to the innocence of Him,
whose death was loudly demanded by his fierce per-
secutors.
After performing such a remarkable ceremony, he
yet, with the strangest inconsistency and the basest
injustice, condemned Him to a cruel death, whose
sole defence was, that He came into the world to
“ bear witness for the truth and who thus became
a martyr in defence of that glorious principle.
Pilate’s question is a most important one. Truth,
in the abstract, is not easily to be defined; though,
in any civilised community, there is scarcely a person
to be found who is without a tolerable understanding
of its meaning.
We may consider it as having both a positive and
a negative side. In the former, we may view it as
the embodiment of all that is founded in fact; in
religion, science, or the business of every day life:
in the latter, as the contradiction of all that is known
to be false and erroneous ; in sentiment, belief, asser-
tion, or practice. Truth may well be compared to
light; which manifests itself hy revealing natural
objects to our sense of sight: in like manner, truth
reveals itself by making known to us the existence of
principles, which are, respectively, conducive to our
well-being, or the contrary.


Some truths are self-evident. For instance, the
mathematical truth that “ The whole is greater than
its part,” and the religious truth that “ Sin causes
misery,” are both clear to the commonest observer ; of
nature in the one case, and of human nature in the
other.
Such self-evident truths, however, like the precious
nuggets which have occasionally been found on the
surface of auriferous ground, arre “ few and far be-
tween ; ” and as the experienced miner, not content
with securing the specimens he has picked up with-
out any trouble, sets to work diligently ; and with
patience and perseverance toils on, till his labours are
crowned with success; so must the truth-seeker be
constantly animated by a spirit of persevering dili-
gence, assisted and directed by well-trained observa-
tion.
While estimating at their proper value the surface
nuggets of superficial information, he must descend
into the golden mines of knowledge ; must follow the
deep leads and drives where brave pioneers have pre-
pared the way for him ; and must then continue the
search till he find the “ hidden treasures of know-
ledge.”
If we contemplate the vast improvements that
have been effected, in most branches of science and
art, during the last two or three centuries, we shall
not fail to discern that their successful accomplish-
ment has been the result of long, laborious, and
patient investigation of the laws of nature. Is it
not a remarkable fact, that our present knowledge of
the important truths of Astronomy is mainly due to
the life-long labours of the immortal Newton ? In
like manner, the great discoverer of the universal law
of gravitation was himself indebted, in some
measure, to the labours and successes of previous
explorers in the then “unknown domain” of the visible
universe. As the jealous detractors of the renowned
Columbus taunted him by remarking that “ if he had
not made his great discovery, some one else would


probably hare done it; so it may be urged that, if the
author of the “ Principia ” had never followed up
his original idea respecting the direction and mo-
mentum of a falling apple, until he not only found
out, but firmly established by the clearest mathema-
tical demonstration, the nature and amount of the all-
pervading force of attraction ; some other philoso-
pher might have done as much, to bless humanity.
It is true it might have been so ; but it would most
probably have been far otherwise.
Instead of having our splendid astronomical
observatories, with their well-appointed apparatus
and skilful observers, we, of this nineteenth century,
might still have been groping in the darkness of
uncertain speculation ; as to the distances, motions,
magnitudes, and densities of the heavenly bodies.
Indeed, it is quite possible that the fact of the
rotundity of the earth might not, even yet, have been
ascertained, but for the genius and perseverance of
the brave Columbus; whose mean contemporaries, (as
the candid historian informs us) after disputing his
theories, and discouraging his projects, were not slow
to imitate him in making voyages of discovery, after
he had shewn them it was both safe and profitable to
do so.
Granting, however, the possibility that similar dis-
coveries would have been made by individuals other
than those who did actually make them, we still
maintain the principles which it is the business of
this essay to prove; by fearlessly asserting that who-
ever might have achieved similar greatness must have
exhibited similar qualities and traits of character.
Thus, the counterpart of Newton would have re-
quired to possess intuitive perception equal to his;
and, with equal zeal and mathematical ability, he
must also have manifested indomitable patience and
perseverance, as did the illustrious Sir Isaac; who,
though he made more important discoveries, perhaps,
than any other man has ever done, before or since ;
yet, with modesty equal to his great ability and


worth, compared those grand discoveries of his to
“ pretty pebbles,’’ which he had “ picked up, on the
shores of the vast ocean of truth.” Other children
of the earth have picked up bright pebbles, too. Let
us hope that some of the sons and daughters of Vic-
toria may hereafter be so fortunate as to bring to
light some beautiful ones : —genuine diamonds of
precious truth.
As in astronomical and nautical science, so in
almost every department of knowledge, it might be
easily and clearly proved, by historical facts, that
similar success has only been attained in a similar
manner.
As we contemplate the wonderful rapidity with
which we are carried by the “ iron horse,” along the
smooth iron roads, or, with similar speed and punctu-
ality, across the trackless ocean, do we not often bless
the*names, and indulge a feeling of profound admira-
tion and respect for the genius, of such men as Watt
and Stephenson ? Most certainly we do ; and, as we
receive important messages, or transmit them to our
friends in distant parts, (it may be on the other side
of the globe we live on), by the aid of artificial light-
ning; or, as we peruse the daily telegrams from dis-
tant nations, and places far remote from each other,
and from us, flashed to us by the same marvellous
agency: —what is more natural for our thoughts
to revert to the curious experiments of the earlier
electricians ? In imagination, we behold the enthu-
siastic Franklin, flying his kite in the thunder-storm.
No lover was ever more devoted to the object of his
choice than he to that precious kite, which was to
solve a new problem, most important to mankind. At
last he is abundantly rewarded. What intense satis-
faction he must have experienced when, from the kite-
string, wetted by the rain, the sparks entered his
knuckles! To think that he, a mortal man, had,
uninjured, drawn down a portion of the electric fluid
from the cloud overhead ! How grand, yet how
simple was the experiment: how full, too, of useful


results ; for was it not clearly evident that our build-
ings, and consequently ourselves, might be protected
from the fierce stroke of the lightning, by a most
simple device ? It was, indeed, a glorious triumph of
science. So, also, with the many valuable discoveries
made by the aid of modern chemistry. Did our
limited space permit, it might be shown that, though
some new discoveries, or useful inventions, have been
the result of intuitive genius,—that very intuition
has been, in most cases, the outcome of a long course
of mental discipline.
In estimating the vast improvements produced by
“ Applied Science” in the various arts and manufac-
tures ; which have already caused the civilization of
the present day to be so far superior to that of the
past; we must give all honor to the great Lord
Bacon ; who, in his great scheme of deductive philo-
sophy, taught men to clear their mental vision of
distorted ideas ; (or “spectres,” of various kinds,which
he classifies) ; and, having done this, to analyse the
so-called truisms of all previous systems of philosophy,
in the crucibles of experiment and experience; retain-
ing only those truths that would stand so crucial a
test; and with these to lay a sure foundation, on
which the superstructure of science, in all its de-
partments, might be so constructed and arranged as
to form one harmonious whole : Substantial because
true ; ornamented by all the useful arts ; enriched by
the elegance of refined poetry and correct senti-
ment; and enlightened in all its parts by the sunlight
of ascertained truth. The world is, and must always
be, deeply indebted to the author of the “ Instauratio
Magna;” whose maxims have been universally re-
ceived, and acted upon. A valuable moral lesson,
though a sad one, may also be deduced from a con-
templation of the actual career of the remarkable
individual to whom we have just referred; as com-
pared with his vast intellectual attainments. It was
said of Bacon, that he was both “ the greatest and
the meanest of men ;” and though there may be some


exoneration in such a statement, yet, his selfish
cupidity, together with the shameful ingratitude he
displayed towards his former friend and patron, the
unfortunate Earl of Essex, must for ever stamp his
name with disgrace. But “by other people’s errors
a wise man will correct his ownand we may learn
from Lord Bacon’s character that it is just as re-
quisite to study and practise good morals and con-
duct, as to acquire mere worldly wisdom and dis-
tinction.
Truth, in life and character , is as valuable and
beneficial, (to its possessor individually, and to society
collectively) as falsehood is injurious. A strict regard
for truth will produce, in those who exercise it, a
genuine force of character; which will carry them
safely through the most trying vicissitudes of life.
This was strikingly exemplified in the history of
George Washington ; who, when a little boy, could
not tell a lie ; and whose unflinching truthfulness
was such as to inspire perfect confidence in him, as
the guide of his country’s destinies, during a most
critical and painful ordeal; out of which he brought
her most triumphantly: placing her safely in the
front of the nations, with his name on her coins, as
her first President. It is of the first importance, then,
to be truthful in character and conduct; but it is
further necessary, (in order to become truly wise and
virtuous,) that we cultivate, and make careful use of,
the faculty of observation ; which will enable us to
discern between right and wrong : —between wisdom
and folly; with their natural consequences, happiness
or misery.
Many cases are on record, of men comparatively
ignorant, who, by the mere exercise of their natural
powers of observation, have become a credit to
themselves, and a blessing to their neighbours.
By cultivating, (as far as lies in our power) the
acquaintance of the good and wise, we may make
their knowledge and experience our own: but, if we
are privileged with access to good books, and are


able to understand them, our circle of society is ex-
tended, so as to include within it the good and the
great of all ages, and of all countries. By books,
therefore, our power of observation is increased, to
an almost unlimited extent.
It is not sufficient, however, to cultivate the power
of observation, and to make use of our opportunities
of inquiry, as regards both facts and opinions • not
only from persons, but from books . In addition to
all this, we must learn to think for ourselves. In
religion, in politics, in social life, we must learn to
feel that we are individually responsible; not only
to one another, but to ourselves also ; and especially
to Him who is the fountain of all wisdom, and the
Giver of all good. While it is well, as a rule, to
respect the conventionalities among which our lot
may be cast, we must “ dare to be singular” when an
enlightened conscience so directs. It is most im-
portant, therefore, that we also cultivate the faculty
of reflective thought ; for this, if carefully and con-
tinually exercised, will induce and promote sound
judgment, which is as necessary to an individual as
the rudder to the ship.
As, by the natural process of digestion, food is
assimilated, and becomes part of the system, so re-
flection is, to a well regulated mind; enabling it to
retain truth, and reject error.
To possess “ a sound mind in a sound body” is a
very great blessing; and it is both folly and sin, to
neglect the proper care of either the one or the
other. Young people of the present day have
abundant opportunities for improvement, in all that
will make them good citizens; a credit to themselves,
and to their country. This is particularly the case
in Victoria ; where a fair amount of education has
already become the birthright of every individual.
If this precious birthright be properly valued and
appreciated, then may we expect to see our country
prosperous, and our citizens happy. Education,
however, without religion is incomplete. It is like


a beautiful statue ; wanting life , which God only can
give; but which He will give to all who ask for it.
“ The fear of Hod is the beginning of wisdom,”*
which, though so exceedingly precious, that “ the
price of it is above (that of) rubies,”t may be obtained
by all, “ without money and without price,”£ if they
will only make it their chief business to obtain it.
Indeed, it would seem to be easier to be truly wise
and good, and consequently happy, than to become
prosperous in the affairs of every day life. No one
expects to “ get on” in life, unless he is prepared to
give his whole energy and ability to his profession or
calling, whatever that may be. If this be done, pe-r
severance will, as a rule, command success; but
“ the race is not (always) to the swift, nor the battle
to the strong.” The uncertainties of life are so
numerous, that even the most likely individual cannot
be absolutely sure of obtaining success ; or of retaining
it when obtained. A mere accident may prevent the
former, or deprive him of the latter. While it is
right, therefore, to do all in our power to improve
both ourselves and our circumstances, this should
always be done in a spirit of dependence on Him “ in
whom we live, and move, and have our being.” We
should, as the old proverb tells us, both “ Trust in
God, and keep the powder dry.” But, though
failure is possible in worldly matters, in his search
for truth the diligent student need not be baffled or
thwarted by adverse circumstances. In the school of
adversity he may learn valuable lessons that cannot
be learned elsewhere. Even in death itself, Religion
whispers to him, sweetly and softly, of that “ Better
Land,” where, in the best of company, he shall enjoy
the fruition of truthful happiness for ever. What is
Religion ? It may be summed up briefly, as know-
ledge and duty, rightly combined. To be truly re-
* Proverbs, ch. 9, v. 10,
f Proverbs, cb. 3, v. 15.
j; Isaiah, ch. 55, v. 1.


ligious, we must first obtain a correct knowledge of
human nature in general, and of ourselves in par-
ticular. The peculiar charm which pervades the dram-
atic writings of Shakespeare is mainly due to the
remarkable and intimate acquaintance with human
nature possessed by that gifted author. But our
knowledge must extend much further than ourselves ;
it must include the knowledge of the Great Creator.
Though such knowledge, on our part, must neces-
sarily be very imperfect, yet it is the most important
of all knowledge we can acquire; as by it we are
taught our duty to our Creator, to ourselves, and to
our fellow-mortals. We should, therefore, seek to
know all that can be known of God ; as manifested in
the open book of nature, as seen in the wonderful
workings of Divine Providence, and especially as re-
vealed in the inspiration of the Sacred Scriptures.
The second, the practical part of religion, consists in
doing our duty, to God and man; ourselves included
in the latter. And what does this imply ? It means
that we love Him, who is the glorious source of all
goodness, wisdom, and love ; and who, as such, is
worthy of our highest love and reverence.
“The Lord God is a sun and shield!”§
The natural sun, the great centre of attraction in our
system ; without whose beneficent rays neither animal
nor vegetable life could exist; is His gift to us, His
erring creatures. Let us learn to love Him, as an
affectionate child returns the love of a most kind and
indulgent parent.
Then shall we also love our fellow-creatures, and
do all we can for their benefit. It would be invidious
and out of place, in this paper, to select, as examples,
men from any particular set or sect of religionists;
but we cannot do wrong in pointing out two great
heroes of modern times —Howard and Wilberforce —
whose self-denying labours procured, for the poor
prisoner proper treatment in the one case, and in the
§ Psalm 84, v. 11,


other, for the oppressed and down-trodden slave the
priceless boon o£ freedom. May we not also be per-
mitted, (without offence to any) to mention the
names of two other giant workers? We refer to
Father Matthew and Matthew Burnett, who have
been so successful in rescuing their fellows from the
shackles of intemperance and vice. Let us endeavour
to “ catch the inspiration” of such “ mighty men of
valour” as these, and many others, to whom we
might allude if time, space, and prudence permitted.
So shall we enjoy the special “blessing of the Lord,”
which “ makelh rich, and addeth no sorrow there-
with.” (| Walking in the sunlight of the “ Sun of
we shall reflect, on all around us,
the life-giving beams of eternal truth.
|| Proverbs o£ Solomon, chap. 10, v. 22.
Psalm 84, v. 11. Malachi, chap. 4, v. 2.
E. Purton & Co„ Printers, 106 Elizabeth-street.




