

The
Western Australian
GARDENING GUIDE
Methods Simplified and
Condensed
By WILSON & JOHNS
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Price 2/-
Perth, 1924
Beers' Union Print., BS3 Hay Street. Perth.


WILSON & JOHNS,
NURSERYMEN AND SEEDSMEN.
BARRACK STREET, PERTH
Flower, Vegetable, and Farm Seeds of Unrivalled
Quality.
Garden Plants and Pot Plants of all descriptions.
BULBS.
Special Show Collections of the finest Carnations,
Chrysanthemums, Dahlias, Roses, and Sweet
Peas.
Fruit Trees and Grape Vines of all descriptions.
Citrus Fruits a Speciality.
Climbing Plants, Hedge Plants, Ornamental Trees
and Shade Trees suitable for all parts of the
State.
FLORAL WORK.
Garden Requisites, Pest Exterminators, and
Concentrated Fertilisers always on hand.
We like a square deal, so give one.
NOTE THE ADDRESS:
70 BARRACK ST., PERTH


CONTENTS.
Page
Preface 3
Introduction 5
Plant Life 7
Soils . ... io
Manures # 13
Table for Measurement of Concentrated Fertilisers 17
The Lawn 17
The Bowling Green, Tennis Court and Croquet Lawn 20
Transplanting 21
The Hedge ... ... 23
Cross Fertilising 26
Nomenclature ... 28
Hardy Annuals, Biennials and Perennials 29
The Aster 31
The Carnation 3 2
The Cassia 4 1
The Chrysanthemum 4 2
The Cineraria ... 47
The Delphinium 49
The Fuchsia 5°
The Geraldton Wax Plant 5 2
The Heaths 5 2
The Hydrangea 54
The Iceland Poppy 56
The Michaelmas Daisy 57
The Pansy 58
The Rose 59
The Sweet Pea 64
Bulbs 68
Freezias, Ixias, Jonquils, and Watsonias 68
The Gladiolus and Spanish Iris 69
The Daffodil Ji
The Hyacinth 73
The Dahlia 74
The Hippeastrum 76
The Tulip 77
The Lilies (Lilium), 77
Humboldtii Paralinum Hybrids 78
The Ranunculus 79
Palms 83
Shade House and Verandah Plants 85
Climbing Plants 85
Shrubs and Trees 88


Page
Ornamental Trees 94
The Vegetable Garden 96
Asparagus 96
Artichokes 97
Beet 98
Beans 99
Cabbage and Cauliflower 100
Carrots and Parsnips ... 101
Celery 101
Cape Gooseberry 102
Cucumber 103
Leeks 104
Lettuce 104
Melons 104
Onion 106
Peanut 106
Peas 108
Potatoes 108
Radish no
Rhubarb no
Spinach in
Sweet Potato in
Tomato in
Turnip 113
Suitable Varieties of Vegetables 114
Fruit Trees 116
Approximate Quantity of Vegetable Seeds to Sow
Half an Acre ... 116
Table showing approximate number of trees required
per acre, and amended method of calculating the
exact number 120
Gardening in the Nor’-West 123
Plant Pests and Diseases 126
Afterword 127
CONTENTS—Continued.


PREFACE.
THE object of this book being Utility, difficult
botanical names will be avoided where pos-
sible.
Most plants have common everyday names
which we intend to use, though occasionally it may
be necessary to couple them with their botanical
names for the guidance of beginners.
Pictorial embellishments also will be avoided,
for everybody knows what a cabbage, a rose, or a
mulberry tree looks like; and if pretty pictures of
the most perfect varieties are desired, it is only
necessary to consult sundry horticultural catalogues
to obtain all that are wanted—and more.
A life-long experience has taught us that the aver-
age gardener, more especially the enthusiastic be-
ginner, wants clear, concise information without too
many elaborations. Summed up his queries are:
“ What are the best plants to grow? When is the
time to plant or sow? How are they to be manured
and generally cultivated?”
These questions are put to us so frequently and
with so much persistence that the necessity of a
work dealing with plants suitable for cultivation in
the various soils, and under the climatic conditions
of W.A. only, is obvious.
WILSON & JOHNS.




INTRODUCTION.
WHEN the world was young the happiest man
on earth was a gardener. For disobedience
he was banished from his garden, a punish-
ment the severity of which has been thoroughly
comprehensible only to the multitude of enthusiastic
gardeners who have succeeded him throughout the
generations.
For why? The gardener is the happiest man
on earth to-day, and he knows it. Deprive him of
his garden and you take from him his most absorb-
ing interest in life. Whether to him gardening is an
occupation or a pastime, it is always a hobby, a
hobby that helps a lot to keep him young, physically
fit, and mentally sound.
The gardener troubled with a liver or bored to
distraction is not to be found; chronic weariness to
him is an unknown quantity; his days glide by on
downy wings. Contentment is his, for even when
no job is on hand to keep him busily occupied, he
does not become so peevishly discontented that life
is a burden. Instead of finding the hours intermin-
able, or wishing himself somewhere else, someone
else, or something else, he is perfectly happy in be-
ing just himself pottering about among his favourites
complacently contemplating the results of his labour
of love, and living in delightful anticipation of the
wondrous beauties to be unfolded to him as season
merges into season, revealing new gems day by day,
or bringing about a recurrence of his glorious old
favourites of which he never tires.
Nearly everybody likes doing a bit of garden-
ing, even when they don’t know how. In this State
there would be thousands more gardeners, and, inci-
dentally, thousands of people would be happier but


for the difficulties of cultivating apparently unkindly
soils, overcoming the disadvantages of our long,
dry summers, and selecting a collection of plants
suitable to the environment. But difficulties such as
these are not by any means insurmountable; indeed,
they are overcome with wonderful ease when once
the problems are tackled with skill born of know-
ledge gained by experience.
Be not discouraged or disheartened if you
have accepted as facts the fictions of any successful
amateur who may have claimed to have got aston-
ishingly good results from plain, dry sand without
any particular care or attention. Believe such tales
by all means, but don’t attempt to go and do like-
wise.
The object of this little work is to impart such
information on soils and their improvement, plants
and their culture, and the suitable varieties to grow,
that success will be a foregone conclusion.
An experience of over twenty-five years has
taught us the true value of the West Australian soils,
as well as the most effective method of working
them up to their highest standard of fertility; what
plants are most suitable to the different districts;
and the most rational methods of cultivation which
should be adopted to develop them to the high
standard of perfection that reveals to the grower
so many of the exquisite beauties of Nature, and
rewards him with satisfaction supreme.


PLANT LIFE.
Most gardeners, whether they grow for
pleasure or profit, aspire to grow their plants to per-
fection ; but many are not as successful as they might
be, because, being unfamiliar with the rudiments of
the nature and nurture of plant-life generally, they
become discouraged by failures due to attempting
to grow their plants out of season, or in soil unsuit-
ably prepared, or under unfavourable climatic con-
ditions.
For instance: the soil is scratched, the seeds
are sown, the forecast says “ rain is approaching ”
and disappointment is inevitable.
Had the soil been properly prepared, the seeds
sown in season or under artificial conditions similar
to the proper season, the seedbeds being sprinkled
until the rain eventuated, success had been certain.
A superficial observer may see a seed fall upon
the ground from which a plant springs up, flourishes,
matures, and in due time reproduces others of its
kind, all without the slightest apparent effort.
As a matter of fact, that seed was a veritable
storehouse of food, surrounding the nucleus of the
plant, which kept the seedling plant going until it
developed sufficiently to gain its own living by
working its roots into the soil and its leaves into the
air; the climatic conditions must have been favour-
able or the seed would not have germinated; and
the mineral compounds necessary to the plant’s
existence must have been in the water-films sur-
rounding the soil particles, or the young plant after
consuming the food stored in the seed would have
perished of starvation.


And, in common with all living things, the
parent plant had to eat to live, and to work for its
food as well as the supplies stored up in the seed.
The root system of a plant is quite as elaborate
in its way as the stem, branch and leaf systems, for
the roots not only anchor the plant securely, but
they are constantly sending out root-fibrils or feed-
ing roots in search of food.
Plants may be called heavy feeders, gross
feeders, or light feeders, as the case may be, but all
absorb in varying proportions the following mine-
rals: Sand, iron, lime, potash, magnesia, soda, car-
bon, sulphur, phosphorus, ammonia, manganese,
salt, bromine, fluorine and iodine.
The researches of the botanists, however, have
made it pretty conclusive that all of these are not
absolutely essential to the development and health
of the plant, some being absorbed by them because
they cannot help themselves, as we, when indulging
in the luxury of a drink of Perth water, swallow
many a queer-looking customer we would rather
leave behind.
Of the above the necessary articles of diet are
ammonia, sand, iron, phosphorus, carbon, sulphur,
potash, lime, magnesia, soda and salt, which,
together with an ample supply of air and water,
just about fill the bill.
Although the other salts may be superfluous,
it is not impossible that they are absorbed for the
manufacture of something obnoxious to insect
enemies as a protection against their attacks, or with
the object of converting them by some process not
yet understood into acids to diffuse on the soil
particles to render available the naturally insoluble
minerals, thereby materially increasing their supplies
of food.


But all the plant foods absorbed by the root
fibrils must be in a state of solution, otherwise it is
impossible for the plants to feed.
Plants never take up their foods singly, but
always in different combinations. Hydrogen and
oxygen are absorbed as water, hydrogen and nitro-
gen as ammonia, phosphorus and lime as phos-
phates of lime, carbonic acid gas and lime as car-
bonate of lime, phosphorus and potash as phos-
phates of potash, potash and sulphur as sulphate of
potash, potash and chlorine as muriate of potash.
Sand, iron, magnesia, salt, soda in their combina-
tions need not be worried about, as we are assured
there is an abundance of them in all soils.
As carbon and oxygen, mostly absorbed from
the atmosphere as carbonic acid gas, form the com-
bustible parts of the roots, stems, branches, and
leaves of plants, it may be as well to remark here
that the leaves take a very active part in the build-
ing up of the plant; indeed, at first glance it looks
as though the leaves do all the work, and that the
plants live on atmosphere.
This is not the case, however, for although the
water absorbed by the roots is also directly, or in-
directly, derived from the clouds, it must contain in
solution from 2 to 5 per cent, of the mineral com-
pounds above enumerated, which, being of vital im-
portance, may be termed the foundation upon which
the whole structure is built.
If a crop of plants be taken from a plot of
ground, and after being dried 1 001 b. are thoroughly
burnt, the ash will contain approximately from to
21b. to 51b. of incombustible minerals. This cer-
tainly is not much, but if the ground be constantly
and heavily cropped it will sooner or later become


exhausted, unless its stores of minerals are re-
plenished.
During its first year of growth a plant is un-
able to suck up more than one-half of the soluble
mineral compounds available, and generally takes
up less. Moreover, all the essential mineral com-
pounds in solution must be in the soil, or the plant
can consume none; for the minimum available quan-
tity of any one of them regulates all the others and
controls the growth.
Of course, different plants need different feed-
ing, some requiring more lime, more potash, more
phosphorus, more iron, etc., than others, but all
must have ample supplies, and it’s up to the gar-
dener to provide them.
SOILS.
Geologists teach us how soils are formed, how
to classify them, and how to subdivide the classes;
the agricultural chemists teach us all about the
chemical compounds of soils; and the plants teach
us whether the soils in which they are placed are
good, bad, or indifferent; for, after all, the plants
are the most reliable analysts. When the soil is
good, keep it good; when bad, make it good; when
indifferent improve it—quite an easy matter when
you know how. All soils must contain a supply of
potash, phosphoric acid, lime etc. (see Plant Life
p. 8) in a soluble form to maintain plant life; there-
fore if the gardener is desirous of keeping his plants
healthy, vigorous and productive he must feed them
by replenishing the soil with all the plant foods
they absorb from it, making a liberal allowance for
leaching and other Wastage.


If all our soils are not good they can be made
good. The soil of the Channel Islands is as pro-
ductive as anywhere on earth. Originally it was
poor granitic stuff that grew very little. However,
its favourable climate induced some of the best gar-
deners in the world to take it in hand. They
gathered as much seaweed as they could, imported
bones from Plevna, mummies from Egypt, all sorts
of guano from anywhere they could get it, all of
which they dug into the ground, building it up to
the highest state of fertility possible.
We often hear the soil upon which Perth is
founded described as poor, hungry sand. That is
not the case, although in its raw state it is not so
productive as many would wish. Cultivate it
methodically, manure it thoroughly, and learn the
trick of watering it judiciously, and it will grow to
perfection all fruits, flowers and vegetables suitable
to our climate.
Its depth and porosity prevent its ever becom-
ing waterlogged, it is naturally friable and is ex-
ceedingly easy to work; advantages that more than
compensate for its few minor natural defects.
The gardener with highly fertile soil, who pro-
duces only moderate results through not knowing
how to make the most of his opportunities, is de-
serving of sympathy; but the gardener who trans-
forms a dirty barren-looking sandpatch into a veri-
table bower of beauty, and carries all before him
on the show benches, has achieved something of
which he has every right to be proud*


CULTIVATION.
Although digging may be looked upon as a
little gentle exercise that helps to keep the gardener
healthy and fit, its real object is to loosen the sur-
face and open it up to the air, thereby improving
its physical condition by rendering it more mellow,
and bettering its general conditions of fertility by
improving the general texture and facilitating the
combining of the soluble minerals held in the water-
films, It also affords the roots an easy and con-
genial passage.
When the soil is loosened by digging, however,
it has a tendency to dry up quickly; it also permits
the finer particles to work downwards, as they do
more or less in all soils, leaving the coarser particles
on the surface. But the drying may be prevented
by rolling the ground after digging and then loosen-
ing up the surface with the hoe. Sandy soil should
always be well tramped after digging—and future
diggings bring the fine particles to the surface again
and help to fine the coarser particles down.
The finer the soil the more fertile it is.
Why fineness controls fertility is because a
larger surface is exposed to the roots than when the
soil particles are coarse, giving the root fibrils easier
access to the chemical compounds held in solution in
the water films surrounding the soil particles.
The great defect of our sand is its tendency to
coarseness, which not only causes it to dry up very
quickly, but is the principal cause of its losing a large
amount of its chemical compounds by leaching.
This defect in the texture, however, is easily
enough remedied by occasionally applying a top-
dressing of pulverised clay, which, when dug in and
thoroughly incorporated with the sand, stiffens it


considerably, makes it more retentive, and improves
its capillarity immensely. The cost of the clay is
soon saved in manure and water.
Plants that are cultivated in soil that has been
deeply dug, and well tramped if sandy, will thrive
on less manure and water during our long dry sum-
mers than plants growing in similar soil shallowly
dug.
Practically the whole of our indigenous peren-
nials are deep-rooting.
MANURES.
Gardening should be intensive or it is not worth
calling gardening, and to all soils carrying heavy
rotations of crops manures are essential.
To maintain the fertility of the market garden,
especially, heavy and regular dressing of well-
balanced manures are indispensable. If a thorough
investigation were made it would be found that in
almost every instance the difference between success
and failure is merely that the proper application of
suitable manures ensures success, and the neglect of
their use, failure.
Everything convertible into manure should be
saved. The habit of throwing bones into the rubbish
bin, and tossing straw, twigs, leaves, weeds and
other refuse over the fence, is pernicious. If it is
impracticable to crush the bones, they should be
burnt and dug in with any other decomposable re-
fuse, whenever convenient, to form manure.
This recalls to mind a rather amusing extem-
pore lecture on manure delivered in a cauliflower
plot about the time the first motor cars were im-
ported.


A canny old market gardener and his son were
manuring the plot, “ What’ll Ido with this. Dad?
asked the boy, holding up on his fork the dilapi-
dated remains of a pair of trousers, “ Fork it in,
Joe, fork it in; it all makes ‘ manoor.’ Everything
makes ‘manoor’ except glass bottles, but them dam
things ain’t no good at all; they only jag a man’s
fingers and spile his temper.” While the makings
of “ manoor ” were being dug in, a car laboured
noisily by. The boy asked: “ Why don’t you buy
one of them things, Dad?” The old man leant on
his fork, silently watching the car till it clattered
out of sight, then, turning to Joe and jerking his
thumb over his shoulder, drawled sarcastically:
‘ Buy one of them things! Not me! Them things
don’t make manoor, they’d only get a man into
debt. Never get into debt, Joe, but if ever you do
get into debt let it be for manoor. When one of
them things’ll take a full load of caulis to market
by 4 o’clock, and be home before breakfast with
a load of good manoor, I’ll buy two, a waggon one
to make the money, and a buggy one for mother
to bank it. And we ll keep the horses for useful
pets. Gosh!”
The moral of that lecture is obvious: Full sup-
plies of manure are of such paramount importance
that the procuring of them must be precedent to
every other consideration.
Unfortunately, however, the best part of our
animal manures are wasted. Stable manure, if pro-
perly conserved, that is if the liquid as well as the
solid matttr were saved, would be sufficient in itself
to replenish the soil with all the mineral foods ab-
sorbed by the plants. But as a rule the liquids are
lost, and the solids are allowed to remain exposed
until the greater part, if not the whole of the am-
monia escapes. However, as a humus forming
substance it is of inestimable value to all our soils


excepting the peaty swamp lands; and when supple-
mented with a little phosphorus in the form of
bonedust, Thomas’s phosphate, or superphosphate;
potash in the form of sulphate of potash, muriate of
potash, or kainit; nitrogen in the form of sulphate
of ammonia, nitrate of soda, or blood manure, as
well as an occasional sprinkling of lime, will main-
tain the fertility of the soil under a system of in-
tensive cropping indefinitely.
Fine ground Thomas’s phosphate or basic slag
contains a sufficiency of soluble lime in itself; but
when superphosphate is used lime should be added,
for the plants can only absorb the soluble phos-
phates contained therein when in combination with
lime as phosphates of lime.
Although nitrate of soda and lime may be ap-
plied simultaneously, sulphate of ammonia should
never be used in conjunction with lime.
The quantity of manure necessary to fertilise
an acre of ground depends upon the manures used,
as well as the natural richness of the soil. When we
treat of the several plants or crops we recommend
for cultivation in our various soils, we shall en-
deavour to explain their needs.
On the average, sheep manure is about twice
as rich in plant foods as horse-dung, and fowl
manure is as rich as both, though it contains less
humus.
When sheep or fowl manure is used, sulphate
of ammonia or nitrate of soda may be dispensed
with.
In our light-coloured soils a plentiful supply of
humus is indispensable. Dark soils are always more
productive, not only because they are warmer in
winter and cooler in summer, but because the humus


they contain absorbs and holds ammonia wonder-
fully as well as lime, phosphates, potash, magnesia,
and soda, thus preventing our heavy winter rains
and heavier summer sprinklings from washing these
necessary substances through the sand to a greater
depth than the roots can reach. It also retains mois-
ture under climatic conditions that would dry out
light coloured soils.
Humates, formed by the combination of humus
with phosphorus and potash, immensely increase the
available plant foods in soils.
Our peaty swamp soils, being mostly humus,
need no stable manure. An occasional dressing of
fine yellow sand, or, better still, loam, or clay, to-
gether with fairly heavy dressing of fine ground basic
slag and a light dressing of sulphate of potash would
materially improve their productiveness and render
them inexhaustible.
Some of our swamp lands are deficient in lime;
others, especially those in the vicinity of Fremantle,
have an abundance of it.
An acre of perfectly balanced soil capable of
carrying a constant rotation of heavy crops should
contain, besides an abundance of humus, about
180 cwt. of carbonate of lime, 90 cwt. of potash,
35 cwt. of phosphoric acid, and 35 cwt. of nitrogen.
It does not seem much, considering that the
soil covering an acre of ground to the depth of a
foot weighs somewhere about 1,500 tons; but, un-
fortunately, few if any of our Western Australian
soils reach that standard.
The art of manuring is to replenish the soil
with those plant foods as they are absorbed by the
plants or are lost through leaching or other wastage.


Handy Table for the Measurement of Concentrated
Fertilisers.
i oz. equals 1 teaspoonful
1 oz. equals 1 dessertspoonful
2 ozs. equals 1 tablespoonful
I lb. equals 1 large teacupful
\ oz. to the sq. yd. equals 150 lbs. per acre
1 oz. tolthe sq. yd. equals 300 lbs. ~
2 ozs. to the sq. yd. equals . . . . 600 lbs. ~
I lb. to the sq. yd. equals . . 2 tons 3 cwt. ~
An inch of rain supplies 22,600 gallons of water to
the acre.
THE LAWN.
Everybody is aware that no adornment is more
effective in beautifying the front of a home, be it
large or small, than a well-grown nicely trimmed
lawn; yet, throughout the residential quarters of
Perth and suburbs, it is truly pitiful to see innumer-
able traces of abortive attempts to grow a bit of
grass in the places where the grass ought to grow
that have failed simply because the growers at the
outset had no idea how to go about the business.
To make a lawn, and a good lawn, too, is sim-
plicity itself; to maintain it indefinitely is inexpen-
sive; and to be the proud possessor of the finest
lawn in the street is more than compensation for
the little labour and expense involved in laying
down the lawn rationally in the first place, and keep-
ing it well-nurtured afterwards. Our business is to
explain how.
The generally adopted method of scratching
the sand, planting the grass, turning on the sprinkler,
top-dressing, and hoping for the best, is ridiculous,
therefore it should be avoided. Besides, the back-
breaking practice of hawking immense quantities of


yellow sand to top-dress with every year merely
gives the grass a filip which always loses its efficacy
before the spring merges into the actual summer.
A lawn worth calling a lawn must be grown
in ground thoroughly prepared for it. This is done
by trenching the ground two feet deep at least
(deeper if you like) and incorporating a heavy
dressing of stable manure or street sweepings, to-
gether with a liberal allowance of coarse-ground
bonedust, say a large teacupful to the square yard.
Before planting it is advantageous to dig the ground
over again a couple of times to the full depth of a
spit, removing all bricks, bottles or building refuse
it may contain, and keeping slightly damped. After
the final digging firm the soil down by tramping,
at the same time raking it to a nice even surface;
then it is ready for the grass.
The best month to prepare your ground is
March, the best month to plant is April.
Some gardeners advocate spring planting, but
that practice necessitates excessive watering; where-
as the Autumn planted grass becomes established
without trouble, receives the full benefit of the winter
rains, and has ample time to develop a vigorous
root system before the hot dry season sets in.
The only grasses possible for lawns in and
about our city are buffalo and couch. Of the two,
buffalo generally gives the most satisfactory results
singly, although when both are grown together the
couch prevents the buffalo from developing too
coarse a growth, thereby improving its appearance
and rendering it much easier to mow.
When planting, the roots should be placed from
four to six inches apart in uneven rows. If planted
in straight rows the evenness of the surface of the
ground is liable to be disturbed and run to ridges.
After planting water well to settle the soil firmly
about the roots.


By adopting the above method a beautiful
lawn may be established in a season.
It is inadvisable to commence cutting too early*
or to cut too closely before the ground is covered,
although it does not do to permit the grass to grow
too tussocky or patchy. A little discrimination is
necessary until the ground is ready for the lawn-
mower, then go ahead.
After the second season it is advisable to ad-
minister a little moderate feeding to maintain the
vigor and verdure of the lawn. A sprinkling of
blood and bone manure mixed with a shovelful or
two of sand beforehand to nullify the disagreeable
odour, or a light dressing of the scrapings of the
fowlyard scattered evenly over the surface during
August or September, besides being most beneficial,
dispenses with the necessity of any other top-
dressing. Sulphate of ammonia, and nitrate of soda,
are also wonderfully stimulating, especially to old
lawns; but they should always be used sparingly and
immediately well watered in.
Watering must be thorough. Two goods soak-
ings a week during moderate weather, and three
during very hot weather should be ample; but the
watering must be done evenly or the grass will soon
show unsightly patches of brown caused by the
roots being unable to obtain a sufficiency of mois-
ture.
Should weeds appear in the lawn never let
them run to seed. Keeping them mown, besides
being easier than yanking them out one by one, pre-
vents their injuring the grass, and soon eliminates
them.
For the planting of a couch lawn, the prepara-
tion of the ground is similar to that described above
for the planting of a buffalo or a mixed buffalo and
couch lawn; but the actual planting of the roots is


another matter. When giving the ground the final
digging, the roots should be placed along the
trenches close to the surface, and lightly covered as
each successive trench is made during the progress
of the digging. When completed tramp or roll the
ground down firmly, see that the surface is even,
and water. A bag of buffalo grass at a cost of 10/-
is sufficient to lay down a lawn of an area of one
hundred square yards, and a like quantity of couch
grass roots at a cost of 6/- is sufficient to plant a
similar area.
THE BOWLING GREEN, TENNIS COURT
AND CROQUET LAWN.
To ensure permanency, and withstand the
heavy wear and tear it is called upon to bear, the
grass of the bowling green, the tennis court, and
the croquet lawn must have a more solid foundation
than our sand affords. Therefore it is essential that
the sand, besides being enriched in the beginning
with manures similar to those used for the lawn, be
stiffened by the addition of a liberal dressing of
heavy loam or clay, to be dug in and thoroughly
incorporated with the soil to the depth of a spit.
Couch, being the only possible grass to use, should
be planted carefully, and subsequent rollings given
to firm the ground down and maintain a perfectly
level surface. By preparing the ground thoroughly
in the beginning, and attending to it sedulously while
the young grass is growing, an immense amount of
labour in top-dressing and levelling is saved after-
wards. Nevertheless, unless the grass is systemati-
cally fed, watered, mown, and rolled, your bowling
green will not rival the billiard table, vour tennis
court will be anything but a joy to play upon, and
your croquet lawn will engender crotchetty tempers.


The dimensions of a bowling green are 37
yards by 37 yards, the total area being 1,369
square yards; the cost of planting it with couch at
5/- a bag being about £3 10/-. A tennis court
26 yards by 12 yards would cost 15/- to plant;
and a croquet lawn about a similar amount.
The above measurements do not include the
margins.
TRANSPLANTING.
A tree, whether it be a rose tree, a hedge tree,
a fruit tree, a shade tree, or any kind of tree;
whether it be balled or pot-grown; whether it
grows on its own roots or is budded on to a stock
plant, needs to be transplanted properly or it will
languish.
Many a patch of soil has been condemned as
unfit for trees, and many a tree has been declared
unsuitable for the ground through no fault of its
own, but simply on account of the bad management
of its grower, or, rather, would-be grower.
The gardener who scoops out a hole, dumps
his tree in, and lets it take its chance courts the
well-merited failure he generally meets with; but
the gardener who plants his tree carefully seldom
has cause to complain.
To plant a tree the ground must first be pre-
pared for its reception. Should the soil be poor it
must be enriched with manure to give the tree a
start; should it be too tenacious it must be broken
up; should it be parched it must be watered.
When ready for the plants the surface is in a
condition to permit of the ready access of air and
water.


The actual planting of the tree is a simple
operation, but, simple as it is, it is of vital import-
ance.
First, a sufficiently large hole must be dug, into
which the roots are carefully placed at a depth that
will ensure the trees being from three to four inches
deeper in the ground than it grew before being
transplanted. Then the soil must be rammed down
firmly about the roots as the hole is being filled in
to within an inch or two of the surface level. This
will leave a saucer-shaped depression around the
tree which will facilitate its watering. After plant-
ing, water well and be sure to give sufficient until
the roots become established in their new environ-
ment.
Even the tiniest plants need to be transplanted
a trifle deeper than they grew in their seedbeds or
boxes; whilst large plants, such as fruit-trees, for
instance, are generally planted down to the bud,
that is, to the joint on their boles where the variety
was budded on to the stock plant.
Most failures are caused by not planting deeply
enough, by not planting firmly enough, by not leav-
ing a sufficient depression about the bases of the
trees to ensure their obtaining a sufficiency of water,
and by not watering regularly until the trees are
well established. Sprinkling the surface is good for
surface rooting plants; but deep rooting plants must
have the soil kept damp about their roots until they
have made sufficient growth to fend for themselves.


THE HEDGE.
The Horizontal Cypress
Cupressus Lamber-
tina Horizontalis) comes first as a hedge-plant. For
growing in our sandy soil it is without compeer;
indeed, its pre-eminenge is so obvious that it really
needs no recommendation.
But as seedlings of the same species are fre-
quently confounded with the horizontal cypress, a
word in season may prevent the uninitiated from
purchasing the inferior seedlings unawares, and
growing them under the impression that because
they are cypresses they will grow into as bonny a
hedge as the very substantial and exceptionally
beautiful one enclosing the grounds of Parliament
House, where it luxuriates in about as hungry a
patch of sand as is to be found in the State.
The horizontal cypress is easily distinguishable
from the seedlings by its habit of growth, its uni-
formity of colour, and its robustness; the seedlings
as a rule show several shades of green, a weak curly
foliage, and a constitutional lack of vigour which
causes many to die out, some almost immediately
after being planted, others when the hedge is grown,
leaving unsightly and irreparable gaps in what
should be a trim, even, thick-set fence.
To grow the horizontal cypress in sand is an
easy matter. If a medium hedge is desired, say
about 5 ft. high, all that is necessary is to dig a
trench about two feet deep close to the fence,
manure moderately, and tramp down firmly when
filling in. The young trees should be planted from
three to four feet apart and eighteen inches from
the fence, care being taken to firm the soil as tightly
as possible about the roots. From early May to
late October is the ideal time to plant. Planting


should always be followed immediately by a tho-
rough watering. When the roots have made new
growth and taken a firm hold in the sand further
waterings will not be necessary. Do not commence
trimming until the young plants are thoroughly
established and making rapid growth, then judicious
trimming may be commenced after any chosen
design, and the hedge, instead of becoming a source
of annoyance will develop into a useful, ornamental
living wall that will be the pride of the grower’s
heart.
Messrs. Wilson and Johns, who supplied the
plants for Parliament House hedge, have a splendid
stock of vigorous young plants in pots ready for
immediate use.
Although the market value of the seedlings is
considerably less than horizontalis, the latter is the
more economical to buy, the first cost being the'
only expense.
The Bougainvillea
is another beautiful, vigor-
ous, easily-grown plant eminently suitable for the
hedge. When well kept and in full bloom it is a
sight to behold. Its one failing is its somewhat
rapid growth, which necessitates frequent and care-
ful trimmings: frequent to keep it within bounds,
and careful because, armed as it is with multitudes
of business-like thorns, liberties should not be in-
dulged in when using the shears. But when kept
well under control it is really little trouble and never
needs watering when once established.
The young plants, which need to be spaced by
about three feet, are better for being lightly tied to
a temporary support the first season. To induce
the quick-set growth so essential to a hedge, the
commencement of pruning is advisable as soon as
the branching shoots begin to interlace.


Pittosporum Undulatum
makes a really elegant
hedge when grown in our sand under expert treat-
ment, but is only seen at its best when grown in
deep loamy soil. If wanted only to overtop a picket
fence, then its usefulness is as unquestionable as is
its beauty; but if the desire is to grow it as the
living fence itself, its thin growth close to the
ground is a defect most difficult to remedy.
The young trees if planted about three feet
apart in deeply trenched and well manured ground
quickly become established, but the soil must al-
ways be kept damp about their roots during their
first year’s growth.
Salt Bush
is the latest novelty hedge-plant.
This beautiful little plant, of soft silvery foliage,
seems naturally adapted for hedge making in city
grounds where it is protected from possible raids by
stock. Being of intensive branching habit, rapid
growth, and moderate height, it develops into a
perfect hedge in an incredibly short time; nor does
it demand excessive attention being devoted to its
trimming and watering, that part of the business
being but child’s play.
Its utility as a dividing hedge in an ornamental
garden is unquestionable; and grown as an orna-
mental shrub it is an acquisition to the garden.
Planted out in the Autumn, about two feet
apart, it needs practically no after-attention; al-
though, of course, an occasional trimming is advis-
able, as well as a sprinkling, should the foliage lose
any of its brightness during an exceptionally hot,
dry snap.
The Plumbago
is another hedge plant of high
merit. Although we do not recommend it as an
ornamental hedge abutting on the street, it is ex


tremely useful to screen an unsightly back or par-
titioning fence, as well as any outbuildings that are
detrimental to the general effect of the garden. Its
cultivation is easy, it requires little or no watering
when once established in our sandy soil, it is sweetly
pretty when in bloom, but is Somewhat difficult to
keep within bounds; hence our preference for other
plants, the horizontal cypress in particular, for front
fence hedges, where neatness and trimness should
be the first consideration.
Planted about two feet apart and within six or
eight inches of the fence, the rapidity of the plum-
bago’s development quickly forms a most effective
screen and ensures privacy.
CROSS-FERTILISING.
Raising new varieties of flowers, fruits, cereals,
and vegetables is essentially the work of the enthusi-
ast and the scientist—not the professional gardener.
The enthusiast is out for pleasure, the scientist for
knowledge, the professional gardener for his living.
Indeed, if it were not for the enthusiasts there is
every reason to believe that our domesticated plants
would deteriorate in quality and diminish in variety.
Therefore it may safely be asserted that the enthusi-
ast is the mainstay of gardening.
Fortunately, too, the enthusiast varies, or all
would be working on simijar lines. There is the
conservative enthusiast who loves his dear old
favourites for their own sakes, whether they be
good, bad, or indifferent, and who cannot be per-
suaded to have anything to do with novelties until
they are thoroughly proved; he keeps the best of
the old varieties up to the standard and prevents


them from being neglected. Then we have the
novelty hunter with his library of catalogues, whose
chief delight is in beating the professional at his own
game. He studies catalogues and procures from
near and afar specimens of improved or rare vari-
eties, which he cultivates at a cost in time, labour,
and manure that would be impossible to anyone but
a specialist and ruinous to a nurseryman. But as
he is out to win at all costs, his failures are carefully
hidden, his successes vaunted. His principal use is
in keeping stocks up to date, for without him there is
little doubt that many obsolete stocks would be in
cultivation to-day. On the other hand, the nursery-
man must work on known safe lines. Stock that has
deteriorated is discarded, but a business reputation
cannot be risked by booming novelties that have
not been thoroughhly tested.
We also have the imaginative experimentalist
who strives to attain the perfect by improving on
existing varieties, or attempting to evolve new ones.
His mind conceives possibilities of exquisite beauty
stored up in the mysterious recesses of the germ
plasm, to be brought forth nobody knows exactly
how, or can possibly know how, by a simple opera-
tion with a camel-hair brush. His faith is in the
seed, and truly the seed is the most wonderful of
all creations; for small and insignificant as it may
often appear, it contains, as well as the future genera-
tions, mysteries which even the biologists dare only
hope to unravel, the possibilities and impossibilities
of hybridisation being illimitable. Think of them!
No two pollen grains are alike, no two ovules are
alike, no two combinations are alike. Owing to the
immense wastage of surplus pollen grains, what
could possibly be combinations are impossible, and
we are as helplessly unable to select the most suit-
able grains of pollen from any particular set of
anthers as we are to direct them to the ovules with


which we wish each to combine. Therefore the
results of hybridisation can never be anticipated
with accuracy, but only as general or average.
And yet one little seed, be it tree, flower or
cereal, may increase the world’s wealth by millions
of pounds and be of inestimable value to mankind.
The embryo of all the “ Granny Smith ” apples
in cultivation to-day was one little pip, and doubt-
less there is still room for improvement.
“ Federation ” wheat has added millions to
Australia’s wealth, and fed millions of people. Some
day a monument may be raised to the man who
produced it.
Many of the best varieties of fruits, flowers,
cereals, and vegetables in cultivation to-day have
been evolved from veritable weeds of the wilds by
hybridisation and selection by successive experi-
menters whose names mostly have sunk into
oblivion; for, unfortunately, the producers are sel-
dom considered deserving of fame.
NOMENCLATURE.
Annuals.—Plants that die after seeding, their off-
spring being propagated annually from seed.
Biennials.—Plants with a life of two years.
Perennials.—Plants that live indefinitely.
Herbaceous.—Perennial plants whose stems die
down shortly after seeding, the roots remaining
alive in the ground to send forth new growth
annually.
Deciduous.—Plants that shed all their leaves an-
nually.
Evergreen.—Plants always in foliage.
Parasites. —Plants that attach themselves to and live
upon other plants.


HARDY ANNUALS, BIENNIALS, AND
PERENNIALS.
These include only those varieties suitable for
growing in the open border to maintain a bright
and constant show throughout the greater part of
the year.
But as the preparation of the soil of the border
in the first place is the key to success, any little ex-
pense that may be incurred in following these direc-
tions will be amply repaid as season follows season
without signs of deterioration among your favourite
flowers.
In the first place, then, the sandy soils of Perth
must be deeply dug, enriched with liberal allowances
of manure, as well as a few loads of loam, or silt
washed from our gravelled paths. Afterwards it is
easily improved by regular dressings of suitable
manures. Stable manure, fortified with a little
bonedust, applied on the little-and-often principle
is all our border flowers require in any of our soils.
Our loams and peats also are better for being
deeply worked and enriched, drainage being at-
tended to where necessary, before seeds are sown
or plants purchased.
The design of the borders, being mostly a
matter of convenience, we leave to the good taste
of our readers.
The following varieties are most suitable for
outdoor cultivation in this State. Though many of
them are perennials, and some biennials, most give
best results when treated as annuals.
The seeds should be sown in boxes of
moderately rich sandy soil and afterwards trans-
planted into the borders or special beds to them-
selves.


When sown as set forth hereunder most satis-
factory results are obtained:—
SPRING.
From August to November.
Amaranthus
Arctotis
Aster
Balsam
Cockscomb
Dahlia
Hunnemannia
Marigold
(African)
Portulacca
Salpiglossis
Salvia
Vinca
Zinnia
AUTUMN.
From February to April.
Anemone
Aquilegia
Calliopsis
Candytuft
Chrysanthemum
Cineraria
Cornflour
Daisy
Delphinium 1
Dimorphotheca
Forget-Me-Not
Foxglove
Godetia
Iceland Poppy
Larkspur
Leptosyne
Lobelia
Marigold
(French)
Nemesia
Nigella
Pansy
Pentstemon
Petunia
Ranunculus
Scabiosa
Shirley Poppy
Sweet Pea
Sweet William
SPRING AND AUTUMN.
Antirrhinum
Canterbury
Bell
Carnation
Cosmos
Dianthus
Gerbera
Jamesoni
Gillardia
Hollyhock
Lupins
Mignonette
Phlox
Polyanthus
Pyrethrum
Snapdragon
Stock
Sunflower
Verbena
Wallflower


THE ASTER.
Although the sandy soil of Perth does not pro-
vide the happiest home in the West for this lovely
flower, it may easily enough be built up to grow a
creditable show by the addition of a few
barrow-loads of loam to the garden, together with
liberal allowances of stable manure.
The plants, however, take very kindly to our
loams and black swamp-soils, providing drainage is
attended to; and produce a wealth of glorious
bloom in the early Summer that makes a gladsome
display in the garden, and supplies the home with
a superabundance of exquisitely beautiful cut-
flowers.
But the plants, which like a lot of feeding, only
attain their maximum development when the soil has
been enriched with plenty of bonedust as well as
stable manure, and are stimulated during growth
with light sprinklings of sulphate of ammonia.
As the aster is quite hardy in most of our dist-
ricts, the seeds germinate readily during the Autumn
and may be planted out early in the Winter; al-
though where frosts are severe it is advisable to
defer sowing till August.
Most saisfactory results are obtained by sow-
ing the seeds in boxes of moderately rich soil and
covering with a sheet of glass.
When grown as pot-plants they are splendidly
effective for decorative purposes during the whole
of their blooming period; but the potting soil must
be rich.
Our choice of varieties: Chrysanthemum
Flowered, Comet, Tasmanian Giant Branching, Vic-
toria, White Branching, and the new Giant Grego.


THE CARNATION.
For general utility few flowers equal the per-
petual-flowering carnation. It possesses a charm
all its own, and of all our domesticated plants none
have proved themselves more adaptable to our soils
and climate than this general favourite.
Perpetual carnations thrive in all our soils, and,
as they fairly revel in our climate, yield an abund-
ance of beautiful flowers throughout the year if
they are properly cultivated.
The admitted fact that the perpetual carnations
of Western Australia have no compeers throughout
Australasia is indisputable; it is also questionable
whether superior varieties are in cultivation in any
part of the world. Therefore it may be asserted
without exaggeration that the selected stock of
Messrs. Wilson and Johns, of Perth, has no equal
for quality and is unrivalled for beauty wherever
carnations are procurable.
Although these glorious flowers thrive in the
open border under ordinary conditions, they require
a little special attention if intended for show pur-
poses, or for the personal gratification derived by
developing the exquisite blossoms to the full limit
of their size and beauty.
As space permits of our giving but a brief
summary of the methods employed in developing
the carnation to its utmost perfection, we shall en-
deavour to be as clear and concise as possible.
Soil.
The carnation delights in a light, deep,
friable, well drained loam. Should the soil consist
of sand only, it may easily and inexpensively be
stiffened to the required consistency by the addition
of a few barrow-loads of heavy clay, which should
be baked dry in the sun, reduced to a powder, and


thoroughly incorporated with the soil to a depth of
fully two feet.
Should the soil be heavy loam with no getaway
for the surplus water, draining is essential, for if
the ground becomes waterlogged or sodden during
the rainy season, the plants will either become un-
healthy and lose their vitality when they should be
at their best, or will perish outright.
Fortunately, most of our heavy soils are natur-
ally so well-drained that it is impossible for them
to become sour through being surcharged with
stagnant moisture. Nevertheless it is always ad-
visable when growing carnations in stiff ground to
give the beds a heavy top-dressing of rather coarse
sand, which should be dug in and well mixed to
the full depth of a spit. The beds also should be
built up, the centres being a few inches higher than
the margins.
The black peaty soil of our swamp lands will
not grow carnations to perfection unless it is tho-
roughly drained or systematically built up into lands
at least two feet above the permanently wet level.
Even then the soil is far from congenial to the plants,
but may be made so by adding liberal quantities of
fine yellow or red sand and working it well into the
soil.
All soils should be thoroughly dug till brought
to a fine tilth.
Manures.
Hardy doers as carnations undoubt-
edly are, it does not pay to starve them. Though
anything but gross feeders, they are heavy feeders
that must have an abundance of all the plant foods
necessary to their wellbeing in order to develop into
strong vigorous plants capable of producing flowers
of champion quality, and plenty of them.


Potash, lime and phosphorus being indispens-
able to the health and wellbeing of the plants, it is
advisable to add a supply to the carnation beds,
especially if it is intended to keep them going for a
few seasons, no matter how rich the soil may appear
to be naturally. But a fair percentage of the plant-
foods must be in a readily soluble form or the plants
will not be able to absorb them when perhaps most
in need of feeding.
Should the soil be light coloured it probably is
deficient in humus, a defect that may easily be
remedied by the addition of liberal quantities of
rotted or partly decomposed animal manure. Some
growers claim to get superior results by using cow-
manure, but our advice is to use whichever is most
conveniently procurable, and plenty of it. Carna-
tions love wood ash.
Preparing the Beds.
Sandy Soil: Trench light
sandy soil to a depth of two feet or more, incorporat-
ing to the square yard a kerosenetinful of pulverised
clay, the same quantity of partly decomposed
manure, a handful of fine ground bonedust, a hand-
ful of air-slaked lime, half a handful of sulphate of
potash, and all the wood-ash available. Tramp
well down, for carnations must have a firm root-run.
Dig up again to the depth of a spit, breaking up and
mixing the soil as fine as possible. Allow to settle
for a week or two, keeping the soil slightly damp,
well trodden, and the surface loosened with the hoe;
then bed out your plants.
Heavy Soil: The same method of preparing
heavy soils may be adopted, excepting that a tinful
of coarse sand to the square yard should be sub-
stituted for the clay, a little more lime and a little
less sulphate of potash used, and the tramping down
dispensed with.


Swamp Soil: Build up peaty beds into lands,
incorporating liberal quantities of fine yellow sand,
together with a handful of bonedust, two handfuls
of slaked lime, and a sprinkling of muriate of potash
to the square yard. As the peaty soil is practically
all humus, stable manure would not only be super-
fluous, but would probably do a lot more harm than
good by inducing a rank sappy growth that would
give you lots of foliage, but few flowers. A hard,
woody, well matured growth is essential for the pro-
duction of four-inch blooms. Sand is cheaper than
manure, and puts body into the peat.
Situation.
Site: The site of the carnation beds
is a matter to be considered, for if shaded by trees,
fences, buildings, etc., the plants are apt to grow
up leggy, and the blooms will not open freely during
the winter. No doubt very young plants are all the
better for having a light, temporary shade during
the hot months: it helps them to make rapid growth;
but the wood must be hardened off before they are
permitted to flower, otherwise the stems will have
no stability, and the blossoms will not come up to
the standard.
Form: The length of the beds, which should
run East and West, where practicable, is a matter
of convenience; but they should not be more than
four feet wide, with two-foot paths between.
These permit of three rows of plants, which
may be kept weeded and generally cultivated with-
out the beds being tramped down.
Plants.
Select the very best plants money can
buy, they’re cheapest in the long run. Better to
have several plants of a dozen or two of the choicest
varieties than hundreds of indifferent ones.


When bedding out, plant firmly in straight
rows. Run your line down the centre of the bed
and set your plants about 1 Bin. apart; then plant the
outside rows, setting the plants exactly opposite the
centre of the spaces of the centre row.
For spacing, a piece of stick the required length
is most convenient to facilitate the work and en-
sure symmetry.
After planting, water moderately to settle the
soil more firmly about the roots.
The best time for bedding out is from April
to November, inclusive, the best plants are young
struck cuttings, the best place right out in the open,
and the only nurserymen from whom you can pur-
chase the best perpetuals procurable are Messrs. Wil-
son & Johns, Barrack Street, Perth.
Cultivation.
When the young plants are
firmly established in their beds a very light sprink-
ling of superphosphate, an ounce to three square
yards, mixed with an equal quantity of air-slaked
lime, followed a few weeks later by an even lighter
sprinkling of sulphate of ammonia, may with advan-
tage be applied between the rows to harden and
stimulate a fine healthy growth. An occasional
light stirring of the surface soil with the hoe permits
the air to percolate freely, prevents excessive
evaporation by disturbing the capilliary tubes, and
helps to destroy the weeds.
Carnations love lime—in moderation. There-
fore, lime must be used, not abused. A moderate
dusting of air-slaked lime applied after a shower or
watering early in April and August is very beneficial,
an extravagant application that converts the surface
soil into mortar is very injurious.
Should the blooms be wanted for the winter
shows, a little fowl manure, if procurable, together


with a handful of blood and bone to the square
yard, applied between the rows and lightly scratched
in about the end of April, intensifies the colours,
increases the size, and gives the blooms that refined
delicacy and finished appearance which catches the
eye, captivates the beholder, and maintains the car-
nation’s reputation for being the most conspicuously
popular attraction of the flower shows.
Stopping.
Young plants that are bedded out
during the winter or early spring should not be per-
mitted to bloom till the following autumn.
They are prevented by pinching out the flower
stems when the buds appear, or even earlier, leaving
only two or three of the lateral stems near the bases
of the main stems. This induces a thick, stocky
growth which enables the plants to bear a profusion
of beautiful blooms, and prolongs their flowering
period indefinitely
Stopping or pinching out the stems should be
discontinued in March.
Disbudding.
Each flower-stem should be per-
mitted to carry but one bloom. As the crown bud
generally develops into the best flower, all the side
buds should be rubbed off as soon as they are large
enough to be handled with safety. The whole nour-
ishment of the stem thus being concentrated into
the one flower, naturally it develops into a larger
and better bloom than would have been the case had
not the lateral buds been nipped out.
Shelter.
Our scorching summers and wet win-
ters necessitate the sheltering of flowers intended
for shows. This is usually done by passing the
flower-stem just below the bud along a slit in a small


wooden platform affixed to a stake, arid inverting a
flower-pot over the bud as soon as it commences
to show colour.
If this be neglected the blooms are in danger
of being bleached in summer and drowned in
winter.
Calyx.
During the bleak wet months a few of
the best as well as all the worst carnations some-
times split their calyces. To prevent this, narrow
bands or rings, cut from a piece of rubber tubing,
are slipped over the calyces and prove very effec-
tive. When the flowers are well opened the bands
may be gently pressed down to the stems, when the
calyces will quickly resume their normal appear-
ance, showing no marks of the contractions caused
by the bands.
Cuttings.
A carnation grower who knows his
business always has a few cuttings coming on to re-
place the old plants. Young plants are more prolific
and yield finer blooms than the old. The best cut-
tings to strike are sturdy young shoots from three
to four inches long, stripped from the stem about
half-way between the base and the flower. These
strike freely if planted from April to November in
well-drained boxes of sand or light loam, which con-
tains little or no humus and is perfectly sweet. The
cuttings should be shaded until they strike and com-
mence to make growth. Before bedding out re-
move the shade for a week or so to permit of their
hardening off.
Watering.
Carnations should be watered with
care. Gardeners, as a rule, speak very disparag-
ingly of Perth water, but this is to be said in its
favour. It’s better than none. Perth water in


moderation appears to do carnations no harm, even
if it isn’t as good as rain. However, its quality being
questionable, it is advisable to use no more of it
than necessary. The plants stand a lot of drought,
and it must always be borne in mind that the soluble
plants foods are liable to be carried to a depth
greater than the roots can reach if the soil is
drenched too frequently with floods of water.
Therefore, about two good waterings weekly are
sufficient to keep plants growing in well-prepared
soil in good health during the summer months; but
care should be taken that all the plants get a fair
share. Should the surface become dry as dust it
does not signify, so long as the soil shows dampness
two or three inches below the surface. A dry sur-
face discourages the plants from sending their roots
up instead of down, minimising the danger of their
being damaged by the hoe, shrivelled by the sun,
or injuriously affected by sudden extreme varia-
tions of temperature.
New Varieties.
New varieties of carnations
appear as sports or are raised from seed. Occasion-
ally a plant bearing a flower of certain colours will
produce a flower of a totally distinct colouring.
This, in gardening parlance, is termed a sport. As
a cutting taken from the branch bearing the sport,
if struck, generally bears flowers identical to the
sport, it may be named and classed as a new variety.
Carnations rarely self-fertilise or are fertilised
by the wind or insects, because, generally, the
anthers burst and shed their pollen before the stig-
mas are receptive; therefore, crossing must be done
by hand to produce new varieties of quality in quan-
tity. In any case, the bees are out for nectar and pol-
len, not to produce new varieties of size and beauty
rare; and even if they were, it is questionable
whether they have the ability to discriminate which


flowers should be crossed with the expectation of
bringing about anticipated results.
The reproductive organs of plants are the
stigmas, the stamens which bear the pollen-bearing
anthers, the ovary or seed pod, and the ovules or
unfertilised seeds.
The stigmas of a carnation are the two or more
little rounded stems which grow up out of the centre
of the seed pod as the flower opens and expands,
and the stamens are the several slighter stems which
appear from around the base of the seed-pod and
bear the anthers.
When the stigmas are receptive they commence
to curve outwards and assume a beady appearance;
when the pollen is ripe the anthers burst and it may
be seen like tiny beads of dust in its spoon-shaped
receptacle. Cross-fertilisation is performed by
gathering the pollen of one flower, preferably on the
tip of a fine camel-hair brush, and depositing it on
the extremities and upper surfaces of the stigmas of
the flower you desire to be the seed-bearer, care
being taken not to bruise or in any way injure the
stigmas. The pollen should be used as soon as
possible after the anthers burst; if allowed to re-
main till it becomes dust-dry it is useless.
When examined through a microscope, the
pollen grains are similar to eggs in appearance, and
the beadiness of the stigmas assumes a globular form
not unlike electric-light globes with tiny holes for the
reception of the pollen.
Almost immediately the pollen grains are de-
posited on the stigmas they become active, work
their way through the stigmas into the pistils, and
down into the seed-pods, where they combine with
the ovules to become the true seeds.


The minutest examination of the ovules im-
mediately before and after fusion with the pollen
reveals no change to the eye, though the mind is
conscious that a wonderful work of nature has been
accomplished.
The seeds take from six to eight weeks to
mature. When ripe, the pods go brown and com-
mence to split; then is the time to gather. Although
the calyx and petals may be removed from a de-
veloping pod, great care must be taken not to
injure the stigmas, otherwise the pod will open im-
maturely and the seeds will not develop.
The seeds germinate freely if sown at any
time, "but best results are obtainable if sown in the
Autumn and Spring.
Raising new varieties of carnations is a fas-
cinating pastime. Perfect as the latest novelties in
commerce seem, there is still room for improve-
ment.
Although we now have a new glistening white.
Crystal Queen, which is infiitely superior to White
Perfection, being an exceptionally profuse grower
and prolific bearer of larger, fuller and better built-
up flowers, a rich yellow, a vivid scarlet, and a deep
crimson perpetual are badly needed, and there is
no reason why we should not raise them in the
West; all the advantages are ours, especially stock,
soil, and climate.
THE CASSIA.
How beautiful it is, yet how few we see.
Blooming throughout April and well into May,
when flowers with us are rare, this wonderful little
tree with its smother of glorious golden bloom is a
delight to the eye wherever it is grown. And how


easy to grow it is. Your nurseryman supplies you
with a young sturdy plant, you choose a warm con-
genial corner for it, water it occasionally during the
summer, and, lo and behold! you have a lovely
tree from 8 to 10 feet high with a spread of like
dimensions within a year or so, that does you good
to gaze upon and makes you wonder how it is pos-
sible that such a riot of exquisite b.eauty could have
been developed through the medium of sand. The
cassia should be in every garden; and every home
where a garden is practically impossible should pro-
vide some warm sheltered nook for at least one of
these delightful plants. The wattle is said to be
Australia’s national flower, but the cassia should be
emblematic of Western Australia.
THE CHRYSANTHEMUM.
This favourite Autumn-flowering plant will
grow anywhere, and if allowed to run wild will pro-*
duce a prodigious quantity of bloom—of a kind—
providing it is supplied with plenty of water during
the summer.
Such treatment is right enopgh providing the
cut bloom or a garden show is all that is Wanted;
but if the flowers are wanted for show purposes it
is a different matter altogether.
“The richer the soil the bigger the bloom ”
is a motto chrysanthemum growers who are chrysan-
themum showers should keep in mind always; and
when selecting the plants for planting in the rich
soil some consideration must be given to their habit
of growth; for plants of sturdy bushy habit are
easier to handle, and generally reward the grower
with more satisfactory results than those of spindly
habit, which need ever so much more attention, and
frequently fail altogether when wanted most par-
ticularly.


Cultivation.
Show chrysanthemums cannot
be grown in our sand. The only way to grow them
is in tins, tubs, or pots, preferably kerosene tins.
By denting in the bottom corners of the tins they are
very easily rounded, especialy when about half filled
with soil, which not only improves their appearance,
but gives the plant a freer root-run, with no awk-
ward corners to negotiate. Drainage must be per-
fect. This is easily attended to by punching two
or three fairly large holes through the bottoms of
the tins, placing over each hole a crock or two, and
covering the whole with about an inch of clean
charcoal, together with a few pieces of charred
bones.
Soil.
Chrysanthemum being both heavy and
gross feeders, the soil must necessarily be very rich,
or the results will be disappointing. A good com-
post may be made up as follows:—First obtain a
load of the rich dark surface loam from the foot-
hills. To every three kerosenetinsful add one tin-
ful of thoroughly decomposed manure, together
with a shovelful of fowl manure if obtainable, a pint
of fine ground bonedust, half a pint of slaked lime,
the same quantity of sulphate of potash, and a little
wood-ash. Mix the lot up thoroughly when slightly
damp, and when you are satisfied that it is tho-
roughly mixed, fill your tins to within an inch or so
of the tops, ramming it firmly down. The compost
should be prepared and the tins filled at least a
fortnight before planting time.
Plants.
These may be obtained either by
striking cuttings or selecting suckers which are al-
ready rooted. When late varieties are wanted to
bloom early, the practice is to select cuttings from


growths springing from the old stems. Cuttings
that are too woody or too sappy seldom make ideal
plants; therefore it is advisable to select the happy
medium. The cuttings, which should be from three
to three and a-half inches long, should be divided
from the parent plant by cutting just below a joint
with a sharp knife. When varieties are wanted to
bloom in their own good time, cuttings from suck-
ers or the suckers themselves are selected.
The cuttings strike readily when planted in
boxes of sand, which must be well drained, slightly
shaded, and kept somewhat close until the plants
show signs of rooting. Firm planting and regular
watering are essential. To prevent the plants pro-
ducing a multitude of suckers, it is necessary when
preparing the cuttings to remove the leaves and rub
out the eyes to the depth they are to be planted.
From the middle of August to the middle of Sept-
ember is the best time to strike cuttings.
When the cuttings have developed a sufficiency
of roots they may be transplanted into six-inch pots,
using a good rich compost, but with less manure
than is used in their final move into the tins, to
prevent them from making too rapid and rank
growth.
As soon as the pots are well filled with roots,
but before they become pot-bound, they may be
transferred to the tins.
The cuttings of late-flowering varieties should
always be struck early, the early varieties being
struck late to encourage both varieties to flower
simultaneously.
Treatment.
Stopping: Early varieties may
be stopped before being transplanted from the
boxes in which they have been struck to their six


inch pots, and three of the likeliest looking shoots
retained to bear the show blooms eventually; but
the late varieties will probably show no signs of
breaking till early in November, when they should
be stopped. As soon as the new shoots develop
sufficiently select three of the best, all others being
cut out. Should the early varieties make their final
break before the second week in January it will be
necessary to retard them by pinching them back,
and should the late varieties show no signs of
breaking naturally by the same time it will be
advisable to stop them in order to stimulate the
new growth. The object of this is to force both
late and early varieties to be at their best on the
dates fixed for the shows.
Disbudding.
Towards the end of February
the crown bud should commence to show. A little
experience teaches the grower when to expect it a
week or two beforehand, and if the indications point
to its too early arrival, it may be retarded some-
what by transferring the tin to the coolest and
shadiest position available. Generally, however, a
bud that appears early in the month is pinched out,
one of the side buds being selected in its stead.
When final selection of the bud intended for de-
velopment has been made, all other buds must be
rubbed off as soon as large enough to handle, and
no suckers, undergrowths, or side shoots should be
allowed to burden the plant and share the nourish-
ment intended for the show-bloom.
As the lateral buds never develop a flower
quite as large as the crown buds, the latter should
always be retained if possible.
Shelter.
As soon as the buds show colour
they should be sheltered. A conical-shaped calico


cap painted with boiled linseed oil suits the purpose
admirably; the framework of the cap, which is of
wire, being constructed with an adjustable clasp to
hold it in position on the stake to which the stem
is tied.
Watering.
The development of a hard woody
growth being indispensable, over-watering must be
avoided, otherwise the plants are apt to run up
sappy and spindly, yielding weak undersized flow-
ers. On the other hand, they must have a sufficiency
of water, or the growth will be stunted. Until the
buds are set, and the tins well filled with roots, a
good plan is to water from twice to thrice weekly,
just giving sufficient to permit of a little filtering
through the drainage holes.
Manuring.
Although the compost in which
the plants are growing should be rich enough to
keep them in health and vigour, extra feeding in
the form of liquid manure is essential to their pro-
ducing show-blooms of first quality.
From December to early in February an oc-
casional manuring with weak liquid cow manure is
advantageous.
As soon as the buds appear, however, a weekly
application of sulphate of ammonia, half an ounce
to a kerosene tin of water, stimulates the plant to
absorb as much food as it is capable of consuming.
About a quart of this should be applied after a good
watering. Alternate weekly waterings with liquid
fowl manure and cow manure are exceptionally
beneficial, the fowl manure seemingly having the
effect of increasing the size and intensifying the
colours of the blooms.
An additional supply of food in liquid form
is easily provided by steeping half a pint of super


phosphate, half a pint of slaked lime, and a quarter
of a pint of sulphate of potash in ten gallons of
water for a few days, and applying to each tin a
quart of the liquid, followed by the same quantity
of water.
When the petals of the developing buds are
easily discernible, liquid manuring should be dis-
continued, otherwise the flowers are liable to be
coarse, of imperfect form, and lacking in colour.
Cutting.
Should the flowers expand a little
earlier than anticipated, the tins may be removed
to a cool shady verandah or the blooms cut and
kept in a darkened room, care being taken to renew
the water daily and trim the ends of the stems.
THE CINERARIA.
“ Glorious! ” is the general exclamation that
involuntarily issues from the lips when the eyes light
upon a bed of well-grown cinerarias in full bloom;
yet the sight is one we seldom have the pleasure of
witnessing, although with a little care and attention
the cineraria grows remarkably well in all our soils
in the open, as well as being eminently adapted to
pot cultivation in the shade-house or sheltered
verandah.
In order to assure success, the beds must be
prepared a few weeks before the young plants are
bedded out by deep trenching, heavy manuring
and subsequent stirrings. Although the plants do
not send their roots down to any great depth,
loosening up the soil by trenching perfects its physi-
cal condition, thereby improving the vigour and
general health of the plants wonderfully.


Two tins of dung, 1 lb. of blood and bone,
and 2 ozs, of sulphate of potash to the square yard
well worked into the soil suit the requirements of
the plants admirably.
If the beds are in a position sheltered from the
winds and slightly shaded by trees, so much the
better; though there is a hardy strain now on the
market that produces remarkably good results with-
out any shade whatever.
For growing in pots a good compost is made
by mixing two parts of fibrous loam to one of
thoroughly decomposed cow manure, then adding
1 lb. of blood and bone, 1 oz. of sulphate of potash,
and a little sand, to every 60 lbs. of soil.
The seed germinate freely when sown in boxes
of rich soil from the middle of January to early in
March; but the boxes must be kept shaded and the
soil damp or there will be trouble.
The seedlings may be planted out during May
and June, a growing space of from 1 5 inches to 1 8
inches being allotted to each plant.
As growth progresses, a little extra nourish-
ment is advisable. This is provided by sprinkling
an ounce of sulphate of ammonia to the square
yard between the plants every three weeks on a
nice wet day.
A fairly heavy mulch is also essential.
When grown as pot plants, liquid manurings
are indispensable. These are best applied in weak
alternate doses of cow manure and sulphate of am-
monia at intervals of four or five days.


THE DELPHINIUM.
A few years ago the delphinium, or perennial
larkspur, was looked upon as the showiest of all
the blue perennial flowers, but during the last few
years it has been so immensely improved by cross-
fertilisation that it is difficult to believe that the
wonderful varieties in cultivation to-day can have
sprung from a common stock.
Now we have the Giant Victoria strain, not in-
aptly named for for size, robustness, and vigour of
growth, coupled with a most profuse flowering
habit, it completely overtops all other varieties in
cultivation.
Conspicuous as it is for its size, it lacks none
of the beauties essential to perfection.
Its towering massive spikes of flowers, though
often carried on stems six feet high, the flower-heads
being from three to four feet, stand up boldly and
majestically, and are a picture of graceful sym-
metry; its bright colouring, ranging from deep blue
sometimes tinted off with delicate lavender blue to
exquisite shades of mauve, mauve-pink, and blush;
and its beautiful foliage, are sufficient to command
a first place for it in every garden, where, during
its flowering period of fully four months, it is a joy
to behold.
In our loams and peaty soils it is very easily
cultivated: all that is necessary being a well dug
soil moderately manured with a little dung and
bonedust, and regular sprinklings during the sum-
mer months.
If a good mulch be applied in the Spring its
beneficial effects are easily apparent.
In sand it also grows well, providing the soil
be dug two spits deep and fertilised with a kerosene


tinful of well-rotted manure, a tablespoonful of
fine bonedust, and a dessertspoonful of sulphate of
potash, to each plant.
This seems heavy manuring, but the delphi-
niums are well worth it.
The most satisfactory results are obtained by
sowing the seed in well-drained boxes of rich soil
during February. As soon as the seedlings are
large enough to handle they are better for being
pricked out singly into pots: that is, one pot for
each plant, where they will become thoroughly
established and develop a mass of fibrous roots by
the end of April, when they may be transplanted
into the open with safety.
Seed boxes and pots must be kept well watered
and lightly shaded, otherwise the tender seedlings
will wilt.
During August or even earlier it is advisable
to sprinkle a little blood and bone manure around
each plant, to be lightly raked in, and covered with
a mulch.
THE FUCHSIA.
This is essentially a ladies pet flower, as well
as a general favourite of growing children.
Throughout the greater part of this State, when
cultivated as a pot plant in the shade-house, shelt-
ered verandah, and window-sill, it not only grows
to perfection, but has a decided effect in influencing
the young to take to gardening as an innocent pas-
time, and gives them many happy hours.
Under guidance, the little ones, who quickly
learn the points of the exquisitely dainty flowers,
become adepts at growing it, and delight in point-
ing out the perfections of tube, sepals, and corolla,


as well as the vividly beautiful and contrasted
colours of the flowers.
The best plants to buy are young struck cut-
tings, which are obtainable from June on to the
following Spring.
A good potting compost can be prepared by
thoroughly mixing 1 part heavy loam, 1 part black
sand, and 1 part cow manure, with 1 lb. of blood
and bone to 100 lbs. of soil.
Cuttings strike readily when planted in boxes
of sand during May and June, the boxes being well
drained and kept in a sheltered place.
When struck the cuttings are ready for trans-
planting into small pots, to be again moved into
larger pots as growth progresses, till finally planted
into their seven or eight inch flowering pots.
During growth the tips of the stems should be
pinched out to induce bushiness, the stems being
neatly but not too tightly tied to a light wooden
frame.
As the fuchsia likes lots of feeding, a splendid
liquid manure may be prepared by steeping 7 lbs.
of fresh cow dung with a handful of soot in 5 gal-
lons of water for three or four days, one pint of
which is then added to two gallons of water and
given the plants growing in the green-house, in
weekly allowances of a pint or two.
But as the fastidious might consider this some-
what smelly for the window-sill or verandah, an-
other good liquid may be composed by dissolving
a dessertspoonful of sulphate of ammonia in a
kerosenetinful of water, each plant to be given a
weekly dose of from a pint to a quart after a good
watering.
Old plants are better for pruning back and re-
potting every year.


THE GERALDTON WAX PLANT.
The worth of this magnificent shrub is so well
known and appreciated that it is almost superfluous
to say a word in its favour.
Flowering at a period of the year when blooms
are scarce, continuing in bloom for fully four
months, when cut lasting from two to three weeks
in water, and growing luxuriantly in hungry sand
without manure and with very little water, it should
be an absolute necessity not only to every garden,
but to every backyard, or vacant piece of ground,
where its manifold beauties would be a delight to
the eye even amidst the dingiest surroundings.
Ranging in colours from white, through vari-
ous shades of pink to a deep reddish purple hue,
it does not lack variety; and at the moment of
writing a new pure yellow is undergoing a trial at
Messrs. Wilson and Johns’ nursery, that will be a
great acquisition should it prove to be as robust a
grower and as constitutionally sound as its con-
temporaries.
To keep the plants shapely and within bounds
it is advisable to trim them, as a hedge is trimmed,
immediately after flowering. An additional light
trimming about January or February ensures a pro-
lific growth of sturdy flower-shoots.
Although the plants take kindly to, transplant-
ing at any time, best results are obtained by bedding
out from May to November.
THE HEATHS.
Possibly it is because the heaths (Ericas) are
so easy to grow that they are not more extensively
cultivated, though probably failures have occurred
through growers, not being familiar with their likes


and dislikes, having killed them with kindness by
attempting to coddle them with manures.
“ What’s one plant’s food is another plant’s
poison ” applies to the Heaths more than any other
plant we know.
They abominate lime and all artificial manures.
The only manure they tolerate is dung rotted to a
powder, and very little of that as a surface dressing
only.
Although they thrive without manure of any
description in all our soils except those in the im-
mediate vicinity of limestone formations, they do
best in light sandy loams, and in the black sands
in the vicinity of swamps.
The sandy soil of Perth suits them admirably
if dug over a few times and thoroughly tramped
down, though it may be improved by the addition
of a light dressing of swamp soil.
A properly grown heath is a wonderfully
showy and useful addition to the garden, and pro-
vides a great quantity of cut flowers.
Several varieties are suitable for cultivation in
pots.
As the heaths cover a good range of colours
and produce a succession of blooms throughout the
year, they offer a big inducement to the grower
who desires to specialise in them.
One load of black sand from the borders of a
swamp will supply a sufficiency of potting soil for
a good collection.
Our selection for a continuous show of bloom
is as follows:


(D, M, T: Symbols for Dwarf, Medium, Tall.)
Autumnalis ... D
Baccams T
Beaconsfieldiana . M
Bowieana . . . . M
Cavendishii ... D
Cerinthoides
Coronata ... D
Charsleyana ... T
Cruenta M
Hartnelli .... D
Hentyana . . . . M
Hybrida M
Hyemalis M
Intermedia . . . . M
Jubilee M
Lambertiana ... D
Linnaeoides . . . M
Mammosa . . . . M
McNabbiana Rosea D
Melanthera M
Roegerminans . . D
Rubens D
Ventricosas ... D
Vulgaris Alba . . M
Webbleyana . . . M
Wilmoreana M
THE HYDRANGEA.
What a wonderful display these old favourites
make at Christmas time, and what a variety of
shades have come into existence during the last
few years; but to attempt to grow them in the open
border in our sand is folly.
In the cooler Great Southern and South West-
ern Districts the hydrangeas grow exceptionally well
and develop into exceedingly beautiful plants when
grown in good soil in the open on the South side
of a building, but even there there are days when
it is necessary to shade the blooms to prevent them
from being wilted by the hot sunshine.
In Perth, however, they are best treated as
pot-plants or tub-plants, for when grown in a fair-
sized tub of good soil in a well-shaded position the
plants develop to a great size and carry a multitude
of magnificent blooms which last for weeks.
The hydrangea’s wants are few. Cuttings
strike readily. Given a bit of decent soil the plants


develop rapidly, and when carefully tended will
produce creditable blooms when confined to 6-inch
pots.
A potting soil, consisting of one-part loam, one-
part sand, and one-part decomposed manure, to-
gether with a little bonedust and ashes, are about
all they need, though when coming into bloom an
occasional liquid manuring improves the size and
quality of the flowers. They love liquid fowl man-
ure.
Any position that is shaded from the sun suits
them admirably, though they must never be allowed
to go dry.
After their flowering season pruning is advis-
able to induce a nice stocky growth.
One of the strong points about the hydrangea
is its great utility as a cut-flower at a time when
flowers of quality are rare.
The general cry that the flowers fade almost
as soon as cut is all nonsense; for if treated in the
following manner the cut blooms will last for
weeks:—
Choose flowers for cutting that have not quite
reached their maximum.
Carefully peel the stems to the depth they are
immersed in vases.
Plunge the stems to within an inch of the
blooms for an hour in a bowl of water.
Then arrange in vases, the water of which
should be changed daily, and the long-
evity of the flowers is surprising.


THE ICELAND POPPY.
This elegant little ffower is becoming more
popular every year, and no wonder. It is sweetly
pretty, easy to grow, occupies little space, blooms
profusely, and may be grown in almost any soil
where from May to November its bright colours
charm the eye and have a most pleasing general
effect.
Daintily arranged in suitable vases, the har-
monious blending of its vivid colours radiates an
irresistible charm which not only enhances the
adornments of a room, but is the finishing touch
in making it home-like and cheerful.
There is not another winter-flowering plant to
compare with the Iceland Poppy’s prolificness, its
yield of bloom being truly enormous, and covering
a period of fully six months, providing the flowers
are regularly cut and not allowed to run to seed.
Before arranging the cut-blooms in their vases,
however, it is advisable to scrape off about an inch
of the bark from the bases of the stems. This
not only prevents their drooping, but prolongs their
lives and ensures their maintaining the freshness of
their lustre until the petals fall. Singeing the ends
of the stems, if done carefully, destroys the bark
and is quite as effective.
Cultivation.
Any soil that will grow annuals suits the Ice-
land Poppy. Dig it over, tamp it down with the
back of the spade, broadcast the seed early in April,
press them in, or scatter a few handfuls of fine soil
over the beds, and there will be a beautiful poppy
show that commences in August and continues until
the hot weather sets in.


But if the flowers are wanted during the winter,
then some little attention must be devoted to their
cultivation.
The seeds should be sown in well-drained
boxes of sandy soil during January or early in Feb-
ruary, special precautions being taken to prevent
their becoming waterlogged by any mischance; the
boxes being placed in a position where the frail
seedlings are protected from the full glare of the
sun without the exclusion of ample air and day-
light. Water regularly but moderately with a fine
spray, using rainwater if procurable.
Bed out during April, choosing a nice cool
afternoon for the transplanting, and the plants will
commence to bloom in May and make a beautiful
display throughout the Winter and Spring.
Plant the seedlings about a foot apart, tem-
porarily shading with light bushes until thoroughly
established should the weather be exceptionally hot
and dry.
MICHAELMAS DAISY.
This sweetly pretty flower is so well-known
as one of the principal mainstays of the Summer
garden that it needs little or no recommendation.
Summed up, its requirements are growing
space, an occasional watering, and transplanting
every four or five years when the clumps become
overcrowded.
It is one of the easiest plants in the world
to propagate from cuttings or suckers, and may be
broken up and transplanted any time between May
and September without showing the slightest sign
of deterioration.
When in bloom it makes a beautiful show in
the border and provides an abundance of cut-
flowers for the house.


THE PANSY.
This little gem of flowers appeals to most
people’s finer feelings, and has a special fascination
for children.
To grow it successfully in our climate it must
be treated as an annual.
All our soils suit it if worked and manured to
grow annuals.
If sown in boxes of rich sandy soil during
February the young plants are ready for transplant-
ing into their beds towards the end of April, and
commence to flower in June.
As they continue to grow and bloom all
through the winter and well on into November, they
are an acquisition to any garden, whether grown in
beds by themselves, or as a ribbon edge along the
margins of the border. Of course, the exercise of
a little care is necessary to ensure success with the
seed.
A good plan for the grower not possessed of
a cool frame to follow is this:—Three parts fill a
Nestle’s milk box with good damp soil, first boring
a few holes through the bottom of the box and
covering them with crocks, then add about an inch
of finely sifted black sand.
Sow the seed thinly on the surface, press them
down firmly, then just cover with a dusting of the
sifted soil, and water with a fine spray.
Cover the box with a sheet of brown paper
until the seedlings are well up, renewing the water-
ings whenever the surface soil shows signs of dry-
ness.


The box must be kept in as cool and shady a
place as possible. A verandah facing the south or a
tree with fairly thick foliage, such as the white
cedar, affords the right shelter.
If the seedlings come up so thickly that there
is danger of overcrowding, they may be pricked
out as soon as large enough to handle into other
boxes.
Should a hot dry snap set in after the young
plants are bedded out, watering and sometimes
shading must be attended to or the plants will wilt.
THE ROSE.
Everybody knows the rose, everybody loves
the rose, but few know how to grow it.
Many valuable books on the Rose are in circu-
lation, but, alas, the would-be rose grower, who
after reading through the pages most sedulously,
exclaims: “ Yes! But how am Ito grow them in
sand?” confesses that he is little the wiser for his
pains.
In Western Australia there is room for a book
on Roses, for the climatic conditions here are totally
different to those of the Eastern States, not to men-
tion our great variety of soils, including sand.
Our intention is not to write a book, but to
give our readers a few pithy, condensed hints on
rose growing.
The rose is a deep-rooting plant. If the roots
are carefully followed down, it will be seen that
after working through the surface soil they take a
tremendous grip in the subsoil. And there lies the
key to the secret of rose growing: Something to
grip into within reach of the roots must be provided
or the rose cannot thrive.


ROSES
ROSES FOR THE SPECIALISTS!
ROSES FOR THE MULTITUDE!
ROSES FOR ALL SORTS OF SOILS!
ALL PRIZES; NO BLANKS!
Failures have occurred through the Choicest Varieties
having been budded on to Unsuitable Stocks.
After Repeated Experiments we have Remedied that
Defect and are now possessed of a Perfect Stock.
Our collection of the most Beautiful Roses in Com-
merce will grow on that Stock and give you Every Satis-
faction.
We are now sending out Standards, Half-Standards
and Dwarfs that have no compeers in the West.
Select from Our Catalogue or send to us for a Collec-
tion and there will be no Regrets.
WILSON & JOHNS,
NURSERYMEN and SEEDSMEN,
70 BARRACK STREET, PERTH.


By providing the right sorts with the right sort
of grip, and attending to the surface feeding, roses
can be grown in sand; perhaps not so well as in
loam, but quite good enough for ordinary purposes,
and often good enough for shows.
Most of the sand upon which Perth is founded,
although not much to look at on the surface, con-
sists of a large body of fine, rich, reddish-yellow,
close-set fertile sand from two to three feet below
the surface.
In such sand the rose-beds need to be pre-
pared by trenching fully three feet deep and en-
riching with liberal allowances of animal manure,
together with half a pound of bonedust and the
same quantity of sulphate of potash to the square
yard. If a few barrowloads of clay or heavy loam
are procurable so much the better, providing they
are thoroughly mixed with the sand.
After the soil has been thoroughly trenched,
manured and tramped, a light surface dressing of
slaked lime scratched in with the hoe, expedites the
decomposition of the manures.
The beds, if prepared in April, will be ready
for planting in June —the best month of the year.
The right sorts of roses to take the right sort of
grip in such soil are the vigorous Tea Roses and
Hybrid Teas, especially the climbers, as well as
climbers of other varieties.
If, after planting, their watering, feeding, and
pruning are properly attended to, their roots will get
their grip in the close-packed fine yellow sand, when
the vigour of their growth, coupled with the quality
and quantity of their blooms, are truly surprising.
But if you try the Hybrid Perpetual or Dwarf
Polyantha varieties in such soil they will be un-
satisfactory, they not being deep-rooting enough to
get a real good grip into the sand.


Peaty soils prepared as above will grow beau-
tiful roses, but it must be perfectly drained, and a
little body put into it by the addition of heavy
dressings of loam or rich red or yellow sand.
Of course, we all are aware that a medium
loam with a good clay subsoil is the ideal home of
the rose; but even such a soil must be drained,
trenched, and enriched with suitable fertilisers, or
the yield of bloom will be disappointing in quality.
Planting the rose is our next consideration.
Before putting them into their permanent beds
during the winter, the pruning of their roots, as well
as their shoots, must be carefully attended to.
In sandy soil they do best if planted fully eight
inches deep; in peaty or loamy soils six inches is a
sufficient depth, the soil being packed closely about
the roots (not puddled, mind), and after being
filled in to within an inch or two of the surface given
a good watering to settle it down even more firmly.
As almost every rose requires its own method
of pruning, no hard and fast rule can be laid down
here. Generally, July is the best month for pruning,
but should a shoot show signs of dying bhck at any
time it must be cut out immediately.
The object of pruning is to encourage the plant
to send out new growths from about its base, which,
when matured, produce the most reliable flowering
shoots. These shoots are first apparent soon after
the first blooming period in the Spring.
Cutting the shoots back early in the winter
forces the buds about their bases to develop into
new vigorous growths, which yield blooms of size
and quality.
Some roses need hard pruning, others light
pruning; therefore, some little knowledge of their


requirements is necessary, which is soon acquired
by the grower possessed of gumption.
Whether roses are grown for show or not, they
should be fed, and fed from the surface. During
the hot months a mulch of manure is beneficial, but
is not enough in itself. Blood and bone manure
supplies a sufficiency of phosphates and nitrogen if
sprinkled about the feeding space at the rate of a
handful to the square yard, whilst potash, of which
roses are very fond, may be applied in the form of
sulphate of potash, a similar quantity being used.
The safest artificial phosphatic manure to use
is Thomas’ phosphate, which contains, besides phos-
phoric acid, a liberal allowance of lime; but if it is
used as a substitute for bonedust it is advisable to
stimulate growth by applying about two ounces of
nitrate of soda to each growing space early in Aug-
ust, and if the weather is dry at the time, hosing it
well in.
Many roses do well on their own roots from
cuttings. Cuttings, if taken late in June and placed
horizontally on the ground in a damp shady corner,
being covered over with weeds, callus in from
twelve to fourteen days, when, if planted in tins or
boxes of sand, they strike readily.
Budding, which is simply taking a bud with a
heel of bark from a rose plant and inserting it in a
T-shaped slit in the bark of the stock plant and
binding it up, is most successfully carried out during
the summer months.
Show blooms are always the better for being
protected from the weather. This may be done in
various ways: from tying the bud up in a roomy
paper-bag, to covering it with a specially constructed
cap affixed to a stake.


Many ingenious contrivances have been in-
vented for this purpose, but the paper bag appears
to give as satisfactory results as any.
When selecting plants to grow, the first con-
sideration must be given to the class of soil they are
to be grown in, as well as the district.
In the cooler districts, wherever a good stiff
loam, together with an adequate water supply, are
available, the gems of all the roses, the bewitchingly
beautiful, fragrant, and rich-coloured hybrid per-
petuals, may be grown to perfection as standards,
half-standards, or on their own roots.
If planted in well-trenched soil and given a
fair amount of attention in the way of feeding,
watering, and pruning, they not only develop sur-
prisingly, but produce a wealth of glorious bloom
that it is impossible to surpass.
In the warmer districts, however, or where
only light soils are available, the beginner would
do well to confine his efforts to the cultivation of
the teas, the hybrid teas, and the climbers, until a
study of their likes and dislikes brings him confid-
ence begotten of experience to extend his collection
until it is a joy to himself and a surprise to his
friends.
THE SWEET PEA.
Nobody can complain that the Sweet Pea is
not widely grown in W.A.
Thanks to the generosity of “ The Sunday
Times,” practically everybody with sufficient ground
has, during the last few years, accepted that news-
paper’s invitation to grow a show of the winter
flowering varieties so freely distributed.


The astonishing part of the business, however,
is that, although it was generally understood that
the blooms were to be exhibited at the Spring
Shows, no special effort seems to have been made
in the gardening column to educate the novice how
to grow for show.
Whether grown in sand, in loam, or in peat,
the sweet pea must have a rich, deep, sweet, mellow
soil to do justice to itself and its grower.
Sand should be trenched at least 3 ft. deep by
3 ft. wide, liberally manured with animal manures,
bonedust, and potash, well mixed with the sand to
within six inches of the surface, and tramped down
as firmly as possible afterwards.
If the trenches are prepared two or three
months before the seeds are sown the manure may
be fresh; but if only a week or so, thoroughly de-
composed manure should be used. From 12 to 15
Sbs. of decomposed manure, \ lb. of bonedust, and
2 ozs. of sulphate of potash to the square yard is
a good dressing.
After trenching, a handful of slaked lime to
the square yard scratched in with the hoe or rake
acts beneficially by helping to promote the decom-
position of the manures.
The soil must be kept moderately damp,
though not excessively wet.
Before sowing the seed, the trenched ground
should be covered with 6 inches of clean, rich, un-
manured soil, and wire netting set up to support
the vines.
The seeds are then sown from 6 to 8 inches
apart and 1 inch deep along the centre of the pre-
pared ground.


SWEET PEAS
Our collection of Winter Flowering Sweet Peas
winners of the Horticultural Society’s Gold
Cup—ranks second to none.
We grow for Seed—not for Show—in the rich Loam
of Carmel; but when we show we Win.
Our Seeds, gathered from thoroughly acclimatised
plants, besides being hardier and more prolific than Im-
ported Varieties, are Constitutionally Sounder than local
seeds saved from sand-grown plants.
We are offering at Reasonable Prices over fifty of the
Best Named Varieties, as well as Carefully Selected Mixed
Lots in bulk or in 6d. and i/- packets.
If you want strong plants, long stems, plenty of
flowers, and no disappointments, send for your seed to —
WILSON & JOHNS,
NURSERYMEN and SEEDSMEN,
70 BARRACK STREET, PERTH.


If sown during the second week in April, the
blooms have a good chance of being at their best
for the shows; but if wanted for home use only,
they may be sown in succession from February to
May inclusive.
As growth advances, the runners must be tied
lightly to the netting, for if the tendrils alone are
trusted to, they are in danger of being torn off and
irreparably damaged by strong winds.
With the first appearance of the flower buds
feeding may be commenced. A light mulch of
partly decomposed manure applied after a handful
of blood and bone to the square yard has been
sprinkled on and scratched in not only feeds the
plants slowly and constantly, but is safer to use
than artificial chemical manures even in liquid doses.
LOAMS, when thoroughly worked and liber-
ally manured in a similar manner, produce blooms
infinitely superior to those grown in ground that
has been slovenly cultivated and sparsely manured.
Peats need very little, if any, stable manure,
but are better for having a heavy dressing of loam
or fine sand. They also must be deeply trenched
and built up into lands, or they are in danger of
becoming too wet in the winter. In their case 1 lb.
of basic slag (Thomas’ phosphate) may with ad-
vantage be substituted for bonedust.
Sweet peas delight in a change of soil. Seeds
of plants grown in the loamy soil of the hills in the
vicinity of Perth develop a more vigorous growth,
a stronger constitution and bloom more profusely
than plants grown from seeds produced by sand-
grown plants.


They are cheaper to buy, too, because all not
adapted to cultivation under our climatic condi-
tions are discarded.
Points to Remember.
Trench thoroughly,
manure lavishly, cultivate assiduously, water abund-
antly, and grow only the best varieties. Before
sowing tramp well, for sweet peas thrive best if
given a root-run as hard as a garden path, even
though they like the surface scratched occasionally.
The blooms quickly deteriorate if the plants are per-
mitted to run to seed.
BULBS.
Too little is generally known about the cultiva-
tion of bulbs and bulbous plants, the aristocrats of
the Flower Kingdom, or more space would be
allotted to them in every garden, and more atten-
tion devoted to their cultivation.
A system of cultivation or a description of soil
common to the welfare of all bulbs is impossible;
the accepted standard of planting, namely, “ plant
bulbs three times their own depth,” is absurd; and
the belief that all bulbs thrive best in light sandy
soil is probably the cause of most of our failures
when we attempt to grow many of the classy vari-
eties occasionally seen on exhibition in Perth.
Therefore, we shall confine ourselves to a brief
summary of a few of the hardiest acclimatised vari-
eties adaptable for cultivation in this State, suitable
soils and manures, depth and time of planting, and
after treatment, grouping them where practicable.
FREEZIAS, IXIAS, JONQUILS, WATSONIAS.
With little or no attention these thrive like
weeds in all our garden soils. Planted three inches


deep in loamy soil and four inches in sandy soil from
March to May, the freezias and ixias make a beauti-
ful display in the Spring. As a ribbon edge border-
ing paths they are most effective. They may be left
in the ground, without danger of deterioration,
until overcrowding renders transplanting necessary.
When that is the case the bulbs should be lifted
during December and stored in a dry comer till
planting time.
Jonquils if planted in March and watered oc-
casionally until the rains set in bear large heads of
bloom on long strong stems. In loamy soil four
inches, and in sandy soil six inches is the depth of
planting.
It is advisable to lift the bulbs every third year
towards the end of November.
They may be planted in the border in clumps or
in beds to themselves.
Manure lightly. Heavy dressings of manure
force a tremendous growth of foliage pfc the expense
of the flower.
Watsonias should be planted four inches deep
in loam, six inches in sand; they make a fine dis-
play when grown in clumps.
Being heavy feeders, they require heavy dress-
ings of manure.
THE GLADIOLUS and SPANISH IRIS.
These gorgeously beautiful flowers, if properly
treated, do well in our sandy soil, although in a
light to medium loam, their ideal soil, they do
better. But whatever the class of soil it must be
deeply cultivated and enriched with animal manure


as well as supplementary manures containing phos-
phates, potash and lime.
Best results are obtained when the soil is pre-
pared a few weeks before planting time, thus: Spread
the animal manure evenly over the surface at the
rate of a kerosenetinful to the square yard, dig to
a depth of two feet or a little deeper, mixing the
manure well with the soil, tramp well down if sandy
and keep slightly damp. In stiff loamy soil tramping
is not necessary.
Then, to add the necessary supplementary
manures, sprinkle about four ounces of bonedust and
two of sulphate of potash to the square yard to be
dug in to the depth of a spit.
As gladioli bloom with us throughout the year,
the corms may be planted at any time; but as they
yield the finest spikes throughout the winter and
early spring, that consideration must not be lost
sight of. Consequently, the most satisfactory re-
sults are obtained by planting from the end of Feb-
ruary to the beginning of June.
In sandy soil and light loam full-sized corms
do best when planted eight inches deep; in stiff
loam a depth of from five to six inches is sufficient.
An open unshaded site is most suitable, though
not altogether indispensable.
If planted in rows the corms may be spaced
by six to eight inches, with fifteen inches between
the rows; if in the border, clumps of from four to
six corms add wonderfully to the general effect
when in bloom.
During the dry weather watering must be at-
tended to. Immediately after planting give the
ground a light dusting of lime.


After the plants are well up, a little fowl
manure or blood and bone applied between the
rows and lightly scratched in intensifies the colours
of the flowers and invigorates the plants.
During growth the surface soil should be re-
gularly stirred with the hoe.
Each growing season a new corm develops out
of the old, which perishes.
From six to eight weeks after flowering the
corms are ready for lifting.
Before being stripped of the stalks and ex-
hausted corms they should be matured in some
convenient corner, thoroughly protected from the
rain and sunshine.
The Spanish iris responds surprisingly to
similar conditions, excepting that the depth of plant-
ing is from four to six inches, the bulbs being placed
about three inches apart early in April and left in
the ground until overcrowding necessitates trans-
planting.
Clumps of a dozen bulbs are admirably suit-
able for embellishing the border.
THE DAFFODIL.
To many were given the daffodils, to few the
inspiration to improve and make the most of them.
Here in Western Australia we scarcely know
what a daffodil is, more’s the pity, for it has been
clearly demonstrated that they thrive in this State
equally well as similar varieties grown in the East-
ern States. The necessary conditions of cultiva-
tion are a negligible quantity for they may be gained
by reading these pages; what we need are the
varieties.


A few obsolete varieties are grown by us year
in and year out without any attempt at improve-
ment.
On the other hand, a visit to the Victorian
daffodil shows is a revelation. There we see the
wonderful creations of Messrs. Alister Clark, Leon-
ard Buckland, D. V. West, Robert Campbell, and
the late Robert Bell. Thousands of magnificent
blooms of types and shades we have never dreamt
of here are displayed on the benches, practically
the whole of which were raised by the abovenamed
enthusiasts. At first they are bewildering, as well
as bewitching; but a careful examination not only
makes them comprehensive, it reveals the hand of
the artist as clearly as though his name were en-
dorsed on the blooms.
In Mr. Clark’s flowers you see that the ideal
sought was the etherially beautiful, together with
perfect balance and contour; in Mr. Buckland’s, the
big, the bold, the brilliant verging on the bizzare,
but in nowise approaching the coarse; in Mr. West’s,
the general utility flower of size, beauty, form and
substance; in Mr. Campbell’s, similar characteristics
to Mr. Clark’s combined with endless variety, and
in Mr. Bell’s size, form and constitution.
Many of the trumpet varieties measure four
inches and more across from tip to tip of their
broad, rounded perianths, but are so evenly bal-
anced and so perfectly formed that there is not the
faintest suspicion of clumsiness about any of them.
Others have buff coloured trumpets, a sure indica-
tion that before many years daffodils with yellow
perianths and red trumpets will be seen on the
show benches.
Of course, there are already many daffodils of
the Incomparabilis and Barii types with red cups,
but the red trumpet will be unique.


What has been done in Victoria is to be done
in Western Australia; but first, we must grow the
flowers, and plenty of them, or the inspiration to
cross-fertilise with the object of attaining the per-
fect will be useless.
In our sand the daffodils do well if the soil be
enriched with a load or two of loam, or peaty soil,
or decomposed manure. Deep digging is essential.
Before planting, a sprinkling of bonedust or
Thomas’ phosphate should be thoroughly mixed
with the soil.
After planting, which should be done towards
the end of March, the soil must be kept damp.
Trumpet varieties do best when planted six
inches deep in sand, four inches in loam or peat;
but the Incomparabalis, Leedsii, Barrii, Poeticus,
and the many hybrid varieties raised by crossing
the trumpets with the jonquilla are better for being
planted at a little less depth.
Eight weeks after flowering, or when the seeds
have matured, is the time to lift the bulbs. When
the foliage is dry, clean up and store in as cool
a place as possible.
THE HYACINTH.
Hyacinths respond wonderfully to treatment
similar to that described for the daffodil, with this
difference, they must be planted at least eight inches
deep in light soils, and six inches deep in from
medium to heavy loams.
Shallow planting results in a fine crop of leaves
and thin miserable flowers; deep planting helps to
keep the bulbs at an even temperature, giving the
flower spike an opportunity to develop slowly and
naturally before being pushed up to the light.


THE DAHLIA.
This popular flower, which is gaining favour
every year, is amenable to cultivation in all our
soils as is evidenced every Autumn at the shows.
There we now see dahlias of every conceiv-
able type, shape and colour; some grown in loam,
others in peat, but most in the sandy soil of Perth.
Although the plants do well in our heavy
loams and rich peaty soils with little or no manur-
ing, they do much better when the soils are well
worked and manured; and it is absolutely essen-
tial not only to enrich the sand with heavy applica-
tions of manures, but to trench them in, thoroughly
incorporating them with the soil, to produce the
splendid results we see on the show trays.
Therefore, the rule is to manure, and manure
heavily, to grow dahlias of the highest quality, with
one exception, the Pompom, svhich, being the ex-
ception which proves the rule, yields the best crop
of blooms if grown in a moderately good soil with-
out any forcing.
A good general method of cultivation is to
trench the ground to a depth of at least two feet
early in November, using horse manure for heavy
loams, together with about 11b. of Thomas’ phos-
phate and 1 oz. of sulphate of potash to the square
yard; a light dressing of horse manure, 11b. of
Thomas’ phosphate and 1 oz. of sulphate of potash
for peaty soils; and a heavy dressing of cow manure,
11b, of bonedust, and 2oz. of sulphate of potash
for sandy soils.
If a little clay or heavy loam is procurable to
mix with the sand it will improve it immensely, the
improvement being permanent.
After trenching, a dusting of slaked lime is
beneficial.


During the interval between trenching and
planting out the tubers or struck cuttings all soils are
better for being turned over a few times and kept
slightly damped.
Planting for exhibition should be commenced
about the end of December and continued through-
out January, the slower growing varieties, such as
the cactus type, being planted first, a stout hard-
wood stake for the support of each plant being
driven in at the same time.
As growth progresses watering must be at-
tended to regularly, and liquid manurings com-
menced as soon as the buds appear, alternate doses
of weak liquid cow manure and nitrate of soda
(2oz. to 6 gallons of water) applied weekly being
most beneficial.
As soon as the buds are sufficiently developed
to handle with safety, disbudding may be proceeded
with, the most promising bud on each stem only,
generally the crown bud, being reserved for the
show bloom.
When the buds are about half developed the
liquid manurings may be discontinued.
The blooms are better for being shaded and
protected from the weather.
From June to July is the time to lift the tubers;
chop off the stems, leaving stumps about 3in. long,
and store in a cool, dark corner.
Raising new varieties and types of dahlias is
an absorbing pastime which could be much more
extensively indulged in in this State than it is.
New varieties are assured simply by trans-
ferring the pollen from one flower to the stigmas
of another in the manner described previously in
“ Carnations,” and saving and sowing the seed.


Some discrimination, however, is necessary in
selecting the blooms for cross-fertilising, “ Big ”
isn’t everything; Contour and Balance must be
maintained. Unfortunately, flowers bordering on
the clumsy and the misshapen are receiving recogni-
tion on our show benches just because they are big,
when in fact they should never have been named.
The experimentalist who raises new varieties
of perfect balance, contour, and purity of colour-
ing, together with adherence to a recognised fixed
type or a marked break to a decidedly new type,
is bound to win in the long run, even if he is handi-
capped for a time by competing against coarse, un-
gainly mongrels as big as cabbages.
THE HIPPEASTRUM.
This big, bold, handsome flower, often mis-
named amaryllis, is remarkable easy to grow in all
our soils, providing they are well drained.
In the open border all that is required is a
hole just deep enough for the bulb to be covered,
into which the bulb may be popped either in the
autumn or early spring, and in an inconceivably
short space of time your hippeastrum has a spike
of four or more flowers each measuring from eight
to ten inches across.
As a pot plant it is an acquisition well worth
growing for its foliage alone. A moderately rich
potting compost suits it best. Should the leaves
die off, as they sometimes do during July, little
water should be given till the flower-scape appears.
Generally the flower-scape and new leaves appear
simultaneously in September.
We have, at a moderate price, varieties raised
in W.A. of larger size, superior form, and sounder


constitution than any of the high-priced imported
sorts.
THE TULIP.
Tulips will not grow in sand, but that is not
to say they cannot be grown in Perth; they can.
A few loads of loam, the heavier the better,
mixed with the sand to a depth of two feet, is about
all they require the first season.
The bulbs may be planted three inches deep
from the second week in March to the middle of
April, and lifted and stored away early in
November.
Peaty soil, if stiffened with a liberal allow-
ance of loam or even fine yellow sand, will grow
tulips to perfection providing the beds are well
built up and in nowise sour.
Their ideal home, however, is a deep, mellow,
well-drained loam.
After the first season the beds should be en-
riched with a moderate dressing of manure, pre-
ferably cow manure, together with a little bonedust,
to be dug in and well mixed with the soil six or
eight weeks before planting time.
THE LILIES.
Such varieties as Lilium candidum (the Ma-
donna lily), and Lilium longiflorum (St. Joseph’s
lily) are so wonderfully easy to grow, so majesti-
cally graceful when in bloom, so delicately chaste
for special decorative purposes, and so much loved
by young and old, that it is inconceivable why they
are not grown in abundance throughout the West.


They may be grown in any well-drained soil
in the full glare of sunshine, or in the shade, but
certainly do best if grown in partial shade such as
that afforded by a trellis, a building, or a lath house.
To grow them to perfection, all that is neces-
sary is to trench the ground, preferably on the south
side of the house, to a depth of three feet, all the
leaves, twigs, straw, and refuse of that description
being incorporated with the sand when filling in.
A layer of manure on the bottom of the trench is
also beneficial, but there must be none near the
bulb itself.
In this State, January is the best month to
plant. The bulbs should be covered with eight
inches of sandy soil or six inches of loamy soil,
which must be kept moist throughout the Summer.
Towards the end of April and early in May the
plants break through the soil, and are very beauti-
ful in themselves. Flowering commences in October
and continues till well on in November.
The bulbs may be left in the ground for years,
but the soil must always be kept damp.
When transplanting becomes necessary, the
bulbs should be lifted early in January and put in
the new ground as soon as possible, although it
does not appear to injure them if left out of the
ground for a week or two, providing they are stored
in a cool, shady place.
HUMBOLDTII PARDALINUM HYBRIDS.
These wonderfully graceful flowers do well in
our loamy soils, especially when partly shaded by
trees.
In the cooler districts of our State, where the
soil is naturally deep and rich, they need no manur


ing whatever, although deep cultivation is neces-
sary to develop them to the limit of their capacity.
If planted 6in. deep and 1 Sin. apart during
the winter they break through the soil early in
September, make rapid growth, and send up tall
sprays of orange blooms, spotted with deep brown,
at Christmas time.
Each spike carries from 20 to 30 individual
flowers. The bulbs may be left in the ground for
years; but it is advisable to transplant every two
or three years or they will become overcrowded.
When lifted they should be returned to the
soil as soon as possible, and they must never be
allowed to become absolutely dry.
Unlike imported lilies, there is no need to lose
time acclimatising them, for, raised in Victoria,
they are naturally adapted to our seasons.
In Victoria they have superseded the tiger
lilies.
THE RANUNCULUS.
It is extremely difficult to understand why this
beautiful flower is not more generally cultivated in
the West. Possibly because of failures due to seeds
being sown in unsuitable seedbeds, or to claws of
cheap, inferior varieties being grown and giving
disappointing results. As a matter of fact, the
ranunculus has been grown to perfection in several
parts of this State, and the growers without excep-
tion maintain that of all the spring flowers none
make a finer show, last longer, or are better suited
for cutting for decorative purposes.
In Perth, and as far east as Kalgoorlie, we have
them in bloom from July to well on in November,
and in the Great Southern and South-Western dis-
tricts they bloom even later.


Varieties.
There are four distinct types of ranunculi in
cultivation: the French, the Persian, the Turban and
the Hybrids, which mostly are intermediates.
French: The French ranunculus is the most
gorgeously beautiful of all, the rounded, incurved,
rose-like petals having a richness and brilliance of
colouring possessed by none of the others. Un-
fortunately, it does not thrive unless planted in very
rich loam, therefore its cultivation is limited unless
the grower is prepared to procure a few loads of
rich loam from the foothills with which to build up
sandy or peaty soil.
Persian: This is of a different type, the petals
being narrower, more numerous, and less brilliantly
coloured. But it has the great advantage of being
very easily grown in any of our soils.
Turban: This variety is named from its re-
semblance to a turban. Although very beautiful, it
is short-stemmed and somewhat delicate, conse-
quently its cultivation is recommended only to those
who desire to specialise in ranunculi.
Hybrids: These have been evolved by inter-
crossing the other varieties, mostly the French and
Persian, and selecting only those plants that have
inherited the vividly gorgeous colourings of the
French parent flower together with the iron consti-
tution and profuse habit of growth of the Persian.
Cultivation.
The French ranunculus thrives in a rich, deep,
well-drained loam, and produces an abundance of
bloom lasting over a period of about four months.
In Perth and suburbs they may be grown to per-
fection by trenching the soil about 1 Sin. deep,
manuring it well with thoroughly decomposed man-
ure and then adding about 6in. of the rich loam


from the valleys about Kalamunda or Gosnells,
which should be well dug in and mixed with the
sandy soil to the full depth of a spit. The addition
of a sprinkling of bonedust improves the vigour of
the plants and gives an added lustre to the flowers.
The beds should be prepared by the beginning of
March and allowed to settle till planting time, being
kept slightly damp.
The claws, as the tuberous roots are called, are
planted in drills, covered with about 2in., not more,
of soil and, firmed down, the soil being scratched
over afterwards to permit of the easy access of
water. Until the rainy season sets in it is necessary
to water occasionally to prevent the soil drying out.
From the middle of March to the middle of
April is the best time to plant. As the plants do
practically the whole of their growing during the
winter, they prefer an open situation where they get
the full benefit of the light, but are sheltered from
the winds.
The flowering period commences about the
end of July, and is prolonged by cutting out the
blooms as they fade to prevent their running to
seed.
About a month after the flowers are gone the
claws should be lifted and allowed to dry off. When
the foliage is quite dry it is advisable to cut off the
stalks about an inch above the claws, which should
be stored away in some cool, dry corner till plant-
ing time comes round again.
If allowed to remain in the ground too long
after their flowering period, the claws deteriorate.
The Persian and Hybrids thrive in the open
border in any soil suitable for flowers in general
•cultivation, where they make an exceptionally bril-
liant display when planted as a ribbon edging along
the margin of the border next the walk.


Many of our latest hybrids besides being ex-
ceptionally large, double, and long-stemmed, are
almost, if not quite, as brilliantly coloured as the
French.
It may come as a surprise to many to learn
that the best varieties in cultivation in Victoria to-
day were raised in Western Australia.
All types need very little room and may be
planted about Sin. apart, and within two or three
inches of the walk.
Seeds.
The seeds of all varieties should be sown
thinly in specially prepared seedbeds or boxes
of moderately damp, rich, sandy soil from the
middle to the end of March. If the soil in the boxes
becomes in the slightest degree sour through bad
drainage, or from any other cause, the seeds fail to
germinate or the seedlings fail to develop. Should
the weather be very hot, it is advisable to protect
the young seedlings during the heat of the day;
but as the winter sets in they are better for all the
light and warmth they can get. Whether sown in
seedbeds or boxes, the seeds should be scattered as
evenly as possible over the surface, pressed firmly
in, and then barely covered with finely-sifted soil..
To prevent the soil washing, the seed boxes should
be watered with a fine spray.
The seedlings may be pricked out with safety
as soon as they are large enough to handle; but it
is advisable to leave them in their beds or boxes
until they bloom, when the singles, the weaklings,
and those of indifferent colouring should be plucked
out and discarded, the doubles and semi-doubles
of good colour being retained for planting out the
following season.
An immense field is open to the amateur en-
thusiast in the improvement and development of
this enchanting flower by cross-fertilisation.


Besides the above, there are many other
species of bulbous plants which thrive in the West
and bear strikingly beautiful flowers to reward their
growers for the labour spent upon their cultivation.
But the gardener who succeeds in growing ranun-
culi experiences no difficulty whatever in cultivating
anemones; so it is with practically the whole of the
bulbs.
Should operations be commenced by experi-
menting with the few we have enumerated, and it
is found to be desirable to increase the collection,
by all means add to it from time to time, and it will
come almost as a surprise that the knowledge al-
ready acquired is sufficient to ensure success with
practically every bulb worth cultivating in this
State.
PALMS.
Gracefully beautiful palms, unrivalled for de-
corating the drawing-room, the hall, the verandah,
the greenhouse, or the garden, are procurable at
such reasonable prices that to go into details de-
scribing the method of rasing them from seed—a
long and laborious process—would be altogether
unsuitable to the majority of our readers.
Perfect specimens of sizes suitable to all re-
quirements being so readily available, it is of more
importance to know how to keep them healthy and
vigorous subsequent to their purchase, as well as
the most suitable varieties to select.
The Kentia Palms, Kentia Fosteriana, Kentia
Melmoreana, are perhaps the handiest, the hardiest,
and the most suitable for general indoor use, be-
cause they stand a lot of knocking about and are
as much at home in the drawing-room of the cottage
as of the mansion.


There is no reason why these lovely decorative
plants should not be kept in a perfect state for years.
All that is necessary is to water them sufficiently,
feed them occasionally, give them plenty of air,
and keep them clean.
One or two waterings a week are generally
sufficient, care being taken to see that all the sur-
plus moisture has drained away before the pots are
returned to their jardinieres, for if ever so little
water is allowed to lodge in the bottom of the
jardinieres it will soon kill the palms.
Feeding is best administered in fortnightly
doses of liquid sulphate of ammonia—a teaspoonful
to two gallons of water —from a pint to a quart,
depending upon the size of the pot, to be given
immediately after the plants have been watered.
Instead of keeping them overnight in a closed-
up room, give them regular airings on a sheltered
verandah where they are sure to be protected from
strong winds as well as from hot sunshine if they
happen to be forgotten.
Cleanliness is assured if the leaves are gently
washed now and then with Sunlight soap.
The Cocos, especially Weddeliana, and the
Phoenix Palms are also singularly adapted for in-
door adornment.
For outdoor cultivation we specially recom-
mend Brahea Filamentosa, Corypha Australis, and
Latania Borbonica; but the last named needs shade
and shelter.
All thrive in our sand, but when grown in
tubs a liberal allowance of peat should be mixed
with the soil.
Other varieties well worth growing are Chame-
rops Humilis, Chamerops Excelsa, the rather slow
growing but beautiful Sabals, Cocos Plumosus,
Jubea Spectablis, and Diplothemum Maritinum.


HARDY SHADE HOUSE AND VERANDAH
PLANTS.
For growing in shade house or on a sheltered
verandah we recommend the following:—
Asparagus Plumosa, Asparagus Sprengeri,
Aspidistra (green and variegated vari-
eties), Begonias (shrubby), Camellia,
Cineraria, Coleus, Cyclamen, Dracaena,
Fuchsia, Hydrangea, Pelargoniums (Re-
gal and Zonale), Palms.
Ferns: Adianthus (Maiden Hair), Davallia
(Hare’s Foot), Fishbone, Nephnolepsis,
Staghorn, Pteris.
These thrive in a compost of fine sand and
swamp soil, whether grown in pots or tubs, but are
all the better for an occasional liquid manuring,
when in full growth, with a weak cow-dung solution,
to which a pinch of sulphate of ammonia may be
added.
When taken indoors to decorate the drawing-
room, care must be exercised to prevent the soil
becoming sour through over-watering or through
water lodging in the bottoms of the jardinieres; and
in any case they should never be kept inside for a
prolonged period, unless placed near a window
where they can obtain a sufficiency of light.
CLIMBING PLANTS.
When adorned with suitable creepers, both the
appearance and the value of a dwelling are very
much enhanced; especially when additional im-
provements are effected by converting outbuildings
into bowers of beauty, and unsightly fences into
walls of living loveliness.
Nature, in evolving the climbing plants, lav-
ished upon man one of her greatest blessings by


presenting him not only with their glorious beauties
to soothe his senses, but with a deliciously cool
shade on hot summer days, as well as the means to
fortify himself in his own home against the prying
curiosity of the outside world.
The vines have been designed for all purposes;
but man, the practical, has domesticated a few of
the most ornamental species mostly for the follow-
ing purposes:—To beautify his home and surround-
ings, to provide himself with the comfort of their
shade, to fence himself in, and to please himself
with a congenial pastime. He wants a permanent
dense shade, he has the evergreens; he wants a
leafy bower in the Summer and all the sun he can
get in the Winter, he has the deciduous.
Providing his desires are backed up with suf-
ficient energy to plant and attend to his climbers,
he gets all he expects, and more.
Hereunder are listed only species that have
given every satisfaction to their growers in W.A.
Practically the whole of the climbers, shrubs
and trees should be planted out from May to
October.
Ampelopsis, D. (Virginian Creeper). Varieties:
Hederacea and Henryana, as ordinary climb-
ers; Veitchii for growing on walls. The bright
red Autumn leaves of this species are glow-
ingly beautiful.
Asparagus, E. Plumosus for fences, trellis-work,
and foliage for cutting. Sprengeri for hanging
baskets.


Bignonia or Tecoma, E. Colours of some of the
varieties described in Shrubs. (See Tecoma.)
Other varieties; Australis (cream and brown),
Capreolata (orange and red), Jasminoides
(purple and white), Lindleyana (lilac), Mac-
keni (rose-pink), Rosea (rosey-lilac),
Tweediana (yellow)—this variety will cling to
brickwork without artificial support; and
Venusta (orange)—the gem of the lot.
Bougainvillea, E, Varieties: Braisliensis (dark
rose), Glabra Sanderiana (violet-red), Inter-
media (rose-mauve), Magnifica Traili (bright
purple), and Lateritia (terracotta). Suitable
for the hottest and dryest parts of the State.
Boussingaltia Bassiloides, E. The potato creeper.
Canavallia Bonariensis, E. Foliage heavy and beau-
tiful. Pea-like flowers, bright purplish red.
Clematis, D. Wonderfully showy when in bloom.
Ficus Stipulata, E. The climbing Fig. Needs no
tying.
Hardenbergia, E. Digitata (blue), indigenous to
W.A.; Monophylla Alba (white).
Hedera, E. Ivy. Common and variegated vari-
eties.
Hoya Carnosa, E. The climbing Wax Plant. Flesh-
coloured wax-like flowers.
Ipomaea Learii, E. The Morning Glory Convolvu-
lus.
Ivy Geraniums (Pelargoniums), Single and double
and of a good range of colours.
Jasminum, E. The Jasmine. Varieties: Grandi-
florum (white), Revolutum (yellow).
Kennedya Nicricans, E. Suitable for covering fowl-
houses. Flowers very dark.


Lathyrus, E. The White, Blue, and Pink varieties
of everlasting Pea.
Lonicera, E. Honeysuckle. Varieties: Confusa
(yellow), Caprifolium (creamy-white), and
others.
Mandevillea, D. White flowers, purely beautiful
and deliciously fragrant.
Medeola, D. The Bridal Creeper, also American
Smilax.
Passiflora, E. The Passion Flower. Varieties: Con-
stance Elliott (white), Coerulea (blue), Edulis
(Passion Fruit).
Phaseolus Caracalla, D. Fragrant lilac and yellow
flowers. Commonly known as the Snail
Creeper.
Rhyncosperinum Jasminoides, E. Delicately sweet
white flowers, that make the name excusable.
Solanum Jasminoides, E. Rapid growth; flowers
white.
Solanum Wendlandi, D. Very strong trusses of
large blue flowers.
Stephanotis Floribunda, E. Large trusses of waxy-
white flowers. Warmth and shelter necessary
for its perfect development.
Tacsonias, E. (the Passion Flower). Varieties:
Scarlet, Pink, Crimson, and Rosy-cerise. The
Pink also bears the white Passion Fruit.
Wisteria, D. Pea-shaped lavender-blue flowers,
fragrant, borne on long pendulus racemes.
Several varieties of white, also doubles. Tho-
roughly hardy when once established.
SHRUBS AND TREES.
It is not our intention to describe in detail every
tree and shrub that may be grown throughout Aus


tralasia. Our idea of the utility of a tree, irrespec-
tive of its timber-value, being its beauty, its useful-
ness as a shade, or a breakwind, or a hedge, and its
adaptability to the soil and climate, we shall en-
umerate only the varieties we consider of major
importance for such purposes in this State.
When purchasing trees to adorn the garden,
to beautify the landscape, to ensure privacy, to
shelter stock, or to provide cool shady bowers in
the children’s playgrounds, to which substantial
swings may be affixed, it is of paramount import-
ance that the most suitable for their special purposes
should be selected, providing they will grow well
in the only environment available; and, irrespec-
tive of their individual cost, the most suitable are
always the cheapest in the long run, because they
are the best.
Should a tree wanted for its shade develop
only a stunted growth on account of unsuitable soil
or unfavourable climate, it can never be other than
an eyesore, no matter how luxuriously it may grow
under suitable conditions.
The symbols E. and D. are for Evergreen and
Deciduous respectively.
Acmena, E. Shapely; flowers white, followed by
pink and white berries.
Aloysia Citriodora, D. Lemon scented Verbena.
Flowers white,
Amygdalus, D. Double-flowering peach. Varie-
ties: Persua, various colours; Splendens, vari-
ous colours.
Arduina Grandiflora, E. Cape Plum. Habit dwarf,
flowers fragrant, fruit edible.
Arundinaria, E. Bamboo. Varieties: green and
variegated.


Boronia Megastigma, E. Fragrant. The pride of
W.A.’s wildflowers.
Bouvardias. Growth beautiful; flowers in Autumn.
Brugmansia, E. Trumpet Lily. Single and double;
flowers white and fragrant.
Buddlea, E. Varieties: Globosa and Paniculata are
of rambling habit; Veitchiana and Variablis,
shrubby, bearing reddish-violet flowers.
Callistemon Coccinea, E. The Scarlet Bottle Brush.
Camalanceum (Geraldton Wax Flower).
Cassia Corymbosa and Grandiflora, E. Hardy free-
flowering gems.
Choisya Ternata, E. Dwarf. Flowers dainty and
sweet.
Chrysanthemum Frutescens. Marguerite Daisy.
Single and double.
Clianthus, E. Beautiful drooping dwarf shrubs.
Coprosma Lucida, E. Bright shiny foliage. Varie-
ties: Baueriana Picturata and Variegata are
two of the finest variegated shrubs in cultiva-
tion.
Daphne, E. Flowers delightfully sweet. Plants
need light shelter from sun.
Deutzia, D. Varieties: Crenata Flore Pleno, Gra-
cilis, Gracilis Rosea, being the best.
Diosma Ericoides, E. Foliage scented; flowers
white.
Dombeya, E. Mastersii. Growth vigorous; flowers
pure white.
Dracaena or Cordyline, E. Foliage palm-like. Va-
rieties: Stricta, Belmoreana, Baptistii, Hender-
sonii, Lindenii, and others. Most suitable for
cultivation in shade-house or green-house.
Duranta Alba and Plumieri, E. White and blue
flowered, followed by racems of yellow, wax-
like berries.


Eugenia, E, Varieties numerous, but E. Myrtifolia
is most beautiful as a single specimen, as well
as most useful for a hedge.
Euonymus, E. Variegated sorts, all good. Aureus
Variegatis and Latifolius Albus thrive through-
out the State.
Gardenia Florida, E. Deliciously scented waxy-
white flowers, but must be grown in a warm,
sheltered position.
Genista Fragrans, E. Shapely. Bears an abund-
ance of fragrant yellow flowers.
Habrothamnus, E. Elegans and Newelli bear crim-
son flowers.
Heliotropium, E. Cherry Pie, President Garfield
and White Lady are the best varieties. Flow-
ers deliciously fragrant.
Hibiscus, E. The Crimson, the Double Red, the
Scarlet, the Pink, and the Double Pink all do
well throughout the State.
Hydrangea, D. All varieties of these superb plants
thrive and flower abundantly, providing the
blooms are shaded.
Jasminum, E. Grandiflora (white) and Revolution
(yellow) are the best Jasmines grown.
Lagerstroemia India, D. The Crape Flower. Va-
rieties, pink and mauve-pink. Daintily crimp-
ed flowers bloom in masses.
Lasiandra, E. Both the rose and the violet flower-
ing varieties are beautiful shrubs and perfectly
hardy.
Lavandula, E. The English and French varieties of
Lavender; will grow anywhere.
Ligustrum, E. The Privets are beautiful shrubs
which all luxuriate in this State. The Golden
Privet, the White Flowering, and the Japanese
varieties do exceptionally well in our sand.


Nandina Domestica, E. The Sacred Tree of Japan.
Foliage white and green, tinted with red in
winter; berries bright red.
Nerium, E. All the Oleanders are beautiful and
perfectly hardy. Varieties: Album Grandi-
florum (white), Lilian Henderson (white),
Luteum Plenum (pale yellow), Madame Mar-
tin (salmon), Mdlle. Dubois (single white),
Monsieur Belagier (pink), Professor Martin
(crimson), Souvenir de Cazalis Allut (deep
crimson), Splendens (double pink), Splendens
Variegatum (green and yellow variegated).
Philadelphus, D. Mock Orange. Flowers white
and fragrant.
Phormium, E. New Zealand Flax. Foliage similar
to the Iris, but variegated.
Pittosporum Undulatum, E. Valuable for hedges
and breakwinds.
Plumbago, E. Alba, white; Capensis, blue. Suit-
able for covering unsightly fences, etc.
Podalyria, E. Grandiflora and Stracifolia. Bears
beautiful pink pear-shaped flowers.
Poinciana Gilliesii, D. Bird of Paradise Flower.
Flowers scarlet and yellow.
Polygala Grandis, E. The Bearded Pea. Flowers
purple; blooms in winter.
Psidium Cattleyanum, E. The Purple Guava. Fruit
edible and very tasty.
Punica Granatum, D. Pomegranate, Flowers scar-
let; fruit edible. A good double-flowering
variety is P. Nana Flore Plena.
Raphiolepis, E, Indian Hawthorn. Flowers white
and fragrant. Berries black.
Romneya Coulterii, E. Giant Californian Poppy.
Fragrant white flowers.


Rosemarinus, E. Rosemary.
Salvia, E, Varieties numerous and showy. Colours
of flowers, blue, pink, rose-pink, red, scarlet,
and crimson.
Sparmannia Africana Flore Pleno, E. Double-
flowering white. Exceptionally shapely growth.
Spartium, E, Varieties: Album (white), Junceum
(yellow). Flowers fragrant.
Spiraea, D. English May. Varieties: Anthony
Waterer (red), Corymbosa (white), Reevesi-
ana (double white), Grandiflora (the Snow
Bush).
Swainsonia, E. Alba (white), Osbornei (pink).
Both bloom profusely.
Syringa, D. The Lilac. Alba (white) and the
common English Lilac. Both do well in the
Darling Range, also in the cooler districts.
Tamarix, D. The pink-flowering Cypress. Splendid
for exposed positions.
Tecoma or Bignonia, D. Semi-climbers and very
showy. Varieties: Capensis (red), Grandi-
flora (orange), Guilfoyleii (dark red), Smithii
(yellow with brown throat), Staus and Velu-
tina (clear yellow), Toxicophlea Spectablis
(white).
Viburnum, D. and E. Opulus, D., the Snowball
Tree, and Tinus, E., the Lauristinus being the
most suitable for this State.
Vitex Trifolia Variegata, E. Green and white.
Growth rapid.
Yucca. Exceptionally hardy. Aloefolia (cream),
Gloriosa (immense spikes of white flowers),
Recurvata (cream).
Besides the above, several varieties of Azaleas
and Rhododendrons should thrive if planted in the
cool districts in rich, friable, well-drained loam,
where shade and a plentiful water supply are avail-
able.


ORNAMENTAL TREES.
For Avenues, Breakwinds, Shade, etc.
Araucarias, Cupressus, and Conifers, E.—
A. Bidwilli. The Bunya Bunya of Queensland.
A. Excelsa. The Norfolk Island Pine.
A. Imbricata. The Monkey Puzzle.
Cryptomeria Japonica. The Japanese Cedar.
Camellias, E. Varieties numerous, all being beauti-
ful.
Camphor Laurel, E. Camphor Officinalis. A
shapely tree of beautiful foliage.
Carob Bean, E. Ceratonia Siliqua. The Locust
Tree. Flowers yellow; beans edible.
Coral Tree, D. Erythrina. Flowers scarlet and
gorgeously beautiful.
Eucalypti, E.—
Citriodora. Lemon-scented Gum.
Corynocalyx. Sugar Gum.
Globulus. Tasmanian Blue Gum.
Gomphocephala. Tuart Gum.
Ficus Macrophylla, E. The Morton Bay Fig.
Fire Tree, E. Stenocarpus Cunninghami. Foliage
good; flowers crimson.
Flame Tree, E. Brachytchiton. Bright palmate
foliage; flowers scarlet.
Gums, E. Eucalyptus Ficifolia. Crimson-flowering
Gum. Eucalytus Macrocarpa: foliage silvery;
flowers pink and very large.
Jacaranda, D. Fern-like foliage; masses of pale-
blue flowers.
Kurrajong, E. The Bottle Tree of N.S.W.
Magnolia, E. Grandiflora bears immense fragrant
flowers and is the gem of the family.
Melia Azedarach, D. The White Cedar or Texas
Umbrella Tree.


Plane, D. (For damp ground only.)
Pyramid Tree, E. Fugosia Pattersonii. Handsome
tree, bears pink flowers.
Schinus Molle, E. The Pepper Tree.
Silky Oak, E. Grevillea Robusta, grows rapidly;
flowers orange.
Tristania Australis, E. Foliage very broad and
beautiful.
Walnut, D.
Wattles, E. Acacias. Varieties: Decurrens (Black
Wattle), Baileyana (Cootamundra Wattle),
Pycnantha (Golden Wattle) ; Podalyriefolia
(Queensland Wattle).
Cupressus Lambertiana Horizontalis. The
Horizontal Cypress; Cupressus Knighti; Cu-
pressus Lambertiana Horizontalis Aurea;
Cupressus Macrocarpa; Cupressus Torulosa.
Pinus Canariensis; Pinus Insignis.
Special attention must be drawn to the general
utility of the Tuart Gum. As a shade-tree it is un-
surpassable. Its rapidity of growth, hardiness, and
spreading branches make it a very valuable adjunct
to stock paddocks, sheep runs, and poultry farms;
whilst as an avenue tree it affords a delightful shelter
along many roads where other trees are most diffi-
cult to grow.
The Plane will only thrive in permanently
damp ground.
The Walnut is a beautiful and useful tree that
may be grown to perfection in the rich alluvial
gullies of the Great Southern and South-Western
districts.
The Oak, if well looked after till thoroughly
established, also does well in Perth and the cooler
districts.


THE VEGETABLE GARDEN.
We all like our vegetables fresh, but many of
us have to put our likes into our pockets, because
we have not the ground, or the knowledge, or the
energy to grow a few for ourselves. Of course, the
majority of us are unable to keep the pot full all the
year round, but it is truly surprising the amount of
garden stuff the average backyard will yield, pro-
viding we sow the right kinds of seeds at the right
time, and afterwards cultivate sedulously.
In vegetable gardening method is everything,
especially when backed with a long-handled shovel;
therefore the reader will do well to skim through
this book methodically before deciding that it is
only necessary to look over the Chinaman’s fence to
learn all about gardening.
The reading will impart theory, the long-
handled shovel practice, the exercise health; the
sum of which is knowledge; and the results will be
beautifully clean crisp vegetables that are good to
behold, better than those sold, and best to enfold.
What is nicer on a hot summer’s day than a
cool sweet salad of tender lettuce, fresh picked and
made piquant by the addition of a tomato, a radish,
or an onion, all grown by oneself and known to
be thoroughly wholesome? Yet how often do we
hear, “Yes, I would like to grow some, only I never
seem to have any luck.” Follow the directions given
hereunder and the luck will change for the better.
ASPARAGUS.
To grow asparagus successfully it is essential
that the soil be worked deeply, thoroughly enriched
with manures, and the encroachment of weeds pre-
vented. Light to medium loams are most suitable,
although it does well in peaty soil if stiffened with
loam or fine sand, in sandy soil, or in heavy loam.


All soils are the better for being turned over a
few times before the seeds are sown or the roots
planted.
The seeds are best sown thinly in shallow drills
from the middle of August to early in October, the
rows being about eighteen inches apart. As the
young plants come up they should be thinned out,
the sturdiest being selected. About nine inches of
space in the rows for each plant is sufficient.
The roots should be planted out during the
winter, from May to August.
Asparagus likes lots of manure and must have
it for the production of quick tender growth in the
Spring. Besides stable manure, a sprinkling of
bone and blood, together with two ounces of salt,
to the square yard is most beneficial.
As the stems decay in the Autumn they should
be cut away, the beds manured and top-dressed. A
further top-dressing in the Spring is recommended.
THE ARTICHOKES.
Any ground suits the artichokes, but all
grounds produce heavier crops when deeply culti-
vated and manured.
The seeds if sown in the warmer districts during
August, and in the cooler districts as late as Octo-
ber germinate freely.
For the first year’s growth thin sowing in rows
is advisable. The seedlings should be thinned out,
a space of about fifteen inches being allowed for
each plant.
During the following Spring the root's are all
the better for being transplanted, each plant being
allowed a growing space of 4 feet.


Jerusalem artichokes are not grown from seed.
The tuberous roots are planted in the Spring in rows,
the tubers being placed about one foot apart, with
a space of eighteen inches between the rows.
BEET.
Beet grows well in all our soils, providing they
are deeply worked and heavily manured. The plant
develops an immense mass of fine rootlets which not
only work deep down into the soil, but come to the
surface to feed, and extend to some distance from
the plant. In soils rich in lime from three to four
cwt. of superphosphate per acre, and in soils poor in
lime about two cwt. of fine bonedust or Thomas*
phosphate per acre, together with about eight tons
of stable manure, will produce an abundant crop.
A light dressing of sulphate of potash also is bene-
ficial.
Immediately before sowing the seed a dressing
of one cwt. of nitrate of soda to the acre, or about
one ounce to two square yards, is wonderfully effec-
tive in stimulating growth.
The seeds are sown in inch-deep drills, at any
time for cultivation in peaty and loamy soils where
ample water is available, the drills being eighteen
inches apart; but for a winter crop only, they may
be sown any time between January and April. The
seedlings should be thinned out to six inches.
During growth an additional cwt. of nitrate of
soda per acre applied shortly after thinning out, fol-
lowed by two cwt. a few weeks later, stimulates
growth continuously and materially increases the
Weight of the crop.
In light soils, including peat, salt at the rate of
from four to six cwt. per acre, improves the crop;
but the small grower must always keep in mind that


six cwt. to the acre is only a trifle more than two
ounces to the square yard.
Silver beet, the roots of which are not edible,
responds to similar treatment, excepting that it is
best as a Winter crop. The seeds germinate readily
when sown in the early Autumn. When grown as
described above, it is a remarkably good cut-and-
come-again food for poultry.
BEANS.
Unless beans, peas, or any of the legumes are
grown as a rotation crop after cabbages or any other
heavily manured vegetable, it is necessary to manure
the ground with a moderate dressing of stable
manure, together with bonedust or Thomas’ phos-
phate, and sulphate of potash, to be well incor-
porated with the soil to the full depth of a spit.
Half a kerosenetinful of manure, two table-
spoonsful of bonedust, two tablespoonsful of lime,
and one of sulphate of potash to the square yard,
will ensure full pods and a heavy crop.
Broad Beans may be sown from March to May.
The seed if sown 2 inches deep in drills, 1 ft. apart,
with 3 ft. between the rows, seldom fail to germi-
nate.
When the plants are in flower, the tops of all
the stems should be pinched out to ensure a heavy
crop of well-filled pods.
French Beans, including Butter Beans, Runner
Beans, etc., may be sown and grown throughout the
year in and about Perth.
The small grower, however, obtains the most
satisfactory results by sowing in Autumn and Spring.
During March and April, or September and
October, the seeds if sown two inches deep and four


inches apart in rows, with two feet between the rows,
germinate readily and produce good crops, but the
plants must have ample supplies of water during dry
weather.
THE CABBAGE and CAULIFLOWER.
In common with all broad-leaved plants, the
cabbage, as well as Brussels Sprouts, Kale, and the
Cauliflower, must have a rich, warm, well-drained
soil.
These useful vegetables grow remarkably well
when generously treated in all our soils, but owing
to the ravages of the cabbage fly, can only be grown
in the vicinity of Perth during the Winter or early
Summer.
The ground should be prepared by digging or
ploughing in a heavy dressing of stable manure, to-
gether with three or four cwt. of bonedust or basic
slag (Thomas’ phosphate) to the acre.
The plants do best if raised in specially pre-
pared seed-beds, the seeds being sown during Janu-
ary and February, and the seedlings transplanted
during April and May, the plants being placed about
twenty inches apart, with a space of two feet between
the rows.
During growth a mulch is beneficial, and
several light dressings of sulphate of ammonia and
salt, one cwt. of each to the acre, applied at intervals
of a few weeks after a good soaking rain, improve
the quality and increase the weight of the crop
immensely.
In districts where the cabbage fly is not pre-
valent cabbages may be grown throughout the year,
providing a sufficiency of water is available.
Seeds may be sown at any time excepting from
the middle of May to the middle of July.
Before the cauliflowers are bedded out, the
ground is better for being well rolled.


CARROTS and PARSNIPS.
These require a deep, rich, friable soil. If
grown after cabbages that have been thoroughly
manured, no further manuring is necessary, although
in light soils a sprinkling of sulphate of potash gives
excelljprlt results.
Before sowing the soil should be reduced to a
very fine tilth.
The seeds, if sown thinly a quarter of an inch
deep in drills about a foot apart, and rolled or
trampled firmly afterwards, will need little thinning
out; but to allow them to become too crowded is
anything but an economical method of cultivation.
The time of seeding depends mostly on the
available water supply, but most satisfactory results
are generally obtained by sowing in the Spring and
Autumn.
CELERY.
No matter how rich a soil may be, deep trench-
ing, heavy manuring, liberal and constant feeding
are necessary to grow celery to perfection.
A heavy dressing of stable manure, together
with a handful of bonedust, a dessertspoonful of
sulphate of potash, and the same quantity of salt to
the square yard, if well mixed with the soil to a
depth of a little more than two feet a few weeks
before planting, does for a beginning; but when
the trenches are prepared for the reception of the
plants, a further application of manure dug in the
bottom of the trench is advisable.
The trenches should be 1 8 inches wide by 12
inches deep, and 3 ft. apart.


When raised in well-drained boxes of rich soil
during the early winter the seedlings make rapid
growth, and may be planted from Bto 12 inches
apart in their trenches as soon as large enough to
handle.
During growth frequent applications of liquid
manure are necessary; this may be prepared by
dissolving a tablespoonful of sulphate of ammonia
or nitrate of soda in ten gallons of water, to be
given the plants at intervals of from 18 to 20 days
at the rate of a gallon to three plants.
Alternate waterings with liquid stable or cow
manure improve the sticks immensely.
As growth advances the plants must be earthed
up carefully.
About a month before they are ready for use
they may be covered right up to the leaves to ensure
perfect blanching.
The soil must always be kept moist or, the celery
will be stringy.
CAPE GOOSEBERRY.
When grown in a rich mellow loam the Cape
Gooseberry is a profitable crop.
The seeds may be sown in seed-beds in the
Autumn or Spring, and planted out in rows when
ready, the seedlings being planted 3 ft. apart with
4 ft. between the rows.
If in a dry situation the plants require an oc-
casional watering during the Summer.
A few weeks after the fruit is gathered the old
wood should be pruned back.


CUCUMBER.
The early cucumber catches the early market
and commands high prices.
To get them early it is necessary to sow the
seeds during July in a frame with bottom heat.
As soon as the plants are sufficiently developed
they may be hardened off and planted out, pre-
cautions being taken to protect them from any late
unexpected frosts.
From October to December the seeds may be
sown in the beds where it is intended to grow them.
The cucumber thrives best in deep, rich, well-
drained loam that has been thoroughly worked and
manured.
Stable manure is sufficient to produce a good
yield, but if a little Thomas’ phosphate is added the
yield is better.
In loamy soil or peat it is always advisable to
grow cucumbers on built-up beds or hills, the hills
being from five to six feet apart.
From ten to a dozen seeds may be sown on
each hill and thinned out to five or six, the strongest
being selected.
Watering must be attended to during dry
weather.
When the young cucumbers are forming, light
manurings of nitrate of soda, applied in a weak
liquid form, with alternate doses of liquid cow-
manure, materially increase the size and improve
the quality of the crop.


LEEKS.
Prepare the soil as for Celery.
The seeds, if sown in seed-beds or boxes of
rich, fine soil during February, should be ready for
planting out during May.
When about the size of a spring onion, they are
ready for planting out in rows, the roots being
planted at least six inches deep, with eight inches
between the plants and eighteen inches between the
rows.
For the Spring and Summer crops the seed
may be sown from June to September.
LETTUCE.
This best of all salad plants is very easily
grown, and may be had all the year round.
Any of our soils that have been well worked
and manured with stable manure and a little bone-
dust suit it to perfection.
Providing plenty of water is available, the seeds
may be sown at any time, either in seed-boxes, seed-
beds, or in rows where they are intended to be
grown.
As the seedlings transplant readily in the win-
ter, however, it is more economical to sow the
seeds in seed-beds; but for summer use they are
better sown in rows and thinned out afterwards, a
space of one foot being allowed for each plant.
During summer liberal waterings are necessary.
MELONS.
These vary in their likes and dislikes, some
liking rich ground, others, the pig and pie melons,
for instance, any sort of ground. All, however.


grow stronger vines which yield heavier crops if
grown on hills. The reason for this is, the soil is
better aerated, warmer, and more perfectly drained.
When preparing the hills the ground should be
dug to the full depth of a spit, a moderate dressing
of decomposed manure, together with a little bone-
dust, being incorporated. When building up the
mounds, they should be finished off with about three
inches of clean soil without manure as a surface
dressing.
From eight to ten seeds should be sown on
each hill and thinned out to half as soon as the
plants are far enough advanced for the selection of
the likeliest.
Sowing may be commenced early in September
and continued till November.
Water Melons revel in a bit of virgin soil.
Rock Melons, including cantaloupes, are richer
flavoured for having a light dressing of sulphate of
potash mixed with the soil.
Turk’s Cap, Ironbark and Marrow need a little
more manure than the two former.
Cassaba: This melon, which is new to Western
Australia, is a species of Rock Melon, but is well
worthy of special notice on account of its strong
constitution, its wonderfully rich flavour, which re-
sembles cantaloupe spiced with pineapple, and its
exceptionally good keeping qualities. It is only a
matter of time when it will capture the rock melon
market completely.
Like the Rock Melon, it thrives best in a
moderately rich, deeply worked soil built up into
hills, and is most profitable to grow, both for market
and home use.


THE ONION.
This succulent bulb, like the lily, thrives in a
deep, rich, mellow soil. Our red and yellow sands
when properly manured suit it admirably, especially
in the vicinity of Cottesloe, where it grows to an
astonishing size.
When preparing the beds a moderate dressing
of thoroughly decomposed manure, together with a
tablespoonful of bonedust and a teaspoonful of sul-
phate of potash to the square yard, should be dug in
and well mixed with the soil to the depth of a spit.
If sandy, the soil must be tramped down firmly.
For the main winter crop the seeds are best
sown in protected seed-beds or boxes during Febru-
ary, and for the Spring crop during August and
September.
Unlike most seeds, the onion seed germinates
best when sown on the surface and firmly pressed
in without being covered.
When transplanting during May, June and July,
the young plants have sufficient room if set nine
inches apart, with one foot between the rows, care
being taken to avoid planting too deeply.
After the young plants are firmly established
and growing, a light sprinkling of Thomas’ phos-
phate—a dessertsponful to the square yard—to-
gether with a teaspoonful of sulphate of potash and
a like quantity of nitrate of soda, will develop them
to perfection.
If, during growth, flower stems appear, they
must be pinched out.
THE PEANUT.
In Western Australia the climatic conditions
and many of the soils are perfect for the cultivation


of the peanut, which simply revels in a light sandy
loam or sandy peat that is naturally friable and easy
to work, together with a warm even temperature.
By working and manuring the soil rationally,
and attending to its cultivation during the growth
of the plants, a yield of about a ton per acre can
be expected, that would return a bigger dividend
than even potatoes.
Before sowing the seed, the soil should be
deeply ploughed or dug, a good dressing of stable
manure, together with four or five cwt. of Thomas’
phosphate and one cwt. of sulphate of potash to the
acre, being incorporated. If super, is used in lieu
of Thomas’ phosphate less is needed, but lime ought
to be added; say, 2 cwt. of super, and 3 cwt. of
slaked lime.
After ploughing, the surface must be harrowed
fine.
Good sound seed with unbroken skins should
be sown 3 inches deep, 18 inches apart, the rows
being 1 8 inches apart.
If sown at the latter end of August the young
seedlings commence to push through the soil in from
nine to twelve days.
When the flowers appear the plants lie down,
but continue to grow, and as the nuts develop they
gradually work their way below the surface to
mature.
During growth the surface must be kept loose
all round the plants, which are all the better for
earthing up like potatoes, care being taken not to
cover or damage the stems.
In dry soils watering must be attended to.
When ready for digging the pods turn brown.


The nuts may be put to many uses. In a whole
state they are a valuable pig feed and Chinaman
feed, and when crushed to extract the oil the refuse
makes good fowl feed. An excellent substitute for
butter is also manufactured from them.
Stock relish the dried stalks.
PEAS.
Green peas may be grown throughout the year
in good loamy soil or rich peat; but in our sandy
soils or in loams where plenty of water is not avail-
able they are best grown as a winter crop.
The ground is prepared as for beans (see page
99), and the seeds should be sown 2 inches deep in
drills with a space of 2 inches between the seeds, the
rows being 3 ft. apart.
In and about Perth two main crops may easily
be grown, the first sowings being in March, April
and May, and the second during August and Sep-
tember. The latter crop, however, needs heavier
manuring as well as frequent waterings before the
pods mature.
POTATOES.
Seemingly the potato yielding capacity of a soil
depends more upon its warmth, drainage and
crumbly texture than its actual richness in plant
foods. Nevertheless the plant foods must be avail-
able or the tubers will have nothing to live upon.
Sandy soils must be enriched with stable man-
ure and potash, peaty soils with potash and some-
times lime, and heavy soils with Thomas’ phosphate
and light dressings of manure, if procurable, to
ensure a heavy crop of full-sized tubers.


All potato soils are the better for being tho-
roughly cultivated to improve their mechanical con-
dition.
Over-manuring with stable manure is a mistake,
for it forces a too luxurious top growth at the ex-
pense of the tubers; but as the potato seems to
thrive on artificials, from 6 to 8 cwt. of Thomas’
phosphate and 1 cwt. of sulphate of potash per acre
will materially increase the weight of the crop.
Potatoes are said to be wonderfully good for
breaking up new ground. So they are, providing
they are properly cultivated.
The sets are prepared by cutting a good solid
old potato intwo or three pieces, leaving about three
eyes to each piece. Some growers prefer planting
small potatoes whole.
In the garden the sets are planted 12 inches
apart in rows with two feet between the rows. Soon
after they come up the soil between the rows must
be kept well stirred and gradually heaped up around
the stems so that the tubers will always be well cov-
ered.
Where plenty of water is available, the planting
may be commenced in April or even earlier; but if
almost wholly dependent upon the rain, it is better
deferred till May.
A second crop may be planted during Septem-
ber, which, of course, will need plenty of water as
well as a light mulch, in addition to the hoeing up,
before it matures.
Potatoes seldom self seed. A wide range is
open to the amateur hybridist who is desirous of
creating new improved varieties by cross-fertilisation.


RADISH.
These will grow at any time and in any soil
that is well dug and drained.
With a little stable manure and about a table-
spoonful of bonedust to the square yard our sand
grows them to perfection.
The seeds may be sown thinly in drills or
broadcast and then trodden in, afterwards being just
covered with a sprinkling of sand.
RHUBARB.
A rich mellow friable soil is necessary for the
production of good rhubarb.
It does well in our peaty and loamy soils; also
in our sands if stiffened with a little loam and en-
riched with manures.
Before planting, the soil should be heavily
manured with stable manure for the first, year’s
growth.
The seeds may be sown in special beds for
transplanting or in wide drills where they are in-
tended to be grown.
Each plant needs a growing space of 3 ft.
During the first year none of the stalks should
be gathered.
Ample waterings are essential throughout the
Summer.
Every autumn the plants must be fed liberally
with stable manure as well as a tablespoonful of
blood and bone and a teaspoonful of sulphate of
potash to each plant.


SPINACH.
A rich soil for Spinach is indispensable. The
method adopted of preparing the ground for cab-
bage, and subsequent system of cultivation suits the
spinach admirably.
As the plants do not transplant easily, it is best
to sow the seeds thinly in drills about 9 inches apart,
and thin out afterwards.
A space of 2 feet between the rows is suffi-
cient.
New Zealand is a variety that may be trans-
planted.
Prickly is most suitable for Autumn, and Round
for Spring sowing.
SWEET POTATO.
As the sweet potato revels in a rich warm well-
drained soil, our peaty swamp soils when built up
into fairly high lands grow it to perfection.
Our loams and sandy soils also grow it well
when liberally manured with decomposed stable
manure, potash, and phosphates, as applied to cab-
bage soils.
Rooted cuttings, obtainable from October to
January, if well attended to, will produce a good
crop within from four to five months.
When the tubers are matured they should be
lifted, packed in clean sand, and stored in a warm
place till planting time in the Spring.
THE TOMATO.
With very little manure the tomato grows to
perfection in all our soils.


If the soil be deeply dug and a moderate dress-
ing) of stable manure, together with a handful of bone-
dust to the square yard well mixed with it about the
time the seeds are sown, it will be ready for the
reception of the plants when they are ready for
transplanting.
For an early crop the seeds are best sown dur-
ing July in boxes of moderately rich soil, and pro-
tected with a sheet of glass. Before planting out, the
young plants should be exposed to harden them off,
care being taken to protect them from a stray late
frost.
The most successful modern system of culti-
vation is as follows:
After the ground is worked to a good tilth stout
hardwood stakes are driven in at 18-inch intervals
in rows with a space of 3 ft. between the rows.
At the base of each stake a young seedling is
planted.
As growth advances the lateral shoots are
rigorously pinched out to concentrate the whole of
the plant’s strength into the main stem, which is
kept tied to the stake, and which is intended to
bear the fruit.
When the flower buds appear a weak liquid
dose of sulphate of ammonia is applied and con-
tinued at fortnightly intervals until the berries are
half grown.
A tablespoonful of sulphate of ammonia to
1 0 gallons of water is the amount used, each plant
receiving half a gallon after a good watering.
As soon as the berries are fully developed
most of the leaves are removed from the plant to
permit the free admittance of air and sunshine.


This hastens ripening and enables the grower
to place clean, sound, wholesome tomatoes on the
market when prices are soaring; it also facilitates
the picking of the fruit.
Under this system of cultivation the yield per
acre is much heavier than when the plants are per-
mitted to run practically wild.
THE TURNIP.
This vegetable, including the Swede, although
•closely related to the cabbage, is much more moder-
ate in its demands for food.
Ten tons of stable manure to the acre is con-
sidered a heavy dressing for turnips; but as this
is a little less than 5 lbs. to the square yard, it will
be seen that a lavish use of stable manure would
be wasteful.
Nevertheless, the turnip responds wonderfully
to artificials, and grows remarkably well when a
little stable manure is supplemented with an ounce
of muriate of potash and two ounces of super, to
the square yard.
The soil should be deeply dug and well broken
up. A sprinkling of slaked lime is beneficial.
The seeds may be sown broadcast in beds or
thinly in drills and thinned out afterwards.
Sowing in drills is the better method, for if the
drills are a foot apart it permits the free use of the
hoe, and a loose crumbly surface must be main-
tained or the turnip will languish.
In sand seeds sown in the Autumn produce the
most satisfactory turnips; but in good peat or loam
with ample available water supplies, they may be
sown throughout the year.


SUITABLE VARIETIES OF VEGETABLES.
Artichoke: Jerusalem.
Asparagus: Conover s Colossal.
Beet: Eclipse, Egyptian, Erfurt Long Black Red*
Silver Beet, Sutton’s Crimson Globe.
Broad Beans: Broad Windsor, Leviathan.
Butter Beans: Golden Butter Wax.
French Beans: Canadian Wonder.
Runner Beans: Epicure, Great Snake, Kentucky^
Wonder, Scarlet Runner, Wonderful Tongan
Bean.
Brussels Sprouts: Scrymger’s Giant.
Cabbage: Brunswick, Chinese Cabbage, Copen-
hagen Market, Danish Ballhead, Early Drum-
head, Enkhinzen’s Glory, Henderson’s Succes-
sion, Improved St. John’s Day (Early), Sugar-
loaf, Savoy Drumhead.
Cape Gooseberry.
Carrots: Early Market, Early Shorthorn, Guerade
or Oxheart, James’ Scarlet Intermediate.
Cauliflower: Autumn Mammoth, Early London,
Eclipse, Erfurt Giant, Veitch’s Autumn Giant.
Celery: Cole’s Crystal White, Henderson’s White
Plume, White Solid Paschal.
Cress: Extra Fine Curled.
Cucumber: Apple Shaped, Long Green Grecian,
Long Green Prickly, Short Green, Stockwood,
Long Ridge.
Garlic.
Herbs: Marjorum, Mint, Parsley, Sage, Thyme.
Horse Radish.
Kohl Rabi: Large Green, Large Purple.
Leeks: London Flag, Lyon.
Lettuce: Australian Yellow, Drumhead, Iceberg,
Neapolitan, New York, Webb’s Wonderful.
Melons: Citron Melon, Pie Melon (for jams).
Mango Melon (for preserving).
Melons Rock: Cassaba, Emerald Gem, Extra Early
Hackensack, Rockyford.


Melons, Water: Cuban Queen, Fordhook Early,
Mammoth Santigo, Rattlesnake, the Mclvor
Sugar, Tom Watson.
Onions: Adriatic Barietta (pickling), Brown Span-
ish, Extra Early Golden Globe, Giant Rocca,
James’ Long Keeping, New Queen, The
Odourless, White Spanish.
Parsnip: Hollow Crown.
Peas: American Wonder, Daisy, Gradus, Strata-
gem, William Hurst, Yorkshire Hero.
Potatoes: Early—Delaware, Early Rose, Lapstone
Kidney, Vermont, Carmen No. 1. Medium—
Carmen No. 3, Up-to-Date, Snowflake. Late
—Brown’s River, Pinkeye,
Pumpkins: Bugle, Ironbark, Turk’s Cap.
Radish: French Breakfast, Long Scarlet, Mammoth
White Chinese Turnip Shaped White, Turnip
Shaped Red, White Icicle.
Rhubarb: Myatt’s Victoria, Playford’s Mammoth,
Topp’s Winter.
Shallots.
Spinach: New Zealand, Prickly, Round.
Squash: Early White Scalloped Rush, Hubbard.
Sweet Corn: Triumph.
Sweet Potato.
Swedes: Improved Purple Top, Lang’s Garden.
Tomato: Acme, Burwood Prize, Chalk’s Early
Jewel, Dwarf Champion, Earliana, Early Bur-
bank, Early Large Red, Freedom, Mikado,
Ponderosa, Tomato Tree.
Turnips: Early White Stone, New Champion, Non-
Seeding White, Orange Jelly, Purple Top,
Snowball.
Vegetable Marrow: Custard, Long Green, Long
White Bush.
The small grower who is desirous of produc-
ing a limited crop for home use only, and has not
the time at his disposal to raise Summer vegetables,
is likely to get best results by sowing the seed in


the Autumn, say from March to April inclusive,,
when he will get the full benefit of the Winter rains.
APPROXIMATE QUANTITY OF VEGETABLE
SEEDS TO SOW HALF AN ACRE.
Beet, 3 lbs.
Broad Beans, 1 bushel.
Cabbage in seed beds,
* lb.
Carrots, 2 lbs.
Cauliflower, in seed
beds, \ lb.
Cucumber, \ lb.
French Beans, f bushel.
Kohl Rabi, 2 lbs.
Onion, 1 f lbs.
Parsnip, lbs.
Peas, 1 bushel.
Potatoes, 5 cwt.
Pumpkin, 1 lb.
Radish, 4 lbs.
Rock Melon, 6 ozs.
Spinach, 5 lbs.
Turnip, 2 lbs.
Tomatoes in seed beds*
1 i ozs.
Vegetable Marrow,
lb.
Water Melon, 12 ozs.
FRUIT TREES.
Most of the trouble experienced in growing
fruit trees is caused by neglecting to plant them
properly in the first place, and by giving them in-
sufficient attention during their first year’s growth.
The fact of the matter is the trees are so easily
grown in this State, that much is left to chance.
In other parts of the world where it is neces-
sary to drain, to trench the subsoil, and to cultivate
the soil for a least a year before the trees are planted
out, every care is exercised in establishing the young
trees in their new environment, and nursing them
until they are thoroughly at home.
There is not the slightest doubt that this State
can produce more fruit and better fruit than any of
the Eastern States, but before that is done more
attention must be devoted to the preparation of the
soil for the reception of the trees, due considera-
tion being given to the fact that our long summers
being practically rainless, provision must be made


to enable the roots of the trees to find ready access
to the deeper levels where the precious moisture is
stored.
Throughout the Darling Range there are gentle
slopes and rich valleys as naturally created for fruit
growing as the Garden of Eden; but as our domesti-
cated fruits are not indigenous, Nature must be
assisted by art before it is possible to persuade her
to adopt the strange trees as her own children to
be nourished with her stored-up treasures of centu-
ries to enable them to yield a superabundance of
fleshy luscious fruits to repay the grower for the
labour spent on their cultivation.
The art of fruitgrowing may be summarised in
the choosing of soil, its cultivation, the planting of
trees, and their subsequent treatment.
A rich, deep, friable loam, or a black sandy
soil with a clay subsoil is ideal for fruitgrowing, but
either class of soil should be deeply ploughed and
thoroughly cultivated before the orchard, the orange
grove, or the vineyard is planted.
Our black sandy soil bordering swamp-lands
in the vicinity of limestone formations will produce
table-grapes unsurpassabe for size and flavour; but
it cannot be classed as a good soil for stone fruits,
they needing the heavier loams of the foot-hills.
After the soil has been thoroughly worked and
reduced to a good tilth, the trees should be planted
on the equilateral system from June to August, the
young trees being spaced by twenty feet, on the
average, each way.
When planting the young balled trees care must
be taken to plant them deeply enough. A good
plan to follow in this State is to dig the holes suffi-
ciently deep to permit of the trees being planted
down to the buds, care being taken, however, to
prevent the bud itself from being covered. Around
the base of each tree a slight saucer-shaped depres


sion of sufficient size to hold from six to eight gallons
of water should be made to ensure the plants’ ob-
taining a sufficiency of water until their roots become
thoroughly established. Firm planting is more than
half the battle.
Although carefully planted trees in well pre-
pared soil will stand a lot of drought, it is always
advisable where water is available to give them an
occasional watering during the first Summer.
When growth becomes so vigorous as to render
pruning necessary, the first Winter pruning should
be rigorous; indeed it is hardly possible to prune
too hard; and should the new growth be excessive,
it is always advisable to pinch back during the
Summer.
As the trees mature and reach their fruiting
stage, an annual dressing of two cwt. to the acre of
Thomas’ phosphate mixed with about 60 lb. of sul-
phate of potash is beneficial.
An orchard that is thoroughly cultivated and
kept free of weeds always yields a return higher
than the expense incurred.
WE SPECIALLY RECOMMEND THE FOLLOWING VARIETIES:
Almonds.
Brandes Jordan, Burbank’s Seedling, Non-
pariel.
Apples:
Cleopatra, Delicious, Dunn’s Seedling, Granny
Smith, Jonathan, Rokewood, Rome Beauty,
Y ates.
Apricots:
Campbellfield Seedling, Early Moorpark, Hem-
skirke, Moorpark, Newcastle Early, Oullin’s
Early Peach.
Cherries:
Bedford Prolific, Florence, St. Marguerite.
Figs;
Adam, Brown Turkey, White Adriatic.


Mulberry:
Black.
Nectarines:
Early Rivers, Goldmine, Irrewarra.
Peaches:
Briggs’ Red May, Dunhelm, Elberta, Foster,
Hale’s Early, High’s Early Canada, Royal
George, Wiggins, Triumph.
Pears:
Fertility, Kieffer’s Hybrid, Packham s Tri-
umph, Vicar of Winkfield, Williams Bon Chre-
tien (Bartlett), Winter Nelis.
Plums:
Diamond, Green Gage, Late Black Orleans,
Plums, Japanese:
Abundance or Botan, Burbank, Kelsey, Octo-
ber Purple, Santa Rosa, Satsuma or Blood
Plum, Shiro, Wickson.
Quinces:
Apple, Champion, Missouri, Mammoth.
CITRUS FRUITS.
Lemons:
Eureka, Lisbon, Lisbon Variegata, Villa
Franca.
Mandarines:
Beauty of Glen Retreat, Emperor, Thorny.
Oranges:
Blood or Maltese, Joppa, Valencia Late,
Washington Navel.
GRAPE VINES.
Black Hamburgh, Black St. Peter, Doradilla, Gold-
en Chasselas, Gordo Blanco, Gros Colman,
Knight’s Grand Centennial, Lady’s Finger,
Mrs. Prince’s Black Muscat, Muscat of Alex-
andria, Purple Cornichon, Raison Des Dames,
Sultana, White Nice, Wortley Hall, Waltham
Cross, Zante Currant.


Giving Number of Plants to the Acre.
Distance apart
each way.
1 foot
Square
Method.
43,560
Equilateral Tri-
angle Method.
... 50,300
2 feet
10,890
... 12,875
3 feet
4,840
5,889
4 feet
2,722
3,143
5 feet
1,742
2,011
6 feet
1,210
1,397
7 feet
888
1,205
8 feet
680
785
9 feet
537
620
1 0 feet
435
502
1 2 feet
302
348
14 feet
222
256
1 5 feet
193
222
1 6 feet
170
196
1 8 feet
134
154
20 feet
109
125
25 feet
69
79
30 feet
48
55
35 feet
35
40
40 feet
27
31
MISCELLANEOUS.
Bananas, Currants, Guavas, Persimmon, Straw-
berries.
STANDARD TABLE
RULE, SQUARE METHOD.—Multiply the dist-
ance in feet between the rows by the distance
the plants are apart in the rows, and the pro-
duct will be the number of square feet for
each plant or hill; which, divided into the
number of feet in an acre (43,560), will give
the number of plants or trees to the acre.


Divide the number required to the acre “ square method ” by the decimal 866. The result will be the
number to the acre by this method. See diagram below
THE SQUARE & EQUILATERAL METHODS.


THE SQUARE AND EQUILATERAL METHOD.
It must be clearly understood, however, that
this table makes provision for a margin outside
the actual area planted equal to half the distance
the trees are planted apart.
The general practice in vogue is to plant trees
at equal distances apart in the rows, with spaces
between the rows equal to the spaces between the
trees, the second row being planted opposite the
centre of the spaces between the trees of the first
row, and so on.
To compute the exact number of trees required
for any area the practical man will find the fol-
lowing method simplicity itself:—
Drive a pole into the exact spot where the first
tree is to be planted, measure the length and
breadth of the ground from the pole, divide the
length by the distance it is intended to plant the
trees apart, and add i to obtain the number of
trees to the row; then divide the breadth by the
distance the rows are to be apart and add one to
obtain the number of rows. Multiply the number
of trees to the row by the number of rows and the
product will be the exact number of trees required,
without any allowance for margins.
Example.
Supposing it is intended to put a strip of
ground 1,680 ft. by 450 ft. under orchard, the rows
to run lengthways, the trees being 1 5 ft. apart with
1 5 ft. between the rows.
1,680 divided by 15 equals 1 12, plus \ equals
11 2 trees to the row.


450 divided by 15 equals 30, plus 1 equals 31
rows.
1 12£ multiplied by 31 equals 3,487 trees.
If it is then decided to plant on the equilateral
system—that is, to have the trees in the diagonal
rows at the same distances apart as in the straight
rows, the number of trees required is obtained by
dividing 3,487 by point 866, thus:
3,487,000 divided by 866 equals 4,026 trees,
all planted at exactly the same distance apart.
GARDENING IN THE NOR'-WEST.
Short and swift though the growing season in
the North-Western and Murchison districts may be,
they can be prolonged where ample supplies of
water are available, and made the most of even
under adverse conditions by sowing the right kinds
of seeds at the right time, and growing plants suited
to the soils and climatic conditions.
There, as elsewhere, the soils, both of the
flower and vegetable garden, are all the better for
being deeply worked, well manured, and kept free
of weeds.
In Queensland and Northern New South
Wales there are beautiful flower gardens, useful
vegetable gardens, ornamental hedges, as well as
lawns, fruits, and shade-trees of many varieties,
which we should not find it difficult to emulate,
especially where we have the water.
The following varieties of Flowers, Vegetables,
Fruits, Trees, and Shrubs have been cultivated suc-
cessfully in many places where it was at first thought
to be well-nigh impossible to grow any of our
domesticated plants; and the astonishing rapidity


of their development, together with their vigour,
have been a perpetual source of pleasure to the as-
piring enthusiasts who first experimented with little
hope of success.
As a rule, the seeds are sown immediately pre-
ceding the rainy season, but where ample supplies
of water are available, with a little care and atten-
tion both flowers and vegetables may be grown to
perfection throughout the year, as is demonstrated
on many of the stations.
FLOWERS.
Amaranthus, Antirrhinum, Balsam, Carnation, Cli-
anthus, Cockscomb, Cosmos, Dianthus, Dimor-
photheca Aurantiaca, Gaillardia, Gerbera
Jamesoni, Gomphrena, Leptosyne, Lupin,
Marigold (African), Nasturtium, Nemesia,
Petunia, Phlox, Portulacca, Sunflower, Ver-
bena, Vinca, Zinnia.
VEGETABLES.
Beet: Egyptian, Sutton’s Crimson Globe, Silver
Beet.
Beans: Butter Beans, Canadian Wonder (Dwarf),
Kentucky Wonder (Climber), Snake Bean,
Tongan Bean.
Cabbage: Early Drumhead, Sugarloaf, Succession,
St. John’s Day, Chinese Cabbage.
Cape Gooseberry.
Capsicum.
Carrot: Early Short Horn, James’ Scarlet Inter-
mediate, Guerade or Oxheart.
Cress.
Egg Plant.
Garlic.
Herbs: Marjoram, Parsley, Sage, Thyme.


Kohl Rabi: Green and Purple.
Lettuce: Australian Yellow, Drumhead, Neapolitan.
Onion: White Queen.
Parsnip: Hollow Crown.
Radish: French Breakfast, Long Icicle, Long Red.
Rhubarb: Best grown from roots.
Shalots, Spinach, Sweet Potato, Tomato, Turnip.
MELONS.
Cassaba: Best species of Rock Melon ever intro-
duced.
Citron Melon: Useful for preserving.
Cucumber: Long Grecian, Long Prickly.
Pumpkin: Ironbark, Mammoth, Turk’s Cap.
Rock Melon: Cantaloupe, Hackensack, Rocky
Ford.
Squash: Early White Scalloped Bush, Hubbard.
Vegetable Marrow: Custard, Long Green, Long
White Bush.
Water Melon: Cuban Queen, Mclvor Sugar, Rattle-
snake, Tom Watson.
FRUIT TREES.
Banana, Fig, Lemon, Mandarin, Mango, Mulberry,
Orange.
ORNAMENTAL SHRUBS AND TREES.
Bamboos, Cassia, Canna, Cocos Palms, Cotton
Palms, Coprosma, Dracaena, Erythrina, Fugo-
sia, Geraldton Wax Flowers, Hibiscus, Japan-
ese Pepper, Moreton Bay Fig, Oleander, Pep-
per Tree, Phoenix Palms, Poinceana, Tecomas.


CLIMBERS.
Allamanda, Asparagus Plumosus, Bignonia Austra-
lis, Bignonia Venusta, Bougainvillea, Convol-
vulus (Morning Glory), Mandevillea, Passion
Flowers, Solanum Wendlandii, Stephanotis,
Tacsonia, Tropaeolum Canariensis, Wisteria.
PLANT PESTS AND DISEASES.
From time to time many prescriptions for the
eradication of this, that, and the other garden pest
have been published; but the amateur who experi-
ments by mixing and applying every alleged remedy
he comes across, as often as not finds the cure worse
than the disease.
Prevention is better than cure, and prevention
is to be attained only by growing plants immune to
disease or by making them impervious by cultivat-
ing, feeding and watering them regularly; for, like
all living things, plants that are starved or neg-
lected are more susceptible to disease than those
carefully nurtured.
There are, however, such vermin as cutworms,
slugs, and snails which feed upon and mutilate the
healthiest of plants. These pests are becoming all
too prevalent about Perth.
For their destruction baits prepared as follows
have been proved most effective:—To one lb. of
bran and one of pollard add one oz. of Paris green,
a 1 -lb. tin of treacle, and sufficient water to make
the mixture into a stiff dough. Roll the baits into
small balls about the size of peas, and about night-
fall strew them plentifully over the affected beds as
well as in the vicinity of likely hiding-places. Per-
suade your neighbours to do likewise, and so pre-
vent migration.


Another remedy for spraying may be prepared
thus:—Mix a dessertspoonful of Paris green in a
tablespoonful of treacle, and when thoroughly
mixed use a third of the mixture to a kerosenetinful
of water. Spray lightly towards evening in dry
weather, keeping the mixture well stirred while
using.
Paris green, being a deadly poison, must not
be left within the reach of children.
Remedies for Aphis, Mealy Bug, Thrip, Red
Spider, Scale, Rust, Fungus, etc., are retailed by the
nurserymen of Perth at a less cost than the home-
made articles in small quantities can be prepared.
Therefore it is cheaper as well as safer to purchase
the standard “ Fungus and Insect Destroyers ” than
to risk failure by mixing them yourselves.
AFTERWORD.
Simple as it is to sow the seeds, grow the plants
and to attend to their wants during growth so as
to ensure their yielding their utmost, it is not quite
so simple to describe in few words how the whole
procedure is carried out, or to set down hard and
fast rules for the guidance of the uninitiated. As
all rules have their exceptions, so do the seasons
vary: so much so, that even the most far-sighted
show-gardeners occasionally experience failures, or
partial failures, due to mis-timing sowing time or
planting time, thereby getting their exhibits up to
the acme of perfection either a week too early or
too late for the shows, when they have no recourse
but to take the bad-luck cheerfully, as is generally
done, and congratulate their successful rivals with
right goodwill.
Should the aspiring beginner be living in Perth
or the vicinity of Perth he would do well to become


a member of “ The Horticultural Society of Western
Australia.” By attending the meetings regularly he
would have the advantages of seeing perfect speci-
mens of flowers in season, hearing interestingly in-
structive lectures on horticulture, and obtaining at
first hand useful hints from some of the most en-
thusiastic and successful amateur experts in W.A.
To the writer it seems a great pity that similar
societies are not flourishing in all the settled districts
of this State. Even though competitive exhibitions
were dispensed with, members could meet periodi-
cally, bringing their best with them, to compare
notes, exchange experiences, discuss methods gen-
erally, and interchange seeds and plants.
Such societies would not only help to promote
good-fellowship among the members, but would
materially assist in beautifying many a home and
adding to the innocent pleasures of life.
Every child instinctively holds out its hand for
a flower, a pretty sure indication that the craving
for the possession of the beautiful is inborn.
From time immemorial flowers have been
idealised by the painter’s brush and immortalised
by the poet’s pen; so much so, that without them
the works of art and the poetry of the world would
be anything but complete.
But when all is said and done, the object of
the picture or the poem is to record indelibly a life-
like representation of the real goods—the goods
which we in this delectable climate can coax in
abundance from Dame Nature, who, in her bene-
ficence, lavishes upon all who make and maintain
the slight necessary effort her unlimited treasures of
beauty sublime.


Perpetual Carnations
Our stock of PERPETUAL CARNATIONS is the
best in Australia. It consists of;—
TRUE WINTER FLOWERERS
EXCEPTIONALLY LARGE BLOOMS
ROBUST PLANTS
A VAST RANGE OF COLOURS
PERFECT CALYCES
Our latest Novelties are Unique. If you want to
grow for Pleasure, for Profit, or to Show and Win,
consult our Catalogue and choose for yourself, or
write to us for a good selection.
Varieties stocked by no other
t: Nursery anywhere. :s
WILSON & JOHNS,
NURSERYMEN and SEEDSMEN,
70 BARRACK STREET, PERTH.
