

THE
WHITE SLAVERY
OF
EUROPE.
FROM THE FRENCH OF PASTOR T. BOREL,
OF GENEVA.
WITH SUPPLEMENT RELATING TO THE FOREIGN TRAFFIC
IN ENGLISH, SCOTCH AND IRISH GIRLS.
EDITED BY JOSEPH EDMONDSON.
SECOND EDITION.
“God alone knows how much suffering the writing of the following pages has cost
me. Every page of the second part brings to my mind faces which have appeared
before me in tears, shame, sin, and often despair. I have seen all I describe, and to
every incident my feeble hand has portrayed I can supply a name. Considerations
easily understood would have led me to issue this anonymously, if such a course had
not been cowardly. Truth demands sacrifices and open warfare.”
T. BOREL.
LONDON:
DYER BROTHERS, AMEN CORNER, PATERNOSTER ROW.
Price Threepence.


Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


TO THE
SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS
OF THE
BRITISH AND CONTINENTAL FEDERATION
FOR THE '
ABOLITION OF STATE-REGULATED PROSTITUTION,
TO BE HELD FROM THE 2 7TH SEPTEMBER TO THE
4TH OCTOBER, 1880, THIS SECOND EDITION OF THE TRANSLATION
of Pastor Borel’s pamphlet is respectfully inscribed by
THE EDITOR.




THE WHITE SLAVERY OF EUROPE;
OR, LICENSED HOUSES OF DEBAUCHERY IN THEIR
RELATION TO THE LAW AND TO PUBLIC MORALITY.
I. —LICENSED HOUSES IN THEIR RELATION TO THE LAW.
LICENSED houses of debauchery are establishments for
prostitution, authorised by law, and subjected to police
regulations.
The police register the girls who are received in these
establishments, and subject them to sanitary inspection.
They send commissioners to the houses when judged
desirable ; they tax them ; they can impose fines on, or
close them ; in a word, they rule these houses with a
high hand.
At first sight, these regulations seem only to be an
institution whereby society takes precautions against a
special vice; but to anyone who has studied the mechan-
ism of this institution in different countries, who kijows
its functions, has seen its results, and has been initiated
into the life and the recruiting of these dens of debauchery,
the fact is apparent that it is a violation of common rights,
a legal iniquity, and a social crime, the less known as it
affects individuals condemned to silence by their position
and the contempt which surrounds them: a silence the
more persistent, as it is to the honour and interest of the
thousands of victims attacked each year by the conse-
quences of this iniquity, to conceal their sufferings.
Nevertheless, justice is for all; all crime is an attack on
humanity, and every injustice inevitably recoils on the
society which does not punish and correct it.


If the traffic in negroes has been finally abolished, if
every attempt that a monstrous greed still makes, from
time to time, to renew this crime against man, is watched
and severely punished, should not the White Slave trade
be similarly treated, which, though undoubtedly upon a
smaller scale than that which depopulated Africa, has a
more odious character, since it is carried on in the midst
of Christian and civilised nations. The negro slave trade
was carried on by means of abduction or war. It tore
individuals from their country and homes, and condemned
them to excessive work and cruel treatment. The White
Slave trade is carried on only by treachery and lying;
and whilst it defiles the body, inoculating it with terrible
diseases, it strikes a mortal blow at all that is pure and
sacred in the soul.
Licensed brothels are not solely supplied from the class
of women who voluntarily give themselves up to de-
bauchery. These would not suffice. It is necessary to
fill up deficiencies, often occasioned by syphilitic sickness,
and to procure an article of human merchandise which
will attract clients by freshness, youth, or by mere
novelty.
In spite of police supervision and the penalties they, or
the tribunals, inflict, there are in many towns, offices for
providing servants with situations, which under the pre-
tence of finding honest and lucrative employment, send
unsuspecting young girls to foreign countries, without
money or recommendations. The proprietors of some of
these offices know very well what they are about! in
others they are ignorant of the trades exercised by the
persons who offer situations, and their only care is to get
a fee for entering a name, and the victim is sent into
the trap.


There are men, but more often women, who frequent
the public promenades or the streets inhabited principally
by the working classes, on the look out for young girls
who seem to them likely to fall into the trap laid for them.
These procuresses, who are an incarnation of the genius
of evil, a monstrous excrescence of society, and the last
effort of vice to surpass itself in what is most odious,
possess the keen scent of a wild beast for its prey; they
quickly discover the point where their hook will lay hold.
Ignorant ingenuousness, a bold look, a poor or tattered
dress, any indication of vanity, or a carelessness of
appearances, are signs of a likely victim for their ferocity.
The procuress approaches with a winning manner, and
begins to talk to the young girl. Her words are full of
benevolence ; she cross-questions her with tender com-
passion ; pities her present unfortunate position; declaims
against the hardness of her fate ; flatters the weak point,
be it idleness, love of luxury, greediness or vanity; and
pictures the easy and lucrative places she has procured
for others, who bless her daily. When her language has
magnetized and fascinated the girl, if she be unsuccessful
in obtaining a decision on her first attack, she appoints a
meeting for the next day, promising to look out in the
interval for a good situation; but recommending the most
absolute silence, on pain, if it be not maintained, of
losing her protection.
She is almost sure of victory, for she has created in
this poor heart a ferment which is not long in boiling
over. She has blinded the girl’s mind by a dazzling
spectacle. It is rare, however, that she obtains consent
at the first onset, except when the young girl is entirely
free from the control of parents or guardians. Ordinarily
there has to be a second or a third meeting, as it is neces-


sary to procure certificates of birth, or origin, and to in-
form some relative, who is generally credulous or indif-
ferent. The special protection which the law provides
for minors, and the severity of the penalty for seducing
minors are no obstacles in the way of the procuress.
Either she trusts to the indulgence of a police disposed
to shut its eyes, or she falsifies the certificate of birth,
or even procures one which will introduce her merchan-
dise under another name. Then at the time agreed
upon they set out and they arrive at their destination ;
the procuress delivers her prey, receives her travelling
expenses, a greater or less commission, and returns for
new business. The young girl is in the trap.
The procuress sometimes lives in the same town where
she supplies the market. She is ever on the watch for
wanderers from the country, and especially poor strangers,
to whom —being without references, having sought work
in vain and having exhausted their resources—she appears
as a providence. She frequently watches the arrival of
trains and steam boats. Her instinct, her experience,
her lynx eye, reveal to her a premium to be gained upon
creatures either more than frivolous or deplorably simple ;
and it is these who fill the dens.
It is asserted that the replenishing of licensed brothels
is not done, as a rule, by unfair means; but that a great
number of the boarders in these establishments have
entered them willingly and knowingly. The police will
prove to you that all, or nearly all, have signed an agree-
ment which has been read to them, and of the nature of
which they have been fully informed. That does not in-
validate anything that has just been said, for the mistress
is careful not to bring to the police offices, girls who would
prove refractory. She takes them there only when resis-


tance has been overcome; only after having won them
over by caresses, by presents, or by fear of the conse-
quences of refusal. The fact is, novices state that they
remember well having signed a paper at the Town Hall,
but that their emotion prevented their knowing what it
contained.*
* This procedure was doubtless the model on which the “ Voluntary
Submission” clause of the English “Contagious Diseases Acts” was
founded and brought into operation. This clause is as follows :
Act of 1866, Section 17. “ Any woman in any place to which this
Act applies, may voluntarily, by a submission in writing, signed by her
in the presence of, and attested by the Superintendent of Police, subject
herself to a periodical medical examination under this Act, for any period
not exceeding one year.”
On the Continent the so-called voluntary signature is enforced by
threats and cajolery on the part of the brothel keepers. In England this
coercive operation is performed by the special Police employed under the
C. D. Acts, according to the following instructions issued by the Admir-
alty and War Office, in 1869 :
“ Contagious Diseases Acts, 1866 to 1869.
“ Periodical Examinations of the Common Women. District.
“1. All women subject to the provisions of the above Acts, are to be
called upon to sign the voluntary submission paper (Vide 2nd
Schedule, Form H, Act of 1869).
“2. Should any woman object to sign, she is to be informed of the
penal consequences attending the refusal, and the advantages of a
voluntary submission are to be pointed out to her.
“3. Any such woman still refusing to submit herself, is to be proceeded
against under section 4, Act of 1869.”
It should be observed :
Ist. The Admiralty and War Office have no legal power to issue
instructions to the Police under the Contagious Diseases Acts, but
they have assumed, for the purposes of the Acts, despotic powers
similar to those of a French Prefect of Police.
2nd. No woman whatever is “ subject to the provision of the Acts ”
till after she has signed the “ voluntary submission paper,” or after
a magistrate’s order has been issued after the hearing of her case.
Here the special Police are instructed to regard women as
“ subject ” to the Acts as soon as the said Police think they
should be so.
3rd. Women are to be “ called upon ” to do that which the Act
provides should be only done voluntarily.
4th. If women “ object ”to do that which the Act describes as “ volun-
tary,” they are to be threatened with “ the penal consequences of
refusal.”
sth. There are no “ penal consequences of refusal,” except such as
the Police may have invented, and which they enforce solely by
extra-legal action.— Editor.


“ Anyhow,” it will be said, “they can go out of these
houses. If the decency of the unfortunate one revolts
against the trade which it is wished to impose on her; or,
if already corrupted, but seized with regret, disgust and
despair, she wishes to leave it, is she not free to do so ?”
All a mistake ! It is in this prison of debauchery that a
second crime can be committed with impunity, although
the law is armed with severe penalties against it. This
crime is forcible detention , a necessity of the trade.
The door of the den is solid, sometimes barred with
iron, and the key is always in the pocket of the under
mistress, a faithful gaoler and working lieutenant of her
who keeps the establishment. This door only opens with
her permission, is never opened for exit to the novice or
to one who has had the misfortune to let herself be sus-
pected of ennui, or a wish to escape.*
If the girl of pleasure (what irony in the name) on
account of her health, —for it is to the interest of the
mistress to keep her merchandise in good order, —is
allowed to go out, it is only under the escort and by the
side of the mistress, or a strong and trusted servant, in
whom full confidence is placed.
In addition to these material precautions, the captive
is held by a net, woven by falsehood and horror, which
destroys her will by burning into her soul the thought
which Dante records as written on the doors of hell; “All
hope abandon, ye who enter here.” The chain by which
the mistress fastens her slave, is a debt which she well
knows is unrecognized by law. She counts against the
girl the money for which she was bought, which the
mistress estimates at several hundred francs ; she adds to
* In Brussels the doors open freely from the outside, but cannot be
opened from the inside except by the keeper or her assistant.— Editor.


that the expense of a toilet conformable to her new
position, which also reaches to several hundred francs ;
she crushes her with this total by saying she will be free
only when it is paid ; she points to the prison, if the girl
tries to leave without having paid it.*
The mistress cleverly turns to account her relations
with the police, whose agents, she says, are at her imme-
diate disposal. She frightens the unfortunate one, by
declaring to her that if she determines to leave she will
be taken between two gendarmes to her native village or
town, and thrown into a dungeon ; she depicts under the
most gloomy colours, the disgrace to herself and her
family by such a journey, and such a return home. She
ends by gaining the mastery over this resistance and this
desire to escape, by terrifying the girl, whose soul is
crushed in such an atmosphere.
When one of these unfortunates—devoted to prosti-
tution —is insubordinate, or attacked with diseases tedious
to cure; or when some intrigue has been discovered out-
* The following extracts from the Report of the Commissioners
appointed in 1877, by the Governor of Hong Kong to enquire into the
working of the Contagious Diseases Ordinance, under which Prostitution
is supervised in that British Colony, show features precisely similar to
those here described by Pastor Borel.
“ In most of the regular houses the inmates are more or less in debt to
the keepers, and though such debts are not legally enforceable, a custom,
stronger than law, forbids the woman to leave the brothel until her debts
are liquidated.”
“ Mr. Pang-Ui-Shang says : ‘ the fact of licensing these brothels gives
the keepers a sort of official authority. The keepers are a haughty sort
of people, and they boast of the protection of the inspectors.’ ”
“ Ho-Ui-Shang, formerly interpreter also told us : . . ‘Girls wanted
to free themselves, and the mistresses offered me money to prevent their
doing so.’ ... It seems that, although the Brothel Ordinances did
not call into being this 1 horrible,’ ‘ cruel,’ and ‘ haughty ’ race of women
they have armed them with odious powers, which they would not other-
wise have possessed, and there is consequently reason to apprehend that
Government supervision accentuates, in some respects, rather than relieves
the hardships of the servitude of the inmates. . . . One of the objects
of the prosecutions of inmates of unlicensed brothels was, as we know,
TO COMPEL THESE WOMEN TO ENTER LEGALIZED HOUSES.”


side, or there has been some inquiry from her family, the
mistress exports her, that she may not compromise the
peace or the profits of the house. She sells her to
another place without delay, or may even make an ex-
change of her, with or without the passing of money. It
is a blackleg trade in human cattle.*
Nevertheless, there are some among the unfortunates
who resist this system of deception and terror, whose
spirits being more enlightened, doubt the assertions of the
mistress; or who, possessing an energetic will, aspire to
liberty even at the risk of life. They have sometimes
succeeded in seizing the moment when the door was
opened to rush down the stairs and gain the street.
Others have been known to steal from a first floor into a
courtyard by the aid of projections in the wall; some,
helped by accomplices, have obtained a cord, which has
enabled them to descend from a second or a third story
at the risk of laming or killing themselves.
These bold attempts are rare; for if, in our days,
vigour of character is everywhere exceptional, what
moral strength would not give way in the midst of such
surroundings ?
One fact goes to show how far the audacious impu-
dence of mistresses and their customers may go. One
day two young girls, having found an opportunity of
escaping from a licensed brothel, fled distracted along the
road from Geneva to Coppet, and were followed by a
carriage, the noise of which increasing rapidly behind
them, they quickened their flight. Arrived at Coppet
they flung themselves panting, covered with dust, and
* Carried on for the benefit of profligate men, who demand victims for
the gratification of their evil passions, and who find the money which
makes brothel-keeping a paying trade. — Editor.


bathed in perspiration, into the office of the gendarmerie.
At the same moment there sprang from the carriage,
which overtook them, a man who wished to seize them,
and take them back to Geneva. He pretended that they
were thieves, and he offered money to induce the gen-
darmes to let him take the girls. The honesty of the
gendarmes repelled with disgust this shameful attempt,
and they brought the three actors in this drama to the
Prefect of Noyon. He, after having heard them, ordered
the two strangers to be sent back to their native places,
and the wretched being, who impudently believed he
could renew in the light of day, and on our free republi-
can soil, the atrocity of slavery —too long the opprobrium
of America —was sent back, handcuffed, to Geneva.
Many examples of this nature could be quoted, proving
the double crime of traffic and forcible detention.
Disgusted with such horrors, you will say, “ Are there
then no laws?” Yes; in the Geneva Penal Code of
1874, you have articles 99, 100, 213, 214, 298 and follow-
ing, which deal with the two crimes of traffic and forcible
detention ; there are such in the laws of all countries in
the civilized world; but it must be said that as regards
licensed brothels, these laws only exist to be evaded.
The procuresses are clever, and they are the more
cunning as they know to what they expose themselves if
discovered. In this infernal commerce there is no docu-
ment, no writing that can compromise the dealer; all is
transacted in words which can be denied. The procuress
will say she was solicited by the victim to find her a
situation, or that she was ignorant of the nature of the
house to which she sent her, or that the young girl had
long been lost, &c. This security and the chances of
committing the crime with impunity are increased by the


fact that no one is interested in revealing it; the victim
and her family are the first to wish to stifle the slightest
rumour. Moreover, it cannot be doubted that licensed
brothels have a system of secret telegraphy; they are
quickly informed of a complaint made, or the commence-
ment of a search. The procuress disappears (often the
victims as well) without leaving a trace. She returns —
if she wishes to return—only when all has died away.
She lodges in a distant suburb, which no one knows and
where no one associates with her. It is well for her that
justice wears a bandage over her eyes. But let a man
take flight and carry away a sum of money that does not
belong to him, the police are immediately informed of it,
the telegraph is set to work, a hue and cry is raised
everywhere, a reward is offered, the bloodhounds are on
the trail, the journals are not slow to announce the arrest
of the thief; society applauds and admires. It is true
that in this case it is a matter of money; but a poor im-
moral woman, who takes any interest in her ? Ah! all
the gold in the world will not redeem a life cast into the
whirlpool of vice.
It took more than four months to convict an old pro-
curess of the sale to a licensed brothel of two young girls,
aged 17 and 18 ; and it was not the family who denounced
the wretched being; it was a stranger, who had to apply
to a consul and an ambassador before justice could be
obtained. The procuress was only condemned to one
year’s imprisonment, and in spite of an information laid
according to rule, it was not possible to inflict the punish-
ment legally attached to the house in which, by the
receiving of two minors, the law had been violated. And
this in 1875 !
As regards the crime of forcible detention, there is one


law, it is true, which strikes at it; but for licensed brothels
that law is only a piece of waste paper, which may be
torn up and burnt. In a town I could name, the police
department was confided to an eminent lawyer who knew
of cases of forcible detention. He sent to all the licensed
brothels an order, printed in large characters, which was
to be conspicuously displayed, and which stated that
every girl was free to depart when she wished. Some
days after, it was proved that this regulation had not
been put up anywhere, and that not a trace of the paper
remained.
There are licensed brothels which avoid any infraction
of the letter of the law, and it is just also to acknowledge
that there are police who have the interests of morality
at heart, and who take the best measures they can for
putting down forcible detention. The physicians em-
ployed in the sanitary visits, are ordered to receive any
requests for liberation which may be given by the detained
girls; but these visits are made in the presence of the
under-mistress, whose glance stops any indiscreet word
the unfortunate being may have on her lips. From time
to time a commissioner is sent to question these slaves
individually; they are silent, being frozen with terror at
the thought of their pretended debt, or seduced by the
promise of a good meal, of a drive, or of the gratification
of some vain fancy.
Thus the majesty of the law is trodden under foot; the
sanctity of justice is outraged. Why then not suppress
an institution* which escapes the common law, and which
breaks down the barriers with which society surrounds
itself to protect its own existence ? Why allow estab-
lishments to exist which are an insult to the fundamental
* The licensed or tolerated brothel.


principles on which human society is founded ?
But there is something worse than this defiance of the
law. The institution of licensed brothels is a compromise
with evil, and the law, if it be as it ought to be, the ex-
pression of the universal conscience, cannot admit of such
accommodations. It did not make terms with, gambling
houses. The law reaches and strikes at every outrage
on morality, and when a government covers these houses
with its shield it proves itself under the judgment of the
law, —it is the guilty leader in the crime of exciting to
debauchery. This it is easy to demonstrate.
II. —LICENSED HOUSES OF DEBAUCHERY IN THEIR
RELATION TO PUBLIC MORALITY.
The protection of the law supplies a varnish of honesty
to the licensed brothel. What is not prohibited is per-
mitted. Whatever the law protects is regarded as good ;
and, moreover, licensed brothels are the less suspected be-
cause a Department of the public service is daily in
communication with these establishments.
The licensed brothel has then the right of existing in a
city, either with or without a sign-board. It is not like
the gambling house, which (prohibited, as it now is, by
law) is only known to the few initiated, and to which
they can only go at hours and on days fixed in advance,
and varied in order to mislead troublesome observers,
and in which they run the chance of being surprised and
arrested some day or other by a well-informed policeman.
It is a public establishment, known, licensed, and always
open, like an hotel.
The mistress of the licensed brothel tells you boldly,
that she plies a trade as legal as any others ; and that her
trade is no more to be blamed than that of the grocer;


butcher, or refreshment stall keeper; and that not only is it
no contravention of any regulation, but that it is under
the care of the police. In secret her conscience—that
incorruptible policeman —protests against the favour ac-
corded by the civil law. The mistress will take care not
to bring up her child, if she has one, by her own side;
and she will not dare to have her name connected with a
charity which her heart or a desire for expiation leads
her to support; for there are in this class of women some
whose trade has not wholly stifled the promptings of a
benevolent heart, or the prickings of conscience.
Do not try to picture to yourself the mass of corruption
which seethes in a licensed brothel. Its study is un-
healthy, and is a moral poison to him who pursues it.
Modern civilization has nothing with which to reproach
Pagan antiquity on this ground ; perhaps from this point
of view our times are worse than the corrupt periods of
the Greek republic and the Roman empire.
To what state of moral putrefaction must eight or
twelve unhappy creatures sink, who are shut out from the
world, without occupation, without interest in anything,
cloistered in the twilight of filthy and infected rooms,
reduced to a social intercourse consisting only of quarrels
or obscene conversations ; and at the first appearance of
revolt are beaten like slaves by the mistress or her bully?
In this kingdom of death a sigh may one day escape from
the soul; it is at the remembrance of the village bell, of
the school of childhood, of the family home, of the blue
sky; but it falls back again after this crisis into the
implacable clutches of those words of despair, “it is our
fate.” The chain is rivetted so long as there is any
money to be gained by the mistress with this body which
belongs to her ; but sickness, more merciful in its horrible


ravages, often delivers the unfortunate being by throwing
her into the cell of the hospital. If she escape death, and
enter society again, her only safety lies in plunging, by a
baptism of regeneration, into the living water which
Christ showed to the woman of Samaria; otherwise, a
pestilential moral effluvium will be disseminated by this
soul, impregnated as it is with the habits and the
remembrances of the brothel. Whoever approaches her
will be infected ; the purity even of the child who may be
momentarily confided to her care is stained by this con-
tact, and its unconscious soul is tainted with an indefinable
sickness, which the eye of a mother can alone discern.
Her vast experience of evil, her wantonness, her artifices,
and the inexpressible refinements of her immodesty,
scatter the seeds of moral death far and near*
The kept mistressf is protected to some extent from
sinking into a greater depravity by having some employ-
ment which more or less veils her intrigue, and by the
social position of her seducer. The isolated registered
girl finds in her comparative independence two elements
which prevent her falling below a certain level of immor-
* Pastor Borel has here described the evil influence of the women who
have resided in licensed brothels. Monsieur Aime Humbert, of Neuchdtel,
thus eloquently refers to the similar moral corruption disseminated by the
men who frequent these houses : —“ Men tell you of contagious diseases
which are to be made less deadly and more rare; but I will show you a
contagious disease, which, wherever this system obtains, becomes ever
more deadly and less rare. It does not, indeed, attack any single organ
of the human frame—but it withers all that is human—mind, body, soul.
It strikes our youth at that unhappy moment when first they cross the
thresholds of the abodes of State-regulated vice ; and when they recross
that threshold to the purer air, what fatal deed has not been done ? For
them the spring of life has no more flowers; the very friendships of their
youth are polluted ; they become strangers to all the honourable relations
of a pure young life ; and thus it is that more and more in these days, we
see stretching wider and wider around us the circle of this mocking,
faded, worn-out, sceptical youth, without poetry and without love, without
enthusiasm, without faith, and without joy.”— Editor.
t The women referred to in this paragraph are of three grades, well


ality, and which leave still open the door to repentance
and to a change of life. The registered brothel is more
implacable. The Refuges prove that the unfortunates
who have lived in licensed brothels are the most corrupt,
and the most difficult to reclaim.
0 honest wives, and mothers of respected families, whose
lives flow on amidst duties and pleasures and trials which
always find the balm of sympathy and religion, open your
hearts to all the overflowings of friendship, to the holy
caresses of your well-beloved, to all the joys, to all the
solicitudes of the domestic hearth, and to the easy sacrifices
of charity. You can do so, so long as you know not that
there are in the heart of your towns, markets where a
trade in the bodies and souls of your sisters is carried on,
and that these markets have their financiers and their
depots in Germany, France, Italy, and Switzerland.
The registered brothel destroys, in the interests of
patented infamy, those unfortunates whom idleness, love
of finery, the passion for pleasure, the absence of energy
and moral sense, or, perhaps, a first fall, have prepared
for a more shameful life, which they might have escaped
but for this institution, which strips them of the last rem-
nants of modesty and self-respect.
Imagine what must be the effect on the morality of a
town, of such institutions, scattered about in every
understood on the Continent j but, happily, not so clear to the English
reader. First, the “ entretenue ,” i.e., kept mistress , not registered or
licensed by the police. Secondly, the “Jille en carte ” or “ fille isolee,”
i.e., the isolated registered girl, who lives in her own private lodgings ;
but who is registered by the police, from whom she has received a
“ livret ” or “ carte,” which is filled up weekly, and which is at once a
certificate of health, and a license to pursue her trade. Thirdly, the
women who live in licensed brothels. These, also, are registered and
licensed in the same way as the “ filles isolees.” Pastor Borel here shows
how each of these grades is more hopeless than the one preceding it.
The police make no secret of their wish to drive all the women into
licensed brothels— Editor.


quarter, or even if confined to one; often found in cross
streets, open at all hours to men, young and old, and
sometimes even, notwithstanding the regulations, to
children from the gymnasium, the college, and the work-
shop. This institution, adapting itself to all grades of
fortune, has for the poor the disgusting hovel, impreg-
nated with the acrid odour of wine and tobacco ; for the
rich, the saloon furnished with soft carpets, upholstered
with velvet, and adorned with cytherean pictures and
rosewood pianos.
In one of my journeys to Lyons, I found myself in a
carriage with two clerks, one of whom was relating the
reception he met with at the house of a customer of his
firm. “As for me,” added he, “who have no family,
whenever I wish to entertain a companion, I invite him
to spend an evening in a licensed brothel.” They dis-
cussed this subject with an indifference that surprised
me as much as their recitals filled me with consternation.
This happened some weeks before the German war.
Young men are frequently entrapped in this sink after a
supper, a ball, or an excursion, by a single word from one
of these debauchees, who make a parade of their immor-
ality. “II n’y a qu’une rue a traverser et que le premier
pas qui coute.”
If these centres of corruption, protected by law, infect
the atmosphere of an entire town, judge what must result
from them in their immediate neighbourhood.
O ye, of honest hearts, consider the families of the com-
mon people, whom poverty compels to live in so shameful
a quarter. How many times is the sleep of the workman
—that beneficent and necessary rest which nature gives
to the labours of life —disturbed by the songs of orgies
prolonged till midnight ? How many times has a wife, a


mother, been obliged to shut out air and light from the
room which faces the brothel, in order that a husband and
children might not be witnesses of spectacles, the sight
of which cannot always be concealed by the shutters im-
posed by the police on licensed brothels.
What must be the effect produced in populous quarters
by the daily passage of these girls of idleness and folly,
insulting honest labour by their luxurious toilets, and
whose lascivious looks in their careless promenade, are
excitements to debauchery ? Have you reflected on their
influence on the young workwoman —the apprentice—
who, wearied after a day’s work, in going to her sad
lodging, rustles against a silk dress, and perceives the
illumination which the lowered blinds fail to hide ? It is
only in exceptional natures that the sight of evil strength-
ens virtue, the greater number are seduced and dragged
down.
Have you reflected on the effect produced on the num-
erous children found in quarters inhabited by working
men, and who—living much in the street—see and hear
what they cannot yet understand, but whose imagination
being on the alert, is blighted and its purity taken away,
even before they have any idea of vice ?
Official documents of this year [1875] show that in one
of the principal towns* in Switzerland there are eight
licensed brothels in a street containing 156 households
and more than 200 children.
Where is the being who will not shudder at the thought
of his fellow citizens being condemned by their position
to breathe, and to let those they hold most dear, breathe,
* This is Geneva. Earnest efforts are now being made for abolishing
the system there and throughout the whole of Switzerland. It has
already been abolished in the Canton of Zurich.— Editor.


the poison of this atmosphere which the law maintains
around their dwellings ? What benevolent community
would not, above everything, preserve those whom it
assists from this deleterious influence ?
Shamed and wounded in heart by this plague which
disgraces Europe, we ask where we must look for a
remedy, and what Government will take the initiative
in legislating to extirpate this scourge ? Alas !it is not
a question of a province to be added to existing territories,
or of an extension of trade or industry. The end to be
attained is purely moral and humanitarian.
France, which has 67 towns containing licensed brothels,
has adopted this system, and its most eminent publicists
support it or remain silent.
England, which has abolished her traffic in negroes,
has seen an Association spring up in her midst whose aim
is the extirpation of legal prostitution. This Association*
has its journal and its committees. It is forming public
opinion. The day of its triumph is not far off in England,
and as we may hope, on the European continent also.
A woman, Mrs. Butler, an emulator of those Christians
whose devotion appears to me to be the ideal of heroism,
has just travelled through Italy to preach this holy cru-
sade, and to form committees, whose bulletins have
already been issued ; she has also been to Geneva, Lau-
sanne, Neuch&tel, and Berne, in Switzerland ; the dedi-
cation of her life to the service of a cause as noble and
just as it is sad, and her moving speeches have reanimated
* Pastor Borel here refers to the “ British and Continental Federation
for the Abolition of State-Regulated Prostitution.” He does not appear
to be aware that there are, in addition to this, no less than eleven associa-
tions (besides local committees) working harmoniously for the Repeal of
the “ Contagious Diseases Acts,” under which the State Regulation of
Prostitution is carried out in England and Ireland. They have three
English and one French journal.— Editor,


our courage, have shaken our indifference, and have
called forth from many hearts a response to her appeal.
It may be asked—will Switzerland, preoccupied with
religious questions and local politics, dream of sweeping
away a disgrace which only infests three of her towns,
and which is a blot on only a corner of her escutcheon ?
In January, 1871, Professor Hornung, distinguished as
much by his scientific knowledge as by the sincerity of
his patriotism, won the Grand Council over to his views,
and in April, 1872, he read before the “Society of Public
Utility,” a most important report, which has since been
printed. In Italy and England, he is quoted as a valiant
champion in the war against legal prostitution. At Neu-
chatel, Professor A. Humbert works actively, both by his
personal influence and by publications, to purge away
this leprosy.
Petitions from Geneva and Chaux-de-Fonds* have
been presented to the Grand Council with the same
object. It is said that a committee has been formed at
Berne also, to draw public opinion into this purifying
current. But in the Switzerland of our day, questions
are only decided when they are carried on the wind of
popularity and supported by public opinion, and that I
believe has not yet come to pass.
Will Switzerland one day have its Wilberforce ?
Elect of the nation ! Members of the Legislative
body ! Councillors of State ! You are preoccupied with
what will promote national weal! At public festivals
you make patriotic speeches. To carry out your ideas
you call meetings ; you have your journals ; you invite
the people to sign your petitions; and when the question
* At Chaux-de-Fonds the Regulation of Prostitution has since been
abolished. — Editor.


is one of effacing from the statute book a disgrace, an
injustice, and a crime of treason against the person, will
you wait until public opinion imperiously calls for it ?
At the time when Mrs. Butler was holding conferences
in Switzerland, a woman,* who was not aware of them,
but whose soul is open to all noble and tender senti-
ments, wrote the following lines with which I will end
this sad work :
“ There is only one means of dealing with the licensed
corruption which degrades our Switzerland ; boldly attack
it in front and stop it. To do that, obtain a law to sup-
press licensed brothels ; by virtue of it close all establish-
ments like them which may be opened clandestinely; do
with them in a word as is done with gambling houses;
as is daily done with unlicensed houses of ill fame.
“ Any palliation or temporising will only aggravate the
evil.
“Whilst there are markets for it, there will be
Yes, I will write this hideous word; there will be mer-
chandise.
“ So long as markets for black slaves remained open
in Christian countries, there was black merchandise for
Christians. So long as slave markets continue to be
authorized in the East there will be an African slave trade,
with its turpitudes, and its atrocities, to supply them.
And so long as there is with us a market for white flesh,
there will be a trade in white slaves to sustain it.
“ Shall we any longer endure this? Shall we endure
in the heart of Switzerland these bastiles of prostitution,
with their bolted doors and barred windows ? If it were
proposed to establish within our walls a house for assass-
ination, legally constituted, organized and supervised,
# The Countess Agenor de Gasparin. — Editor.


where only those would go who cut their own throats,
resolving to destroy both soul and body, should we con-
sent to it ?
“ Now what is it, I ask, that is killed in these infamous
dens, in these licensed resorts? What is it, but the
entire individual, soul and body ?*
“ How a father can dare to look at his sons, or a
mother at her daughters, until they have done all, I say
all, in their power, to demolish these moral cesspools, in
which young girls wither away, and where married men
and their sons may go and sully and corrupt themselves for
ever, is more than I can in honesty conceive or imagine.
“ Prayer meetings are called, assemblies of Evangelical
Alliance are convoked, people are everywhere under-
taking pious journeys to attend Christian Congresses.
“To pray together, to edify one another, and to frater-
nize from the four corners of the horizon, is undoubtedly
good. But with all this religious agitation some result
should be seen ; something definite ; something like the
suppression of social corruption, or the arrest of legal
vice; something, in short, which will compel the nations
to exclaim, ‘ There are still sincere men on earth.’
“ Oh that all who have a soul, a heart, and bowels of
mercy, would unite together! This is a good war. We
shall have partial defeats, but victory is at the end. Only
let us know what it is to will P'
* Dr. Hippolyte Mireur, of Marseilles, who has written a large work in
favour of the State Regulation of Prostitution, entitled “ La Syphilis et la
Prostitution dans leurs Rapports avec L’Hygiene, la Moraile et la Loi,”
strikingly confirms these words of Madame Gasparin. He says “ The
system of registration which regulates and legalises the sorrowful
industry of the prostitute, is in fact, the sinister stroke by which women
are cut off from society, and after which they no longer belong to them-
selves, but become merely the chattel of the Administration.” And
again, “ They are cut off not from Society only, but from heaven, from
hope, and from the power to repent.” And yet he pleads for the extension
of the system to the whole civilised world.— Editor.


SUPPLEMENT BY THE EDITOR.
Thus has Pastor Borel described what he himself
knows of the slavery and slave traffic of France and
Switzerland. He has asserted that a similar traffic exists
in other countries both internally and internationally.
In the first edition of this translation we published a
letter from H. Barron, Esq., the British Charge d’Affaires
at Brussels,* which confirmed this assertion, but it is
only recently that other facts have come to the surface,
which bring into prominence the dark and cruel incidents,
and somewhat indicate the extent, of this traffic between
England and Belgium.
* (From the Times of February 3rd, 1876.)
ENGLISHWOMEN ABROAD.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ TIMES.”
Sir, —At our recent annual meeting, several startling facts were disclosed
showing that increasing numbers of young Englishwomen are allured to
Belgium by deceptive representations.
Relying on promises of remunerative employment, attracted moreover
by the novelty of visiting a foreign land, they often fall into snares
prepared for their ruin by established traders in vice. Others, engaged
for the theatres, are often abandoned to want and temptation, and are
sometimes rescued and sent home by this committee.
We think it desirable that this evil should be more generally known, in
order to impress upon parties interested the necessity of caution. No
offer, however specious, ought to be accepted without due investigation,
and a written agreement providing for the payment of the return
journey in case of a termination of the engagement. This alone, how-
ever, is but a slight security against the practised agents employed in
this commerce.
We look to the Press as the chief means of warning against this danger.
Its voice cannot be raised in a better cause. We therefore appeal to you,
in full confidence that you will give this matter the publicity of your
columns and the benefit of your remarks. _
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
H. BARRON, H.B.M.’s Charge d’Affaires.
(For the Committee of the 8.C.F.)
British Charitable Fund, 17, Rue des Petits Carmes,
Bruxelles, Jan. 26.


The following Memorial and Declarations recently
presented to Earl Granville tell their own tale. It is
needless for us to comment upon them further than to
point out how entirely they agree item by item with the
allegations of Pastor Borel, shewing that in all countries
the same revolting features of the traffic uniformly pre-
sent themselves.
To the Right Honourable the Earl Granville , K.G., Her
Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs.
The MEMORIAL of the undersigned Members
of a Committee, formed in London for the
purpose of exposing and suppressing the
existing traffic in English, Scotch, and Irish
Girls, for the purpose of Foreign Prostitution,
Respectfully Sheweth—
That there exists a system of systematic abduction to
Brussels and elsewhere on the Continent, of girls who
are British subjects, for purposes of prostitution, and
that the girls so abducted, being sold to the keepers of
licensed houses of infamy, are generally confined and
detained against their will in such houses.
Many of the girls so abducted are induced by men of
respectable exterior to go abroad under promise of
marriage or of obtaining employment or situations ; and,
on arrival there, are taken to the Office of the Police des
Mceurs for registration as prostitutes.
In most cases, the girls know nothing of the language
or customs of the country, and are entirely ignorant of
the system of registration of prostitutes which exists on
the Continent, and of what is being transacted at the
office aforesaid; and, before being taken there, they are


often made to believe that the place is the Custom House,
and that they are going there to comply with formalities
required from travellers who arrive from another country,
and they are generally registered, for reasons which are
hereinafter stated, in false names.
According to the letter of the Belgian law, a woman
may not be registered as a prostitute under the age of
twenty-one years, but this legal rule is easily and most
frequently evaded for the purpose of securing young
victims, by the following means : —Any certificate of
birth can be obtained in England, by any person whom-
soever, on payment of a few shillings. The abductor,
therefore, produces a true certificate of the birth of some
female who has attained twenty-one years, and presents
such certificate to the Police des Mceurs as that of the
girl who is under age, and whom he wishes to register.
Any girl who is registered under a false name is, in
Belgium, liable to suffer the penalties of forgery.
After a girl has been registered (with or without her
knowledge or consent), and immured in a licensed house
of prostitution, it is, in most cases, impossible for her to
regain her freedom by any means within her own reach
or power, however much she may wish to escape; she
becomes practically a British subject sold into slavery
under the regulations of a Foreign State.
The houses are constructed so as to prevent egress
without the concurrence of the keepers thereof. Terror-
ism is also exercised over these girls, if any wish or
attempt to escape is manifest; they are subjected to
violence, and are intimidated by threats of the imprison-
ment to which they have become liable through being
registered in a false name. They are also invariably
kept in debt to the keepers of the tolerated houses, and


these persons frequently sell the miserable girls from one
house to another, that traces of them may be lost or
rendered difficult.
By these means, and the prospect of the brutal treat-
ment they would suffer, if left in the licensed house after
complaint, they are made afraid to complain to any
person not possessing the power of affording protection
or securing instant release. We have never heard of
such power being exercised, even if it exists.
A female British subject, who has been entrapped
into, and is kept against her will in, a maison toleree in
Brussels, is seldom allowed to go out of the house —never
unless accompanied by a person in charge ; and it has
been found almost impossible for friends desiring to
assist her, to obtain any help, either from the Belgian
Police or the English Diplomatic or Consular authorities.
Her condition is that of a slave to the lust of all who will
pay the brothel keeper’s charge for permission to violate
and outrage her, until disease renders her unprofitable,
or death shall afford release.
Your Memorialists have made themselves acquainted
with the cases of English, Scotch, and Irish girls who
have been decoyed into or detained in this horrible
slavery ; and some of your Memorialists have personally
visited Brussels for that purpose, and have aided some of
the victims to effect their escape, and have failed in
releasing others.
Your Memorialists beg leave respectfully to refer your
Lordship to the declarations which accompany this Mem-
orial, which the parties concerned desired should be
deposed to by affidavit; but as they have hitherto been
unable to find a party on English soil against whom crim-
inal proceedings could be taken, they have been pre*-


vented from making their statements on oath by the
provisions of the law against the taking of voluntary and
extrajudicial oaths.
Your Memorialists submit to your Lordship that such
changes ought to be made in the English and Belgian
law as shall make it impossible for any woman, who is a
subject of Her Majesty the Queen, to be deprived of her
liberty by fraud or force, and to be kept in that country,
in bondage for the vilest of purposes.
It is the proud boast of England that she is the pro-
tector of the enslaved and oppressed. She has made
great sacrifices in the past to free the slaves in her own
colonies, and she still shelters beneath her flag those who
may escape from inhuman oppressors in every quarter of
the globe. She would visit with swift retribution any
infraction of the liberty of a British subject by any un-
civilised State. How important therefore it becomes that
she should, through her executive, take such steps on
her own part, and make such representations to the
Government of a friendly ally, who professes to rule in
the spirit of English freedom, as would render it impos-
sible that British subjects, however humble, should in
the future be deprived of personal -liberty as they have
been in the cases which your Memorialists now bring
under the notice of your Lordship.
And your Memorialists crave your Lordship’s power-
ful influence in favour of such measures as shall provide
effectual and prompt release for those of Her Majesty’s
female subjects who have been decoyed into a foul
slavery abroad, and whose forlorn, helpless, and utterly
woful condition (as shown forth in the statements before
mentioned), your Memorialists hope will enlist your
Lordship’s sympathy in the cause they thus venture to


submit to your Lordship’s consideration.
And your Memorialists will ever pray, &c.
(Signed)
BENJAMIN Scott, Guildhall, City, Chamberlain of
London.
Robert C. Morgan, Publisher, Paternoster Square,
London.
George Gillett, Banker, 72, Lombard Street.
Alfred Stace Dyer, Publisher, 1, Amen Corner,
Paternoster Row.
Septimus R. Scott, Old Broad Street, City, Chair-
man of Committee of Stock Exchange.
Mary Steward, Ongar, Essex.
Mary H. L. Bunting, Euston Square, London.
E. Philp Bastin, West Drayton.
T. L. Boyd, Amhurst Lodge, Tunbridge Wells.
William Payne, Kennington Road, London.
August sth, 1880.
Declarations in substantiation of some of the allegations
of the foregoing Memorial .
DECLARATION OF MR. ALFRED STACE DYER.
I, Alfred Stace Dyer, of No. 1, Amen Corner,
Paternoster Row, in the City of London, Publisher, do
solemnly, sincerely, and truly declare, as follows :
1. For several years I have taken a deep interest in
matters affecting public morality, especially in relation
to the condition of women and children ; and in conse-
quence of such interest it has recently come to my
knowledge that English, Scotch, and Irish girls are fre-
quently decoyed under false but specious pretences to
licensed houses of prostitution on the Continent of
Europe.


2. In the ninth month of last year (1879) I heard that
an English girl had two or three months previously been
induced to go to Brussels under promise of marriage ;
that on her arrival there she was taken straight to a
licensed house of prostitution ; and that she was detained
in the said house against her will. I caused several
respectable persons in Brussels to be communicated with,
and, chiefly by their aid, E N ,* a minor, the
girl above alluded to, was returned to England. I met
her on her arrival in this country on the 24th* day of
twelfth month, 1879, when she corroborated what I have
stated in regard to her betrayal to Brussels, and her
detention in that city.
3. Having been informed that there were other English
girls confined in licensed houses in Brussels who desired to
escape therefrom, but could not, I went to that city in
the second month of the present year (1880), and visited
several of the said houses, and also the hospital of “ St.
Pierre,” to which the inmates of such houses are sent
when affected with'venereal disease.
4. In this hospital, I, in company with the wife of
Pastor Leonard Anet, of Brussels, saw a young English-
woman named S . She told me that she was in-
veigled into a house of prostitution without knowing the
kind of place to which she was going. She also said
that she had once escaped, but had been pursued, cap-
tured, and taken back, and that after having been in the
said house for three months, she was removed to the
hospital where she then was. She has since escaped and
has returned to England.
5. In the same hospital I saw another English girl
* The full names are in the Declarations submitted to Earl Granville ;
they are suppressed here for reasons which will be obvious.


named A T , a minor, who had been received
into this institution from a licensed house of prostitution
in Brussels. The said A T then and there told
me that she was not, nor had been, suffering from disease,
and that she could not understand that there was any
just cause for her detention. I now verily believe that
she was sent to this hospital not because she suffered
from venereal disease, but to be instrumentally treated
that her virginity might be destroyed, and that she might
be made fit for prostitution.
6. I have read the declaration of the said A T ,
dated this 26th day of July, 1880, and I say that the
statements therein contained relating to her being
decoyed to Brussels, and her detention in a licensed
house in that city, and her cruel treatment there, are in
accord with the statements she made to me when I saw
her in the hospital aforesaid, between four and five
months ago.
7. Prior to visiting the hospital of “ St. Pierre," I went
in company with another English gentleman, who has
joined in the Memorial to Earl Granville, into several
licensed houses of prostitution, where I saw three Eng-
lishwomen who were either willing or anxious to leave,
but who were intimidated from doing so ; two of whom
were apparently much under age. The last of these
three, who was greatly agitated at the mention of a pos-
sibility of escape, told me that she was formerly employed
in a large drapery establishment in the West End of
London, and had been enticed to Brussels by a man who
pretended to be her suitor, who decoyed her into a
licensed house of prostitution, where he left her.
8. This young Englishwoman being deterred from
leaving with me for fear of violence, I went to the Pro-


cureur du Roi for assistance, but could not obtain any.
He said the young woman had a right to leave the house
at any moment. I replied in substance that if this were
so by the letter of the law, the intimidation and terrorism
practised at these places made it impossible for her to
escape unassisted. He then referred me to the Com-
missioner of Police of the district in which this licensed
house was situated. I went to the Commissioner’s office,
but could only see his deputy, who at first refused to do
anything, but ultimately said he would go and see the
girl. In a few minutes he returned, and told me that she
denied the statement she had made to me.
9. Believing that if this were so, it was from fear of
brutal treatment at the hands of the keeper of the house
of prostitution, I went to the said house again, accom-
panied by my English friend and a Belgian gentleman ;
and, on asking to see the young Englishwoman, we were
refused admission, and threatened with violence if we
came there any more, in such a manner that the smallest
indiscretion on our part would have produced a breach
of the peace.
10. Considering the position of the girl to be now one
of great danger, I went to the residence of the British
Minister to solicit his intervention. He declined to see
me, although I told his Secretary that I had good reason
to believe that a young Englishwoman was imprisoned in
one of the tolerated houses, and that unless she were at
once removed to a place of safety, she would probably
suffer brutal treatment, and have her life placed in jeo-
pardy. Notwithstanding this, the Minister would do
nothing but refer me to the Vice-Consul, whose office
was closed when I reached it, it being after four p.m.,
and whose residence was five miles off. I, however,


went thither, and was referred to the Pro-Consul I
sought the Pro-Consul, and appealed to him to have the
young woman removed to a place of security whilst her
case was properly investigated ; but he told me he had
no power to do so, and would communicate with the
proper authorities. I have not since received any com-
munication from the British or Belgian authorities on the
subject, although I have obtained privately a list of
questions which were subsequently put to this young
woman in the tolerated house by three Belgian officials,
unaccompanied by any representative of the British
Embassy, and which questions were, in my judgment,
most ill-adapted to disarm the suspicions of the terrified
girl, or to elicit the truth.
11. I have ascertained that the inmates of licensed
houses of prostitution in Brussels are exposed to, and
often suffer, violence and brutality if they show any sign
whatever of intending or attempting to escape, and that
the doors of such houses are so constructed as to afford
ready ingress, but to make egress impossible without the
doors being unlocked by the persons in charge within.
Such inmates are frequently resold to keepers of houses
of prostitution in other cities and towns.
12. I verily believe that under the present system,
English girls who have been enticed into, and sold for
considerable sums of money to the keepers of licensed
houses of prostitution in Brussels, have no opportunity
of obtaining their freedom, unless through the persistent
efforts of friends; and that no additional precautionary
measures (so-called) on the part of the Belgian authorities
will be able permanently, on account of the corruption
necessarily incidental to such a system, to secure freedom
to leave the said houses by Englishwomen and children


who find themselves in such places; and that nothing
short of a total prohibition of the introduction of female
British subjects to Belgian licensed houses of prostitution
will prevent innocent English girls being decoyed to
Brussels, and there kept in a condition of slavery to
satisfy the brutal lusts of the inhabitants of that city,
stimulated, as they are, by the facilities which the author-
ities afford for their indulgence-.
ALFRED S. DYER.
London, 26th of 7th month, 1880.
DECLARATION OF A T- .*
I, A T , spinster, solemnly and truly declare
as follows :
1. lam the daughter of E T , late of Bristol,
in the County of Gloucester, commercial traveller, and
Sarah, his wife, and was, I believe, born at Commercial
Road, Hereford, on the 17th August, iB6O, and am a
minor.
2. I resided with my parents until the death of my
father, which happened when I was sixteen and a half
years old, and then I came to London and lived with a
sister and other relations until June, 1878, when I entered
the domestic service of a lady at Dulwich. Whilst there,
on Christmas Day, 1878, I was at Tulse Hill Railway
Station for the purpose of going to visit one of my
sisters ; and as it had been snowing, I was very wet. I
went into the waiting-room and stood before the fire.
As I was doing so, a respectably-dressed man spoke to
me and said my waterproof was burning, and we entered
into conversation until my train arrived.
* Some portions of this Declaration are omitted as not suitable for
general circulation. — Editor.


3. I left my situation at Dulwich in February, 1879,
with a good character, and went at once into the service
of a lady at Clapham, with whom I remained until Octo-
ber of the same year, when I left her, also with a good
character, and solely because I was not equal to the
duties of the place.
4. The same week that I left my situation at Clapham,
I was in Tottenham Court Road, between six and seven
p.m., when I was accosted by the same man whom I met
at Tulse Hill Station, and who subsequently told me his
name was Sullie. We talked together for a short time,
when he invited me to take a glass of wine, to which I
assented. We then had a stroll, and after some general
conversation I told him I was looking for a situation.
He asked me if I should like to go to Paris; and I replied,
“ That depends on circumstances, and who takes me.”
After some further talk he said he had to go and see a
French gentleman for a few minutes, and suggested that
I should accompany him. I did so. He took me to a
kind of Hotel in Soho, where he introduced me to a well-
dressed man, whom he addressed by the name of Roger.
Wine was brought in, of which they insisted on my
drinking, and afterwards they gave me gin.
5. Roger soon left, and Sullie told me that he (Roger)
had taken a great fancy to me, and would marry me if I
went to Paris with him; and that he had a beautiful
house and carriage. Sullie told me he himself was
married, and that if I would go and sleep at his house
that night, he would arrange for me to see Roger again
in the morning. I accordingly went to Sullie's house,
near Victoria Street, Westminster, where I saw a woman
he represented to be his wife, and I slept there that
night in a room by myself.


6. The next morning, between nine and ten o’clock,
Sullie and I went to meet Roger at the Hotel in Soho.
I had no breakfast before leaving, and on our way Sullie
gave me some gin, as I felt exhausted. When we reached
Soho, Roger and a man named Rennie joined us, and
by this time, from having eaten no food and taken the
gin, I felt ill and scarcely knew what I did, and they gave
me some more spirits. Sullie then said he must leave
for a short time. I felt frightened and wished to go
away too, but he persuaded me to stay with Roger and
Rennie, saying they would give me some breakfast, and
he would soon return. The two men conducted me to a
house in Castle Street, Oxford Street, where I saw a
woman whom Rennie called his wife. She gave Rennie
money, and he and Roger left the house. She then
began to talk to me, and gave me coffee with brandy,
but no solid food, and said she had long known Roger,
and he would make me very happy if I would go with
him.
7. It was now about twelve o’clock, and the drink I
had taken, with nothing to eat, made me feel bewildered
and weak. Soon Roger and Rennie returned with
another man, who was represented to be a doctor. * *
** * *
8. Shortly after this man left I was given some break-
fast, and being alarmed at what had been done to me,
the meaning and purpose of which I did not at all under-
stand, I asked for my hat and jacket, which had been
taken from me, and said I wanted to go; but they refused
to give me my things, or to let me leave the house, and
said we should start for Paris directly. Very soon two
cabs were called, and being overcome by drink, and told
that if I did not like Paris I should be sent back, I was


induced to get into one of the cabs. Rennie, Roger, and
a middle aged woman in his employment, together with
two other girls, also went, and we were driven to Victoria
Station.
9. Sullie met us at Victoria Station, and got into the
railway carriage with me, and gave me a small note,
saying, “ Learn this on your way.” As soon, however,
as the train was ready to start, he jumped out, and only
Roger, the woman, myself, and the two girls proceeded
on the journey. I very soon fell into a heavy sleep, and
on awaking, opened and read Sullie’s note, which was
as follows :
ELLEN CORDON, born 14, Oldham Road, Manchester.
Father’s Name, RALPH CORDON, a Forgeman.
Mother’s Name, ELLEN JONES CORDON.
When I had read it I began to cry, and begged to go
back, but was told I could not.
10. I now found that instead of going to Paris we
were going to Brussels, and one of the women told me
that at the Custom House I must say my name was Ellen
Cordon, and that I was twenty-one. I asked her what
would happen if I did not say it? and she replied, “I
suppose we shall all be hung.” We arrived at Brussels
about six p.m., were taken to Roger’s house, and sent at
once to bed.
11. Next morning at about ten, they told me and the
two other girls that we must go to the Custom House,
and Roger and a woman in his employment took us in a
conveyance. As we were going they made us repeat
the names and ages which had been assigned to us, and
we were instructed to say exactly the same when quest-
ioned at the Custom House. I know now that the place
to which we were taken was not the Custom House, but


the place where prostitutes are registered. It was called
the Custom House only to mislead and deceive us, its
proper name being the dispensary.
12. On arriving at the dispensary, Roger went into an
inner room with what he represented to be the certifi-
cates of our birth. I never saw mine, and do not think
the other girls saw theirs. I have since ascertained that
when girls are entrapped under twenty-one years of age,
certificates are often procured of girls who are over that
age, and presented as being the certificates of the girls
who have been decoyed. I was presently taken into
this inner room, and told to sign my name two or three
times. I signed each time “ Ellen Cordon.” I did not
understand French, and the woman in Roger’s service
who had come with us translated to me. I said to her,
“ What if I don’t sign ?” and she replied, “ You will be
in Brussels without any money or friends. You will be
sent to prison, and perhaps we shall all be hung.” When
I signed I had no idea that I was being registered as a
prostitute, for in the whole course of my life I had never
yielded myself to prostitution, and should have recoiled
with detestation from doing so. I thought the place we
were in was the Custom House, and I should never have
signed if I had known I could not be punished for declin-
ing to do so. After I had signed I was told to go into
another room, and to my horror I found I was there to
be again personally examined.
13. When I had undergone this treatment I was taken
back by Roger to his house, which proved to be a licensed
brothel, and there I was kept for two or three weeks,
and subjected to the most brutal outrages. * * * *
*********
i* ******


***** *
16. Although I had not, when I was sent to the hospital,
and never have had any venereal disease, I was detained
there for six months, and during the first half of that
time I was treated for the illness caused by the cruel
examinations and yet more cruel lust of which I had been
the victim. When I began to recover from that illness
fresh horrors were in store for me, and they commenced
to operate upon me for the purpose of making me capable
of prostitution. They did not even give me chloroform,
but the students held my hands and feet, whilst the
operator seemed to tear and cut away my living flesh,
inflicting upon me agonies I can never describe, besides
the intolerable shame. This was repeated at intervals
about seven times, and during the operations my screams
and appeals to my tormentors for mercy were heard, as
the other patients told me, over the whole building, and
the other girls who were there used to cry at the sight
of my sufferings. * * * *
17. When I had been in the hospital some time, I
begged my tormentor to take pity on me and let me go,
as he did other girls whom he could not cure, although
they had been there a much shorter time than I had ; but
he would not, and I believe if I had not soon escaped
from his hands, he would have tortured me to death or
madness ; but fortunately I was again sent for by the
police, on the charge before mentioned, of having given
a false name, and I was committed to prison for two
weeks.
18. When I was in the hospital Mr. Alfred Stace Dyer,
of 1, Amen Corner, Paternoster Row, came there and
brought me a message from my married sister Mrs. Clarke,
who lived near Bristol, and was anxious to hear about


me, and during the fortnight I was in prison, as aforesaid,
she and Mrs. Steward, of Ongar, in Essex, made efforts of
which I was then ignorant, to find me and rescue me
from my most horrible slavery ; and to my unspeakable
joy, when my imprisonment was over, instead of going
back to the hospital or brothel, where death was the only
thing I prayed for, I was claimed by my friends, and
brought again to my native land, under the care of my
sister and Mrs. Steward.
19. I am quite ready and willing to make the above
statements on my oath, and have attended before a
Magistrate for that purpose, but was informed that the
law prevented my doing so unless in the course of legal
proceedings.
A T .
Dated this 26th day of July, 1880.
DECLARATION OF MRS. MARY STEWARD.
I, Mary Steward, of Ongar, in the County of Essex,
widow of the Rev. George Steward, Congregational
Minister, truly declare as follows :
1. Having heard in April last that A T , here-
inafter mentioned, had been decoyed from London to
Brussels, and confined there in a licensed house of pros-
titution against her will, I interested myself on her behalf;
and in the said month of April I went to Brussels with
her sister Mrs. Clarke, and found the said A T
was then in prison for having given a false name at the
time of her being registered as though she were a pros-
titute, by the Police des Mceurs of Brussels.
2. I saw the said A T in prison the day
before her term of imprisonment expired ; and, in com


pany with her said sister, I waited for her at the door of
the prison, so as to take charge of her, the following day,
immediately on her release ; and her sister and I subse-
quently brought her to England.
3. The said A T was in my care for three
days, during which time I extracted her whole story from
her in great detail; and the account which the said
A T has, from first to last, given me of her
abduction to Brussels, her confinement in a licensed
house of prostitution and in hospital there, and of all
that befell her in that city, agrees with what she has
stated in her declaration on the subject, dated this 26th
day of July, 1880, and which declaration I have read.
4. From information I have obtained, I believe that
there are many English girls confined and kept by force,
and against their will, in licensed houses of prostitution
in Brussels.
MARY STEWARD.
Dated this 26th day of July, 1880.
DECLARATION OF EMILY CLARKE.
I, Emily Clarke, the wife of William Clarke, of Bristol,
truly declare as follows :
1. lam the elder sister of A T , the daughter
of E T , formerly of Commercial Road, in the
City of Hereford, and then of Bristol, in the County of
Gloucester, commercial traveller, and Sarah, his wife.
The said A T was born on the 17th day of
August, iB6O, and is the same person as the A
T , spinster, who has made a declaration dated the
26th day of July, 1880, setting forth the circumstances
under which she was decoyed to Brussels, detained, and
ill-treated there.


2. Having previously received a letter from my said
sister, written from an hospital in Brussels, asking me to
help her to get back to England, I went to that City, in
the month of April last, in company with Mrs. Steward,
of Ongar, in the County of Essex, who interested herself
in my sister’s sad case; and I found that she was in
prison in Brussels because a false name was given when
she was registered as though she were a prostitute.
3. I waited in Brussels, with the said Mrs. Steward,
until my sister’s term of imprisonment expired, and made
a claim, according to the forms of the Belgian law, to
have her given up to me, and myself brought her to
England.
4. My said sister was always a well-behaved quiet girl,
of great simplicity of character, and very easily influ-
enced ; and, from my knowledge of her, I am sure that
when she was enticed away to Brussels, she did not
know that she was being taken there for the purpose of
leading a life of prostitution.
5. I have read the said declaration of my said sister,
referred to in Paragraph 1 of this statement, and I verily
believe that all the facts therein stated are true.
EMILY CLARKE.
Dated this sth August, 1880.
Signed by the above Emily Clarke,
in the presence of
Arthur H. Austin Leigh,
Rector of Winterbourne,
Bristol.


The reader instinctively asks, “ What is to be done to
stop this foul inhuman traffic, and to protect British girls
from abduction and slavery ?” It is well to memorialise
the Foreign Secretary to take steps to suppress it, and
British citizens have a right to claim that he shall act in
the matter with promptitude and energy. In most mat-
ters relating to the protection of British subjects, they
might have confidence that he would instantly and
determinedly move. But in regard to this traffic and this
slavery they must not forget that he is paralysed by the
fact that the British Government is itself a participator
in a similar slavery in the Colonies and at home. Where
there is slavery there will be a slave trade. As long as
negro slavery was legalized in British territory, the voice
of Great Britain counted for nothing against the African
slave trade. But from the moment that the negro was
freed throughout the British dominions, Great Britain
spoke with ever-increasing power and effect against the
inhuman traffic. And so in regard to this traffic in
British girls, the British Foreign Secretary can and will
do nothing thorough and effective, until legalized prosti-
tution is abolished at home.
The supervision of prostitution by the. State, is the
backbone of this slavery. The avowed purpose of this
supervision is to make the vice of fornication healthy,
and it seeks to secure this end by the registration and
medical inspection of prostitutes, those who are found
to be diseased, being incarcerated in hospitals till their
recovery, in order that none but healthy women may ply
in the market of vice. The details of the arrangements
for supervision differ in different countries, but the
principles and the main features are the same in all. In
England the supervision is carried on under “ The


Contagious Diseases Acts 1866 to 1869,” * the passing of
which was hailed by foreign “ Regulationists ” as a great
step towards the making of International arrangements,
which they called upon England to aid in establishing
throughout the world. It will startle some of our readers
to learn that there are men (chiefly medical) on the Con-
tinent who have studied the sanitary regulation of pros-
titution as a science and an art. They constitute a class
of specialists who are ever on the watch for opportunities
to urge on Government officials the vast national and
international importance of their theories and plans; and
they are vigorously supported by foreign officials who
have charge of the regulations in their respective countries.
We call them “ Regulationists.” They and the foreign
officials are most seriously concerned about one thing—
the tendency of licensed brothels and registered women
to decrease in number, while unregistered houses of
accommodation and unregistered prostitutes steadily
increase in spite of the vigilance of the officials. They
regret the decrease of the licensed brothels, because
‘‘tolerated houses of debauchery are the basis of all
[sanitary] regulations of prostitution. The officials
have therefore a great care for the interests of the
keepers of such houses, and have begun deliberately to
* Though there is no provision in the C. D. Acts for the licensing of
brothels, and though no form of license is issued by the officials employed
under these Acts, brothels are practically as completely and effectually
licensed in this country as on the Continent. The Special Police, who
know, and constantly visit the brothels in the exercise of their duty, have
ample evidence by which they could put the ordinary law in motion and
suppress every one of them. Yet, during the whole of the sixteen years
that the Acts have been in force, these police have not prosecuted a single
person for brothel-keeping, but it is perfectly well understood that they will
not prosecute so long as the brothel-keeper co-operates with them.
f Le Cour “La Prostitution a Paris et a Londres ” Paris 1872,
page 137.


plead in their favour, in a manner which is only one step
removed from claiming for them a vested right in their
trade and its profits.* It is urged on their behalf that
“ they are obliged to lay out large sums of money in
costly researches for women.” These very researches
are the initial incidents of the slave traffic which we are
now discussing, and the writer of these words of apology
is the Chief Commissary of Police in Brussels, the City
to which the traffic in British girls has recently become
so prominent !
Regulationists and regulation officials are deeply im-
pressed with the “ immense amount of mischief which
one diseased individual can, and in most instances does
* Extracts from the “ Report presented 6th August, 1877, to the
Burgomaster (of the City of Brussels) by the Chief Commissioner of
Police. (Mons. Lenaers.)
“ I have said above that the number of houses of prostitution under
police control is diminishing every day, whilst that of the unauthorized
houses augments. I should add that the number of isolated prostitutes is
also increasing, whilst that of the women living in the known houses dimin-
ishes. According to the report for Brussels of the year 1874, there were
among 320 inscribed women, only 75 living in the houses, while 245 were
living in their separate lodgings. The same I found to be the case in Paris,
when I visited that city in order to examine the organisation and
administration of the service of prostitution. This change, on which we
have no reason whatever to congratulate ourselves, arises from causes
which I shall briefly summarise. Women who live in their own apart-
ments enjoy a degree of liberty which the cloistered prostitute cannot
have ; they receive only such visitors as they choose, regulate their own
expenses and are not subject to any compulsion. These latter are also
those who rebel the most against the rules and sanitary measures, and are in
every way the most difficult to superintend. The women in thehouses on the
contrary are subjected to obligations without number; they are forced,
so to speak, to give themselves up to the first comer, however deep their
repugnance to him may be ; they are compelled to incur heavy expenses,
and to submit themselves to the yoke of the keepers of the houses;
their liberty of action is exceedingly limited ; they must never be seen at
the doors or windows of the house, they scarcely ever go out, and then
always under the escort of the mistress, in a word they possess only
that amount of independence which the mistress chooses to grant them,
and the mistresses extend or control this independence according as it
suits their own interest, and without any reference to the will or
preferences of the women, who in fact consider their residence in a


inflict on the community.”* They are therefore specially
anxious that not one individual prostitute shall escape
registration and sanitary inspection, and it is the very
essence of their arrangements that suspicion shall warrant
them in compelling a woman to submit to enrolment and
its dire consequences, and that every avenue of escape
shall be closed against her, or shall be made so difficult
as to be practically impossible to all but a very small and
select number. They are therefore bound to disregard all
objections, and to disbelieve all statements of innocence,
made by women brought up or pointed out by brothel
keepers for registration. It is their business to secure
all the prostitutes they can, and as a matter of course,
an abducted girl has no chance of being believed or aided
tolerated house simply as a pis-aller, and one can easily understand that
they seize the very first opportunity of freeing themselves from a life
which offers them so little that is desirable, and go forth to augment the
ranks of clandestine prostitution. The result is that the keepers of the
houses are experiencing from day to day even greater difficulties in
recruiting their numbers, and that on account of this difficulty they now
see their patrons diminishing in number while their expenses are aug-
menting. In order to keep up their establishments they are obliged to
increase the luxury of their arrangements and to lay out large sums of
money in costly researches for women.” . . . . “ I would add that
I consider it desirable not to place the exploitatian of the houses of
tolerance under any restrictions except those strictly demanded by the
public interest. These houses present several advantages. Their keepers,
being interested in the maintenance of order, are themselves a police,
they watch over the health of their girls, they exact their regular sub-
mission to the examination, and send them to the hospital on the least
suspicion of illness. The reputation and the prestige of their establish-
ment depend on the security in regard to their health which their clients
find there, on the guarantee given to them of not being exposed to
anything disagreeable, and the assurance that their presence in such
places will never be divulged. Through these causes the keepers of the
houses become in a manner the auxiliaries of the police. It is therefore
of importance that prostitution should be as much as possible gathered
into houses of debauchery where it can be easily superintended, and
where all scandal is concealed, and in fact does not exist except for those
who seek it.”
* « Third Report on the operation of the Contagious Diseases Acts,”
issued by “ The Association for promoting the extension of the Contagious
Diseases Act, 1866, to the civil population of the United Kingdom” page 40.


to escape by them. They are impelled by the purpose
of the regulations, to support the brothel keepers in
maintaining their hold on their victims.
Further —it is a principle of the Regulationists that
the prostitute “ should be considered, in the exercise of
her calling, in the light of public merchandise, which it
is the duty of the medical man [who conducts the exam-
inations] to certify to, in every possible manner, as of
good or bad quality.”* “ Public merchandise ” —human
merchandise — LEGALISED HUMAN MERCHANDISE —certi-
fied by the State as of good quality and fit for the market!
This is the theory which avowedly underlies all State
surveillance of prostitution. It admits and legally estab-
lishes the right to buy and sell human beings.
It carries with it the principle of girl-farming (exploi-
tation des Jules') by capitalists with large establishments.
As we have already shewn, this theory regards it as of
prime importance that the girl-farmers and their victims
shall increase, while the isolated girls in the trade shall
decrease, and demands that there shall be a ceaseless
lynx-eyed watch for illicit traders, in order to bring them
under the regulations. The whole staff of police and
medical officers employed in this department are as
completely familiarised with the idea of a legal trade in
prostitutes, as were the officials of the American Slave
States with the idea of a legal trade in negroes. In those
States the slightest taint of negro blood made its unhappy
possessor liable to be bought and sold, and the law courts
were not over exacting as to the evidence required to
prove the taint. So also in the slave trade that we are
* Dr. de Amieis, quoted by Dr. P. Castiglione (who was employed by
the Italian Government to introduce the regulations into Rome in 1870)
in his work “on the Surveillance of Prostitution, and on the means of
preventing the diffusion of syphilis.”


now discussing. The girl-farmer brings his human chat-
tels to be certified, and, seeing that the purpose of “the
Department ” is thus being carried out, the officials care
not to enquire how he came by the property. If enquiries
are made, it requires small evidence to satisfy the official
mind that the victim is touched with the taint of infamy,
and that the wholesale trader is her lawful possessor.
The poor victim—cowed by her captor, her mental
powers (never perhaps very strong) now weakened by
the drink or narcotics administered by her intending
owner, often not understanding a word of the proceedings,
—is powerless to defend herself, and her owner leads
her forth unmolested—a State ticketed slave and his
lawful prize. All the machinery of the State for the
supervision of prostitution plays into the hands of the
girl-farmer, while, by its very nature, it tramples down
and takes the spirit out of the girls in whom he speculates.
The only effectual stand which the British Foreign
Secretary can take with Foreign Governments for the
prevention of this enslavement of British girls, is to
declare that Great Britain forbids the enrolment of any
of her girls on any State register of vice, and demands
the instant liberation of all who have been so registered.
But alas ! Great Britain herself keeps such a register, and
enrols her own girls for the same purpose of infamy,
and her Foreign Secretary cannot take this stand on her
behalf until her own hands are clean.
Reader, you can do something to compel the abolition
of this supervision of prostitution in your own country.
To extent to which you can influence public opinion
and the legislature in that direction, the responsibility
lies with you. You cannot rid yourself of this responsi-
bility. We beseech you carefully and conscientiously to


weigh it, and to act upon it. Support by your religious,
social and political influence, the demand now being
made for abolishing the English “ Contagious Diseases
Acts.” Otherwise, your apathy will help to maintain
this traffic for the vilest of purposes, in English, Scotch,
and Irish girls. The victims are mostly poor, weak, and
simple. Some of them may have already fallen victims
to the seducer. But they are none the less children of
your Father in Heaven, and He calls on you to aid in
their deliverance ; and not in theirs only, but in the
deliverance of others further away, for whom hope will
arise, so soon as Great Britain enters with clean hands
on the work of liberation.
JOS. EDMONDSON.
Southfield,
Halifax.
4th September, 1880.


THE
EUROPEAN SLAVE TRADE
IN
ENGLISH GIRLS.
Forty Pages.
Price Twopence.
By Post 2\d.
A NARRATIVE OF FACTS.
BY
ALFRED S. DYER.
To which is appended a copy of a Memorial to Earl Granville,
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, from the Committee
formed in London for the purpose of exposing and suppressing
this traffic.
LONDON:
DYER BROTHERS, AMEN CORNER, PATERNOSTER ROW.
May be ordered through Booksellers everywhere.
