

KEBwEKSIIiJ
ii ■ fbi
11
Bllife ft INVEMt ®T THE
! S ,,
\#P- " ' "


m *\JS>YDNBY CAZ ETTEyRBSs 1 *


THE
REMUERIAN
Being a Record of the
Voyage en route of the
38 th Reinforcements.
MAGAZINE STAFF:
EDITOR:
Lance-Corporal Owen Cardston
ASSOCIATE EDITORS:
Sergeant-Major W. A. Whitlock.
Lance-Corporal A. C. Robinson
ARTIST:
Gunner Don Croll




'*^^^444,,-


,0.-
.... . ,,. : v «S». ** >. ..: _
f.
'
.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL E. H. SAUNDERS
Lieut.-Colonel E. H. Saunders, Command-
ing the 38th Reinforcements, entered camp at
Awapuni in the earliest stages of the war,
August, 1914. With the rank of Major he
assumed command of the 17th (Ruahine)
Company, Wellington Battalion. Leaving
with the main body on the troopship "Arawa"
Major Saunders went direct to Headquarters,
Egypt. His first brush was on the Suez Canal
at El Rubra. In command of the New Zea-
land Infantry Brigade, he next took part in
the landing at G-allipoli. He next moved on
to Kitchra a part of the southern peninsula,
where the next attack was made.
At Kitchra Major Saunders was wound-
ed, necessitating his return to Egypt
and straight into hospital at Alexandria.
On his recovery the peninsula again held out
its attractions, but his return there this time
was of short duration, reaching there in July
and leaving again in August, once more for
Egypt. On 8-10-15 Major Saunders received
his promotion to the rank of Lieutenant-Col-
onel, and left for England. In command of
the New Zealand Division at the General Base,
France, Lieut.-Colonel Saunders was an ex-
tremely busy man, and here he would meet
all the lads from his own country, arriving for
the initial taste of warfare, passing through
to ithe firing line. In all twenty reinforce-
ments passed through the base while Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Saunders was in command.
Transferred to Sling Camp to command the
4th Battalion Wellington Infantry was the next
move, and in February this year he received
orders to return on duty travelling out on the
troopship "Willochra". After the usual three
weeks furlough Lieutenant-Colonel Saunders
was appointed Officer Commanding the 38th
Reinforcements. A strict disciplinarian, yet
fully alive to the well-being of the men under
him, Lieutenant-Colonel Saunders' past ex-
perience in handling so many troops, makes
the voyage of the 38th's a memorable one. A
happier band of fellows would be hard to lo-
cate, every encouragement is given by their
C. 0., whether it be sports or concerts, in or-
der to make the same absolutely successful
from the boys' point of view. The genial and
tactful manner of Lieutenant-Colonel Saun-
ders makes him universally liked by both the
whole ship's company and the men of his re-
inforcement.


; .
- - " v
■
CAPT. R. E. J. MARTIN, Ship's Adjutant & Q. M.
At the age of 15 Captain R. E. J. Martin,
Ship's Adjutant—commenced his military
career as bugler to the Zealandia Rifles —then
renowned as one of the crack corps of the
Dominion.
Through his unflagging industry Bugler Mar-
tin rose to Lance Corporal, Corporal and Ser-
geant, being the senior Sergeant of his Com-
pany in 1909-10. Joining the Defence Dept.
again his strict and zealous attention to duty
stood him in good stead. After spending two
years in the Ordnance Department, we find him
Sergeant Major in Group 5, Wellington De-
fence Area. A little later he became Regi-
mental Sergeant Major to the sth Wellington
Regiment.
About a year after the declaration of war
he was recommended for his commission and
received that promotion with the appointment
of Q. M. on the good old "Aparima," then in
command of the late Captain Macdonald of
Christchurch.
Later in 1917, Lieutenant Martin was pro-
moted to Captain Q. M. on the same ship where
he remained until his accident.
This occurred during a voyage to England
while the ship was under the command of Cap-
tain Dourley, and in a submarine area. Answer-
ing the call one stormy evening Captain Martin
collided with a cabin ventilator, badly smash-
ing his knee-cap, which eventuated in his re-
moval to shore on the return journey.
Although at the time he regarded this ac-
cident as a stroke of bad luck, it proved to
be quite the reverse, for, after the Aparima
returned to England and while she was cross-
ing to America she was torpedoed with —we
are very sorry to cay—considerable loss of life.
The Featherston Headquarters Staff now
claimed the Captain, who after doing eight
months duty there was appointed Ship's
Adjutant and Q. M. of the "Remucra" and
here we find him, still young in spirit and
unbroken in body, after sixteen years of ser-
vice as his ribbon testifies.
A keen sportsman? Rather. As a lad
he represented the Wellington South school at
football for a number of years and later the
Wednesday reps. iHe is satisfied and pleased
with the sporting spirit of our soldiers.
Knowing, from his own varied experiences,
how many opportunities fall to an ambitious
soldier's lot this Captain is ever ready to lend
a helping hand, or tender valuable advice to
those who seek it.
Ever a good disciplinarian, he strives to in-
culcate the finest qualities in those come
under his supervision—spurring them on to
greater effort and better results —be it work or
sport, as is very obvious in the daily round
on board this ship. His wise and kind con-
cern for all ranks and his dispatch for prob-
ing out wrongs and quickly righting them, has
won the hearts of all, and the respect and ad-
miration of all on board.
The 38 th Reinforcements are indeed for-
tunate in securing Captain Martin's services
as Adjutant on board; he was only released
from Headquarters at Featherston to
take up Transport duty, owing to his previous
successful administration in that branch of the
service.
Captain Martin's only other brothr Frank
Martin, is a main body man, having seen
strenuous service at Gallipoli and France.
After three years service he returned to New
Zealand with wounds and shell shock. Captain
Martin is a married man and his wife and two
children reside in Wellington, N. Z.


FOREWORD
To all the complement on Troopship 105,
both young and old to those who shortly will
be face to face with sterner things, our
'Remuerian' brings greetings—greetings to all
of you, all the eight hundred. We hope that
the 'Remuerian' will be a joy and pleasant re-
minder in time to come of happy days spent
on Troopship 105.
Knowing that the trip you are at present
taking is not of your own seeking but of a
graver seeking, one that every member of the
ship's company knows only too well how neces-
sary the seeking is. Seeking out Huns natur-
ally must be your ambition, seeking them out
until their last sausage is trussed and fizzling
in fat and roasting where it should he.
But what of the 'Remuerian' and why?
It owes its origin to the initiative and
energy of Adjutant-Captain R. E. Martin who
has not only encouraged the editorial staff but
done all possible to make the 'Remuerian' the
success we feel it will be. To Lieutenant-
Colonel Saunders for his kindly consideration
and help at all times; his interest in the wel-
fare of his men was always manifest through
his co-operation in the 'Remuerian'! For the
drawings we are indebted to Gunner Don Croll;
to Sergeant-Major Whitlock and Lance Corporal
Robinson for their generous help and guidance
apparent to all; to Sister E. Mcß. Goldsmith
who spared neither time nor trouble in her
desire to make th 'Remuerian' a united and in-
teresting edition. To these benefactors and
many others of the ship's company who, skilled
with pen or pencil, have helped in various ways,
our thanks are due for the time and trouble
they have taken and for the results of their
labours on behalf of the 'Remuerian.'
Its purpose is not to contribute to the store
of national literature or art, but to give l voice
to the thoughts and feelings of the 38th Rein-
forcements and to keep them in touch with one
another. To that end a list of all members
is appended.
It is hoped that a tolerant public will ac-
cent this book and find some pleasure in the
reproduction and letter-press all of which are
from the brush or pen of the soldiers on board
Troopship No. 105.
When a glorious and assured peace descends
on the war-wearied world and our associations
with Troopship No. 105 become a retrospect
the subject of recollection —tender, humourous,
pathetic—if this book helps to revivei old
memories, recall old comradeships and as a
souvenir, bring us back again to the days in-
cense sweetened by a sense of duty done and of
efforts made to pass on a heritage of liberty
to those coming after, the promoters will feel
their work amply rewarded.
On their behalf,
OWEN CARDSTON,
Lance-Corporal 38th Specialists.
Editor.


As it Was in The Beginning.
Thus Came The 38th's
Some time during the early days of March,
1918, there came to Trentham Camp a motley
crowd from all parts of little N. Z. Some had
pushed pens or clicked typewriters in the
queen or empire cities, or helped to turn the
wheels of commerce in southern Dunedin, or
the city of the plains. Others had picked fruit
in sunny Hawke's Bay or rattled the milk cans
in the morning mists at the foot of Egmont.
Some had helped to gather the silver fleece or
garner the golden grain, or make giant ship-
loads of frozen meat. Nearly all had done
something to keep New Zealand's horn of
plenty full. Their occupations were legion.
Their costumes were varied and their hair
and whiskers of divers length and hue. None
knew exactly to what they came and none
knew how far each would go. Most of this
strange crowd were travel-stained and weary,
but they quickened their halting footsteps as
they passed the portals of the camp to the
tune of a well-known song about getting rid
of troubles. They gazed with curious eyes on
their strange surroundings. Behind these eyes
were many different thoughts—thoughts and
memories which the army could never take
from them. Nearly all were philosophical,
and said to themselves: "I am here because
the King, Country, Bill Massey, Jimmy Allen
or somebody needed me, and now I am going
to make the best of things till the job's fin-
ished; with decent luck some day I'll be free
again." But it mattered little what each one
thought, for always handy was some one train-
ed to make soldiers of them all, irrespective of
thoughts or creeds. Long days of squad drill
and heartless N. C. O's metaphorically "biting
lumps out of them," soon stopped any dreamy
ones minds from wandering far. A week's
work and each was content to do as he was
hid. to pray for Smoke-oh, or dismiss and to
I've for the day when leave would give him a
brief spell wherein his own convenience
could once again be his chief consideration.
Thus came into being the 38th. Their com-
ing differed little from that of previous rein-
forcements, but for each man those early
days make a page in his life's history to which
he can always turn with interest.
Transfers to other branches or classes and
the subsequent weeks of hard training where-
in many plucky fellows struggled hard to
overcome physical defects only to eventually
cry enough, and take the count as unfits, saw
a considerable dwindling of the many who,
with the present 38th first stood open-mouth-
ed in the Quartermaster's Stores and heard the
N.C.O. recite, "You have there one great coat,
one hat, one paliasse, one kit bag, three
blankets, two pair of boots, two pair of draw-
ers, two working shirts, two undershirts, one
denim suit, three pair of socks, one jersey, one
knife, fork, spoon and mug, two towels, W. P.
sheet —sign here." And now, with stronger
bodies and keener perception the 3 Bth's await
the next stage of their military career with its
wider fields of chance and fate, with the
same lofty ideals that inspired the many
brave Chaps who since 1914 have kept the
N. Z. Division an honorable and worthy fight-
ing force.
"NEMO."
s. % % -5. ft
KKK K K
"To Our Womenfolk in New Zealand."
To all you good women folk of our Do-
minion, whether you are members of our
Patr.otic Socities, the Red Cross, the Red
Triangle, or the Red Jersey, or the Mothers,
wives, sisters or sweethearts of our lads
on board this Troopship. For all the
little luxuries, the comforts, the reading
matter, the home made cakes, sweets, pre-
serves that our lads have been able to enjoy
on this long trip, accept this our added tribute
that we know has gone forward from them.
LIEUT.-COL. E. H. SAUNDERS,
O. C. Troops
CAPTAIN R. E. MARTIN,
Adjutant.
38T 3B" 3P - 3®"' 3B"
PTE, 'ERBET 'IGGINS'S DILEMMA.
With apologies to the third class galley.
In sailin 'ome third class saloon,
Dilemmas I 'ave met
Coneernin' victuallation,
That is, things I've 'et.
I can't decide when grace is said
When table groans with "eats"
I says I never can decide
Between the different meats.
First of all there's 'am and Heggs
And bacon fricasee
An' pork an' lamb an' strawberry jam
And chicken broth and "tea".
The poultry too has many brands
As cause a cove to think
There's turkey fowl and albatross
And parrot out of clink.
But yet with all these tasty foods
This soldiers paradise
I can't decide which one to choose
I 'ave to 'ave hadvice.
With this in mind I asks a cove
Wot knows the kinds of meat
E merely say "Aw, take a pill"
An' curses me a treat.
I 'urns an' 'ahs at this an' that
Goes nearly off me dot
Then looks around an' sees me mates
'As polished off the lot
So next time when I'm scrannin' hup
On bread and strawberry jam
I s'pose I'd best g've hup the ghost
An' 'ave some heggs an' 'am.
A. H. 38th Specialists.


MEMORIES
THE LARK—Trentham
DAWN.
The first faint flush of new born day.
Spread softly o'er the sky in fine array.
One twinkling star peeped down between
the hills.
As tho' to listen to a lark's sweet trills
A whirr of wings—and one sweet voice
Made all the world around rejoice.
Beneath that star—beneath that sky.
Spellbound by rapturous song was I.
DAY.
The scene was changed—the race-course
rang
With bugle-calls and rifles bang.
Shouts of command —the tramp of feet
Until the band led their retreat.
DUSK.
Then oft again—until the dark —
With whirring wings that frail sweet lark.
Beneath a sky all red and gold.
And one clear star—his song retold.
E. Mcß. GOLDSMITH.
3b :
THE REST YET AND THE REASON
THEREOF.
"The Perfect 38th"
It has been suggested and we have every
reason to believe that the 38th reinforcement
is the best that has ever left New Zealand—
the perfect 38th. We do not wish to take
this flattering unction to ourselves without
a reason. We must consider that the war has
been going on for some little time, and the
men have been burning with zeal to take their
place along with comrades at the front. The
m"n have also recognized that it was their
duty to fit themselves physically before com-
ing into camp, so as to make the Work of the
instructors as l'ght as possible. This meant
a considerable amount of sacrifice on the part
of the men. Not only did they devote the
week-end and evenings to long trips in the
country, but they put aside part of their
working hours (with or without the boss' con-
sent) for the practice o.f physical culture ex-
ercises. Many have got into a bad style for
want of proper tuition, but after all it is the
spirit that counts. Naught but stern deter-
mination could make us give wine, women
and song a 'miss in baulk' and make the Em-
pire's need paramount.
Without wishing to' detract front the merits
of any previous reinforcements, but with this
knowledge in our hearts, we must accept with
becoming modesty the judgment of those com-
petent to judge. When we consider that
platoon drill, rifle exercises, etc., have been
our constant companions for years we do not
wonder or take any credit to ourselves for our
proficiency. Our officers have all had their
baptism of fire and are in every sense fit to
command the fine body of men placed in their
charge.
In conclusion we can only look down from
our high pinnacle of excellence and pity the
poor deluded Hun who would have the temer-
ity to oppose us.
R. H. VANEY,
B. Coy.
FULSOME FLATTERY
Our Q. M. Sergeants are reputed to get
more kicks than ha'pence but the morning the
nursing sisters accompanied the C. O. on his
tour of inspection they blushed charmingly
at the delicate compliment paid them.
As the party passed them standing to at-
tention, with their neatly brushed hair, shin-
ing faces, and spotless uniforms one of the
sisters was heard to remark, "Don't the quar-
ters look nice when they have been freshly
scrubbed."
GETTING THE AVTND-UP.
T/ike Gordon hemmed by Mahdist hordes;
Like Townshend at El Kut,
While closer creep the heathen swords
Longing with blood to glut;
Like a seer who scours th' empyrean,
Or reads the horoscope;
Like Oortez when on Darien,
He saw the Pacific Slope;
Like one who watches for a sign,
Or wonder from the skies;
I gaze out o'er the foaming brine
With longing in mine eyes.
Like them I watch, but unlike them
I want not what I await.
If come it must—well let it come—
But let it come too late.
What then the portent I await
That may not yet be seen;
T want it not. Oh no I'd hate
To spot a submarine.
A. C. R.
3W
According to the first letter in the fol-
lowing names of countries and if warring na-
tions do not cease they may all become—
Belgium
England
Greece
Germany
Austria
Russia
Servia.


THE C. O


\ J I >w
V| /J
"THERE NEVER WAS A TIME WHEN I
GAINED A DAY BEFORE."
In the history of the world, when counting
every day, is such a necessity as it is now,
every day brings us nearer and nearer, to the
end of the war. Every day it means an added
personal sacrifice means also another step to-
wards peace and universal brotherhood.
Thursday the sixth of June, 1918, began
the era of my gaining my first day. By order
of Commander I. A. Sutcliffe of Troopship 105
and by his steering that same good ship
across Meridan 180, I found myself the pos-
sessor of a second Thursday, June the sixth,
1918, followng consecutively on my first
Thursday, June the sixth, 1918.
I hailed this gain, with all the joy of a
covetous pocket, thinking of an extra dol-
lar and twenty cents, I may be permitted to
spend, (who knows) perhaps in some distant
cabaret.
The arrival of that first pay day at sea,
was a long looked for joy.
To receive payment for ;my first weeks
pay at the rate of eight days to that week was
a boon that can only happen to Bill Massey's
soldiers once in a lifetime.
That pay day came and with it, all the
wailing and gnasliings of teeth usual in a dis-
appointment of huge dimensions. Although I
had two Thursdays forced upon me and I
paraded on both those Thursdays I was only
paid for one, the paymaster either knowingly
forgot abont that second day or else Bill
Massey decided that a War Tax from his sol-
diers in peril on the sea, a necessity in these
hard times.
Often I am reminded that bad luck like
the poor is often with us, not wishing any of
my comrades, (those who may follow in other
troopships) any harm, I take this opportunity
of advising them in order to avoid having
extra payless days thrust upon them to see
that they avoid those directions responsible
for extra payless days. Meatless and sugar-
less days are expected in the course of sacri-
fice but an extra day given unasked for and
that extra day a payless day—well I ask you?
OWEN CARDSTON,
38th Specialists.
fI f }1 }
A PLATOON COMMANDERS TEN
COMMANDMENTS
1. Thou shalt love honour and obey thy
.senior officers, that it may go well with
thee in the regiment wherein thou serv-
est.
2. Thou shalt not take the name of thy
seniors in vain.
3. Thou shalt not get rattled.
4. Thou shalt not grouse.
5. Thou shalt love thy men as thyself, and
thou shalt see that they are well fed,
clother in fitting raiment, efficent and
cheerful.
6. Thou shalt be keen on all that thou ;l.ayest
thine hand to that thine enthusiasm may
infect thy subordinates so that thou pros-
per in the day of battle and sore trial.
7. Thou shalt hold thy liquor like a gentle-
men.
8. Thou shalt not be familiar with thy sub-
ordinates for familiarity verily breedeth
contempt.
9. Thou shalt exalt cheerful and prompt
obedience from thy subordinates for
verily an army without disciplne is liken-
ed unto a fan in hell.
10. Thou shalt not fear the enemy's wiles, nor
his gas, nor hi.s shells, nor anything that
is his, thou canst not save thy life by
worry.
A FEATURE OF THE SPECIALISTS


Pictures by the Way
No. I—SICK PAIIADE.
Forlorn-looking private, sitting on wooden
form inside hospital, holding his ankle.
Troop's M. O. bending over him.
"Well, Digger, what's the matter?"
No. 2—THE BUGLER.
9 a.m. —Troop Deck.
Left foot forward.
Right heel raised.
Left arm raised with bugle.
Body thrown slightly forward.
"Officers' wives have puddings and pies,
Soldiers' wives have skilly."
No. B—THE TRIO.
Promenading Boat Deck.
No. I—Khaki1 —Khaki suit, brown woolly cap.
No. 2 —Blue suit, red bands.
No. 3 —Tiny black and khaki suit.
No. 4—THE DEBATE.
Lunch time —Skipper's table,
is it wrong to risk 6d. a hundred at bridge?
Sister Chalmer (Eyes front, expression
keen and alert, thumbs up.)
(Warms with the subject and wipes the
floor with the C. O. and the Ship's Doctor.)
No. S—THE CARD SHARPERS.
The lounge.
Two Sisters.
Subaltern No. 1.
Subaltern No. 2 —• Each with a pack of
(shuffled cards in hands—keen as mustard.
"Sister, Sister, pick a card—
Pick any card you like."
No. (I—TO JERK OR NOT TO JERK.
7.30 a.m.
Steward's head protruding from corridor
into Pill's cabin.
"7.30, sir."
Pills, yawning, stretching and rubbing his
eyes, acclaims: "Hang those jerks."
(Turns over and 40 winks.)
7.50 a.m. —Boat Deck.
Five shivering sisters, gasping.
"Why did I leave my cosy, wee bed?
That chap is a
We'll Head.
?
Has this cat and dog life on board the ship
any thing to do with the camouflage on the
medico's face?
No. 7—THE VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD
Skipper's table.
Dinner time.
Ship's Doctor second seat on right.
Body slightly turned to right. Face flushed.
Eyes right—alert and confident rivetted
on skipper's face.
Knife and fork in hand.
Fish freezing.
Skipper startled, but interested and attent-
ive, with wrinkled eyes and a cunning shake
of his wise old head, he is sure that the discom-
fit would be too great.
Food might have to be Albatross.
No. B—LATE FOR PARADE.
C. B. or No. C.B.
In the Orderly room, speaketh the C. O.
"O Fitz, my boy, why did you wait?
It was a cert you would be late,
You knew the ship would sail at one,
Great was the risk you dared to run.
"We know that parting gives one pain,
Please don't let it occur again—
I'llletyouoff —but Oh, dear Fitz,
I simply ought to give you Fitz!"
KIT INSPECTION —No. 3 DECK.
The dish towels sat on the hot water pipes
And shook their red sides at the diggers and
stripes
Who stood at the tables, piled high up with kit,
The diggers' eyes dancing with merriest wit.
Their O. C. stood stiff at the foot of the stairs
And bawled out the goods as tho' selling his
wares,
Saying "two undershirts and one denim trou,
One house-wife, one tooth brush. Cut out
that row."
The sergeants then put up the wind with their
might.
No good, for the diggers were game and stood
tight
While they juggled their socks, while they
dangled their shirts
Till they made the lights blush in their brown
paper skirts.
"No. 3 all correct, sir," This from the stripes,
And the towels pinched hard on the hot water
pipes.
No. 2 all correct, ditto 1, ditto four.
The O. C. looked glum as he bawled out once
more.
On a grey Sunday morning in Petticoat Lane
I have watched a scene so like —again and
again.
War life is a chapter of panics, O dear!
Yet the diggers just kid it's all skittles and
beer.
O diggers, with bands on your round khaki
hats,
And eyes full of fun—you are wicked young
brats,
You are just the K-nuts and you'll settle Bill's
pate
[f you crumple it up like you do your tin
plate.
Land him some of the biff that you give your
old kit,
And I'll bet when you've done he won't feel
over fit.


To
The glowing orb of Phoebus springs
From out the azure sea,
And to my heart meseems it brings
Sweet thoughts, my love, of thee.
Would that I were in Maoriland;
And, seated thee beside,
Would that I held thy precious hand,
Contented there to bide.
High as the heights of heaven,
Deep as the depths of hell,
This is the love I have given;
Wilt thou accept it, ma belle?
Speak! say you love me, truly,
My little guiding star.
Brush back that curl so unruly,
Beckoning me from afar.
Farewell till I return again,
With eager arms;
I come once more across the main
To claim thy charms.
Should in malignant humour Atropos,
With cruel shears the thread of life dissever,
So that I come no more back whence I fared;
Mourn not your loss.
Nay, rather be your great endeavour
To believe this; thy darling he has dared
To pass the pearly portals, through the gates
Of Eden; up the glorious golden trail
To Paradise; and there he patient waits,
His duty done, till named by the fates,
Thou, too, shalt cross the vale.
—Alwyn.
till!
A STORY TN TWO LETTERS.
Whenever I mention the word blanket, my
"cobber" closes up like an oyster. I didn't do
't, anyhow. He foamed as downing his tools
he rushed from the lower deck up to the troop
—as though his precious life depended on the
speed of his feet (feat).
Impatiently I awaited his return and ex-
planation, vain were my expectations for all
I could drag out of him as he gaspingly scrib-
bled on a bit of cardboard, was 13 multiplied
by 3 equals 39-26 from 39 leaves 13. Thank
goodness, its back's broken.
.Sv 3^"
NOTES BY THE SHIP'S POLICE
6 a. m.—Now then you fellows do you
want the deck all day, put those seats away,
where you found them; thats right Corporal,
heave his blankets away.
6.30 a. m.—Parade; shun, stand at ease.
Smith, Here Sergt.
Jones, Here Sergt.
Atkins, Here Sergt.
(Fancy that thirteen times a day.)
Reveille troop deck.
• p - —To sleepy head Digger. Now then
Hop it.
(Then they say the police don't work.)
NOTES ON INFANTRY TRAINING
Definitions.
Right dress: —Shorts worn not unduly reefed.
Left dress;- —The march to bathing parade.
Drill: —The stuff out of which 'shorts' are
made.
Inner flank: —The port side of the body.
Outer flank:—The starboard side of the same
object.
Position, change of: —Equivalent in the N. Z.
E. P. to standing to attention.
Eyes front:—Move all parts of your body ex-
cept your eyes.
Right close: —In strict accordance with your
clothing card.
Headquarters:—A place to be avoided.
C. B.:—Caught bending.
Frontage:—A variable quantity closely allied
to corporations.
Reveille:—An objectionable noise made in the
middle of the ni.ght.
Light out: —Get another cigarette fairly
started.
M. O.:—A mixture of iodine and No. 9.
Arf a M. O.:—A brand of cigarettes used in
Prance.
C. 0.: —A conscientious objector to long hair
bugs and cigarette butts.
O. C.: —The above reversed, only, conditional.
Rifle: —A thing! to lean aganst when tired or
a new pattern walking-stick.
Gas drill:—A lecture on discipline.
Respirator drill:—A new form of masked ball.
M. P's.: —Members of parliament and other
meddlesome persons.
C. S. M.:—Chief stage manager.
2nd lieut.:—May be an O. C. but ranks as a
lance-corporal.
Lance-corporal:—Next in rank to a Field
Marshal.
3®' 3^"
BEWARE OF THE DOG.
SHIP'S POLICE POSTS.
1. Howitzer, forward.
2. 6 "L. Aft.
3. Foot of second-class main deck-stairs
4. First saloon, door.
5. Steps leading on to promenade deck.
1. Regulating traffic on 4 and 5 troop deck.
7. Third-class deck.
8. Foot of stairs leading to orderly room.
9. Promenade deck.
10. Canteen deck.
14. Roving commission.
12. Second-class saloon stairs.
"A WET DAY SYLLABUS."
Camp Sergeant-Major (coming upon sentry
who has left his beat, to sit under Guard
Room Verandah.)
"Why aren't you on your beat?"
Sentry—"lt's raining."
Camp S. M.—"Why didn't you go in the
sentry box."
Sentry—"Oh, there was no seat in there."


Dr. Wishart: (to steward with bad throat) "Your throat is in a very bad state, have you
ever tried gargling with salt water ?
Steward: "Yes sir, I've been torpedoed six times.''


New Books in the Library of
No. 4 Platoon.
"Midnight Trips With a Sergeant-Major," or
Twenty-One in a Side Oar, by Corporal
Dandy.
"Architecture and Masonry," by C. E. Griffiths.
"Adjustment and Use of a S. B. R.", by
Corporal Blandford.
"Chalk and Water," by R. Greer.
''Supper at Palmer's", by Lc.-Cpl. Mattingley.
"Comfort in Footwear", by E. C. Graham.
"Semaphore Made Easy", Lance Corporal J. E.
C ampbell.
"The Waybacks", by A. C. Gordon.
"How I Dodged the Barber", by Lance-Corpl.
Gregory.
"Partners in Crime", by Groube and Kerrisk.
"From Bandmaster to Barber," Lance-Corporal
Wright.
"F'rst Come, First Served", by W. J. Goade.
"Belles in Invercargill", W. I. Altken.
"The Platoon's Only Hope", by W. F.
' The Aristocratic Butcher", by J. Bryson.
"The Mascot", by J. Hastie.
"A Trentham Police Episode", by W. E. Bart-
ram.
"Darwin's Theory Expounded", by J. Hanifen.
"Reminiscence's of Kaitoke", by B. T. Barnes.
"On Our Selection", by E. W. Hayman.
"The Poor Parson", by G. Bleakin.
"Better Late Than Never", by C. B. Hodgson.
"The Anvil and The Sword", by T. W. Carr.
"A Sea Voyage for Health", by R. H. Leslie.
''Ouills", by M. J. Counihan.
"Shorn at Sea", by W. Lamb.
"Hypnotic Suggestions", by R. H. Dry.
"Never Say Die", by J. W. McEwan.
"Shavings V. Shrapnel", by D. Esther.
"Silence is Golden", by C. A. Fricker.
"A Night in a Loose Box", by J. A. Mclntyre.
"The One Who Knows", by J. Fitzsimmons.
"What We did in the 3 6th's", by C. D. Mc-
Callum.
"My Combat With the S. B R.," by J. Galagher.
"Fruits for Messes", by T. H. Maineson.
"Buttons, Belts and Boots and How to Clean",
by C. N. Geale.
"From Leaden Weights l to Leaden Bullets,"
by R. S. Paget.
"A Royal Routine," by J. S. Robertson.
"The Duties of a Mess Orderly", by M. J.
Ruthe.
"Debating and Alone I Did It", by Professor
A. Ross.
"How to Keep Fit", by J. Shearer (the regi-
mental pet.)
'lo9's Defender, or How I Lost My Pyjamas",
by D. H. Scott.
"Tales for Soldiers", by T. Squire.
"How I Sailed With the 38th's", by E. H.
Smith.
"Saddlery to Soldiery", by J. G. Shanagan.
"Local Leave and Abrasions", by W. J. Skin-
ner.
"The Benefits of Physical Drill", by A. G.
Smith.
"Special Leave", by E. F. Timperney.
"Garden Pests", by H. Wilson.
Physical Drill
"As it is spoke."
"Class —tschon".
"Very woolly. Let's try it again. Stand at
ease; 'tschon' ".
"That'® beiter".
"Fingers stretch".
"Let footsideways and hips firm. Two
motions of the feet and two of the hands."
"One", "Two".
"Oh ! that's not very good. Not for this
company. We'll try it again".
"Class —left foot in and hands down."
"One," Two" —Too slow. Too' slow.
Pay attention in rear."
"Left foot sideways and hips firm. "One
Two."
"That's pretty good."
''Now, forward and full downward bend".
"One —wait for it, Charlie".
"Two —seats well to the rear".
"Get down to it, Uncle. What are you
trying to do, Horace ?"
"As you were. Try it again".
"One", "Two".
"That's better. Not bad at all".
"Class —Upward stretch. One".
"Two".
''Left foot in and hands down".
"One", "Two".
"As you were. We'll do it atgain for the
benefit of Horace."
"Good. That's pretty good".
"Awright now, we'll do some hopping on
alternate feet".
"Right oh. Here it is. Rear leg well
braced".
"The record for this hop is five feet".
"Right. On alternate feet, hop".
"Oh, come on, that's nothing like five feet,
not even four foot six".
"Try it again. On alternate feet, hop".
"Charlie got four feet. Well, we can't ex-
pect too much".
"Stand at ease." "Stand easy."


"Le Bon Voyage"
Notes by the Way.
By Nemo.
We Go Down to the Sea.
The last farewells are being said and the
usual merry faces are changed to a deep seri-
ousness as the departing ones gaze into the
eyes of their dear ones, eyes that are bravely
smiling through the tears. ' Firm, but kindly
police hold back those anxious one® straining
for a final glimpse of the ruddy faced soldier
boy leaving so much behind and going out to
take his place along with the many who have
gone before.
"No lady, you can't pass here," and Dig-
ger with his kit bag rolling on his shoulders
walks on through the iron gates and past the
sentries with fixed -bayonets, a feeling of in-
tense loneliness in his heart. No matter how
light hearted each may be or how many merry
comrades there are, each, at this moment
feels that he stands alone. So we left the old
world and entered our new.
Standing on the wharf with harbour build-
ings shutting off the last view of those behind
we gazed up at the huge sides of our trans-
port and home for several weeks to come.
"How do you like the look of her, lad,
said an officer.
"She's a stunner" was the reply.
"She'll be a nice home for a while —steady
as a rock too."
This officer knew the ship and as he had
never been known to falsely raise hopes all
within hearing accepted his words with thanks
and had visions of a voyage free from the dis-
comforts so often attendant upon a journey
over seas.
A few bantering remarks flung lightly from
one to another and smiles are again lighting
up their faces.
As each man's name is called he steps for-
ward and one by one they stagger with their
kit bags up the steep gangway steps.
CASTING OFF.
A few officers shaking hands with fellow
officers staying behind were the last to step
aboard.
Like a swarm of bees the khaki figures
covered the decks and rigging of the ship.
Down below on the wharf stood the old Tren-
tham Band, the band that had played us into
camp was now playing us off to the big war.
The same old tunes that heartened us then
were heartening us now. Yes, we had packed
up our troubles in our old kit bags.
Standing there also were a few of our com-
rades, mostly officers and N. C. O.'s left behind
for later drafts.
They were good chaps and we were sorry
to lose them with their soldierly and comrade-
ly qualities.
They were shouting their last farewell jokes
and messages with voices that showed they
too felt the parting.
On another wharf a little distance away
and facing the bow a number of civilians were
crowded. Picking up the tune the band was
playing a woman sang "Pack Up" in a clear
musical voice and then a younger woman sang
"Over There." The rich full notes came across
the waters clear and bell like to those stand-
ing on the bow.
"Over there! over there!
Send the word, send the word over there
That the 38th are coming, the 38th are com-
ing over there.
We are coming over
We are coming over
And we won't come back
Till its over, over there.
The band was playing another air now, an
air that brought a hush to the cheering and
shouting. The gangways were in.
"Should auld acquaintance be forgot
"And never brought to mind
"Should auld acquaintance be forgot
"And the days of auld lang Syne."
Then came "The King" and there was a
widening strip of water between us and the
wharf. The last note died away and roar of
voices took it place. A "cock a doodle do" on
the siren and we were quickly slipping away.
As we cleared the buildings we could see on
adjoining wharves crowds frantically waving
arms, hats and handkerchiefs and over the
water we could faintly hear their cheering.
An hour or two in the stream during which
time we had our first meal on board enabled
all to locate their births which consisted of
Ist, 2nd or 3rd class cabins, or a pair of
hammock hooks on the troop deck according
to the rank or good fortune of each.
The little tender "Janie Seddon" drew
alongside to take ashore the records clerk
and staff officers.
It is now that the last farewell telegrams
and postcards are hastily scribbled for the
Postal Department have left a man aboard un-
til the last minute. The ever ready Y.M.C.A.
man is handy with a supply of postcards.
The last of the Red tab and Blue tab offi-
cers go down the steps and the little tender
fusses away and our big steamer's engines be-
gin to beat,


As we near the heads we stop again and
far behind the little tender is again seen, this
time ploughing madly through the water and
belching forth a column of black smoke. As
she draws alongside a "jacob's" ladder is
dropped down and up this amidst cheers
scrambles an officer who had found "parting
such sweet sorrow" that he had made a mis-
take in the time of departure. Once again the
little "Janie" chugs away and the big ship
swings out to sea.
NIGHT I .ALL.
Land was still within sight when night
drew her veil across the sea, shutting from our
vision the liast of Aotea-te^Roa.
All lights on and the decks alive with
khaki figures made a bright and happy scene.
Away on our port quarter a revolving light
steadily winked its bright eye at us. The
war seemed very far away as we merrily
chatted and smoked our ciragettea. Even
as we spoke though the lights went
out with a flick, leaving us to grope our way
below. Yes it was war alright. Never again
were we to experience the pleasure of brilliant-
ly lighted decks. Later on we were even to
be deprived of lights in the cabins and sleep-
ing quarters.
THE HOPELESS DAWN.
Next day there is a steady swell and a
strong stern wind. During the night many a
poor Digger has hung wearily to the railing
or lay huddled on the deck. "Cookhouse"
call meets with a poor response. Sick parade
is of no avail. Time alone will steady the
dizzy head and bring back the desire to eat
and live again.
PARCELS AND MAILS.
On following days when the first ill effects
are passing away huge loads of parcels are
brought up from the holds and distributed.
The parcels are eagerly opened and the mes-
sages of hope and love contained therein are
read. Stock is taken of the contents and a
store of delicacies put on one side for future
use. These gift parcels are magnificent. In
addition to the individual private stores there
are the numerous gifts from various: patriotic
societies. No words can ever express our ap-
preciation of these.
The last mail from those at home is also
now delivered. How gladdening and cheering
these letters are only each man knows.
THE CANTEEN.
Though, a somewhat crowded and dingy
little box the canteen is always a scene of
brightness and bustle. Anything that Digger
may want during the voyage is here retailed
at bedrock prices. He pays no duty now and
gets l his cigarettes and lots of other things
ridiculously cheap. Although the shop is
small the stock is large, for down in the holds
are dozens of cases which will not be touched
till near the end of the voyage.
EVENING.
Digger loves his evenings on board. Phy-
sical drill and gas respirators and all other
like abominations of the devil are soon for-
gotten. All have their favorite little haunts.
Some consistently follow the lure of the cards
although it may be said only matches are ever
staked on any hand. Some in quiet solitude
enjoy the smoke of the seductive weed.
The tinkle of a piano attracts: soldiers as
a lamp attracts moths. Every evening the
piano on the promenade deck is the centre of
an army of instrumentalists and choristers.
Now and then all will pause while some clear
voiced soloist sings "The Old Fashioned
Street," "Mother Machree" or "Coming Home"
always these songs are of home or the folks
at home. In another part of the deck with
the lights screened off by canvas are two
champion boxers giving all who like the benefit
of their experience in the roped ring.
And so the evenings quickly pass and the
good ship ploughs steadily on drawing us
nearer the time when with the tried and trusty
comrades who have gone before us we can
show "the mettle of our pasture."


DoeseiBB Si
» w ;§ _J® CbiJ^
n u ° '41k. (s£^ ~~ • 1
f V#, .j£» ( -|U|J
Trt£ \ " ti,E I I I / c ->. \
t | ' Ihe CS.kW,' J
is®®* 1 =rfi
Ljjlv
' \ 6<vi^^
THE REMUERIAN


OBITUARY
Who, when reveille's hateful blare,
link its my ravelled sleeve of care
Growls at me like a wounded bear?
The Sergeant.
And when at "Full knees bend" I strain,
And "upward stretch" who mo-cks my pain
And makes me do the -thing again?
The Sergeant.
Who bays behind my shrinking shanks
And bellows at me from the flanks
When I am talking in, the ranks?
The Sergeant.
Who, as I flag my lonely beat
Beseeches me to lift my feet.
And calls me names I c-an't repeat?
The Sergeant.
Who sees that all my buttons shine,
That I preserve a rigid spine
And go to -bed at half-past nine?
The Sergeant.
Who watches when I clean my swill,
Parades me when I need a pill
And takes my name for extra drill?
The Sergeant.
Wh-o, when after hours, I have a drink
Threatens me with "mat" and "clink"
Who is the bally missing link?
The Sergeant.
And when the pearly gates I spy
And try to pass the sentry by.
Who'll shout "quick march," lef right, lef'
right"?
The Sergeant.
m m m
POSTAL NOTES
The staff of our G. P. O. on board com-
prises two sturdy youths, from the N. Z. Post
and Telegraph Dept., namely, Sergeant G.
Christ en-sen, late- Telegraphist, W-aipu, and
Lance-Coroporal Mattingley, Letter Carrier G
P. O. from the King City. These young men,
supply anything fro-m stamp edging, to a
marriage certificate, or a registration card.
After strenuous battles, with the Army Pay
Corps, these lads to-ok possession o-f their pre-
sent quarters and managed to eject the penny
jugglers, who left, behind them a litter of pay
books, etc., no quids th-o'.
To gain access to- the G. P. O. you must
struggle up to the promenade deck, dodge the
crowd lined up for the early doors, then
scramble through the pile -o-f boxes, bottles,
etc., (kindly left there by the canteen pro-
fessors) probably to give the G. P. O. boys
practice for the little troubles to be dished out
in Fogland, then give the counter -sign -on the
door.
A description of the office is appended, a
perfect cube, eight feet square, and the same
height, Turkish carpets, easy chairs, etc.
This show -was evidently -a strong room, as
no ventilation was provided. The hours for
business, are from Reveille till Last Post.
THE ARMY PAY' CORPS DEFENCE
Most of the soidiers of the 38th Reinforce-
ments are, no doubt, wondering when and
where took place this violent struggle, -be-
tween the Army Pa,y Dept., and the Army
Postal Dept., so widely advertised by the- lat-
ter as resulting in a magnificent victo-ry fo-r
them. So great was their acclamation, that
for -a few days, soidiers in quest of the Army
Pay Department would naturally -eno-ugh, walk
straight into the Ship's Hospital, confidently
expecting to ifin-d the mangled remains of the
two Pay Clerks there. The reader -can imagine
the surprise -however, when, having been re-
directed by the Ships Medical Officer, these
searchers eventually strolled into the Ship's
Orderly Room, there to- find the -two Pay Clerks
in their shirt sleeves, surrounded by Pay
Books, Ledger Cards, Cash 800-ks and all the
paraphenalia usually found in a pay office —
working after the manner o-f Class "A" men.
Looking up one o-f the Pay Clerks would
say, "Well soldier, what's the trouble."
The soldier by this time had forgotten his
business and could only gra-sp " 'Struth, accord
in' t-o what the Post Office chaips -tell me, you
two diggers -are supposed -to be dead. What
is the strength of it?"
Surely it was time for the Pay Department
to take -action. As a matter of fact, owing
to the confined space into which the Pay and
Post Office Staff had originally been crammed,
the Pay Office was shifted into the Orderly
Room by order of the Adjutant, and their
exit was a quiet and peaceable one.
It is -hardly surprising then, that from that
day the Pay Dept., has put up a challenge, to
meet the Postal Dept., anywhere, at any time
to give them an opportunity to substantiate
their mythical victory.
But let it be known among the boys of the
38th, though the Po-stal Department can no
doubt do wonders in speech, (even as the Huns
can do), they have not yet accepted the chal-
lenge.
ttl I I i
D COMPANY, 3 BTH.
We we-re the Glaxo Babies
The lame, the blind, the halt;
Rheuma-t-i-cee and crippled we
But that wa-s not -our fault;
And when we got to Trentham
With Glaxo in our veins
Each swelled his ch-e-s-t and did his best.
To forget h-is bl-o-omin -pain-s.
They fed us up and drilled us
An-d -swore -to us that they
Would make- us or they'd break us-
And th-a-t without delay.
But when it came to fln-als
The Chingford Cup we won
"D" Company for evermore will be
"A. 1." and not "C.1."
TUNE' —"The Anzac Army."
The "D" Company referred t-o above is
"D" Company, 3 8-th Reinforcements; aboard
Transport No. 105 all fit A.


OPERATION FOR APPENDICITIS ON
PRIVATESCADDEN.
On Sunday, June 24th, the ship's com-
pany was grieved to hear that one of the
happy family was seriously ill with appen-
dicitis, the M.O.'s immediately decided to
have everything ready for the operation, and
the padres very kindly lent their room, for
the operating theatre.
The symptoms subsided somewhat on
Sunday evening, but the patient grew worse
on Monday morning, and an immediate
operation was then decided upon, and was
performed by Lieut. Wisbart.
The proceedings were very satisfactory, and
every one was very relieved when it was over.
Private Scadden, so we are informed by the
M.O.'si, was an ideal patient, pluckily tak-
ing his huge quota of pain, with a smile.
Thank heavens we had the sisters' on board
. —without their help we should—like the
turtle —have been in the soup.
A GUNNER
SHIP'S ALPHABET.
A is our Adjutant, he's hard I don't think.
B is for Beer, the stuff we won t drink.
C is our Colonel, one red and three blues.
D is the word we say when we lose.
E stands for Each of us, the ship's crew and
ail.
F for the Forces who answered the call.
G for the Guns on the stern and the bow.
H for the Hit on the U-boat, the cow.
I is the Inspection at 10.30 each day.
J for the Jar if things aren't O.K.
K's for the Kiss we will get when we land.
L for the Ladies; God bless them, they're
grand .
M is the Master distinguished and tall.
N's Navigation of which he knows all.
O is for Oscar who never gets 'Wilde'.
P's for his parrot whose language is mild.
Q's for the Quarter but we've got him in A.
R for our Route, we can't tell you to-day.
S for the Sisters who must dress alike.
T for their Twins —hope they won't get the
spike.
U's for the U-boat —we've slaughtered a few.
V for the vermin they carry as crew.
W's the Water, don't waste it for naught.
X equols the C.B, you'll get if you're caught.
Y's for the young subs all in the pink.
Z's the Zeal they display, I don't think.
TEN LITTLE McKONIKIE BOYS
Ten wee McKonikies drilling in a line;
One sawney moved his head and then there
were nine.
Nine wee McKonikies laughing at their
mate;
One donkey formed fours and then there
were eight.
Eight wee McKonikies kid they were eleven;
One made a blanky-file, leaving only seven.
Seven wee McKonikies thought they knew
the tricks;
A digger let his muscles jerk and that left
only six.
Six wee McKonikies listening all alive;
One pulled a button through and that left
number five.
Five wee McKonikies sprinting all galore;
One doesn't stop in time, making only four.
Four wee McKonikies gazing out to sea;
One staggers just a mo, and then they're only
three.
Three wee McKonikies thought they'd see it
through;
One does a quick right turn, and that left only
two.
Two wee McKonikies burst themselves with
pride;
Both made the same mistake and fell right
off the side.


'~ - " .. ■ a
LIEUTENANT R. W. WISHART.
_ It is not Lieut. Wishart's fault that he
hails from Dunedin. After a good term at
the Otago Boy's High School, followed by a
course of medicine at the Otago Varsity, he
took bis degree flying. For eight months he
was attached to the Dunedin Public Hospital.
Entering camp on April the Bth, Lieut. Wis-
hart was attached to Awapuni camp. Later
he was duly attached to Featherston and Tau-
herenlkau. When free from the duties
of vaccinating, swabbing, and parades
of all kinds, Lieutenant Wishart aspires
to writing plays, etc., rumour hath it
that in his school days he was foremost in
some deadly original tricks on his teachers
at both kinds of day schools.
2ND LIEUTENANT M. R, STEWART.
Lieut. Stewart left on the Maunganui with
the fifth reinforcements going to Egypt. From
there on to Gallipoli. Every body by now is
well acquainted with the doings of the fifths,
the record of their work is already down in
history. After some months sipent on Galli-
poli Lieut. Stewart, fascinated with the charms
of enteric was forced to return to Alexandria,
and on to Ponte-de-Koubeh Hospital. On his
recovery Lieut. Stewart rej'oined his company
with the battalion, in Moascar on. the Canal,
remaining there until April the 15th, when
the whole division moved over to France. On
arriving in France Lieut. Stewart received his
sergeant's stripes, and later, on the Somme
several wounds that kept him at Reading
hospital for 7 months. Cambridge Univer-
sity claimed Lieut. Stewart for the next three
months, and after gaining his commission he
returned to New Zealand, aboard the same
good ship Remuera. The usual furlough and
appointment first to the 3 6 th,., N. C. O.'s, then
37th, Reinforcement, on to the 42nd, Rein-
forcement, and at his own request and knowing
the qualities of the 38th, he was again trans-
ferred and is now quite satisfied that this
reinforcement was meant for him. On the
athletic field Lieut. Stewart has l distinguished
himself with honours, From his early school
days he has been in the front rank of the
Dominion's foremost men. With his permis-
sion part of his record is included here simply
because so many men will be glad to barn
that so prominent a representative of the
Dominion is a fellow member of the 3 8 ill's.
Wellington College he captained the
first fifteen and won championships, one year
junior and three years senior. In the inter-
collegiate championship Lieut. Stewart was
unbeaten over the sticks in the 120 and 440
yards three years running. At the Auckland
University Athletic meeting he held both the
120 and 440 yard championships and lower-
ed the re Col .d winning 4 out of 5 hurdle events.
f fli * a 1914 when the American party
of athletes, Messrs Parker, Kembleton, Bower
and Caughey, visiited the Dominion, Lieut
Stewart upheld the honour of the homeland by
22


defeating them. As a rugby player he re-
presented Wanga.nu-i in 1910-11, Auckland in
1913, and while at Cambridge University cap-
tained the rowing crew. While serving on
Gallipoli Lieut. Stewart had the distinction of
being served with a summons for failure to
attend Territorial parade in Auckland.
2ND-LIEUTENANT L, G. HILL.
First as second in command, and now as
O. C. B. Coy. Mr. Hill has revelled in the
work of teaching the "Rookie" the way that
he should go. His keen perception and know-
ledge of the weaknesses and strength, of
soldier men has- put him in close sympathy,
with tho-se under him.
New Plymouth is his home- town, but
being in Auckland, when war broke out, he
enlisted with the Auckland battalion, and left
with the Main Body. He first he-ar-d the whis-
tle of bullets, when Ja-cko Turk, tried to reach
the- canal. .
On his way to Galliopli. he received his
first stripe, and was wounded, while on the
Peninsula.
Subsequently he saw continuous service,
with the division in France, until M-ar-ch 1917,
when he left for the officers training school in
England, and at the end of July, received bis
commission. In September of the same year,
acting as Sh'i-p's Adjutant, during the voyage
h-e returned to New Zealand on the Remuera.
In the field of sport he has earned some dis-
tinction, representing Wanganui at rugby, in
the years 19 04-6. Moving with the times -and
going north to Taranaki, he again came -to the
fore 'as a rugbyite, and represented the land of
"Cow and Oil" in 19 0 9 to 11 and 13.
Nor d.id he despise- good old cricket, in
1903-4 and again in 1908 to 1913. Lieut. Hill
represented Taranaki, on the cricket pitch,
truly a sporting record.
2ND-LIEUTENANT L. A. MORISON.
Lieut. Mor-ison, from Dunedin, en-listed in
the early stages of the war, eventually sail-'
i-ng on the Warrim-oo with the seventh rein-
forcements for Egypt, and after a sojourn
there, went on to France, in the steamer
Llandovery Castle. He did all the stunts in
France- and gained his commission, on the
field at the Somme.
Received a knockout on the fifteenth of
September, 1916, and invalided home, tra-
velled on -our very own M-aheno. Lieut. Mori-
son, was- discharged unfit in April 1917, but
after a few months spell, he again, enlisted,
passing fit A, in November last year. Enter-
ing Trenth-am camp, and after doing duty,
with the 46th, ,N. C. O.'s, Lieut. Morison was
appointed O. C., D. Coy. 37th's. but at a later
date, he was transferred to C. Coy. 3 Bth's-.
2ND-LIEUTENANT F. D. BARRON.
Lieutenant Barron enlisted in Dunedin, as
a private, and when the Ist Battalion Rifle
Brigade was formed, he was transferred im-
mediately. Left New Zealand in October,, 1915,
CS a Lance Jack aboard the Maunganui for
Egypt, and en route, secured his Corporal's
stripes. After doing the Pyramids, and Cairo,
Lieut. Barron went with the Brigade to Mersa
Matruh, on the western frontier of Egypt, and
had a couple of scraps at Senussi, the beauty
of these brushes being that they were carried
out in Extended Order and strictly in accord-
ance with the Drill Book, finishing up with a
magnificent bayonet charge (See N. Z. Press)
that participants didn't happen to notice. Lieu-
tenant Barron next went on to France and, as
a Sergeant there, answered the ''Order of the
Mat", strange to say—the only time he ever
did so —and under the judgment of our own
worthy C. O.
(Note crime— Pinching a blanket.)
(Note judgment.—Got off.)
Lieutenant Barron then rejoined his Com-
pany as Sergeant-Major, and in March, 1917,
with Lieutenants Hill and Pettit, left for O. T.
0.. Wadham College. Returned to Noo Zee on
the same good ship that he returns on as O. C.
"D." Coy , a bonny crowd of Glaxoites formed
up at C. I. Camp.
2ND-LIEUTENANT R. G. CHRISTOPHERS.
Entered camp in June 1917, joining the
34th N. C. O. class. From October to Jan-
uary, he had charge of a platoon, in the 34th
lifts. Early in February, he was appointed
officer commanding the 38th Specialists Coy.
Under his direction the Specialists' have acquit-
ted themselves with more than usual
credit. Both at musketry and machine gun
practice at Papawai, the 38th Specs, under
this officer, established records.
In the latter practice the high standard of
9 8 p. c. was reached by his company. Lieut.
Christophers comes from a family, who have
indeed answered the call, three brothers having
paid the extreme sacrifice, in their country's
cause. Gunner V. J. Christophers- machine
gun section was the first of this fighting
family to fall, he being killed at Gallipoli.
Next Oa.pt. H. H. Christophers, of the rifle
brigade 2nd Battalion, was killed at Arme-n-
--tieres. Private J. A. Christophers, of the Ist
Canterbury Battalion was- killed in Flanders.
Owing to the latter'® death Lieut Christophers'
departure, w-a-s delayed from the 34'th's until
the 38-th.
2ND.-LIEUTENANT E. R. FITZSIMMONS.
Lieut. E. R. Fitzsimm-ons, hails from
Cbchch, and left as a private with the mail,
body. Present at the landing at Gallipoli,
he remained there until August 1915, when he
was smacked out; -this was severe enough to
keep h-im at Lemno-s, five weeks. Returning
to Gallipoli, he remained there until the evac-
uation. Left Egypt 'on the transport Nile for
England ,and of course on to France, from
there to Cambridge, for four months, back to
Noo Zee, aboard the R. M. S. Tainui. Ap-
pointed in January to C Coy 39th Reifts, go-od
fortune still smiling on him, he was transfer-
red to C. Coy, 38th Reinforcements.
"THE REMUERIAN"


2ND-LIEUTENANT D. A. RAEBURN.
At the outbreak of war, Lieut. Raeiburn
was a member of the King Edward's horse, a
Colonial regiment in London.
Refusing the offer of a commission, and
on the formation of a New Zealand Coy. in
England, Lieut. Raeburn, was transferred to
the British section, of New Zealanders.
This company sailed for Egypt, on De-
cember 4th, 1914, arriving at Zeitoun, on
Xmas Eve, to join the main body.
Half of the Company, joined up with the
engineers, the other half, being attached to
the Divisional train.
i o u k eav ' n !? for the Dardanelles on April
12th, reached Lemnos on April 16th, Lieut.
Raeburn saw the landing at Cape Holies., on
April 25th. For the next eight months, and
up to evacuation be did duty on the Penin-
sula, going right through without receiving
a scratch. He returned to Egypt, via Lemnos
and as a corporal sailed for France.
The latter country entertained Lieut
Raeburn until June 25th, 1917, and on his
? B r r, m f n * led for a commission,
e left for Balliol College, Oxford, remaining
there until Oct. 31st. While at Oxford, Lieut
Raeburn took part in all games there, fol-
lowing his Dominion interests in soccer and
aquatic siports, and had the honor of being the
only New Zealander playing in, as well as
captaining the college soccer team. Returning
aft£ ? 011 the R " M ' S ' Ruahine and
38th Refts" fUrI ° USh ' Was attached to the
2ND.-LIEUTENANT H. PETTIT.
Lieutenant Pettit enlisted as a private with
the Medical Corps, leaving with the 4th con-
tingent for Egypt. Among his earlier experi-
ences was to be stationed on the ill-fated Mar-
quette, when that steamer received the count
at the hand of the Hun and his company. After
this early introduction into the 1 ways and means
of warfare, Lieutenant Pettit did duty for
some months on the Salonika front, later re-
turning to Egypt, where he did duty on the
Suez Canal for the three months following.
F rom Egypt he went on to France via Havre,
going up to the Somme front., where he re-
mained for the next eleven months, when he
was sent to Oxford to study for his commis-
sion at Wadham College. Three months later
having gained his commission, he returned to
New Zealand on duty and was attached to the
3 7th reinforcement draft. Before that draft
sailed be was transferred to the good old 38th
draft, and here we find him with us on our
present tour round the globe.
2ND-LIEUTENANT G. I. PARKER.
Coming from the ranks of the 9th H B
Coy., Wellington battalion Mr. Parker is an
officer who has seen considerable service. His
home is in Gisborne, and he is: an old boy of
Nelson College. He enlisted in June 1915 in
the 7th Reinforcement and left N. Z as a
Q. M. S. On 26th, May 1917 he left France
for England and attended an officer's train-
ing class until the 25th September, when he
was given his commission. At the beginning
of September he sailed for New Zealand on
the Tainui. On reporting for duty again at
the end of February 1918 he was attached to
"B" 38 th., and No. 6 Platoon has been his
chief pride and joy ever since. In sports he
was chiefly interested in rowing and rifle
shooting.
It was in the Somme in September 1916
that Lieut. Parker received the "smack" en-
titling him to' wear the gold bar on his arm,
after this he was 2 % months away from
France before rejoining his old unit.
2ND-LIEUTENANT F. M. JENKINS, D.C.M.
Lieut. Jenkins came to New Zealand, from
England, when the war broke out, he enlisted
at Auckland, leaving with the main body.
Took part in the landing at Gallipoli went
right through the Dardanelles campaign, ifter
the evacuation his health got the best of Jim
and on the hospital ship Llandovery Castle left
for England. Upon his recovery he went back
to France for fifteen, months; from there he
left for Balliol College Oxford to sit for his
commission. In November last year Lieut.
Jenkins left on the S. S. Ruahine for New
Zealand. Being granted furlough he next
visited Sydney, N. S. W. Returning to the
Dominion he was appointed to "A" Company
38th Rftis. As a well known figure on the
English American, and now on the Austral-
ian stage possibly accounts for his many en-
tertaining qualities, Lieut. Jenkins assists
with all amusements on board, his style suit-
ing the boys fine.
2ND-LIEUTENANT POUNTNEY.
Lieut Pountney, an old Auckland boy, an-
swered the call in the earliest stages of the
war, being one of that happy band who jour-
neyed to Samoa on the 'Monowai.' As a ser-
geant in the Divisional Signallers he had
quite an interesting time in the land of kava
and tapa. Returning to N. Z. ,in March as
Sergeant Pountney he went direct to camp.
With the 7th reinforcements he reached
Egypt in November just too late to go to the
Peninsula as the evacuation had then been de-
cided upon. With the N. Z. Division he left for
France, travelling on the steamer 'Franconia'
(■since torpedoed.) After doing Armentieres,
Somme, Fleurbaix and other stunts up till
December, as a sort of Christmas box he left
the trenches on Christmas day for the O. T. C
Cambridge. While at Cambridge Lieut
Pountney represented that university in the
good old game of rugby against Oxford and
in the heavyweight boxing competition he
won the battalion championship. Receiving
his commission he reported for duty in Lon-
don m April and was instructed to return to
N z. arriving there in September last year
After the usual three weekes furlough Lieut
Pountney reported for duty and was posted to
the 3 4th reinforcements and later owing to
is experience as a signaller was transferred
as signalling officer to the 3 Bth Specialists


2ND-LIEUTENANT S. D. RICE, M. M.
Eieut. Rice started his career in the Land
and Deeds Office Auckland, enlisting with
Auckland section in April 1915, entering camp
in May of that year. Leaving as a private
with the seventh contingent, on the Aparima,
he proceeded first to Egypt.
Four months with the Pyramids, and a
further sea trip to France, on the Cunard
liner 'Aseania' doing the Somme and all other
places of live interest, Lieut. Rice managed
his Cooks Tours without receiving a scratch,
until February 1917. His next postal address,
was Trinity College, Cambridge, and gaining
his commission there, was seconded for duty
and returned to New Zealand, on the R. M. S.
lonic. After three weeks' furlough Lieut. Rice
was posted to the 3 6th Infantry, but after one
month's duty there, was transferred to the
machine gun section, 38ths.
Lieut. Rice possesses the military medal.
Under Lieut. Rice's direction the 38th
Specialist's Costume party, toured the Waira-
parapa, with great success, and considerably
helped all the patriotic funds, in that district.
2ND-LIEUTENANT V. R. BERNARD.
Mr. Bernard is a native -of Wellington and
was a member of the N. Z. Advance Fartv
which so successfully effected the capture of
Samoa. On his return to N. Z. he left with
the 11th. Rf'ts., and on arrival at Egypt was
transferred to the Wellington mounted rifles
with whom he saw service at Suez and on
the Sinai Peninsula. In April 1917 he went to
the officers' training class in England and
was granted his commission in September 1917
In November he left for N. Z. in the Tainui.
On being attached to B 38th's;, he took charge
of No. 7 Platoon guiding its members with a
kindly hand past the many pitfalls that beset
the path of the new soidier. He was educated
at Wellington College and was a keen athelcte
representing Wellington in football and athle-
tics.
2ND-LIEUTENANT FLOOD.
From the Bay of Plenty, with school days
spent in Auckland and Tassy, Lieut Flood,
enlisted as a private in England.
Joining the British section of the New
Zealanders in London, in January 1915, his
first move was towards Egypt.
From there on to the Dardanelles, Lieut.
Flood was attached for duty with the Divis-
ional Train, landing on May 19th. Recalled
to England, on August 22nd, from there hack
to Egypt, and again marching orders receiv-
ed, with luggage label endorsed, France. After
a year in France Lieut. Flood, was next sent
to Oxford, receiving his commission, in Octo-
ber. Returning to the Dominion, he was ap-
pointed to the 41st reinforcements, later being
transferred to A. Coy., 38th, and at present
controls that part of the ship, famous for its
cheap cigarettes, and evil smelling cigars.
2ND.-LIEUTENANT A. J. LEYLAND.
Lieut. Leytand is attached to the first
Taranaki Coy. Wellington Battalion, enlisted
at New Plymouth 1914, leaving with the main
body as a Lance jack.
Took part in the first skirmish on the
Suez Canal, and went through the Gallipoti
campaign, and was wounded at the evacua-
tion. On the hospital ship Scotia, left for
England, contracting enteric en route. After
a severe illness in England, Lieut Leytand, on
recovering went over to France, on August
16th 1916, remaining there, until June 25th,
1917. Promoted on the field Lieut. Leyland,
was sent to Balli'ol College Oxford, Return-
ing to New Zealand on the Ruahine, he was
granted the usual furlough, then reported
for duty, and was immediately attached to the
good old 38-ths.
2ND-LIEUTENANT J. V. CURTIS.
A native of old Blighty, Lieut. Curtis has
spent the last ten years in Wellington, re-
ceiving his commission in the D Battery,
Wellington, in 1916, joining utp as a driver and
with the 28th Army Service Corps he gained
three stripes, after two months duty. It was
not long ere he sat and passed his examina-
tion for a commission, and received appointment
as 0. C. 32nd Army Service Corps.
Two months later, Lieut. Curtis, was de-
tailed as O. C. of the 34bhs, and when the
reinforcements were reduced, and the 34ths
became a washout, he found he had to part
with his. men, as all were transferred to other
units. His regret on losing boys he had train-
ed in that branch of the work they were inter-
ested in, was seconded only by that of the
boys themselves. Although not immediately
under his direction, many of his: old boys are
on board with him, and proud to be members
)f the same reinforcement. Lieut Curtis
comes in contact a lot with the- men on board,
especially when distributing the gifts donated
by the .societies in New Zealand, this being
one of the pleasant duties allotted to him on
board.
ONE AND QUARTER


SISTER M. CHALMER, R. R. C.
Sister Chalmer has hart as much war work
as any of our New Zealanrt Sisters, leaving the
Dominion with the first contingent of Sisters,
fifty in all, under Miss McLean, for England.
Awaiting transport in England two weeks,
Sister embarked on the English transport
Scotia for Egypt. Arriving there, twenty-
six of the Sisters, with Miss McLean, were sent
to Cairo, forming the Ist N. Z. Hospital, the
remaining twenty-six being attached and to
help at the English hospital at Alexandria.
Sister Clralmer was then appointed Sister
in charge, Surgical Ward, in No. 15 General.
After trying times here, Sister became so run
down, that in November, 1915, she was sent,
aboard the Indian hospital ship "Glengorm
Castle," with dual purpose of trying to regain
her health and nurse sick as well. The Glen-
gorm Castle was employed carrying English
wounded and sick from Egypt to
England, then would sail to Boulogne
and Marseilles, to pick up Indian
wounded, for transport to Indian hospitals in
Egypt. In May, 1916, Sister was again trans-
ferred to No. 17 General, Alexandria. Here
she had charge of what we would call Canvas-
town, as all her patients were nursed in tents.
In October, 1916, Sister was recalled to
England to do duty with New Zealanders; after
two months at Mt. Felix, Walton-On-Thames,
was sent to take charge of Sectional Hospital
just opened at Oaklands Park, remaining there
until October, last year. Sister was then
granted sick leave and returned to New
Zealand.
All aboard Transport 10 5 will wish Sister
Chalmer a speedy return to health, and allow
her to take up her calling again absolutely
fit A.
Among her treasured mementoes of this
war is the decoration conferred on her per-,
son ally by His Majesty the King at Bucking-
ham Palace: Sister Chalmer is an Associate of
the Royal Red Cross.
SISTER E. Mcß. GOLDSMITH.
Sister Goldsmith received her training
at the public hospital Wellington. Leaving
New Zealand with the 7th Contingent in
charge of the hospital duties on board, for
Egypt, commenced duties at Pont-de-Koub-
ber and remained there till March, 1916.
Sister's wide experience in her calling was re-
sponsible for her being selected to return to
the Dominion, in charge of the mas-
sage treatment of our returned heroes
aboard the "Ulimaroa." After one
week spent in God's Own, Sister reported for
duty and left again with the 12 th Reinforce-
ments, on May Ist, 1916. On arrival at Egypt
Sister immediately joined No. 27 General Im-
perial Hospital, Abbasia, Cairo.
In December 1916, with 25 other Sisters,
Sister Goldsmith left on our own Hospital
Ship "Marama," for England, going direct to
Walton-on-Thames Hospital.
On August 18th, 1917, once more Sister
received her "Pack up your Troubles in
your old kit bag" order, and in charge of hos-
pital duties on board transport "Tofua,"
returned to New Zealand.
After enjoying two months' furlough,
Trentham Hospital claimed Sister's attention,
and during her stay there, found the duties
of nursing C. Esses Emma and Measle patients
a labor of love. Sister's personality is felt
everywhere, and her ever willing to help
dispositon, is responsible for the esteem the
boys on board hold for her.
SISTER J. M. MERCER.
Leaving the Dominion on January 20th,
1916, Sister Mercer went direct to England,
and commenced duties at Reading No. 1
War Hospital, remaining there four months.
Her next move (Sisters on active service
remind me of those people who think it
cheaper to move than pay rent, generally
speaking they are generally moving) found
her on active service address, Walton-on-
Thames, where, for fourteen months dozens
of our pals had the good fortune to be nursed
under her care and devotion. Hazelbrook,
France, was the next luggage label mark-
ing for a (period of six weeks,
when Sister moved out to St. Omer, and,
likened to the ever necessary umbrella on a wet
day, was loaned to No. 7 English General Hos-
pital for four weeks. Sister's next move al-
lowed her correspondence to be a little less
disfigured, for the next four months she did
duty with No. 2 English Clearing Casualty
Station. During this latter part of her service
for her Empire, Sister Mercer was severely
put to the test. This station for the worst
cases only comprised six dug-outs, other
patients being nursed in tents and huts. To
hear how the former was fitted up speaks
volumes for the administration of the heads
"Over There." Not only electrically heated
and lighted, these dug-outs had every possible
convenience. Absolutely shell-proof, yet hidden
from view by (gardens and grass topped
plots. While on duty there, needless
o write. Sister heard strange and weird
noises, that we have yet to learn the meaning
of. Sister then left destine for England to join
up with the big ship "Arawa," leaving the
Homeland on January 10th for New Zealand,
being on duty throughout the voyage. Ar-
riving in New Zealand Sister received the
customary three weeks leave, then reported
for duty at Featherston Camp, remaining
there until good fortune ever following the
Thirty-eights, the members of the latter re-
inforcement found the light of her counten-
ance acting as guide, philosopher and friend,
for the term of this voyage anyway.


THE BABES IN THE WOOD GENERALLY
KNOWN AS SISTERS M. A. JACKSON
AND E. L. BAKER.
Sister Jackson is quite proud to state
that like the cow, petroleum and Egmont she
belongs to Taranaki, receiving her training in
the New Plymouth hospital. She is making her
maiden voyage across the seas and despite all
rumours to the contrary she really is a
splendid sailor. Her weaknesses are music,
violin solos by Sergeant Poole, 38th Specialists,
and a disliking for ship's tea. All the boys
on Troopship 105 sincerely wish Sister Jack-
son could always remain with them, this be-
ing an impossibility they all hope that if they
require nursing Sister Jackson will at least
be there to do her share.
The other babe in the wood, or correctly
speaking on the sea, is Sister Baker and very
quietly (lest she be listening) she hails from
Wairoa. Of the two evils she chose the lesser
one to plant her brightness on this land, and
will tell you without any shame whatever it is
Wairoa, Hawke's Bay, and not Wairoa, Auck-
land she means. Receiving her training at
the public hospital, Christchurch, Sister, like
her chum, the other babe, is a novice where
sea trips are concerned and, of course, she
is a splendid sailor.
Coming aboard Troopship 105 Sister
Baker was determined to keep a diary as
faithful as a woman's letter in the Bulletin;
after five days at sea, not including that one
pushed on to everybody unwelcome and un-
asked for, Sister managed to write in the
diary, "I have not been seasick yet." She
is really a splendid sailor now, but, of
course, I must tell you we have been at sea
days and days, and then it is always beauti-
fully calm. Among her many weaknesses are
music, ragtime, under no circumstances is she
a wowser, and above all she applauded ALL
the concerted items at the first Specialists'
concert and that's writing a lot.
CHAPLAIN MAJOR E. C. W. POWELL.
Chaplain Major Powell, volunteered for
service soon after the outbreak of war, fin-
ally leaving with the 19th Reinforcements.
After a month at Sling, he was ordered to
Prance, and worked at the base camp, when
the division was attached to the No. 1 Field
Ambulance, and also for duty with the A. S. C.
Towards the end of 1917, owing to sickness,
he was transferred to England, and finally
sent to New Zealand with invalids, arriving
there in March.
After a sihiort spell was passed as fit again
and returns with us. In January 1917, the
Padre completed 2 5 years continuous service,
and was awarded the Colonial and Auxiliary
decoration otherwise known as the T.D. Eleven
years of his service was in the Blenheim rifles,
of which he was for some time chaplain.
CHAPLAIN-CAPTAIN E. D. RICE.
Chaplain-Captain Eric D. Rice was horn
in Auckland in 1876, the son of Vincent Rice,
of the Auckland Education Board; he attend-
ed the Auckland Grammar School. After
seven years in an Auckland business he gave
up splendid prospects to study for Holy
Orders. He entered Canterbury College in
19 00 and four years later gained his M.A. de-
gree. He was ordained to the priesthood in
19 05. He was well known in athletic circle®,
winning the school cup in his last year at the
Grammar School, and also captained the first
fifteen which was unbeaten. For the follow-
ing six years he played "soccer," and his
team won the Auckland senior championship
every year. He was in every Auckland re-
presentative team,, which was unbeaten for
the six years. On going to Christchurch he
went back to Rugby, and his team (Christ-
church) won the senior championship. He
was picked in the Canterbury representatives
for four years, and finished up by being chosen
for the famous "All Blacks," but he had to
refuse the tour. He and another student
were the founders of the annual inter-Varsity
tournaments, which have become so popular.
He has won many events himself, chiefly
hurdles and long jump. At tennis he was
champion of Auckland in 1904, and for
several years was University champion of
New Zealand, only being beaten by the famous
Anthony Wilding.
STAFF SERGEANT-MAJOR F. E. B.
IVIMEY.
Born in London 18 80, our Staff Ser-
geant-major arrived in "God's Own" in 1886.
Boyhood days were spent in and around
Dunedin, the Dour City. Leaving school he
was engaged in duties as a clerk. Had dis-
tinction of being selected as a member of the
Federal Contingent to visit the Common-
wealth in 19 01.
On return from Australia, Sergt-major
volunteered for service in South Africa and
went through that campaign. Returning to
New Zealand the R. N. Z. Artillery claimed his
attention and after seven years service
there was transferred to the N.Z. Permanent
Staff to which he is still attached. Throughout
his career he has taken active part in all
athletics, particularly running and football.
In the latter he represented Wellington,
Otago, Southland, South Island and New Zea-
land. In all he was playing the game of
games 12 years. Sergt.-Major Ivimey was
under orders to leave with the Main Body
but at the last moment was detained for ad-
ministrative and instructional duties. After
repeated applications to get away to the
front, leave was at last granted him to em-
bark, with the 38ths. Coming from a grand
old fighting -stock, and with his own
record of seventeen years, he is the
last of four brothers to go to the
front. Of his brothers Sid is with the 12th
Reinforcements, Ist Cyclist Corps from N. Z.,
Ernest is with a machine-gun section, Austra-
lian Forces, and the eldest brother Henry left
from England with Kitchener's first 100,000.


■
COMMANDER I. A. SUTCLIFFE.
Captain I. A. Sutcliffe, Commander of H. M.
T. Remuera and Commodore of the fleet was
born in Northamptonshire in 1855. In 1870 he
joined the training ship H. M. S. Worcester and
two years later became midshipman in the firm
of D. Currie and company, where he remained
until 1884, in sail and steam occupying various
positions.
He then joined the N. Z. Shipping company,
in ISBG he took over the command of the R.
M. S. Aorangi, and since that date has had
charge of most ships in the fleet, having com-
pleted eighty voyages round the world. In
March 1917, while in command of R. M. S.
Rotorua he was torpedoed in the Englisn Chan-
nel, after which he took command of this ship.
Captain Sutcliffe is a first class rifle shot, a
keen crickter, with a good record and an en-
ergetic athlete.
Having made many voyages to and from
New Zealand carrying many passengers, his
name is almost a household word.
CHIEF OFFICER
SUB. LIEUTENANT H. WILDE.
Sub. Lieutenant Wilde, came from the in-
dustrial town of Birmingham. Leaving school,
he decided on a seafaring career, a rather
singular decision, when he had not set eyes on
the sea or a ship, until arriving at Newcastle-
on-Tyne, to join the ship Ladstock. After five
and a half years apprenticeship on this barque
of 700 tons, he returned to Newcastle to sit
for his second mate's ticket. Successful in
this, the tramp Newstead, claimed him for the
next thirteen months, when an examination
for his first mate ticket, sent him ashore again.
Securing this ticket, Sub-Lieutenant Wilde
served as second mate on the steamers, Wad-
don and Nutsford, for a period of three years.
In 1907, being successful in gaining his
Masters certificate, he joined the New Zealand
Shipping company, as 3rd and 2nd Officer on
the Wakanui, and Papanui, as 3rd on the
Kaikoura, 3rd and 2nd on the Whakatane, as
2nd on the Paparoa, and as chief on the
Kaipara.
On the latter .steamer, he came in conflict
with a German raider, which ended the Kaip-
ara'is career. iTaken- a prisoner by the Germans,
he was detained for twelve daysi, until the
advent of the Highflyer; this gallant, ship soon
accounted for the raider, and the collier, on
which our Sub. was detained sailed for Las
Palmas.
At the latter town, he was released, .and
sailed for England. Joining the Remuera in
1914, he has found time to study photography
and rear parrots, most successfully.
CHIEF ENGINEER W. R. SNEDDON
Born in Christehurch, New Zealand, 1870.
In 189 4 first went to sea in the sailing ship
Turakma as 2nd Freezer. Did two trips in
sailing ship and then joined the old S. S.
Ruahine. Transferred then to the S. S.
Mataura in 1897 and shipwrecked in 1898.
Joined the New Zealand Shipping company in
1898 and did service on cargo tramps for two
years. Then joined the S. S. Tongariro and
did five voyages in her. Then transferred to
the S. S. Kaikoura and did twelve voyages
in her. Then transferred to new S. S. Ruahine
as 2nd Engineer. Later transferred to the
S. S. Orari as Chief Engineer. Thence to the
present boat the S. S. Remuera and is now on
his 13 th trip on her. He took a great interest
in swimming sports, won the 100 yards cham-
pionship of New Zealand in 1890 and the one
mile championship the same year. In 1892
won plunging championship for North Scot-
land. He is a congenial soul and is very
popular with all the boys on board.


The Man who makes the wheels go round
MR. P. BOWEN, Steward in Charge.
The man behind the gun, or rather the
Lord Rhondda oif Troopship 105, hails from
that part of England renowned for its beau-
ties and also its hops. (Glorious Kent). A
very genial personality, always ready to help
everybody on board, assist the boys with dec-
orations, etc., for concerts. Mr. Bowen is im-
mensely popular. So often has he been across
the "Pond" that he could almost find his way
between "Noo Zee" and England blindfolded.
Going to sea in 1883, Mr. Bowen has spent 35
years on the deep, has all sorts of stories to
relate, and one or two rare experiences. He
was on the "Kaipara", owned by the N. Z. S.
Coy., when she went ashore at Rangitoto,
Auckland. On the Remuera, Mr. Bowen has
made fourteen trips, has had our returned men
to look after on three outward trips, but this
is the first time any of the troops going to the
front have travelled with him. He is more
than satisfied with the 38tli's. In his own
words, "If any later reinforcements travel on
this ship I will be quite satisfied if they come
up to the standard of the , you know."
His chief hobbies are smokes and more smokes,
and his presence is felt everywhere usually a
most pleasant odour preceeding the popular
"Perc" everywhere.
-jzr jgr ssr 3Rr 3Rr
FIELD SECRETARY WALTER EGLIN.
Field Secretary Walter Eglin, first saw the
light of day in Greenoch on the Clyde. After
a brief stunt to the Emerald Isle when in
pinafores emigrated with his parents (without
the option), in a sailing ship to Dunedin.
Settling in the suburb of Roslyn, he received
his education at the Kaikorai School —under
Dominie McLaughlin—one of the whitest men,
he says that ever lived. Commencing commer-
cial life in a hardware 1 house, he rose to a
branch managership. He believes in healthy
recreation, and has enjoyed many a game of
rugby cricket and hockey. In local affairs,
in the Capital City, he at present is President
ot the Wellington Boys' Cricket League, and
Vice-President of the Y. M. C. A. Offering
his services to Red Triangle, as a Field-
Secretary, he was accepted, and is out to do
his little bit.
ST 3T W 3T 3T
IT'S
If your Officer is crusty,
And roars! you didn't shave,
Keep standing at Attention.
And try his wrath to brave.
If the Sergeant Major blasts you
And growls! your up to snuff,
Remember he's no better
And only there to bluff.
If your Sergeant starts to bless you
When you cannot do your drill
Remember he was a private too
And might have been worse still.
Smithy, C. Coy.
Physical jerks.—Forward part of ship, sea
little rouigh. Wave from over the side,
drenches several jerkers, much to their
loud expressed indignation.
Officer standing by—"Surely you are not afraid
of a little drop of water. What will you
do when its lead?
Digger.--—"Swing it Sir!"
Just quietly—
We have a school boy Sergeant
In old "D" Thirty-eight
Who is teaching everyone of us
To sing the hymn of hate
Of course he cannot help it
It's just his weakest spot,
A little bit too hot.


I' In Mil
" 1 - ——-'--jgr
38th SPECIALIST'S CONCERT.
PROGRAMME.
Orchestral selection —Ship's Orchestra.
Mand.alay—Gunner Braithwaite.
Ladies and Gentlemen, here we are —The Spec.
Pierrots.
It's Tulip Time in Holland —L.-Cpl Cardston
and Pierrots.
Dear Home Town —"Signaller Skam.
Violin solo —Mazurka (Mynarski)—Sgt. Poole.
The One Man Band—Pierrots.
Lightning Sketches—Gunner Croll.
Pianoforte selection. (Carmen) Signaller
Worsley.
Lonesome Melody—Pierrots.
Parted—Gunner Shepherd.
Violin Solo (Beethoven Minuet) —Sergt. Poole.
Another Little Drink—Gunner Croll, Cpl.
Hopkins and L.-Cpl. Cairdston.
Me and My Gal—Pierrots.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
Ill}}
"A" COMPANY CONCERT.
On Wednesday, June 14th, at 7.45 p.m all
roads leading to No. 4 Troop Deck were
thronged with all ranks, making- for the scene
of A Company's concert. Great speculation
was made as to the merits of the talent in A
Company, but a,ll attending concert were quite
satisfied that this Company could hold their
own with any on the ship. The troop deck
was packed, and, despite the heating condi-
tions. being more than desired, the merits of
the performers made up for so trifling a dis-
comfort.
Major Powell presided, and at the conclu-
sion of the concert called for three cheers,
which were readily given by A Company's com-
rades. To individualise all the items would
take up too much space. A programme is re-
printed as a souvenir of one of the best con-
certs ever presented en route.
Selection—The Ship's Orchestra.
God Send You Back to Me—Cpl. Blandford.
Trio (Punniosities) —Lieuts. Jenkins, Flood and
Raeburn.
Clarionet Solo —L. Corpl. Wright.
Comic Song—Private Simpson.
The Grey North Sea—Mr. Mollison, 3rd En-
- gir.eer Troopship 105.
Selection—The Orchestra.
In These Hard Times—Private George.
Sunshine of Your Smile—Corpl. Blandford
Selection—The Ragtime Band.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
The outstanding features were many. A riot
of fun was manifest the whole time Lieut. Jen-
kins, Flood, and Raeburn were on the stage.
Mr. Mollison received a great reception from
the boys, and the Ragtime Band was a scream
Altogether a great show.


CONCERT BY "B" COMPANY.
The third concert en voyage, that by "B"
Company, was in every way as successful as
those previously given, attracting a crowded
house. There is no doubt, whatever about the
popularity of the concerts, the old ship rang
with the hearty applause and cheers of the
lads, clearly expressing the enjoyment that
"B" Company's efforts gave. With "B" Com-
pany a distinct novelty was introduced with
Private Beaurepaire's hypnotism exhibition.
Many were the weird, wonderful, and scream-
ingly funny tricks of those "under the influ-
ence."
Bugler Holly gave some good monologue
stunts.
Private Wilman is certainly a neat step
dancer.
Private Cooper has a fine voice, and his
items were very much enjoyed. It is needless
to write about the success of Privates Tiny
Vin.ing and Scadden.
The programme given by "B" Company is
as follows: —
Selection by Ship's Orchestra.
Songs, "Sunshine of Your Smile," "Mother
Machree' —Private H. Cooper.
Recitation, "The Bush Christening"—Private
W. Scadden.
Ragtime offering, "Ipswich and Northwich",
"Are You From Dixie?" —Private Tiny
Vining.
Ocarina Duet —L. Corpl. Wright and Private
Williams.
Hypnotism demonstration —• Private Beaure-
paire.
Monologue—Bugler Holly.
Step dance —Pte®. Wiliman and Tiny Viniing.
Song, Till the Sands of the Desert Grow Cold"
—Corporal Ashley.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
"C" COMPANY'S CONCERT.
Selection —Ship's Orchestra.
Song—Private l Brummond.
Violin solo —Sergeant Poole.
Sketch —Private Simpson.
Song—Mr. Mollison.
Clarionet solo —Lance Corpl. Wright.
Conjuring exhibition —Private Mclver.
"C" Company's concert was a refresher,
enjoyed by all those fortunate enough to get
within listening space, and the lucky ones
Were rewarded with a fine show. The condi-
tions of time and travel made the possibilities
of holding -a concert on the usual troop deck
an impossibility. It was a pleasant change for
all, when the starboard side of the promenade
deck was the chosen spot, for the members of
"C" Company to display their excellent efforts.
The programme submitted was enjoyed by
all present, and when the concert given by a
united ship's company does eventuate, it cer-
tainly will be worth seeing. Sergeant Poole's
violin solos are in demand all over the ship.
Private Simpson's sketch, as usual, has the
audience in screams. Private Mclver has cer-
tainly started opposition to the Subs of the
Ist Saloon. His card tricks, under more con-
venient circumstances, would have shown the
master he is at sleight of hand. The singing
of' Mr. Mollison and Private Drummond was
all that could be desired. Well done, "C"
Company.
D. COY'S. CONCERT
PROGRAMME
I.—Song—They all love Jack.
The Carnival Private Leigh
2. —Musical Monologue—The Man with the
single hair Pte. W. Smith
3.—Sonig—Jack Britton Sergt. Jones
4. —Song—When you wore a Tulip
Private Wheeler
5. —Step-dance—Sailors Hornpipe
Lance-Cpl. Patterson
6. —S orog—S o m e,r s e t
The village pump . . Lance-Cpl. Morrison
7. —Recitation—The Calliope ..Pte. Bradburn
8. —Song—My old Shako Pte. Kennard
9. —Recitation —The Kaiser's Bream
The things we don't see at the front
Private Baker
10—Buet —Larboard Watch
Privates Kennard and Fields.
D. Company had a decided novelty to of-
fer the ship's complement—a. matinee perform-
ance. If our readers have not had the priv-
ilege of attending a matinee at sea, just let
them accept our advice and do so early;
matinees at sea are simply great.
The promenade deck was crowded with
spectators clamouring on rails, seats, boxes,
anything to catch a glimpse of the performers.
It was unfortunate that B. Company should
be the last of the quintette to give their con-
cert, as for this reason such excellent vocalists
as Sergeant Jones, Private Leigh and Lance-
Corporal Morison were not previously heard.
The duet of Privates Kennard and Fields, the
monologue of Private Smith, and the recita-
tions of Private Baker and Bradburn were real
gems. Among the most popular items ever
presented on the ship was Lance-Corporal
Pi tiers on'S' hornpipe. Private Wullie Simp-
son of C. Coy. officiated at the piano in his
usual best Sunday style.


SHIPBOARD SPORTS
The First Meeting, An Afternoon of Play.
With only very few exceptions everyone
was fit and keen to participate in the first
sports meeting, which took place on our first
Saturday out, June Bth, 1918. At two o'clock
the bugle sounded the ever welcome call "no
parade". At this time our good ship was run
ning before a strong wind and the chilly bite
in the air and frequent showers, made the
more exposed portions of the ship not the most
desirable, consequently some of the major
events had for the time being to be abandoned.
Nevertheless, the promenade decks and the
lee side of the boat deck provided ample space
for the many amusing and exciting games
which our officers and padres had provider]
for us.
For a few moments many men displayed
their characteristic sensitiveness, and only bv
persuasion could entrants be obtained.
However, very soon after one of two had
laid themselves open to the mirthful approba
tion of their comrades, it was difficult to
all comers a chance to compete.
Chalking the pig's eye, eating apples ot,
strings, and whistling competitions were games
which many. thought they had relegated to
the limbo of school days, but in the oldest man
there is a tremendous amount of boy, and the
laughter of the heavy-voiced men was as
hearty as the merry chuckle of any lad.
While it is said the army has made men
of boys, it must also be said it has made boys
of men.
It would do the heart of any mother good
to see her big soldier son, frantically endeav-
oring to dispose of a biscuit with a minimum
of mastication, in order to whistle a few bars,
of a well-known melody, in quicker time than
his comrades.
The MacConochie squad competition will
always be an unfailing source of merriment.
For the benefit of those dear people of ours,
who know little or nought of the thousand
and one things, which go to make up a sol.
ditr's life, it may be explained that in this com-
petition a squad is to act only on the orders,
preceded by the word MacConochie. The car-
rying out of any other order puts a man
promptly out of the game. In each squad there
are usually three or four men, who defy the
many subtle ruses of their Commander to catch
them, but eventually, like the verse about the
ten little nigger boys, the resourceful Com-
mander finishes the remainder off.
On this first sports day, we saw one squad
with two men left in, who refused to be caught
by the wily devices of Second Lieutenant Bar-
ron. Mr. Barron will probably lie in wait for
Lance Corporal Dickenson, and Private Miles,
on some succeeding sports day.
Entrants for chalking the pig's eye, were
numerous, and various were the attempts to
place the porker's ocular organ in its right
place.
While it lasted the apple eating competition
caused great mirth. Private Ward, No. 3
Platoon, A Company, really tried to bite the
apple. After a little persuasion he removed
his false teeth, leaving only two large fangs
to seize the apple with. Only after several men
had banged the apple into his mouth, did he
succeed in getting it off the string. (He did
not win).
The following are the results of the pre-
liminary heats:
Starboard Section.
Deck Quoits —Pte. Beaurepaire (B Coy) ,Ist;
Pte. Hargreaves (Spec), 2nd.
Whistling Competition —Cpl. Hopkins and Pte.
Walker (Specs), Ist; Ptes. Vining and
Cooper ("B", 2nd.
Tug-of-War "B" Company—No. 5 Platoon
beat No. 6; No. 8 Platoon beat No. 7; No.
5 Platoon beat No. 8.
"A" Company V Specialists —After a long and
strenuous pull, Specialists beat "A" Coy.
Chalking tiie Pig's Eye —Pte. McLean, "B" Coy,
first.
Apple Eating Competition —L. Cpl. Lowe "B"
Coy, Ist (first heat); Pte. Shepard, "B"
Coy, Ist (second heat).
Maconocliie Squad Competition—"B" Coy, L.
Cpl. Lowe, Ist.
Port Section.
Chalking the Pig's Eye Pte. Towgood, "C"
Coy; Pte. Carnahan, "D" Coy; Pte. Just,
"C" Coy, winners of heats.
Apple Eating Competition—Pte. Bryson, "A"
Coy, Ist.
Whistling Competition —Pte. Smith, E. H., "A"
Coy, Ist (first heat) ; Pte. Smith, L. C.,
and Drummond, "C" Coy, Ist, (second
heat).
Maconocliie Squad Competition—"A" Coy (L.
Corpl. Dickenson, Pte. Miles, tie. Specs.—
Pte. Marley, A. W. "D" Coy—Pte. Tait
and Pte. Walker C. L., tie. "C" Coy, Pte.
E. R. Smith and Pte. Harrison, tie.
THE SECOND MEETING.
A Glorious Afternoon.
Our second Saturday afternoon sports
meeting turned out an unbounded success.
Little breezes and tiny billows, and the sun
filling the air with a soft warmth made the
afternoon an idea), one.
There was not a sick man on board and,
crowded round the sports area standing on
or hanging to every elevated part of the ship
were swarms of merry-faced soldiers. Here
and there sprinkled among the khaki shirts
appeared the dark navy of a ship's officer or
seaman, while every now and then over the
rail of the bridge appeared the gold-braided
can of the officer on duty as some loud burst
of applause or laughter caused him to> cast
his eves upon the scene below.
Here on one of the forward hatches were
held the blindfold boxing and swinging beam
pillow fighting. Both these competitions
were hard and strenuous, but every man was
fit and took defeat or knocks with equal good
humour. Entrant© for both events wiere
numerous. When some of the officers took
part in the pillow-fighting bouts enthusiasm
reached its highest pitch, each company bar-
racking bard for its own man. A yell of de-
light greeted the ship's doctor as he stepped
up to the beam, and challenged Mr. Leyland
to a bout. As Mr. Leyland gaily picked up
the gauntlet, someone started the cry of
32


SAPPER
'Army versus Navy.' Of course the army had
to win but the little "Doc" stuck to his perch
long enough to ruffle his opponent's hair and
make his head sing.
In the blindfold boxing some of the com-
petitors made the usual delightful error of
mistaking the umpire for their opponent, and
the officers acting in that capacity received
quite an unwelcome number of blows, some-
what to their discomfiture and to the great
amusement of the crowd.
An event watched with breathless interest
was the tug-o-war between the officers and
senior N. C. O's Despite their apparent
heftyness, the N. C. O's failed to win either
the first or second pull. The officers put
too much sting into their tugs and the stars
came out popular winners over the stripes.
At the conclusion of the event a pleasing
uttle ceremony took place when Sister Cha'
mer with a few felicitous wo-rds presented the
winners with a prize. Mr. Stewart of A Coy.
returned thanks on behalf of his comrades and
promised to see each had an equal share. In
h's haste to arrange for its distribution he
opened the parcel on the spot and revealed to
sight an entrancing arranged and valuable
collection of potatoes.
An event of more than ordinary interest
was the chalking of the Pig's Eye by the
sisters none of whom placed Piggy's optic
where it would have been of any practical use
to him. Sister Mercer however made the best
attempt.
The following are the winners of the var-
ious events:
BLINDFOLD BOXING
Pte. Fraser
Pte. Smith, E. H., A Coy.
Pte. Darsen, C. Coy.
Pte. Hargreaves, Specs.
Dance-Cpl. Lowe, B Coy.
Lance-Cpl. Pannell, Specs.
Pte. Mclntyre B Coy.
All the above winning their heat have won
a prize.
Pillow Fighting Competition —Lance-Cpl. Mor-
row, "A" Coy., Ist; Pte. George "A" Coy.,
2nd.
Maconochie Squad Competition—Final: Lance-
Cpl. Dickenson, "A" Coy., Pte. Miles "A"
Coy.
Whistling Competition—Final, Pte. Smith, L.
C. and Drummond, C. Coy., Ist.
Chalking Pig's Eye—Final: Pte. Towgood, C.
Coy., Ist; Pte. Just, C. Coy., 2nd.
Tug-o-war.—After another strenuous pull
Specialists beat B. Coy.
Apple Eating Competition—Semi-final: Pte.
Bryson, A. Coy.; Pte. Cooper, B. Coy.; Pte.
Armstrong, Specialists; Lance-Cpl. Lowe,
B. Coy.
Final: Lance-Cpl. Lowe, B. Coy. Ist; Pte.
Armstrong, Specs., 2nd.
Special Prize —Pte. Walker, F. Specialist, Ist.
Peg Quoits —Semi-final: Lance-Cpl. Weld.
Specialists; Pte. Holt, A. Coy.; Pte. Beau-
repaire, B. Coy.; Pte. Hargreaves, Special-
ists.
Final —Lance-Cpl. Weld, Specs. (6) Ist.; Pte
Holt, A. Coy. (5) 2nd.
AS HE SEES HIMSELF
AS OTHERS SEE HIM


f 1
I J!
c; sEE=g^^^F


Star Athletes Aboard
Aboard our transport there are a number
of men who, as athletes in the Dominion, gain-
ed a pre-eminent position. For the benefit of
lovers of sport, a record of their doings in
old Noo Zee are reproduced. —Editor.
LIEUT. M. R. STEWART —
Hurdles—Won championship Auckland, 1912-
13; won championship Wanganui, 1911-12.
University champion 1914. Records, 120
and 440 hurdles.
Rugby—Started playing 1906. Represented
Wanganui 1910-11; Auckland, 1912-13.
Cricket —Represented Wanganui 1911-12.
LIEUT. L. G. HILL—
Rugby —Started playing 1901. Represented
Wanganui, 1904-5-6; represented Taran-
aki, 1910-11-13.
Cricket —Started playing 1900; represented
Taranaki, 1903-8-9-10-11-12.
LIEUT. E. R. POUNTNEY —
Rugby—Started playing 1909. Represented
Auckland 1912.
Boxing Won heavyweight championship
Cambridge O. T. C. (England.)
S. S. M. (W. 0.) F. E. IVIMEY—
Rugby—lB99, represented Wellington (Wed-
nesday) 1904-5; rep. Ota,go, 1906-7-8-9-
10; rep. Southland, 1911-12-13; rep. S. Is-
land, 1908; rep. N. Z. 1910 (Australian
tour).
CHAPLAIN CAPTAIN RICE, E. I).— . . .
Soccer —Started playing 1893. Rep. Auck-
land 1894-5-6-7-8-9.
Rugby—Started playing 1900. Rep. Canter-
bury, 1900-1-2-3-.
Q. M. SERGT. F. M. G. WATCHORN —
Cricket —Started playing in 1904. Rep. Man -
awatu, 1907-8.
Hockey—Started playing in 1904. Rep.
Manawatu, 1908.
Boxing—Started boxing in 1907. Won Man-
awatu Provincial championship (welter-
weight), 1910-11-12; won Manawatu Pro-
vincial championship (light weight), 1907-
8; won Manawatu Provincial champion-
ship (middle weight), 1912; wci; Well-
ington Provincial championship (light
weight), 1908 ; won New Zealand
championships (welter weight), 1909-10-
12 ; won Australian championships
(welter weight), 1909 and 10. Received
medal for most scientific boxer at N. Z
championships in 1910.
SERGT. H. IV. SPEAR—
Rugby—Started playing in 1902. Rep.
Southland, 1904.
CO'Y S. M. R. W. WYLIE—
Hockey—Started playing in 1908. Rep. Can-
terbury 1912-13.
PTE. A. sr. BRADBURN —
Rugby—Started playing in 1903. Ilep, Auck-
land 1911-12-13.
PTE. W. C. HOLLY—
Soccer —Started playing (England) 1897.
Rep. Burton Swift's Club for several
years. Played 4 years in N. Z. Rep.
Manawatu 1912.
■ t ■
CORPL. O. TANCRED—
Boxing—Started boxing in 1908. Won Wel-
lington Provincial championship (wel-
ter weight) 1909-10-11. Won Welling-
ton Provincial championship (middle-
weight), 1912; won Manawatu Provincial
championship (welter weight), 1909; won
Hawlte's Bay Provincial championship (wel-
ter weight), 1910; won N. Z. Provincial
championship (welter weight), 1911.
CO Y S. M. G. LUXTON — VJ;
Hockey—Started playing in 1902. Rep. Can-
terbury, 1906-7-8.
CRICKET
Quite a break in the proceedings en route
was an impromptu cricket match arranged at
a Port of Call, between the Garrison there arid
the 38th. A very pleasant afternoon's sport
was indulged in. Due to shortness of our
stay in that port, the match resulted in a
draw, the scores are as follows:
Garrison vs. 38th Reinforcement
38tli Score
Sergt. Dumbleton, c King, b Sergt. Lee. . . 43
Pte. Baldwin, b Sergt. Lee 48
Cap]. Tancred 2 6
I<t. Hill, b Serg. Lee 0
Q. M. S. Watchorn, b Sergt. Lee .' 4
Pte. Esther, b Sergt. Lee 4
Lieut. Flood
Private Olsen
COTporal Woods
Private Crone
Fglin (Y. M. C. A.)
Byes 8
Leg byes 2
No balls 1
Closed innings 5 wickets for Total . 136
Garrison
Sergt. Lee, c Cpl. Woods, b Lance-Cpl.
Tancred 69
Lt. Stredwick to Cpl. Woods 3
Sergt. Coke, c Olsen, to Lt. Hill 43
Pte. Marshall, b,,Lt. Hill 0
Cpl. Murray, c & b Lt. Hill 21
Pte. Young 8
Byes 3
Total 147


THE MENU
With Apologies to Ist Saloon.
They say we're on rations;
Its a puzzle to me
How cure and how Frenchified
Rations can he.
The bully old schnapper
Comes up a la grande;
Tihe Hung in plain English
We never could stand —
But its pretty and piquant in pale bollandaise,
And its old bones are decked in a dozen sly
ways.
I'm shocked at the murphies,
Those plain Irish spuds.
In silver-lined dishes
And gay Paris duds
Haven't even Ihe manners to take off their
coats,
And they're puffed out like peacocks, the silly
old goats.
Tournadoes de boeuf and
A la Bretonne, •
And that hardy old upstart
Haunch de mouton
Its quite past a joke and I call it red hot,
And I'm simply fed up when I get through the
lot - . _ jrr
The sweets are the only dear thing I can bear;
I know where I am when I get right down
there.
A tart is a tart, and a pie is a pie;
And you don't have to puzzle and stammer and
isi,gh.
You can sit like a duke, and speak out like a
beau,
And the stewards can't giggle—because you
don't know.
This war is the limit —■
And its rations —oh my!
Tres bon, oh my conscience,
You just have a try;
Why even the cafe is the darkest dark horse,
But its French, and its rations so I take it, of
course.
IT AT.Ii HAPPENED AT GAS HELMET
PRACTICE.
In returning evil for evil, or, rather, kick
for kick, or, perhaps, giving as good a kick
back as received, always look before you kick.
Gas helmets are horrible things at the best oft-
times, and when one unfortunate having been
kicked, return' his kick, he i,s surprised to
receive three days C. B.
(By error of judgment he in return kicked
not his assailant, but his 0.C.)
ANOTHER SHIP'S ALPHABET
A. Stands for apples our money can't buy.
B. Stands for beer—l forget the ship's dry.
C. is just ail that we see in the sea.
D. is the Doctor his hat's all we see.
E. stands for engineers, soldiers and sailors.
F. is for fitting by Bill Massey's tailors.
G. my old gas mask no breathing allows.
H. stands for Howitzers placed at the hows.
I. is the infantry—they capture the trenches.
J. is the joy they have with the wenches.
K. is the Kaiser we all want in—still.
L. is the place where they'll put poor old
Bill.
M. stands for meal time how hungry we are.
N. stands for Nurses so near yet so far.
O. is for Officers they're on a win.
P. is the puttees we have round our shin.
Q. stands for quarter whose right lusty
punches.
R. very unpleasant to feel on our lunches.
S. stands for Specialists gunners and Sigs.
T. is the "tea" we have with our figs.
U. is our uniforms stowed in our kits.
V. stands for victory we want over Fritz.
W. stands for War where we are going.
X. is for extra pay to us owing.
Y. are we here but to answer the call.
Z. stands for zero that's nothing at all.
Sympathiser—"Hello Bill, did you have break-
fast this morning."
Sea Sick One —"For one minute
exactly."


As in Our Forefathers' Days.
It is many years since men have become
aware of the value of song, of the absolute
need of it. In fact, song has come back into
the lives' of a great many who hiad forgotten all
about it.
Already it is evident that song has had a
broadening effect uipon both the head®, and the
men of our army in their duties, and has been
of practical value in helping the social and
artistic stimuli in heightening the morale and
efficiency of our fighters.
A striking illustration of this is always
apparent in the early stages of camp life. Prac-
tically no sooner has the company passed the
main guard outward hound from camp, and
the order 'March at ease' been given than the
Sergeant-Major will say, "Come on, hoys,
strike up a song and see that you get it in
with the step."
The writers take New Zealand camps as an
example of what a beneficial effect song has
had towards making a recruit's life pass more
pleasantly than it might have done without the
advent of its cheering influence. Be it
Awapuni, Narrow Neck, Tauherenikau, Trent-
ham or Featherston, the institutes allotted for
concert programmes are certain of being
crowded to the doors long before the arrival
of a visiting choral party; or, should the enter-
tainment be given by the soldiers themselves,
it is not less popular and the welcome is equal-
ly enthusiastic. And on a route march, with
full pack up, what passes the time more 1 plea-
santly, and makes the march a treat, more
than the happy-go-lucky go-as-you-please miob-
singing. It matters little the sample of song,
be it popular; the witty and at times ill-chosen
parodies on well-known airs—all are sung, and
with what depth of feeling. And to the mother
living in the vicinity of a camp, how cheering
it must be to hear in the distance the happy
voices coming nearer, and particularly when
that mother runs to the garden gate to see the
boys pass chanting with one voice the refrain—
"La-la-la-la-la-la-la-la-la.
"Fisho, fisho, fisiho, he ha blowfly."
It may be that the CI boys, 'way hack at
Featherston, (who rely so much on marching
as a fit A maker) most appreciated the intro-
duction of music into their lives once more.
How cheery they sound out on the march,
singing a favourite with much gusto, for in-
stance: —
"I'm glad I'm in the army;
I'm glad I'm going away;
I'm going to do my darnedest
For to be passed Fit A.
Then' I'll have week-end passe®
With lots more Irish stew,
And when I get to Paris, hoys,
What the am I going to do ?
Fight for my king and country;;
Fight for the girls I love;
Fight for the dirty wasters
Who haven't got the to go.
And when we get to Berlin,
The Kaiser he will say,
Ach hooh, mein gott, what a bally line lot
Is the CI stiff brigade."
The whole world over, where camps abound,
music of every description has come into its
own. Brass bands, orchestras, choirs, concert
parties are encouraged by the heads to such
an extent, that for the asking troops are sup-
plied with any instruments desired. To take
our readers hack to the days when the glax-
oities in dear old CI camp at Tauherenikau,
were minus a band and had enough talent
among the unfits to make an excellent one.
An old warrior then, Chaplain-Captain Carter,
of Salvarmy fame, secured permission to go to
Wellington with a dozen players. They left
camp by the afternoon train one day, return-
ing by the afternoon train next, with a full
set of brass instruments. The result of that
trip is that CI camp to-day possesses the best
of our dominion camp bands, and the CI men
are all the better for the daily music they
listen and march to. The glaxoite loves music,
he can march to the step, his whole surround-
ings are the brighter for the innovation. Be-
fore CI possessed its hand, twice a week only
did it hear music, when the bands from
Featherston arrived on a visit and played the
glaxo boys on and off parade, and how eagerly
those days were looked forward to by all.
Nowadays it is music, and music of the best,
every day. The boys march better, sing more
heartily any song air the band plays, and with-
out any doubt whatever they are happier, bet-
ter soldiers; and the trait of their forefathers
who went into battle to the inspiring accom-
paniment of drum and fife, singing the while
a traditional song, remembered even yet in
these latter days, this trait is once more mani-
fested among their progeny.
The weekly route march, renowned at
Featherston Camp for the uncertainty of its
duration:, would be tiring and irksome to the
men if music were lacking. A band at the
head of the column means a sporty, happy
march. And when there is no band all the
energy in the world is infused by the officers
and the n.c.o.'s to keep the men cheerful, by
encouraging them to sing and let it go. The
greatest joy in those well-remembered
marches occurred when one company passing
another en route, sort of got in first with —
"There's some .hard-looking dials over there."
This anthem set to the air of a well-
known S. and M. hymn ("We shall meet on
the beautiful shore") was followed by happy
and boisterous laughter that proved without
doubt what mob-singing means to soldiers.
Our friends and allies, the Americans,
so near and yet so far, have already dis-
covered the value of mob-singing. Camp


• ' - , ...... . —•—- f.-- %
fn • W
jfi • fJSs% <sg fw > WriA
flSll V5W '
Vfef I </4"'/ f VST* ' Q
i M r T °^"
f • T^o„ Q \ O Ov,rj"
z f ' 3 *®- r 1« i»tl >%. . ■ *£•&
f;
« ~4T — **&. j $$"'j TN> *** • I
s -nflta i?r *&• ; —m
' \^"w
a*, X xv /
■ 1 [7^7^
'** " . - with vs.


Devens in Ayr Mass. is a place for special
study, and an officer has ibeen placed on the
work of encouraging "mob-singing." The
officer in question. Captain Vernon Stiles, de-
scribes what he called a- thrilling impression
of the work he set out to investigate.
"After walking leagues over the bosom
of the rolling country in which the camp is
spread, I sat me down in a hut with a camp
chair in it.
"While I waited there came what I
thought at first to be the sound of distant
fifes. Cut in a moment a company of men
came marching snappily over the hill, and I
saw that they were whistling, every bit as
gnappily as they were marching, some kind of
a fighting tune. It made me want to march
too, even after an endless and fruitless morn-
ing hike.
"Another company came by in a moment,
singing. The tune was 'Tramp, Tramp,
Tramp, the boys are Marching.' The text
was original. Many of the texts and also the
'tunes are original at Camp Devens, which is
one of the surest and best signs of the real
place that music is taking in the daily life of
the men. The whistling was glorious.
"Only now are the players and instru-
ments sorted out and apportioned each to his
or its place. They took a roster of all avail-
able music purveyors in the camp. These
were divided into three classes—good, indif-
ferent, and poor. No one was turned away,
though, and the result was that every bugler
in Camp Devens took to departing into the
hills and practising in his hours off duty.
" 'lt was the most horrible sound you
ever heard,' said 'the soldier, 'for a while.
Then it commenced to work out. The
players were grouped together, given leaders,
and Already, iin- this camp, two and
a half months old, we have bands- -that march
before the troops, -and many small bands who
enliven their various battalions and divisions
with their performances.
" 'There are a- good many musicians among
us, also speakers and vaudeville performers.
It's astonishing what y-ou find when you set
out to look for it. Some of the companies
have orchestras of a number of instruments.
The bands of drum corps play at the football
games. Forty per cent, of the barracks have
pianos. The 30th company of the Springfield
barracks has had its orchestra play for several
dances, (he proceeds of which have been de-
voted to funds for war-purposes. Practically
all regiments -and even smaller units have
brass bands and drum corps. The- orchestras
may not measure up to the standard of the
Boston Symphony, but they certainly make
good . They play for singing. And when it
comes to dancing they're right there with the
jazz-band stuff!' "
It is n.ot all ragtime though that interests
the bands and the men th-ey play for. The old
songs seem to be coming more and more into
favor. Such songs as "Old Folks at Home,"
"Massa's in the Oold, Oold Ground," "Annie
Laurie," "The Girl I Left Behind Me." com-
pete with those the fellows are inventing all
the time:
"In some regiments prizes have been offer-
ed for the best song. Among the most
popular songs- are 'Where dc we go from Ayr.
Boys?' 'Glory to New England,' 'Over There'
—-this not composed at Ayr, but by the dis-
tinguished George Cohan—'lnto No Man's
Land in France.' Some of these have
original air-s. Others ar-e texts- s-et to airs
already known. Local feeling plays a part in
s-o-me of these songs- A verse follows:
New England will be leading,
When we're m-arc-hing down the Rhine.
New York will be the rear-guard
And we'll leave her far behind.
We'll conquer German cities-
And we'll capture Kaiser Bill
As we go marching on.
The foil-owing lines- are sung to the
tune of "There's a Long, Long Trail':
There's- a long, long trail that's winding
Into No Man's Land in France,
Where shrapnel- -shells: are bursting,
And where we must advance.
There'll be lots o-f drills and hiking,
Before our dreams come true,
But some day we'll sh-ow th-e Kaiser
What machine-gun boys can do.
So much for our Yankee friends. To re-
turn to ourselves, what -a pleasure our o-wn
ship's concerts have been. Again take our
Sunday church parade, especially when the
hymns chosen are familiar to the- boys, isn't
that what might be called mob-singing par
excellence. A popular hymn sung in the open
air with the sea surrounding i-s as health-giv-
ing a tonic as any head-ache wafer yet dis-
covered.
Aboard our transport there is certainly one
officer who did m-ore than encourage mob-
singing. With h-is company's party of song-
ster®, -that officer would go everywhere and to
his credit and. through his efforts quite a
large sum was raised at various concerts for
patriotic purposes.
In conclusion., surely men will n.o-t leave
their music behind them on the sih-ip. It will
be carried with them t-o the trenches, and
those that come home-—may the-y be many-
wll-I bring with them th-e airs that sustained
hope and courage in -the field.
A.C.R. and O.C.


M A.
**\ |
f . i
*«"■¥
%■
V :v ' ■ ■' .
Mt \ \V- v ■ • — :;
• V-A
h ■ x" . . . .
%; v " : -v ■ ■
f m - " '
v; |
I
COMMANDER I. A. SUTCLIFFE
THE 38th ASSIST THE FUNDS OF THE
RED CROSS EN ROUTE
At the request of the Red Cross commit-
tee at a port of call, and with the permis-
sion of Lri'eut.-001. Saunders, the 38tli Rein-
forcement Costume Comedy Company appear-
ed with great success in aid of the local pat-
riotic funds. Something like hustle in earn-
est followed up the initial arrangements for
the appearance of the, party. The Red Cross
Committee had only interviewed Lieut.-Col.
Saunders at 2.30 p. m., and at 3 p. m. all the
electric cars, call boys and bell-ringers were
used to announce per printed pamphlet and
poster the appearance of the boys that even-
ing. The result was that the beautifully-
appointed and spacious theatre was thronged
with spectators; and the welcome extended
to the performers as they set in Pierrot cos-
tume on the stage will ever be remembered.
The boys were i:n excellent nick and never be-
fore appeared to such advantage; in fact, the
items were cheered again and again.
The dressing of the ladies attending the
performance and their hearty appreciation of
our efforts was an eye opener to the boys.
So successful was the opening performance,
and good fortune keeping the 38th an extra
day, it was repeated the next evening before
a greater assemblage and with even greater
success. An. impromptu tableau arranged at
about a moment's notice, fairly took the house
by storm. In all about thirty of the per-
formers, arrayed as nurse®, wounded men,
and non-com® leading a bayonet charge were
so arranged that the whole assisted by excel-
lent lighting -arrangements m-a-d© a great
picture, the finest ever presented before an
audience at the port.
The concert party was under the direction
of Lieut. S. D. Rice and stage-managed by
Lance-Corporal O. Cards-ton.
KIT INSPECTION WITH "B" COMPANY


-. "j? " " >: vX/-' -■■" • ' : :■• -> T' : " ' ••■ """'*
OFFICERS AND NURSES
MEMBERS OF THE SERGEANT'S MESS


"AND IT CAME TO PASS."
The breeze was blowing freely
On our calves -and woollen socks,
When the Chaplains roaming down our way
Received some horrid shocks.
Good gracious me! they both declared,
But the legs. we see are far too bared;
There sights, you knew, are quite bizarre.
Henceforth, therefore, your putties wear.
The Colonel glowered uipon us all,
His eyes shone like a rocket,
And some of us, whose shorts, were short.
Would have crept into his pocket
Moral'—
If you would your life prolong,
Be sure and wear your denims long.
—S. Smith, C. Coy.
It all happened because Sister Chalmer was
facing the C.O. at afternoon tea:
Sister C.: Oh, Colonel, is there a young
man among the officers on board named Par-
ker?
C. O.: I really could'nt say Sister, unless
he is one of the Subs.
Sister C.: Oh yes he must be a sub., be-
cause the people who asked me to look him
up said he was a nice young man.
Great was the consternation of the C.O.
Lieut Leyland tells' us: "You don't know
you're bit until after the bullet has struck
you,"
LIFE BOAT DRILL
There was. a young R.Q.M.S.
Y Got himself in a terible mesis;
He careered around madly,
And steered so darned badly
We now have two officers less.
For Sale: Patent "awakener", especially
msful to officers and who
find difficulty in waking at the proper time.
Effectiveness guaranteed. Apply Chief Engi-
neer.
We would advise the M.G. Corp., an ex-
University mian who does not believe in socks
and has been trying to train a meagre and
tawny lip-fungus for the past six months, to
use "Tatcho" or perhaps frequent 'applications
of dubbin would iprove effective. Eh, Silvie?
O. C., reading instructions and giving a
few words of warning to his company before
going ashore at a certain port for a .second
time, "Well, there's the rum—(unconsciously)
"I suppose you have all had that jammed
down your throats before."
S.M.: "Where do you usually look for
submarines?"
Freddy: "In the sea."
S.M,: "But where?"
Freddy: Between the ship and the horizon
sergeant-major."
42


Private Collie, of B Coy., ha® lost that
worried expression since his platoon parted
company with Sergt. Egan. "Eggers" as his
fellow N.C.O.'s called him, was kept behind
to deliver lengthy addresses to unfortunates
in the 42nds.
THE PRIDE OF NO. 9 PLATOON.
Bill Robinson on the range one day
Tried his hardest the target to lay;
He was not such a fool
For he did hit the bull,
Though it was two paddocks away.
Late again! roared Scotch Mac, where
have you been?
Shaving Sir. No wonder wagged Aitken
hi : ! IHeWfl:"
Allchin denies appearing on parade un-
shaven, he admits cutting his face, but its all
"Heald" now.
When Herby returns from the war, he is
going to turn editor. What! What!
"I could gaze at the water for hours and
hours, said Ernie. It's wonderful." "So
could I, if it had a little colour in it," retorted
Persimmons Jack.
Don't you reckon that with such lark
like legs (I'll have a little more please Mac.)
I should make a good singer.
What keys in music will make a good
officer?—A Major.
When the Colonel asked what was his
name, why did the sergeant say, "Our Percy."
On the Barron Ley land®
Starlight will take his stand,
Desert Gold all ready.
To give a helping hand.,
And in the hour of peril
Should we need a man to sprint
What better could we do boys,
.Than chew the old spearmint."
If a three castles cigarette makes: a man
ill, what will a Man-ilia,
"Anything short," exclaimed Lieut Fitz.
No, Sir!" answered the man with the long
pants. "What about your hair Archie?"
Leaning back on the lovely soft cushions
in the Chaplain's room, pipe in hand, all poor
McQuill could say was: "Home sweet home,
who's homesick."
Smith C. H. and Smith C. B.
over a girl had a barney.
Blessed be the peacemaker he
The chip of a sport from Killarney.
(Are you listening Marney?)
Why is a gun like a jury?— Because when
discharged it goes off!
Lance Private: "I could die for you."
Sister:: "Well name the day."
Lance Private: "For the wedding?"
Sister: No, for the funeral!"
Though scores of men have gone before
To fight for King and Country
There's none to beat the 3 8 th®.
AUliough at times they're grumpy.
To Land Buyers.—For sale, a narrow
neck of land, consisting of two acres, mostly
high and dry. For particulars apply to Pri-
vate T. Kelson, 6th Platoon.
Mark Raven though he would make you be-
lieve he is a barber, he is not.
Though lie would have you believe he is a
photographer, he is not.
Though he would have you believe he is a
baker, he is.
A Useful Religion.—Sergt. to mess orderly
not at church parade: "What denomination
are you."—Soldier: "Oh, I'm a mesis orderly."
Why does Q. M. S. Mackay always get ex-
cited when ship's inspection is on. Because
he hears the G. G.'s coming. (The bugler
always gives warning of the approach of the
inspecting officers by sounding G.)
•
Queue-rious. Overheard while patiently
waiting in the canteen queue.
"Say, digger, see this handful of pennies—
three and tuppence worth."
"Yes."
"Why do they remind me of those M. P.'s
on guard over there."
"I dunno."
"Well, they're thirty-eight coppers, aren't
they."
Block up there!
Argument on ship's stairs 3rd class after
M. P. refused to allow private and bucket of
water to pass.
M. P. —"Wot's the matter with you."
Pvt. —"Nothinks the matter with me."
M. P.—"You gave me a nasty look."
Pvt. —"Me! You're a liar; yer certainly
have a nasty look but I didn't give it yer,
s'elp me."
A squad of N. C. O.'s who have been drill-
ing very hard all day and are feeling tired.
Bumper is walking down the ranks when
one of the squad yawns.
Bumper: "Close that (pointing to the
nouth) I want to see who you are."
Another reminiscence of Bumper. A
squad of officers of one of the reinforcements
of parade just prior to moving off to assembly
ground.
Bumper: "Now, gentlemen, a good slope.
The eyes of the world are on you (meaning
those of the troops who had already assem-
bled). Slope arms. ROTTEN. We'll try it
again. Order Arms. Now then all together.
Slope arms. ! What a fool I was
not to have sneaked off with the first one."


"By Jove! Jack, that littlfe cock perspires freely."
"My strike, yes, and it is not all lorst either."
MOTTO OF A B COMPANY MAN.
My name is Vaney,
As you can plainly see
I do not want to go
But they've got the wood on me.
It is stated the Sergeant Mac of the Sigs,
did actually spend 1/6 at the Canteen the other
night. (Great rejoicing in Cabin 56.)
Since Sergt. Cam. of the same corps has
been married, he has studied economy. Much
to his horror, he found out that pork sausages
were one penny per lb. dearer than beef,
(Hard luck Bert.)
It is stated that Sergeant Mac. of the Sigs
Corps, had a great time chasing a black chap,
in his sleep. Show the boys how you bow to
the ladies Mac.
"Nowhere and where is it" by Rogie Mc-
Nab, author of where is my wandering girl to-
night.
How to grow a seven a side moustache, by
Corp Triggs, author of that famous volume,
Half a mo, half a mo, half a mo on, that will
take ten years to grow.
Robertson does know more about the C. B.
call than the rest of his platoon.
"My Shining Bride From Taranaki" by Bill
Graves, author of "It's a Shame to Take the
Money."
Provost Sergeant meets Police Sergeant,
second saloon companionway.
Provost: —"Where the hell have you been
M'Oki,"
Sergeant:—"l have been looking for you."
Provost: —"What bally rot, I have been
looking all over this damn ship for you."
The Editor's terror —Gruff voice of Provost
Sergeant: —"Why arn't you in bed."
Where was the' 'Babbling Brook" when the
lights went out (cries in the Bath.)
A company executing night manoeuvres
for the first time. The instructions were
absolute silence and, that on no account must
an order be passed incorrectly. Great was
the consternation of the O.C. therefore when
on giving the following command: "Wire en-
tanglements on the right, bear to, the left," it
was received at the other end of the line as
follows, "Wine and sandwiches to the right,
beer to the left,"
First ship's pianist to second ship's pian-
ist (criticising a poem sent in for publication
in the "Remuerian"): Say, Horrie, it's a good
job we've got brains at the top to study these
things."
Horrie: "Yes, Pete, but you can't expect
to have brains at the bottom."
GETTING THEIR OWN BACK.
(First Day at Boat, Drill.)
The members of the Medical C (See)
At boat drill were attached to THE
Illustrious, curly headed Specs—
If more I say some chaps I'll vex.
There was a special N.C.O.
Whose hands were cold —his feet so so.
Who stood about at ease—so bored; —
And, every order quite ignored.
Until the C.O. drawing near
Electrified his heart with fear.
C.O.:Are you a Spec? A thirty-eight?
The blow's too much to contemplate.
Now, had it been an N.C.O.
The Medical Corps—why don't you know
I would not be surprised at all,
You know the way they stand—and sprawl,
Now don't you think that was too bad?
Too much for any decent lad? ? ?
I'm sorry for that N.C.0.,
Because its true—l'm in the know —
His scalp, he'd better hide away,
He may be minus it—some day,
They're out like bloodhounds on his track,
To get their very own, right back.
Now friends I cannot pass this by,
Although I am a sister shy,
I like to have my little say,
And SO' —here goes—l'll fire away
If ever that poor N.C.O.
Comes, in on sick parade—what oh!
With all my heart —I pray—l hope,
He'll be too scared to drink his dope.


6KtTCHltTj) ~ .
P - -
TjarksJ- ■ Cjirl y |j • fiWjr- ?0*T ' Of- • C\U. . ,—
— . AiM } to woy'c «>ret- erf&£W&L .An^ter>


38TH MESS ORDERLIES ASSOCIATION.
A meeting of the permanent mess order-
lies was held recently when there was a full
attendance. It was decided to form an as-
sociation to safeguard the mess orderlies in-
terests and the following rules and objects
were approved.
(1) That the name of the association be
"The Permanent Mess Orderlies and Bottle
Gatherers' Association.
(2) That each member of the association
shall be granted the privilege of writing
P.M.O. after his name signifiying that he is
a Permanent Mess Orderly.
(Note. —P.M.O. refers only to life on
board sh.p and must not be confused with any
gentlemen having a similar title in camp life
and especially must it be noted that we have
absolutely no connection with person® doing
menial tasks in camp and christened P.T.O.'s.)
(3) Gratuities,.—No gratuities shall be
refused and any member offending in this
direction shall be liable to immediate expul-
sion from the association.
(4) Any member spilling soup, tea ,or
other article of diet down, a private's neck
shall be liable to expulsion but any member
committing a similar act on an N.C.O. shall, be
granted a monetary bonus proportionate to
the good work performed.
(5) Any member who empties scrap tins,
washes stairs, or perform other duties twice
out of his turn shall be allowed to repeat the
operation a similar number of times.
(6) P.M.O.'s to be exempt from all drills,
fatigues .and, parades except issue of rum
rations.
(7) P.M.O.'S' to see that food, is equally
distributed at the tables (expelled members of
the association not included. The latter to
be served last.)
(8) All empty bottles lying about with-
out authority, to wit —the owner being absent
or not looking—to be handed over to the as-
sociation for the purpose of providing cigars
for Mat, Mut and Jeff.
(9) No work to be performed between
the hours of 1.30 p.m. and 4.30 p.m. daily.
This to be set apart ais smoko and P M o's
to have the prerogative of using the saloon
smoking room during these hours. Cigars
only. No pipes or cigarettes.
(10) That no person whatsoever be al-
lowed to visit the mess room while mess
orderlies are preparing for or cleaning up
after meals. In the event of this concession
not being granted, the rule of the ship pro-
hibiting smoking In mess room be rescinded
in so far as mess orderlies are concerned.
(11) That no person inspects the work
of the mess orderlies without their permission.
(12) Each day to be from daylight until
dark and no deductions whatsoever to be
made.
(13) A minor duty of the mess order-
lies shall be to see that the man receive a fair
proportion of food not forgetting that their
own meals have to follow. (Note. —Men to
be fed. Orderlies to be overfed.)
111^1
Private Hethven despite the responsibility
of his job as S.P. still finds time to discuss
with his mates many amusing little tales con-
nected with the early history of Totara Flat.
In the dear departed days of exemption
Major Conlan, was sitting on an Auckland
board and came in contact with. Billy Couch,
a shepherd, claiming exemption on the
grounds of essential industry.
Major C.: "But you're only a shepherd
looking after sheep; that isnt much, is it."
Billy: "Yes, it is."
Major C.: "But a woman could do that."
Billy: "No she couldn't. There is only
one historical reference, to a woman looking
after sheep and she made a rotten mess of it."
Major C.: "Who was that."
Billy: "Little 80-peep."
(Collapse of court. Appeal dismissed.
A WELL-KNOWN FIGURE


' ' ''' I
Watty Aitken of ragtime band fame, ap-
preciates music to the extent of chasing bugle
ninety-one times in the course of one week.
Corporal Blandford seems to have been a
dark horse till A Coy's concert, judging by the
applause.
Perhaps Shorty Hanifin, had something to
do with it. . |
If C. B. Hodgson still persists in coming late
on parade, his initials will soon coincide with
his punishment.
Griffy took such a liking to the little fish,
that he fed them for three days.
'On dit' that a certain officer during the
course of a lecture on Trench warfare to mem-
bers of his company innocently came to light
with the following:
"Don't leave your bayonet leaning against
the parapet. Patrols sometimes return very
hurriedly, sliding over the top.. You want to
watch that. It's only a little point—"
And then he wondered why rude laughter
drowned the remainder of his utterances.
Corporal Laurence and his staff of four S.
P., may be highly complimented on the effi-
cient manner in which they perform their
duties. It's far easier ;to get through the eye
of the proverbial needle than gain admission to
the lavatories when the law says no.
It would be interesting to know if the
lumour is true that when the second engineer's
parrot over-estimated its strength and
flew out to sea it gasped, "Dear Mother "
with its last fleeting breath as it entered Davy
Jones' locker.
A certain junior N. C. O. has been accused
of food hoarding contrary to the Defence of
the Realm Act, the subject of his fall being
condensed milk. On enquiry, however, we find
that is was not so much his retention of a su-
perfluity of the aforesaid conserve that was
objected to as his crude method of storage.
Q. M. S. Stewart, an active man is he,
If there's anything that Charlies likes
Its a good strong cup of tea.
Who was the Private from "B" Coy. who
went to answer the first call of C. B. one morn-
ing, clad only in his shirt.
It is rumored that a certain N. C. O. of D
Company has found a good bed in one of the
lifeboats.
A Bull by Lieut. Hill.
A time job is one at which you work for
a given time, whetXer you work or whether
you don't.
ALLEY UPLAND.
Cabin 21 —Orderly Sergeant Phil, to Prank
(six a.m.):
"Come on Frank,
THE ORDER OF THE MAT
THE REMUERIAN


"THE REMUERIAN"
:ifl'S ' '"
THE CLASSES AND THE MASSES.
One of the latest claims of the Hun
(there is not much left to claim it is true)
is that they are fighting for the Social-
ists, as well as all the other "ists."
One of the doctrines of socialism, is, 1
think, that "class hatred" and "class" of any
kind should not exist.
The outstanding point is, how can the
Huns be helping the Socialists if they are
rapidly dividing the people into two classes,
"The living and the dead."
A LIMERICK.
For prize money apply to Corporals Short
and Booth. Both been badly bit.
"A bug and a flea went out to sea;
The flea was drowned and the bug was
found."
Our P.M.O. on board after telling sea-sick
Thommy to take a walk on an empty stomach
met the former's cobber Geordie in greiat
agony. 1 1
P.M.0.; "Well, Dig, what's up."
Geordie: "Did you tell that, big blighter
who share® my cabin that if ever he was sick
again he should take a walk on an empty
stomach?"
P.M.0.: "I did, what of it."
Geordie: "What of it. Why the first
thing he did this morning was to walk all
over mine."
A trip on the sea, when stormy and rough!
Oh what fun there ought to be in it.
Even those that are sick, have enjoyment
enough
Something fresh bubbling up ever minute.
—By one who knows.
.3^?"
"Gone but not forgotten."
Back in Trent-ham away behind
We left a Sergeant good and kind,
He used to drill the famous five
Expecting them to keep alive
To all the orders of the army.
So help me bob! he drove us balmy.
Stand steady, wake up, one—one two,
Wake up was the only thing to do,
It helped to make us what we are
The most awakened platoon, by far;
Each a ripping son of a gun.
Waked by Sergeant Hodkinson.
"h." No. 5 Platoon,
ti 1 Jsj A*.
Heard in the mess room—that the letters
Beer Ak, a mom-de-plume applied to a certain
rendezous, not so very far from the Sigs.
quarters either, do not stand for blinking
aristocratic —far from it.


NO. 4 TROOP DECK.
Scene —Breakfast Time.
Officer of the Day:—Any complaints men?
Private Vaney:—Yes Sir, the coffee is not
fit to drink —it tastes earthy.
Officer of the Day: (Tasting coffee).
This coffee is quite good, its ground coffee.
Private Vaney:—Sir, did I not tell you
that! To my mind there is no difference be-
tween earth and ground, and since you agree
with me you must admit my complaint justi-
fied. (Collapse of the O. of the Day.)
The main plank of our Mr. Hill's platform
is the advice often repeated—"Not to get the
wind up."
Now Lieut. Hill of old rugby fame,
Keeps telling the boys to just play the game,
For over beyond there are plenty of foes,
And many a chance for good husky blows.
Now Corp says he "don't get the wind up,"
Just remember you are sons of the bull pup
When out in France we are facing tho'se foes
Don't take any notice of how much it blows.
R. H. VANEY,
Bth Platoon, "B" Coy.
An Si li Platoon Appreciation.
A member of the above platoon writes:
* It should be noted that our late Sergt.
Chas. A. Archer who is now rallying round the
colours with the 42nds., was bursting to sail
with us, but the heads ordered otherwise.
Charlie was very much put out. In rage and
despair he handed two notes for the boys of
his late platoon to drink his health. We will
wish him luck, good old Archer. By he
did roar.
Overheard on the Deck.
Ist. C. B. King: (As the Colonel passes
on his rounds of inspection): I hope he will
be with us in the trenches.
2nd. C. B. King:—Why, what would you
do?
Ist. C. B. King:—Pinch his blooming Gas
Helmet.
A B. COMPANY WONDER.
We have in our company
A man named Westneath.
Who is not troubled
With very bad teeth.
He has on this voyage
Had the time of his life,
And we know in the end,
He'll have a cook, as his wife.
We hear that L.-Cpl Lauder says: " 'Ti,s
better to have lost a stripe than never have
had one at all."
Mark Raven, sort of master of all trades
on this- ship, has a way of his own at enter-
taining the boysi. His anecdotes are very in-
teresting indeed. Among the boys Mark is ,
certai-nly a popular fellow.
A certain spare General noted for his
lead-swinging was very upset when the Sergt.-
Major disturbed his afternoon nap on the poop
deck, asking a question on the machine gun.
In his usual style that Sergt.-Major at once
started on his well-known accomplishment of
going crook by numbers.
Overheard at the sports: "Did you want
Corporal Weld, Colonel."
Girl: "I sometimes wonder why my
parents had me called Peach."
Practical Digger: "Perhaps he was glad
you weren't a Pear."
After 6 p.m. the Sergeant's mess> is closed
to all ranks, in order to allow them to discuss,
or cuss their daily doings.
The O.C. Specialists was so disgust-
ed over his defeat in the cockfight in that all
lie could utter was: Oh, Stew—art."
There are seven?! Smiths by name in C.
Company, but none by nature.
What a lot of Murphy® were among the
officers after their victory in the tug-of-war..
That a Lee—ding Corp of 10 Platoon is
worthy of his stripes.
It is rumored that a certain N.C.O. on
board is masquerading as a bachelor, he is
lucky, he did not receive C.8., for obtaining
leave at Trentham to get married, and return-
ed still a "bachelor."
Of all the "Macs" aboard none appear
water or spray proof.
It is very evident that a certain member
of the M.P. force is new to his- job, in fact he
is distinctly "Green."
Pas Arnold left his pipe behind in N. Z. Don't
get downhearted, Bas, briars are cheap at the can
teen and dopesticks 10 for 3d.
Corpora] Burgess is a general—a spare general—
"Squad Toll." Burgy, I think, you were meant for
a B. T. instructor.
F. Bowley has forsaken the hammock for the
hatch. Sweet dreams, Fred.
Lance-corporal Barnes is Al. An amusing tale
is told of Barney how one day in physical jerks he
get his men into a certain position and after
scratching his head said, "How the am 1
to get them back, Jim?"
A. F. Baker wasn't the only man who got special
leave through a deceased grandmother. It's a cruel
war, Alfred, but the sun hasn't yet gone out of
business.
W. J. Chappell has no complaints. Does this
beat Trentham isolation, Bill?
THE REMUERIAN


Mills, E. M., accident to his arm, necessitates
his resting for the remainder of the voyage. We
hope there's no aim' done.
L/Cpl. May is one of the best, especially at New-
town on Saturdays.
Ottby s seven a side, is once more pushing
through. A 41 tic bit of hair restorer helps 'en
along, (1. A.
]'. W. Phelps had
Censored for same reason as W. R, C. ll.'s
A private in A Company wishes to know
if his Q.M.S. can now bear the sight of a
waterproof sheet or set of Milts-Web equip-
ment.
THE SHIP'S CLERK
A striking personality, is the ship's clerk,
Jack Reitberigen. Born at Rotterdam, and
educated in England, where his parents have
resided in Birmingham, this young man has
spent the last four years at sea.
The Remuera claiming him for the last
two years as ship's clerk, he has come in
contact with many of oun wounded heroes, re-
turning from the war, and for the first time,
with a reinforcement bound there.
On the last voyage outward bound of the
Remuera, Jack assisted the authorities, in many
ways, sort of orderly room clerk, so to speak.
So successful was he, that Colonel Allen,
O. C. Troops, on that voyage, after leaving the
ship at New Zealand, wrote expressing his per-
sonal appreciation of Jack's efforts as clerk,
enclosing the right form of appreciation, with
the letter. The recipient is very proud of the
appreciation, also of the letter.
FRAGMENTS OF THE 38TH SPECS.
He wais a decent little C'HAPPIE quite
HALL WRIGHT yet he could not HEARN a
living unless he blew his HORN. His favorite
tune was "The March of the CAMERON Men."
Then he would CROLL along the FLINT path
to a POOLE in the GARDEN and play with the
BAKER, a WYLIE man of few words who
said WATCHORiN. When it was too COUL-
TER '"play outside he would join, the
BROTHERHOOD and sit on the COUCH.
Going through the initiating process on a
PANNELL he found to his regret that he had
WORRALL his trousers out and had to take
them to a TAYLOR. While waiting for them
he decided to have a BATH , then visit a
friend living near the LAW courts. As they
were HOLLOWAY he turned back. On his
way home he picked up a large sum of money
and decided to SHERRATT with his brother
THOM. Beth, agreed on a journey, and as
they NEWSOME people in the NORTH who
were going to the M'CQUARRIE Islands where
SAGE and SHERWOOD grow, and journeyed
there. At the Islands they met a- GOLD-
SMITH who was a GOODMAN but had'no gold
to WELD. A SHEPHERD showed them a river
like the JORDAN where once he had to
LYNCH a man. This statement made them
tremble and one remembered OWEN WATTS
a visit and the other that he had to meet his
blind mother who, as he led her along the
TARR path, would PATTERSONS back
ANDERSON would then take her off to get
some MOORE RICE.
P S. —Now that I have finished, Dear
Editor, I pray you to overlook my misplaced
grammar for, like CHRISTOPHER Columbus
I am all at sea.
—Cooch Coakly Bh-d.


" THE REMfJERIAN"
Soldier Sampson has received no letters from
Molly recently. Don't give up hope, old chap. Is
Sammy's strength in his hair?
W. J. Smith did good work while on special
leave in N. Z. Good luck, old chap. W. J. an .
F. H. gave a good exhibition of wrestling till F. H.
nose went on strike.
Micky Welsh is good with his dooks. His ex-
hibition in the blindfold boxing the other afternoon
was 'some dream.'
A. Wright is going to have another lool? at th
old Dart although not exactly on a pleasure tn
lie is a spud-race champion.
Paddy Walsh is just about invisible when lie
gets on the inside of a P. H. helmet. Pad* y
joining up with the Submarine Artillery on his arri-
val in France.
Jimmie Lowe's punctured arm tickled some.
"Arms upward bend!" The ninth time is always
the worst.
Mowbray made hay while the sun shone, at any
rate Brighton is a real good place especially for
final.
Monty only prefers long bags; shorts are a wo -"
out with him.
%
George, the popular purveyor of lemon
squashesi to the favoured few, is one of the
most sought after members of the crew. He is
now travelling under an alias and is generally
known as the "Vegetable Steward.'
We have with us a New Zealand-made one-
seater and self-starter 'tin lizzie.' Well, Fordie, we
hope you'll have a good run. By the way, Hector
Gray won the last race at Taulierenikau.
E. Curran is in the best of spirits and is seeing
things. Some say Teddy is on a pleasure trip to
Ireland.
De Bakker is fasit becoming a catch-as-catch-can
champion. Hurrah ! the war will soon be all over—
Europe.
Duncan was prominent in the apple bobbing the
other Saturday. Have you ever seen Dunk deliver-
ing a long point?
L. 11. Clark while in the tropics has been put-
ting in overtime in the stokehold. We'll all be wil-
ling to lend a hand on the return trip.
Desert Gold is still going strong and is enjoying
sea life. What's that man moving for? Up in the
centre. Back on the flank.
Eraser is going to be used as a pull through for
some of the big guns at the front. 'Admiral Togo'
distinguished himself in the blindfold boxing with
another bantam. The referee —an officer —stopped
one by mistake.
Gudex is just the man to knock the L out of
Berlin. How is Whiferocks getting on, Harry ?
Lance-Corporal Tommy Harris had a lively time
the last week-end leave in Wellington. Tommy was
one of the sports in Hut 42.
Hood, W. R. C.
(Dear reader, the censor would only have cut
this out so saved him the trouble.
Otira Bill Kelly would rather be back on the
wild west coast than on the deep blue sea. You
haven't got it on your own, Bill!
Sometime in the near future Charlie will be go-
ing home. We hope it will not be 'Long.' Charlie
is the man of 'Bushwhacking at Gross Creek' and
"'Candlestick' fame.
Strayed from Shorty Pratteleys kitbag, one
towel and one singlet, will finder please re-
turn immediately, Shorty badly needs a change.
E. Mills is a relative of the inventor of the
famous grenade. We shudder to think of what
may have happened if he had been related to the
inventor of that d P. H. helmet.
D. McSmith was prominent the other day when
we were hauling up boats. We didn't know that
you were a sailor in civvy life, David?
W. J. Porteous was unlucky enought to get in
the road when someone was practising a straight
left. We all laughed but Porty —he went crook.
C. E. T. Palmer's thoughts are back in a south-
ern city, dry a wireless, Claudie, or better still,
catch toe next boat back.
A. Pahi (Darky) is a cure and causes many a
smile. Whatever would the platoon do without
him? Ask Desert. Have you heard the yarn how
Darky made the corp of Hut 43 go snakey about a.,
upturned bed?
P. E. Painter is a first-class mess-orderly and
should be a ueful man about the house. No more
leave to Christchurch for a time, Percy.
Roger Russell is still in the running. R. R. is
writing a book some day entitled 'Engines and how
to drive them.'
F. 11. Smith (another man from the wild west
coast) has been exploring the stokehold. Smithy
knows how to wash clothes and will be a useful man
on Mondays.
W. Smith has been promoted to the rank of full-
blown senior private and is now orderly-room clerk
for D Coy.He possesses great vocalistic talent and
has a great future behind him.
jit ytr
DON'T trespass on the parts of the promenade deck
that are reserved for sergeants and hospital
orderlies.
DON'T go near the boat decks except when on duty
for these are reserved for the nurses and
officers only.
DON'T pass forward of the first hatch for this is
ground sacred to the crew.
DON'T sit on the rail and do the birds out of
perch.
DON'T pitch your bunk or hammock before 7 p. m.
for you may get too much sleep.
DON'T wash too often or you will waste the limited
water supply.
DON'T roll your shorts too high because some peo-
ple can't bare knees.
DON'T go about without a handkerchief round
your neck. (If you don't possess one pinch
someone's).
DON'T say naughty words for you may teach the
officers something.
DON'T get drunk at the canteen for there are no
fish and chips saloons aboard,
DON'T drill after parade hours or the sergeant-
major will have a fit.
IF there is anything else you can do DON'T DO IT.
A. F. 8., 73370.


My Dear Mab:
What a change from gardening, sawing
down blighted peach-trees and cleaning chicken
houses. You said I would soon tire of that—-
you were right! And here I am once again on
the great wide sea. Great, yet inspiring in its
myriad colours and ever-changing moods,
which so far have dealt kindly with us.
Time passes like an evening express. Al-
though we had a "backshee" day at the begin-
ning, we find them still—all too short.
So far the weather has been delectable.
We could say a lot about our comfortable
quarters, but the one word "Fairyland" will
do the trick. Here, to wish is to have—and
although only the most imaginative see the
fairies and elves, yet they supply us with every-
thing, even to enough pegs to hang our clothes
on without spoiling them.
We have all made an attempt to be chummy
with Satan, the ship's glossy black cat, who,
unlike his namesake, makes few friends, and
nips any friendly overtures in the bud by a
well-timed scratch. The Captain says we
ought to avoid Satan always and ever—we are
very fond of him, —not Satan, of course, but
the Captain. We take off our hats to him for
being the commodore of the fleet, having made
eighty voyages round the world, having the
smoothest sailing and most comfortably ap-
pointed ship, the finest officers, the best crew
and the jolliest, healthiest and the most agile
soldiers.
That reminds me that, although I am no
novice at trooping, yet never before have I had
the pleasure of travelling with such hale, merry
fellows. At times the whole ship is nothing
more or less than a playground. No matter
where you are it is impossible to be unaffected
by the merry sounds of laughter, chatter, sing-
ing. stamping, running, shouting and tramp-
ing—some of it work, some of it play. I
heard the Captain remarking to the C. O.
that never before had he come across such a
jolly lot of romping fellows. No wonder the
hospital is empty!
They have started a ship's paper. Any
hopes one had of being above suspicion are
now dashed to the ground. Every other per-
son scribbles in private; quite a lot of do it in
public; the covert glances they shoot from time
to time at their neighbors made a guilty person
feel quite nervous; nor are all Peeping Tom's
relations dead.
Talking about papers, there's one man
here (we all admire him), who has been a
perfect victim to the press. He has greyish
hair, kindly blue eyes, a fine figure and an
aristocratic nose. Yet the officials on the
wharf eyed him with mysterious suspicion.
On board he felt it, even the sea breezes failed
to chase it away. If he paused in his per-
regrinations around the deck to hob-nob with
a fellow -officer, some chap was sure to hap-
pen along and, with a hasty "Excuse me,"
pour into the other officers' ear a lengthy tale
that easily put "Guy Fawkes" and the "Forty
thieves" in the shade. Of course, our friend
felt horribly de trop, and simply had to make
himself scarce. He didn't know about the
newspaper. Further along a gunner of nine


teen fairish summers eyed him ud and down
so critically, that he felt the outlines of his
figure smarting. Naturally he murmured:
"What's his game, anyhow! He soon found out.
In a few days he became better acquainted
with that gunner—even unto giving him C. B.
The gunner retaliated in a Christian manner,
as becomes a good soldier. The splendid re-
sult was well applauded at the Pierrots' concert.
On another occasion when an enterprising
journalist was on the outlook for copy, a sug-
gestion was made to her which she "deceived
with much laughter from the company pres-
ent. On enquiring the donor's name, the blush-
ing journalist discovered a snare, —cleariy it
was a case of mistaken identity.
Those who have had a lucky escape can
pat themselves on the back. Personally 1
think there are a great many casualties. >
On our second week out invitations
were issued to all the troops to attend
a small gathering at the hospital,
where our doctors scratched many brawny
arms, while, under the direction of a
sister, the eager orderlies clapped dressings
thereon. The party was a great success as
far as the hosts and their assistants were con-
cerned; but the guests don't seem to be at all
enamoured by the performance.
We get topping sweets here. The canteen
specializes in toffees nutty ones which
ten-pt us to overdo it, judging from the fol-
lowing:—
7 a.m. —On troop deck.
Private No. I—"What's1 —"What's up, Crook?"
Private No. 2 —"Yes, lump in me chest.
I've eaten more lollies on this ship than I ve
eaten in all my life."
Not a bit surprising when you see the way
the Corporal and his three hefty salesman
handle the business. They are at it early and
late, unpacking, sorting and putting the eat-
able's up in paper bags ready for the rushes
at 11 to 12 a.m., 1 to 1.30 p.m. and 5.30 to 8
p.m. It is easily seen that they do their bit
and a bit over. If their jolly faces are any-
thing to go by they certanly enjoy the fun,
Two Church of England chaplains are
aboard, and they have the use of the fine
second-class social hall, which they have con-
verted into a chapel, circulating library and
reading room. It is very comfortable, with
cushioned seats and easy chairs, and is made
full use of by the boys; often the floor is cov-
ered with men reading, as well as the seats.
A short service of prayer is held each evening
at 5.50, and afterwards the room is kept quiet
for private devotions.. Some splendid gifts of
reading material have done much for the en-
joyment of the men, viz: Five sacks from the
Auckland Women's Patriotic League; four
cases from the Christ church Red Cross, and
several cases from the Lady Liverpool League
Christian church. On Sundays there are held
here three celebrations of Holy Communion, a
song, with sermon, in the evening.
It's astonishing how these Y. M. C. A.
chaps get to work with the men, so unob-
trusively, too. Badly wanting a lemon, we
strolled along to see if Mr. Eglin, the field
secretary, could oblige, and, bless your heart,
the contents of the old curiosity shop was
nothing to the miscellany of articles we found
in the Y. M. C. A. room; two hundred books,
16 cases of magazines, sweets, writing ma-
terials, requisites for darning and patching,
even the brand new patches themselves, cof-
fee and cocoa for free treats for the men; in
fact, everything a sick or robust soldier could
possibly want on a sea journey down to the
very pens and ink. The latter they make
themselves, What took my fancy was a cun-
ning wee machine for sharpening the naughty
lead pencils. The room opens at 8.30 a.m.
The field secretary has an assisting corporal.
They go at top, serving 45 to 50 men at each
off duty time, those on mess and light duty
dropping in between whiles.
Here, the latest and most popular method
of dressing the hair makes it a thing of the
past.
Short skirts are again in vogue. I have
noticed one or two Mexican sombrero hats,
i wonder if they are coming amongst us.
There is an old-fashioned hymn about stars
in our crowns. The sergeants are wondering
if, when they arrive in England, they will have
stars on their arms.
We say Hip-Rah to B Company for simply
walking over everyone else at kit-inspection.
Without doubt their's was a very neat turn-
out.
If you ever have the good luck to make
Sister Chalmer's acquaintance, ask her for
her definition of a nice man. She has a very
original one. The editor of the paper has it
by now, and is offering a hundred
pounds down on the bargain. Will Lance-
Corporal Cardston be weak enough to part
with it? The fact is, "money wouldn't buy it."
We wish Lieutenants Hill and Barron many
happy returns on their .birthday.
There is a great run on T parties. The
babes must have heard that old saying that
"the way to a man's heart is through his ap-
petite." The C. O. had better beware, for
there is more in that special brew than meets
the eye.
We have had a case of supposed suicide.
It's hard to say whose fault it was. Anyway,
he was fed up and made up his mind to put
an end to his misery. At the last moment —in
case he might change his mind—he took a
spin all round the ship and a look over the
clear, purple water; then, near the crow's nest,
he thought the matter over. . Evidently he
had the courage to carry out his convictions,
for he took a flying leap into the sea, nor has
he been heard of since. Poor old Poll! No
one seems to mind. They say he was a croaky
old devil! Moral: If you want to be missed
when you die, be a good-natured old beggar.
TIIE FIRST CONCERT.
The Specs' Pierrott concert was a
fine affair, right from the opening
chorus, down to the last item, which
fairly took the place by storm. Lance-
corporal Cardston would have us believe that
he is fond of Dutch tulips. Was it the splen-
did way he sang' the good old song that made
us all believe that we are found of them, too?
Sergeant Poole gave us a fascinating violin
solo, and I may state that on many other occa-
sions Sergeant Poole has discoursed sweet
music, for which the sisters and officers tender
their sincerest appreciation. Private Wallie
Simpson, from Auckland, was out on his own
in his little contribution of impersonations.
Gunner Croll gave a very fine exhibition of
lightning sketches, not the least of them be-
"THE REVfUERIAN"


, I
,
... .
«R| '
THE WEDDING PARTY
ing his O. C. I wonder if he was paying off
an old score? However, he brought the "ship"
down, so to speak.
We say Hip-rah to Sig. Skam for his pretty
rendering of "That Dear Old Home of Mine."
Sig. McCullough sang that pathetic little song,
called "In a Quaint Old-fashioned Town," to
a grateful audience. "I'm on My Way to
Mandalay." by Gunner Braithwaite," was hail-
ed with such delight that we wondered if the
lads were anxious to get rid of him. That
popular cheery stunt, "Another Little Drink
Wouldn't Do Us Any Harm," was sung by
Corporal Hopkins, Lance Corporal Cardston
and Gunner Croll. They made a witty addi-
tion relating to the Ship's Commander and the
C. 0., which made the audience burst its sides
with laughing. Another trio, Gunners Braith-
waite and Shepherd, with Lance Corporal
Cardston, were loudly applauded by all hands.
Then Sig Worsley gave us one of his brilliant
pianoforte selections, which are keenly
sought after by all and sundry; needless to say
he did justice with his customary skill. Here
again we offer our sincerest thanks to this
talented young man for so often snatching us
away from dull care by wafting sweet music
throughout the lounge.
Corporal Stewart also gladdened our hearts,
making them lighter and merrier by far ere
he finished his charming pianoforte selections.
Last, but not least, came the wedding party,
at whom the never-satisfied spectators simply
screamed with laughter. Gunner Croll, as the
bride, looked very chic in a wedding gown of
snowy georgette and true lover's knots of tur-
quoise blue, over ivory satin. He wore the
orthodox veil and wreath of orange blossoms,
and carried a shower bouquet of queen roses.
The bridesmaids were Billy Couch from Auck-
land, and Harry Herne, from Hawera. The
former looked sweet and demure in mouse-
colored silk taffeta, a bewitching bonnet of
frou-frou lace and dinky pink rosebuds—and
carried ea bunch of violets. The sky-scraper
was at great pains to keep a straight face, but
failed hopelessly, owing to the over-candid re-
marks his mates made about his height, hair,
hat, silk stockings, a stunning bodice of crepe-
de-chine and crinoline of rose-pink glace silk
over accordion pleated charmeuse satin. We
really cannot repeat all the witty criticisms,
suffice it to say that we were simply swept off
our feet by it—or the lurch of the ship. The
heartily-sung national anthem brought the very
enjoyable concert to a close.
CONCERT NO. 2.
A. Coy. was simply rushed; the place be-
:'ng tightly packed in consequence. Sisters in
grey, red. and white adorned the front stalls —
officers in khaki the gallery—the brave sol-
diers were everywhere—God bless them—and
the chief officer with his special friends
lounged in the luxurious boxes..
The ship's orchestra gave an overture
which was just the shining shilling—then Cpl.
Blandford made his debut. His song was short
and sweet, but the lads were not going to be
had that way and the bashful youth was drag-£
ged, by applause, back to the footlights and
compelled to do his duty like a man. Tackling
the song afresh he turned out a fine piece of
work —much to everyone's delight.
Some patter by Lieut®. Jenkins, Raeburn
and Flood showed those energetic youths in a
different light to that of card sharpers, and
they were briskly applauded.
L.-Opl. Wright came to the fore with a
pretty clarionet soro, and aia nis bit witn skill
and neat judgment.
Pte. Simpson, from Auckland, excelled him-
self once again and many and flattering were
the compliments we heard bestowed upon his
artful and life-like recitations. It is easily
seen he is a great favorite with the public.
The 3rd Engineer, Mr. Molison, captured
all hearts with his magnificent voice. One has
only to hear to be enraptured and everyone
hopes to be enraptured again.
The orchestra chipped in a second time
much to the crowds satisfaction.
Pte. George was not going to be beaten by
Cpl. Blandford—nor was he—for he sang his
piece like a Briton, just before Cpl. Blandford
got in his second and better dash.
The Boys and their Band made the success
of the evening. They had only to look at the
eager, laughing faces thronging about them to
find the great credit and applause they de-
served for their clever t'ho' spoony efforts.
Truly they made much ado about nothing with
fine effect.


Every one is anxious to hear the name of
the firm who turned out the beautiful instru-
ments, as numerous orders for a similar set
are forthcoming.
SPORTS.
The fun at the first sports was greatly ex-
aggerated by the unexpected rolling of the
ship at the most inopportune moments. Just
when you felt the pig's eye under your foot
the ship lurched and you scratched yoty mark
on the end of the tail, or, right out of bounds
when a sympathetic crowd cackled with
merriment at your lack of judgment—it mat-
tered not that you were blind-folded. In the
finals, two Ptes. from C. Coy—who were —
Just, Toogood for everybody else, rushed off
with the prizes. „
Not content with winning the cup at Tren-
tham, for most points all round —at sports.
These Ceeites must pinch the Pig's eyes—just
like the pair of rogues they are.
When the lads had the apples on a string,
the ship again began its pranks. Proof against
fierce tempation to call the ship names, our
boys went, eyes out, to do their worst. They
put in some solid work, which resulted in Pte.
Bryson standing up to his apple and eating it
like a gentleman, he lost, however, while his
two rivals riggled after theirs, on their chests,
as to the manner born.
The prizes fell to L.-Cpl Lowe B Coy., Pte
Armstrong Specs, and the special prize to Pte.
Walker. Specs again!
The Peg Quoit competition was hot and
U.ronig—L.-Cpl. Weld Specs, and Pte. Holt A.
Coy. carrying off the trophies.
McOonochie squad drill was intensely
thrilling. Even the most wily being caught
red-handed by some trivial remark or com-
mand from the infallable O. C. To jerk, to
tremble, or to wink at the psychological
moment was fatal, and finally only the invin-
cible remained.
These were put to the supreme test on the
2nd day when the goats were separated from
the sheep by the same drastic treatment.
After a severe struggle L.-Cpl Dickson and Pte
Mile®, both oif A.Coy., threw up their hands' —
they stuck to each other until the last terrible
moment and were presented with a prize for
their gallant resistance.
The Blind-folded Boxing called for a good
deal of skillful manoeuvring on the part of the
officers engaged in superintending the sport,
Lieut. Pettit being involved with a belligerent
on several occasions, when grave fears were
entertained for his safety. However, he man-
aged to escape without damage and L.-Cp.l.
Pannell (Specs) and L.-;Opl Lowe and Pte.
Mclntyre, B. Coy, are to be complimented upon
their plucky exhibition—for which they were
rewarded.
By far the most comical, the whistling
competition aroused a fair amount of anxiety.
It isn't all beer and skittles to try and whistle
with a half masticated biscuit in one's mouth,
as those who were game enough to try can
testify, yet two undaunted privates,, L. C.
Smith and Drummond rose to the occasion and
managed to whistle off a few more laurels for
C. Coy.
The officers and senior N. C. O.'s Tug-of-
war was a serious affair until the game was
won, Judging by the strained faces of Lieut.
Pountney and his fellow officers it might have
been the crucial moment of the great war.
Joking aside—it was an anxious time. For the
officers at least, must at all times set a good
example to their men, even winning greater
battles, by far, than Tug-of-war.
The N. C. O's vanquished and the strains
over at last. Sister Oh aimer nimbly mounted
a seat and after making an appropriate speech
presented a trophy to the captain of the win-
ning team —amid loud cheers.
With his usual good nature Lieut. Stewart
handed out a share of the spoils to the rest
of the team, who, to, their horror, discovered it
was a wash out; the natty bundles of tissue
paper containing potatoes only—earthy ones
at that —as a bystander remarked to his mate
"The sister got a dirty one on to them." How-
ever, all's well that ends well and the little
episode is the joke of the sports, Tug-of-war
—Those Specs actually won another game.
Volunteering was not brisk at the Pillow-
fight. Perhaps the "vaccination" had a lot to
do with the slacknqfs. It wasn't like our
lads to fight shy of it. When conscription was
carried straightway vim became visible and
from that on the fight became a huge success
—Champion Lc. Morrow, A. Coy. Runner-up
Pte. George A. Coy. »
We tender our thanks to Major Powell for
a tin of delicious homemade Turkish Delight.
Deck Quoits are in full swing and biceps
are developing in consequence. Sister Chal-
mer and the ship's doctor are "warm mater-
ial". Fair wind or foul weather —it is hard
work to get a game from them. Dr. Wishart
is an obliging referee, but a wee bit biassed
unless you make it worth his while. At all
events you must keep an eye on his scoring.
B. COMPANY CONCERT.
When B. Coy. took their turn before the
footlights,, the concert room was full to the
brim —nor were the anticipations of the audi-
ence disappointed.
The programme began with a selection by
the ship's orchestra and we must compliment
that little party upon its huge success.
"The Sunshine of Your Smile" brought
dear, old "Mother Mach'ree" onto the, stage
once more; for both these items we nave iu
thank P,te. H. Cooper, who ha,s a nice sym-
pathetic voice.
Pte W. Scad,den gave us a bush christening.
This sent us all into peals of laughter. Pte.
Scadden, the young monkey, evidently thinks
a good laugh is a splendid tonic.
Rag time Ipswich and Northwich by Pte.
Tiney Vining succeeded in getting everyone
so absolutely tied up that no one really did
know which which was which. It was quite
a relief when he changed the subject to "Are
You From Dixie." We all agreed that Pte.
Tiny ought to take to the stage.


Bugler Holly (garbed as a vagrant) gave
two clever monologues which were well ap-
plauded by the boys.
The Ocarina duets by L.-Opl Wright and Pte
Williams were quite a novelty, besides a work
of art; both these lads deserve promotion.
Pie. Eeaurepaire's weird exhibition of hyp-
notism was much appreciated by the men who
stood, climbed or sat about the stage in such
a manner as to resemble a dark wall.
The performance was uncanny to say the
least, and not in favour with a great many of
us. From the men's point of view it was al-
right—there's no accounting for taste.
The step dancing that followed by Pte. Wil-
man broke the spell and was most refreshing.
Time and again the dancer was swept off his
feet by his own elasticity when Pte. Tiny flew
to his rescue, and succeeded in jerking him
into an upright position. The temperature
was stifling, however. Pte. Wilman gave us
an encore for which he deserves three cheers.
Cpl. D. Ashley, who has a charming voice,
sang that favourite little song "Till the Sands
of the Desert Grow Cold." Then the singing
of the National Anthem brought a very suc-
cessful concert to an end.
Best congratulations to B. Company.
0/
C. COMPANY CONCERT.
This concert was given on the evening of
June 20th on the starboard side of the boat
deck and went with a hilarious bang from
start to finish. The first performance by the
ship's band received much applause, which
was quite equalled by the reception given to
the "Six Pro®." The smart reference to certain
"Wowsers" re shorts brought forth much
laughter from the huge audience. A well-
known Highland song by Pte. Drummond set
all the Scotch hearts tingling, and was fol-
lowed by a very witty recitation from that son
of Erin, Pte. Mclvor.
Sgt. Poole, without whom a ship's concert
would be sadly wanting, then gave us two de-
lightful solos on his violin. We take this op-
portunity of thanking the gallant Sergt. for al!
the pleasure he has given us during the voyage.
Mr Mollison, the ship's 3rd Engineer, then
delighted the company with a couple of songs
in his merry and nautical style. He was fol-
lowed by that youthful humorist Pte. Simp-
son, whose successful imitation of the in-
ebriated, suggested a long course of practice.
A contrast to this boisterous fun was the per-
formance of Pte. L. S. Smith, who in his two
songs, brought a real genuine note of pathos
into the proceedings.
The concert was concluded by some dex-
terous and clever card tricks by Pte. Mclyer,
and a puzzled and mystified—albeit happy
crowd rose to attention on the first note of
"God Save the King."
BRIDGE NOTES.
As is usual at sea, quite a lot of time has
been devoted to Auction Bridge—an excellent
card game, in which a man more clearly re-
veals his character than any other.
The C. O. is a habitue of the command-
er's school. His play is not of good quality
and this coupled with bad cards and faulty
judgment, has caused numerous losses. How-
ever, he is a "kicker" and when, ever there is
a chance of declaring he declares.
The commander is a very sound player in
every way. His one fault is the intimidation
of his partner. The chief engineer is too want-
ing in bridge courage, to be sucessful. Among
other prominent players is Lieut. Barron, a
sound player, whose devotion to poker rend-
ers his playing at time unstable.
Lieut. Stewart is sound, Lieut. Hill sound,
with a bearing towards caution, while Lieut.
Morrison at times is frankly bad.
? The poor fatherless engineers or the Mary
Janes as they are called —have had a bad time.
Having been turned out of their cabins, the
isolation and ship's hospital, when I saw
them last they were living in a large crate, and
punching meat tickets up on deck in their off
time —or rather when they had finished their»
fatigue. They look a healthy, happy lot of
lads, although fate is against them.
There? is a fine little hospital of 10 beds on
board, with dispensary attached, also a plenti-
ful supply of hot and cold water and steriliz-
ing apparatus.
Cpl. Brooks is the dispenser. The 10 or-
derlies do duty in turn under the supervision
of the sisters.
The two Isolation Hospitals have 4 and
6 beds respectively.
Lectures are given to the orderlies by thei'
Troop's M. O. and the Ship's M. O. The many
hospital comforts sent by the ladies of New
Zealand have proved of great use to the sick
men.
There was an extra fine sunset the other
evening. Tea had just started when the
strong rays penetrating through the port holes
threw halos over the heads of those men fac-
ing the ports.
Indeed so strong was the light that several
men had to use their hands to shield their
eyes.
Then the Q. M. inquired if the men had
seen the sunset —where upon they left their
tea —sardines, strawberry jam, etc., and rush-
ed on deck and to the port holes. Many and
various were the opinions expressed. Hoki.tika
men declared that they had the finest sunsets
in their county. H. B. that they had the best
and so forth. However, they all agreed that
the exquisite sunset before them was hard to
beat. In fact it was the finest they had ever
seen. The sunset also cast its tranquil spell
over the "quoit" places on the boat reck.
Cordially yours,
"MOLL."
Dear "Sister":
Everybody thinks that the ship's police
have got a soft job on. Well, the ladies have
always supported us—how many times have
our confreres on shore been of great assistance
to Mrs. Pankhurst—so we think it is up to you
to disperse this impression. Morning or night
we are chasing men out of "poasies". Some i'el


lows think that this ship is a pleasure yacht,
all they have to do is take root in some corner
and vegetate, and its only with the assistance
of the "sweepers" that some do not.
Do not think that we are "grumbling" but
now that Woman's Rights are we
place our views before you.
We are enjoying the trip. Some good,
we always did think the "Johns" in Trenthem
were a healthy looking crowd and now We be-
gin to understand why the army of to-day is
all right.
On behalf of the police, we are your
hearty supporters.
George, Mokau, Jack.
Now then Jack, what the are y«ou
doing? Looking for you.—Looking for me!
I've been up since five to six on this bath
parade, wet through too. —That's the worsf of
trying to find "little" fellows in the dark.
THE HISTORY OF THE THIRTY AND
EIGHTH REINFORCEMENTS?
* (According to the Book of Flood.)
Now it came to pass that a great multi-
tude was gathered together at the place which
was called Trentham. They were <Uj> become
soldiers for the forefront of the Great Battle
which was raging in the world and they be-
came known as the thirty and ninth reinforce-
ments. But it became necessary for yet
greater haste. Therefore the Governors of
the land did change them into the thirty and
eighth reinforcements.
They began then under the teachings of
the divers learned men who were there as-
sembled for that purpose to practice the arts
of war. After many days they became fierce
and mighty soldiers.
There were many among them who in-
dulged in an art known as "swinging the
lead." By falling sick and other sinful means
sought to escape from conflict with the enemy.
The women of (he land heaped scorn and
loathing upon them, not taking heed of their
manner of doing so, which is the way of
women. But the men were shameless and
could not be persuaded. Instead they hid
themselves in the wilderness.
And the ones remaining, after many days,
journeyed to a place' afar off which was called
Featherston. At this place was discovered
unto them divers men of great wickedness
who wore as part of their raiment, a blue
band about their heads. One of these was
Parker, or A.P.M., and his years were but
one score and ten. Those placed in authority
over the men who were called officers, loved
not this man.
Now it was the custom in the land to
give the men some days in which to visit the
homes of their fathers. This was done even
while the men were yet at Featherston. Many
there were who discovered upon arrival at
their father's house, fences which the oxen
and other beasts trampled under foot. These
and divers other happenings, as the death of
an aged aunt, the sale of lands, even the min-
istering of herbs to a sick ox by the wayside
for a sojourn of yet greater
Notwithstanding all these things a great
many of the men returned and subjected
themselves unto those in authority.
Verily evil times must come to an end
and .it came to pass that the multitude after
many days journeyed again to the place which
was called Trentham.
Evil men were to the forefront here too,
yea even as it was in Featherston. One of
these was called Keen. Verily he was a
'bight.' And his years were one score and
ten also and had been filled with wickedness.
At that time it became necessary for the
thirty and ninths to pursue with still more
violence their practice in war. They were
taught to use their weapons until they became
exceedingly skilled. Verily was it said of
them, yea and unto them "Lo! Ye are the
best ever. " Only their officers 1 were defiled.
THE ADJUTANT


Now there were many who were as yet
not satisfied with the period of time given
them in the house of their fathers. These
therefore went in a great body to those in
authority and lifting up their voices cried:
"Shall it be said of you that ye denied us that
which we ask, even on the very eve of battle?
And one of high rank, spoke unto them
softly and with words which were of a honey-
ed sweetness, "Go ye now quietly to your
sleeping places and I will refer the subject to
the Governors of the land!" And deceived by
these words they went their way.
But another spoke to them even after the
night had passed and exhorted them with
passion. "Take heed of what ye do, lest the
powers of the land rise up and strike in their
wrath. If you need be great go your ways
quietly to the homes of your fathers." It
was in this way that many went their way.
Now at that time began a day of great
rejoicing. The young men vied one with
another in games and feats of strength. Those
of their women who could be spared came
from afar off to witness the festivities and re-
joiced exceedingly when one of their house
overcame the adversary. Those who were
called officers mounted them upon great
changers, and rode in a race. Some there were
who being unskilled in "the management of
these animals did fall by the waysiide, and
caused great laughter among the multitude
assembled. Ay, verily it was a big day.
The days which followed were fraught
with much shouting and noise and prepara-
tion, for the day of departure was close at
hand. Many things had yet to be done. Bag-
gage was packed and borne off to a great
ship which was by the water's edge. It was
done at length and all were safely housed.
Now of those who went of their own accord to
the house of their fathers many returned to
the ship. These were judged and each was
fined five pieces of silver for each day and re-
ceived also an award of much C.B. In much
excitement the ship was cast off and the long
journey began. The second history of the
thirty and eighths is written in the book of
Haiig in the forty-second chapter.
3®"
WITH OUR FRIENDS OF THE RED
TRIANGLE.
The übiquitous Red Triangle is now a
household word. From the Home base t,p
the far flung front line trenches, it stands as
a home away from home, with open arms to
serve the fighting men, from sunrise to
sunset. *
Right under the flash of the enemy's
howitzers camouflaged lies many a dug-out,
bearing that mystic but ever-welcome red
THE PIERROTS


triangle sign to the weary, mud-stained,
blood-stained warrior, where practical Chris-
tianity hands out the cup of hot coffee, a bis-
cuit, a smile.—Cheero.
On board our fine Transport 105 the red
triangle has its place, having settled down to
business and (pleasure in the 3rd class smoking
saloon kindly arranged for. Here the secre-
tary and his helpers are kept busy from morn-
ing to hammock-time in the many and varied
duties, of the day, and in distributing the
many expressions of love from the friends
left behind. All sorts of good, things have
been placed on board even from a needle to
an anchor (bachelor's buttons), to say noth-
ing of the cakes, sweets, apples, etc. The
library is greatly appreciated, our Ghirist-
church friends having been particularly gOod
in supplying books, magazines and paper
liberally. The 100 new books supplied by the
Y.M.C.A. National Committee are in much de-
mand, 726 books: have been circulated in 14
days. A' liberal supply of the Y.M.C.A.
Hymnal has provided much pleasure to the
boys during the Sunday,, and mid-week song
services. Recreation is well catered for, the
National-Committee having given ua» a large
supply of boxing gloves, skipping ropes, tug-
of-war ropes, chess, draught®, and some in-
teresting puzzles. Pens, ink, paper and en-
velopes, to meet the requirements of the most
copious writer are available. Unfortunately
the case containing the usual letter pa tar has
no-t been put on board, causing some incon-
venience which however was overcome by a
p'urchase of writing pads from the canteen.
One man said recently after closer
contact with the associations, ramifica-
tions, "Now I can understand the need of a
Red Triangle Day Fund Appeal." Privates Frank
Robb and Don Scott deserve special mention
for their untiring voluntary services after
parade hours.
Tq the many friends at the home base whose
duty it is to "watch and wait" we say: "Be
of good cheer, keep the home fires burning
bright, and God bless you all. Ch-eero."
WITH OUR CATHOLIC BOYS ON BOARD.
Although without a chaplain of their own,
our lads of the Roman Catholic faith, are in
no way neglected. Every Sunday morning
at 10 a.m. Lieut, S. D. Rice presides at a ser-
vice, where the "Rosary" is said and suitable
hymns heartily sung by the boys.
There are two Padres on hoard, Chap-
lain-Major EL W. Powell, T.D. (returning
for duty) and Chaplain-Captain E. D. Rice
The second class lounge has been placed at
their disposal, for Holy Communion, services,
meetings, and is also used as a reading room
by the men,, who thoroughly appreciate same.
There are three celebrations of Holy Com-
munion on Sundays, that all m,ay have an op-
portunity of attending.
Besides the parade service, a Bible class
in the afternoon is well attended, at the latter
service Padre Rice is leading the study on the
life of St. Paul. A Confirmation class is also
in progress; furthermore on Sunday evenings
a song service is conducted by Padre Powell, at
which he talks on some of the favorite hymns,
and the day closes with evensong at 8 p.m.
The services are well attended, and evidently
appreciated, For the parade services, four
companies gather on the deck, where the sting-
ing is led by a small orchestra, comprising
piano, violin, and two cornets. The remain-
ing company meets in the first-class, saloon,
where there is an organ, Every week night
closes with prayer, remembering the Empire,
her soldiers, her sailors and dear ones; after
prayers the room is quiet for fifteen minutes
for men's private Bible reading and devotion®.
The spirit of the' men on hoard is excellent
and a pleasing feature is the way in which
the Sunday is kept quietly, and not as is some-
times, the case forgetful of its sacred obliga-
tions, The Chaplain's room contains a cir-
culating library, of books: placed on board by
the Patriotic Societies, and this is much ap-
preciated.
CONFIRMATION EN ROUTE.
During the voyage Chaplain Rice held
confirmation classes several times a week,
and at he presented six candidates
(Pte© C. B. Chandler, A. E. Starkie, R. C.
Webb, A. V. Baker, H. M. Smith, and F. J. H.
Patterson), who were confirmed by the Bishop
of in his private chapel. It w,as a
beautiful service and the Bishop's practical
address was: most helpful. Afterwards the
Bishop entertained the candidates l to supper,
and yarned with them about New Zealand
which he visited as Missioner de Carteret in
1910. Two of the confirmees thought that
Ms visit was hardly worth while as he did
not go to New Plymouth, which we believe is
a small township somewhere near Mt. Eg-
monit.
CHAPLAINS' WORK
"'THE REMUERIAN"


* i || | ; /'
o
SMILING "SCADDIE"
The Appendicitis Patient
AN APPRECIATION OF OUR OFFICERS.
"Some are born great!" wrote 1 the im-
mortal Bard of Avon, "some achieve greatness,
some have greatness thrust upon them," and
even so, it is. c
May we not truly say that the officers
with us, aboard the .ship, the officers of the
reinforcement, have had real greatness thrust
upon them? Have they not been honoured
in the highest sense of the word, by being
detailed to command the perfect Thirty-
eighths?
Let us hope that they honestly and
thoroughly appreciate their great glory and
strive in all their deeds and words to uphold
our great name. We must now proceed
further, and examine into their qualifications
for this great and onerous responsibility.
Have they indeed merited their good fortune?
They have fought our foes for us, and held
them at bay in the early days of the struggle,
when we were unprepared for the burden,
when some of us were loathe to leave our
happy homes, and all of life that we held
dear. But the tide of Hun invasion had to
be stemmed. Maori-land had to do her share in
the stemming. Someone had to fill the
breach and hold the fort, till aid could come;
someone had to restrain the haughty Hun,
who overbearing In all his preparedness swept
like, a cyclone through Belgium. And these
"Our Officers" were among the first who an-
swered the call, of dying liberty and lent their
aid.
Have they c ever on our transport permitted
their authority to grow irksome; have they
presumed upon the power of their commis-
sions to be unnecessary exacting or overbear-
ing?. No! again emphatically no! If they have
not treated us like pampered girls, they have
at any* rate always remembered that officers,
n.c.o.'iS and privates are all men and they
dealt with us, as men should deal with men.
They are not paragons of virtue, nor do
they claim to be such, but, we may say in good
sooth that they have achieved their own great-
ness.
t,
Tribute to Our Halifax Friends
How "The Remuerian" was Printed
The 38th Reinforcements will ever re-
member the business firms of "The Halifax
Heralds and the Royal Print and, Litho.,
Limited. The universal desire of the whole
ship's company to have the "Remuerian"
printed at a waypost received a terrible blow
on arrival there, when it was learned with
d'smay that it was impossible to have the
treasured souvenir printed, fortunes of war
accounting for the heavy shortages in the
staffs of the printing works, this alone being
responsible for the apparent disappointmeifc.
Undaunted Lieut. Curtis and the "Remuerian"
staff with Nil Disperandum as, a motto, made
a personal request to Senator Dennis of Hali-
fax, and on that gentleman learning the nature
of the souvenir he immediately decided that
the "Remuerian" would be printed, even if
his daily .paper "The Halifax Herald" had to
cease publication and 1 he gave instructions to
his staff to report for duty on the Sflnday
morning, and requested as much help
from the ship's company a® possible. Work
commenced on Sunday morning, the staff
assisted by Pvt. T. Rhodes, of the Medical
Corps, as lino operator, and the editorial staff
as readers. Long into the hours of the night
they all worked,, Senator and Mrs Dennis ex-
tending the hand of hospitality to such an ex-
tent, that when it was absolutely necessary for
the staff to secure a little rest, that coveted rest
was in their beautiful home. The manager of
the printing works, personally congratulated
our only operator Tommy Rhodes, and he
stated l that Tommy was as good a .man as
could be found anywhere. Needless to say
every member of our ship's company, who now
possesses- the treasured "Remuerian", an
established record of the trip, thanks Senator
and Mrs. Dennis and Messrs. W. H. Dennis,
Perry, Dexter, Vaughan, Pope, and their com-
bined staffs for giving such generous assist-
ance.
The whole ship's company wishes our Hali-
fax friends- "KIA-ORA" (Good Luck).


-I—ii—- - - ' Ml'« - • •""-"""'I
—"*' "" "' " " |
<3®
JlL. (?©BBB^0raGffi^
*rL_y" -i]
* 1 \ a
Barry: Sorry we cannot publish your
amendments to infantry training. Your
method- of forming fours from single rank
seems, however, to -be quite sound.
Fitz: We agree with you. The practice of
hiring a special tug should, however, be dis-
continued.
Monty: It was- only right that before- al-
lowing your parcels on board the authorities
insisted upon you giving an undertaking not
to enter into competition with the canteen.
Big Mac: The consumption of a certain
amount of vinegar, say half a pint, per -day,
should help tone your system up.
Blindfold Fighter: It's a ipityy-ou didn't
knew it was an- officer you were hitting—you
could have hit harder.
M-ate: Yes, Cinnamon is a hot-stuff mess
orderly.
Orderly: If you did have cocoa and sar-
dines- for supper, sorry y-ou all can't be baby
zebras.
Urewera: Yes, Corporal Mac has- been on
the mat again, but you know that's nothing
new for anyone from the Urewera country. I
know he- -had 14 days' C.B. and in- all proba-
bility will be sent back by return boat for los-
ing his housewife.
C. Coy.: Poor McOnion was not 'a-rf
crook, or was it just swaying the pencil a
little?
No. 9: Re your queries. We'll endeavour
to answer you as desired, (1) Will get 'Fi'tts'
for telling you. (2) You- can- search me. (3)
Squared the military ipolice. (4) The staff
S.M. can select a cat from a variety on board.
(5) With the chiropodist. (6) I am and I
could (E-dit-or). (7-8) Deleted by the cen-sor.
Scragiger 739 Corporal Triggs decora-
tion was not bestowed upon lxim by the King;
1 feel sure it was an accident. Re Nugget:
I am forwarding some dubbin for that eleven
aside of his. Thank you Toby.
Ejected: Certainly 'We agree with Liuet.
L that the small point of a bayonet can-
not fye despised.
Dissatisfied: We do not presume to de-
cide trade union functions; that is not our
department and l if you do note with dismay
that certain mess 1 orderlies are contemplating
asking for rises- in wages, we ve,yy much re-
gret we must refer you to Signaller Matheson,
the All-Highest on trade union etiquette.
Freddy W.: Even coujd we help you in
your desire to have the boat stopped during
meals,, you are certainly well over the fence
in asking us to use our influence to secure
you a sleerping-in pass.
Bella Coak: This department is in n-o
way responsible for leave being, stopped this
week-end. Your wrath is nothing to the dis-
gust your question gave us.
Bob: Thanks for copy of routine orders.
Like you the editors think it unnecessary to
remove their glass eyes on the first sign of
sea-sickness. H-a-d it been false teeth —well —
are you listening, Harry?
Racehorse owner: No- the result of the
Birthday Handicap cannot be wirelessed to us.
We are afraid you will find it difficult to ob-
tain a copy of the N.Z. Turf Register at
Sling.
Total Abstainer: You certainly had a
nice final week-end in N.Z. No, the- proprietor
of -the hotel will not be able- to recover dam-
ages- from a man- on active service.


Seventeen Stone: We do not recommend
Antipon. It has a depressing effect on the
system. There is certainly not enough activity
in a policeman's life to keep one healthy.
Tripper: Yes, the Remuera is a good boat
to travel on. We hope you have a happy
time in London. We are not allowed to men-
tion the date she returns but feel sure you'll
be in time.
Tourist: No, he was not in the Charge of
Balaclava, but he is in charge of the bala-
clavas.
Honey Dew: It was a good joke but some-
what cruel. How was it the bottle only smelt
of the "real Mackay".
Leave Demonstrators: It is in the song
"Invictus" you will find the words, "It matters
not how charged with punishment the scroll."
Boat Drill: Yes, we heard of your acci-
dent, but out of consideration to the force
refrained from reporting it. We hope your
lip will soon get better; meantime you should
use only large glasses.
Dreamy Dan: Would suggest you get in
touch with a reliable correspondence school;
band conducting has sometimes been taught
by this means. c
Fighting Mac: Your suggestion to act
as punching ball bo six footers should prove
popular.
Charlie: You may be awarded the Order
of the Toilet in next Birthday Honours. Mean-
time we advise you not to mention it to the
lady. ot
Hurry Genuine: It is unfortunate that
the Dental Staff sent no more appointment
cards for you. You must be careful to keep
the cold air out of your mouth..
Big Sciitch: We are sorry you have been
over-worked in your job. You must remem-
ber to take your pipe from your mouth on
three occasions; g'hen commencing a meal,
saluting an officer, or kissing a- lassie.
Hoppy: It wasn't a submarine yea saw
the second day out nor yet a flying-fish; we
are really very much surprised; the specks
need a change.
Miss Smith: Yes, there are several ballet-
dancing schools on board but terms are strictly
in advance. Re your latest love affair. It is
hardly fair of you to expect this department
to give such advice gratis. You could summons
him. The age of discretion is a matter of
opinion; most people never reach it.
Joe Craigie: We recommend you to
Hodder and Stoughton's Is 6d edition of
"Why did the cuke go cruke?" obtainable at
all bookstalls in U.S.A.
Spec.: No, like you the editors think
Smithy one of the whitest, although he comes
from Timaru.
Geordie Ellis: Yes, in my mind Pete and
yourself are some couple, the mob are grate-
ful to you both for the many pleasant duets
on the piano and violin. But tell me, did
Pete always play at churches on Sundays.
Corn Sufferer: It is your own fault; be-
cause Dr. Bunion in private life is an architect,
it does not follow that he can draw corns. Even
if he did figure out foundations of buildings,
human foundations, especially of the feet,
aie totally different.
Enquirer: Corporal Neave is his name, a
little chap, with a quaint mode of speech,
slightly Haw Haw, but most obliging round
these parts.
Long Tom: Have advised the lads that
your corkscrew is loaned out on the hire sys-
tem.
Jack Morrow: Did you miss her so much.
Herb Taylor: England can never offer the
same attractions to you that Lyall and Orien-
tal Bays did.
Pte. 6- : Yes, I'll take your word
for it that on last foot inspection day land
was sighted.
Dick: We trust you will be successful in
your dealings with , the British War Trophies
Committee. Your kit-baig is probably the
most interesting in jthe army.
Janjjfiican: Yes, dearie, it gospel. Ser-
geant Smellie .and Sergeant Daw got away
with a 4s dinner at a third rate hotel at King-
ston for the price of a bottle of laager. Yes,
like you I'm hoping they will ease their con-
science by spending that money in "Remuer-
ians."
Sergt. Wrigley: Who told you about
Wilf Rattray, you've nothing on him and he'»
not married.
Corp Brooks: Why worry old chap; the
whole crowd of them are not worth it.
Medical Corp:"Will instruct Gunners to
remember lie is to be known as Sawby; what
did you do to help anyway?
Stiffy "Young: It is unanimously agreed
we take off our hats to your easily *won
laurels at lead-swinging.
Appendicitis: Never mind, Scad, old chap,
the editor will write her for you; don't trust
Spud Murphy, he is married.
Tommy Rhodes: You are quite in error,
it is now passed an engagement. Dick Leach
is now Mrs Murphy; Spud came up to scratch
only at the point of the bayonet.
Reg: You belittle the town you come
from. No self-respecting Wanganuite would
leave his money belt where you did.
George Hanlon: Dave Hipkins and Mil-
ton Wood both declare you a dodger, the Doc,
remembering all the cigarettes you gave him,
is only neutral.
Private Scadden: It was not your appen-
dix that was exhibited for your inspection,
but a genuine lizard, legs, tail and all; a find
by those medicos on the heights above Con-
stant Springs. I am surprised at a fully
qualified sister mistaking a lizard in a bottle
for a pickled appendix. It really does not say
much for her training.


Corp. Speck: It certainly was bard luck
Ernie, but this department cannot use its in-
fluence as you suggest. You should keep a
bucket there, and, even then you had the
human pull through.
Sergt. MacQ : Yes! Srearmint does
retain its flavour overnight, despite the fact
that you had it stuck to the saloon walls.
To Nosey: No, we are not in sympathy
with the energetic ship's assistant who 'was
reprimanded by his chief, for talking the
sisters, instead of being at his allotted Station.
You are entirely mistaken, be is not related
to Lord Devonport, the recent food controller
of England.
From C. Coy.: Some dreamer that chap
in No. 11 Platoon, from Hamilton I think,
wjio wants to go home, dear mother?
Bill: If beauty is only skin deep, then
Sergt. Hansen must be thick skinned.
Frank: It must be clearly understood that
the ship's inspection is not a muster parade.
Bitten 1 : The vaccination stunt has not
been too kind to some poor fellows, in fact
more than one arm is "Aitken" yet.
Parrot: Yes! We have some very clever
birds on board, besides canaries and cocka-
toos, one often sees a "Hawke" drilling.
Cleanliness: It really is a pity that the
Sergeants should spoil their denims at mess
times, by neglecting to use their serviettes.
To C. Coy's orderly-room clerk: No, you
are quite in error, those two gunners Noel and
Trevor always with the ship's quartermaster
have nothing in keeping with royalty. Can-
not you be true to one black-eyed Susan.
Red Triangle helpmate. Re medicine
king McGuire. We certainly miss his merry
countenance and I know he regrets missing
his cobbers. His laugh was medicine to lots
down in the dumps, then again l you know his
"slight exaggurations" were a treat. But
har en't you a model soldier in the mallet-
manipulator, a real beauty and he is more
than Airteen, that's certain.
Y.M.C.A.: Re passenger: We are sure
that L.-Cpl Byatts will be better when the
ship reaches dry land. It is too bad that he
should worry about missing parades.
Andy: Despite the fact that Corp.
Chapman lives in~that notorious alley, he has
no connection with cabin®' 128 and 124.
Bessy: Your article is unfit for publica-
tion; this is not the 'Stratford News.'
Sergeant D. Coy: Yes, it is a fact.
Grandad did walk the floor with you and de-
spite your objections the C.O.'s orderly hap-
•pened to be right that time. Yes, he is enjoy-
ing the trip. Thanks for enquiries.
Fatalist: Yes, Gunner Dunlop still enjoys
the freedom of the ship. You were quite mis-
taken; it isn't him at all. Yes, it's just as
big as ever; I hapipeA to know.
Three popular ladies on board are the
stewardesses, their courtesy, obliging disposi-
tion and always ready to,, help in any way at
all, is greatly appreciated by the whole ship's
company.
OUR MEDICAL STAFF


f IX1
Medico: Yes the Doctor does wear the
same vicious look, when operating as when
co-ckfigbtimg—no wonder vaccine has its ter-
rors.
Gambler: Even if the ship does pitch and
toss, that's no reason why you should gamble.
C. Coy.: Things evidently are not all Q>K.
with your company. Simply "Kay."
C. Coy.: You should not worry about par-
rots escape, if it does return you will be able
to "Pet-it."
C. Coy.: Yes'. Some of -those yarns are
"Toogood" to be true.
C. Coy.: Yes. That 'gas helmet stunt
makes you all at sea. o
C. Coy.: We hear that a certain defaulter
is going to give somebody "Fit-ts" for getting
so much C.B.
Ship's Steward: No, we do not know who
hit Pills, nor -the cause of -the argument;
however, it is better now, so why worry.
Machine-gunner: No, I have never seen
Lieut. Rice in shorts ,-and to me that has no
relationship to his matrimonial status. Your
letter il- unworthy of the standing of a gunner.
fpickyn-o-se: Yes. your serge-ant-majoi
was born in Boston; his a-lways rushing
the bean dish a-t the mess-table. He- could
have been king of Albania had the princess
said yes (she didn't) so he still is- a sergeant-
major. He has- a bad habit of chewing gu-m
and saying God-dam*
The- Twins: Considering the special cir-
cumstances mentioned, we think yoij. are
both entitled to more sick leave on reacbing 0
Blighty,
Morry: N-o, the name frowsy is not libel-
lous, it is merely a bridge term of endear-
ment. a
2NR-I .IE I TEN AN T MORE! SOY.
We regret announce that 2nd-Lieut.
Morison was brought to bed by sunstroke dur-
ing the passage through the tropics, At first
his condition gave rise to some anxiety, but
we now hear that he is well on the high-road
to convalescence. Second-Lieut. Morrison was
badly woundgd in the head during the early
days of the 9omme offensive. He was sub-
sequently discharged, but joined up again
after a few months in New Zealand.
. We understand that his old wound -some-
what complicated his- present illness, and the
whole «vhip'-s- company join in wishing him a
sipeedy recovery. May his cheery and invigor-
ating personality again be felt amongst us be-
fore we reach "Blighty."
BIRTHS. TABB. At her residence,
Stewards' Cabin, 3rd Class Saloon, to Mrs
T-abb, three healthy kits (not sea kits)
• thanks to Dr. Cyril and Nurse Smith, C.
Compa&y.
MARRIAGE. —POOL„E - PATERSON. At
cabin 56. the above two were tied up after
much difficulty, something definite at
last. No cards.
DEATHS. —BUDGE. —At sea, on June 14th,
after a scr-eacfci-ng flight for life, Polly,
dearly beloved and only old maid on the
shft), property -of El-e-ctrican Budge. No
flowers. Friends please accept this, the
only intimation.
OUR ARTIST.
He takes a thing most commonplace and dull,
And- shows u-s beauty smiling in its- heart;
He makes a poem of familiar scenes,
That we despise because our minds are
A song of joy he sings to cheer the world;
Encourage it and bid it hope again;
And then, because we do not understand,
Because we Ihink that money is- hie aim.
Because a hundred reasons make us blind.
To what he sees, despair falls on his soul.
And all that gladness he had thought to share
Fades in „the Darkness,
Until he returns from you know where^
—At Sea, June 10th, 1918.
"THE RE'MUERIAN 1 "


Commanding Officer Corpl. Frisby, R. Pte. Dalton, T. W.
Lieut.-Col. Saunders, E. »H. Corpl. Tyrrell, W. G. Pte. Dry, R. H.
Corpl. Booth, W. R. Pte. Esther, D.
Ship s Permanent Staff. Corpl. Mulholland, F. B. Pte. Fisher, A. D.
Capt. Martin, R. E. J., Sirp's Corpl. Short, F...W . Pte. Fricker, C. A
Adjutant and Quartermaster. Corpl. Westerholm, H. A. Pte. Fitzsimons, J.
S. S. M. (W. 0.) Ivimey, F.E.B. Corpl. Triggs, A. W. Pte. Graves, W.' J.
N. Permanent Staff (at- C° r pL Barry, J. H. Pte. ..Green, C. W.
tached to reinforcement.) £ or Pr 5} ' e - George, H.
S. Q. M. S. McEwen, A. !I a" A ' B " B j; e - jSallagher, J.
Dawp FA FT? Qlim'Q Corpl. Dandy, H. Pte. Geale, C. V.
Peco-d CVrk L " CpL Morrow , A - F - H. Pte. Griffiths, C. E.
Keco-a L.erk. L Cpl Ferriman> G D _ pte G
N. Z. A. S. C. L. Cpl. Taylor, H. T. H. Pte. Gordon, K. S.
a 2nd Lt. Curtis, J. V., . L - C'jl. McGregor, S. E. Pte. Grahilm, F. C.
N. Z. A. N. S. L - Cpl. Dickinson, N. J. Pte. Gordon, A. C.
"Sister Chalmer, M. ' L - Cpl. Morrison, L. M. Pte. Groube, C. J.
S. Nurse Goldsmith, E. Mcß. L - Cpl- Campbell, J. GS Pte. Goad, W. J. ,
S. Nurse Mercer, J. M. ) L. Cpl. Gregory, G. L. Pte. Hartley, N.
S. Nurse Jackson, M. A. L - Cpl. Mattmgly, A. V. Pte. Hamilton, R. B.
S. Nurse Baker, E. L. L - Cpl. Wright, A. H. F. Pte. Holt, J. I.
, T „ ° Pte. Aitken, W. I. Pte. Horner, J. W.
•N- z - M - C. Pte. Bakes, J. Pte. Hendry, J. •
Lieut. Wishart, R. M. Pte. Basher, W. F. Pte. Howell, N. A.
Corpl. Brooks, J. F. Pte. .Bauchop, N. D. pte. Hope W. J.
Pte. Hanlon, G. N. Pte. Beadle, T. M. Pte. Hall, F.
Pte. 4 Hipkins, D. A, Pte. Beer, A. A. G. Pte. Hastie j!
Pte. Hollis, R. C. J. * Pte. Bennet, K- W. Pte. Hanifin, j.
Pte. Leach, R. M. Pte. Blithe, J. T. * Pte. Hayman, E. W.
Pte. Murphy, F. G. Pte. Blundell, D. P. Pte! Hodgson, C. B.
Pte. Rattray, W. J. Pte. Bolton, J. Pte. Irvine, R. A. W.
Pte. Rhodes, T. Pte. Bradley, A. O. Pte. Innes, A. G.
Pte. Wood, L. M. Pte. Breading, R. pte i nn i s ' w.
Pte. Wrigley, A. E. Pte. Beazley, C. C. pt e . Jack,' F.
N. Z. Army Pay Corp. Boyd, W. Pte. Kummert A. W.
S. Sergt Cullinane, T. W., and pte. Roswell, T. E. p te . Kerrick'D '
S. Sergt. Fougere, M. H., pte. Baines, J. L. pt e Lone T M
N. Z. A. Chaplains' Dept. Bugler Barnes, B. T. pt e Lvttl'e T W
Major Powell, E. C. W. Pte. Bartram, W. E. Pt" A. C.
Capt. Rice, E. D. pte. Bleaken, G. Pt e Lyall K. C
Y. M. C. A. Representative Br y s ? n TT Pte. Lee, G. W. C.
Eglin, W. £ te - S Urt, + S ' I' H - Pte. Leslie, R. H.
"A" COMPANY E Christophers, C. B. pt e _ Lamb, W.
Pte. Cowan, J. E. Pt„ Miles T F
2nd Lieut. Stewart, M. R Pte. Cheeseman, J. H. p tp " Mnrnbv T F
2nd Lieut. Flood, J. W. Pte. Clark, W. O. Pt®' Morrow' T
2nd Lieut. Jenkins, F. M. Pte. Cromar, C. F. E:®' MolthT A
C. S. M. Luxton, G. W. Pte. Carr, F. W E> e " f T1 V T T , *
C. Q. M. S. Mackay, E. V. Pte. Counihan, M. J. lles ' M " R i A '
Sergt.'Bloomfield, L. F. Pte. Dean, G. A. Pte. Moorhead, J.
Sergt. Smellie, D. A. . Pte. Dick, W. J. Pte - Mameson, T. H.
Sergt. Pownall, N. McS. Pte. Duggan, D. Pte. McCarthy, T. F.
Sergt. Rawson, A. J. S. Pte. Devlin, W. H. Pte. McKay, D.
A. Sergt. Christensen, T. Pte. Daniel, W. H. Pte. McNab, R.
L. Sergt. Dunn, F. W. B. Pte Daysh, L. R. Pte. McLeod, H.
NOMINAL ROLL
38TH' REINFORCEMENTS


Pte. McGill, A. C.
Pte. McNaughton, D.
Pte- McKeay, M. T.
Pte. Mclntyre, J. A.
Pte. MeCullam, C. D.
Pte. McEwan, J. W.
Pte. Nicholson, J.
Pte. Newton, J- W.
Pte. Nolan, R. J.
Pte. Newland, J. D.
Pte. O'Connor, R.
Pte. O'Hara, P. J.
Pte. Osborne, J.
Pte. Officer, A. A.
Pte. Potter, N. F.
Pte. Prattley, E. C.
Pte. Pollock, I. McM.
Pte. Puttick, A.
Pte. Prendergast, T.
Pte. Pagel, R. S.
Pte. Reed, A. E.
Pte. Robertson, D. H.
Pte. Richmond, W- H.
pi-e. Rentoul, P. A.
Pte. Robertson, J. S.
Pte. Ruthe, M. J.
Pte. Ross, A.
Pte- Rusling, A. C. m
Pte. Smallfield, R. E.
Pte. S'pencer, G.
Pte. Scanlan, T.
Pte. Smith, J. J.
Pte. Shearer, J. .
Pte- Scott, D. H.
Pte. Smith, E. H.
Pte. Squire, T.
Pte. Shanaghan, J. G.
Pte. Skinner, W. G.
Pte. Smith, A. G.
Pte. Thompson, C. C.
Pte. Thomn;on, J. A.
Pte. Timpany, E. F.
Pte. Wilson, W.
Pte. Warren, T. G.
Pte. Woodward, W. J.
Pte. Ward, F. C-
Pte. Wilson, H. C.
Pte. Wilson, Harry.
"B" COMPANY.
2nd Lieut. Hill, L. G.
2nd Lieut. Parker, G. E.
2nd Lieut. Bernard, V. R.
C. S. M. Whitlock, W. A.
Q. M. S. Stewart, C. A.
Sergt. Cook, C. N.
S'ergt. Jones, E. M.
Sergt. Harrison, H. D.
L. Sergeant Laurenson, T. P.
Corpl. Ashley, C. D.
Corpl. Daniels, H. R.
Corpl. Hewit, W. H.
Corpl. Kidd, R. D.
Corpl. Linton, R. J.
Corpl. McDonald, C. C.
Corpl. Quigley, F.
L. Corpl. Cartwright, J. L.
L. Corpl. Drown, L. H.
L. Corpl. Greenfield, W. J.
L. Corpl. Gordon, W. J.
L. Corpl. Griffin, E. A.
L. Corpl. Lowe, W. E.
L. Corpl. Lucas, J. H.
L. Corpl. Martin, L.
Pte. Arnet, F.
Pte. Baldwin, F.
Pte. Black, G-
Pte. Barry, J.
Pte. Bradley, M. F.
Pte. Bromley, J. H.
Pte. Buckley, M.
Pte. Beaurepaire, L. I.
Pte. Bidmead, B. W.
Pte. Barkla, S.
Pte. Benson, T.
Pte. Black, E.
Pte. Blacker, J.
Pte- Blair, R. A.
Pte. Broadbent, A. M.
Pte. Cooper, W. A.
Pte. Clark, O. M.
Pte. Chandler, C. B.
Pte. Collie, W. H.
Pte. Condon, W.
Pte. Cooper, H. C.
Pte. Donnelly, G.
Pte. Duncan, J. S.
Pte. Darragh, W.
Pte. Ewbank, H.
Pte. Foster, A. A.
Pte. Fake, W. H.
Pte. Fischer, 0. A.
Pte Friedrich, L. T.
Pte. Frewin, F. R-
Pte. Greaves, J. E.
Pte. Guthrie, P.
Pte. Giles, H.
Pte. Hayes, W.
Pte- Hanyan, J.
Pte. Holley, W.*C.
Pte. Hooker, A. C.
Pte. Home, R. W.
Pte. Hudson, A. E-
Pte. Hanna, R.
Pte. Herbert, A. M.
Pte Hoskin, S.
Pte. Hodgetts, D. T.
Pte. Ibell, P. T.
Pte. Johnson, H.
Pte. Juiy, V. R-
Pte. King, A. A.
Pte. Kelsen, T.
Pte. Leydon, D.
Pte. Laing, A. H.
Pte. Lauder, D.
Pte. Locker, A.
Pte. Lowery, T.
Pte. Lyman, R.
Pte. Lyster, W. H.
Pte. Langland, C. B.
Pte. Lee, J. W.
Pte. Mills, E. E.
Pte. Mouat, R. D. W.
Pte. McLeod, J. F.
Pte. Mee, J. E.
Pte Murchison, L.
Pte. Murphy, E.
Pte. Murphy, J.
Pte. McLean, G. L.
Pte. McMillan, J. W-
Pte. Mansfield, J. A.
Pte. McNamee, A. K.
Pte. Marston, J- H.
Pte. Morgan, J T.
Pte. Mcintosh, W.
Pte. Mclntyre, J. B.
Pte. Nicol, L. G.
Pte. Olsen, A. M.
Pte. Oke, L. H. G.
( Pte. Pearce, B. M. A
Pte. Piper, A. W.
Pte. Poad, W. N.
Pte. Payne, J. M.
Pte. Pinny, E. G.
Pte. Quin, E. R.
Pte. Quinn, J- P.
Pte. Ross, W. J.
Pte. Rae, P. B.
Pte. Reid, 3.
Pte. Ritchie, H. K.
Pte. Rowland, A. A.
Pte. Seymour, L. E.
Pte. Stanford, R. S-
Pte. Shepherd, L.
Pte. Smith, G. C.
Pte. Scadden, W. L. J. C.
Pte. Smith, H. M.
Pte. Starkie, A. E.
Pte. Stephens, B. 0. *
Pte. Tuck, A. S. M,-
Pte. Tfelfer, W.
Pte. Tuff, G. A.
Pte. Upston, T.
"Pte. Vaney, R. H.
Pte. Vining, C. G. B.
Pte. Voyce, J.
Pte. Waters, R- H.
Pte. Wilman, G.
Pte. Wilson, E. A. T.
Pte. Wilton, A. H.
Pte. Weir, C. G. m
Pte. West, S. N.
Pte: Williams, M. A.
Pte. Westneat, F. R.
Pte. Whittington, W. C.
Pte. Whitty, R. G.
Pte. Wigg, E. A.
Pte. Wilson, W. F.
Pte. Woods, J. A.
Pte. Wyllie, J.
•
"C" COMPANY
2nd Lieut. Morison, L. A.
2nd Lieut. Fitzsimmons, E. R-
2nd Lieut. Pettit, H.
C. S. M. Kay, M.
Q. M. S. Wilkie, C. H.
S'ergt. Batchelor, J. M.
Sergt. Hanson, E. G.
Sergt. McFarlane, A. J. H.
Corpl. Ince, J.
Corpl. Jackson, A. W.
Corpl. Lawrence, A.
Corpl. Lee, G. G.
Corpl. Molloy, J. F.
Corpl. Montgomery, G.
Corpl. McDonnell, S. J.
Corpl. Rowland, M. F.
Corpl. Woods, L. S.
L. Corpl. Bracey, J. L.
L. Corpl. Chaytor, C.
L. Corpl Coss, C.
L. Corpl. Dillicar, L. R.
L. Corpl. Jelfs, C. S.
L. Corpl. Johnstone, J F.
L. Corpl. Larsen, H. V. S.
L. Corpl. Smith, B. D
Pte. Absalom, D.
Pte- Aitken, T. R.
"THE REMUERIAN"


Pte. Alexander, R. W.
Pte. Allchin, A. C.
Pte. Anderson, A. C.
Pte. Anderson, R.
Pte. Andrew, J.
Pte. Armstrong, H. E.
Pte. Bain, J.
Pte. Barlow, T. H.
Pte. Beattie, B. 0.
Pte. Belford, J.
Pte. Bell, G.
Pte. Boswell, D. W.
Pte. Brown, M.
Pte. Browne, J. W.
Pte. Burridge, H. W.
Pte. Calvert, G.
Pte. Campbell, N.
Pte. Carpenter, R. M. B.
Pte. Chalmers, T. B .
Pte.Churton, F. L.
Pte. Clancey, H.
Pte. Clemmey, J.
Pte. Cojjgins, A.
Pte. Corless, B. J.
Pte. Corrigan, W. P.
Pte. Coyle, T.
Pte. Cole, W. J.
Pte. Craddock, T.
Pte. Deere, M-
Pte. Docherty, A. C.
Pte. Doyle, S. H. G.
Pte. Drummond, P.
Pte. Ellis, G-
Pte. Finlay, R. A.
Pte. Fleming, C. F.
1 Pte. Fletcher, F.
Pte. Geoghan, F- W.
Pte. Gibson, R. A.
Pte. Green, A. E.
Pte. Hamilton, N. A.
Pte. Harrison, W- R.
Pte. Harper, T.
Pte. Hawke, V. L.
•Pte. Heald, W.
PtG Herbert, C. A.
Pte. Hinton, E.
Pte. Hoar, C. W.
Pte. Jackson, H.
Pte. Jenkins, C. V.
Pte. Jenkins, H. A.
Pte. Just, H.
Pte. Kasper, C.
Pte. Kelliher, J. J.
Pte. King, P. J.
Pte. Lamot, H.
Pte. Lash, W. H-
Pte. Macdonald, C. W.
Pte. MacVicor, G. H.
Pte. Mahoney, A.
Pte. Martin, W. A.
Pte. Merrick, P.
Pte. Methven, W.
Pte. Montgomery, G. T.
Pte. Mclvor, F.
# Pte. McSCimmon, R. A.
Pte. McLeod, R. F.
Pte. McMullien, W. H.
Pte. McQuilkan, A.
Pte. McQuillon, H.
Pte. O'Connor, S.
Pte. Olsen, J- W.
Pte. O'Meara, A. N.
Pte. O'Neill, J.
Pte. Pickup, W.
Pte. Preece, T. G.
Pte. Quinn, C.
Pte. Robinson, G. W.
Pte. Robinson, G.
Pte. Scott, F. H.
Pte. Simpson, J. •
Pte. Sigipson, P. R.
Pte. Sinclair, D.
Pte. flattery, J.
Pte. Smith, C. H.
Pte. Smith, C. T.
Pte. S'mith, E. B.
Pte. Smith, E. R.
Pte. Smith, L. C.
Pte. Smith, S.
Pte. Stratford, J.
Pte. Tarbutt, G- S.
Tte. Taylor, A. G.
Pte. Torbett, J.
Pte. Towgood, A.
Pte. Trewena, R.
Pte. Tuckey, C.
Pte. Walsh, E. J.
Pte. Warneford, C. H.
Pte. Webb, R. C.
Pte. Wellburn, G-
Pte. Whelan, W. C.
Pte. Whittle, C. V.
Pte. Wilkins, M.
Pte. Wilcox, P.
Pte. Williams, W.
Pte, Wilson, S.
Pte. Young, G. A.
"D" COMPANY.
2nd Lieut. Barton, F. D.
2nd Lieut. Raeburn, D. A.
2nd Lieut. Leyland, A. I.
C. S. M. Jensen, J.
Q. M. S. Auther, A. T.
Sergt. Dumbleton, L. P.
Sergt. Jones, E. H.
Sergt. Spear, H. W.
Corpl. Brooks, V. H.
Corpl. Brown, R. L.
Corpl. Brown, S. H.
Corpl. Burgess, C. S.
Corpl. Lowrie, E. J.
Corpl. McCullum, S'. S.
Corpl. Neave, K.
Corpl. O'Flaherty, R. C.
Corpl. Slater, C. H.
Corpl. Tancred, O.
L. Corpl. Barnes, E.
L. Corpl. Blackmore, W. J.
L. Corpl. Byatt, C. F.
L. Corpl. Corkill, T.
L Corpl. Craig, C. S.
L. Corpl. Ellis, T. H.
L. Corpl. Harris, W. T.
L. Corpl. Harrison, W. L.
L. Corpl.cLynch, J. Y.
L. Corpl. May, J. E. B
L. Corpl. Morison, H.
L. Corpl. Mosley, A. M.
L. Corpl. Patterson, F. J. H.
L. Corpl. Pilcher, A. S.
Pte. Adlam, C. A.
Pte. Anderson, D.
Pte. Andrews, P. H.
Pte. Andrews, A. T.
Pte. Arnold, B. E.
Pte. Atchison, A. J.
Pte. Baker, A. F.
Pte. Baldwin, P. E.
Pte. Benson, J.
Pte. Black, W. T.
Pte. Blake, R-
Pte. Bochel, D. M.
Pte. Bowley, F. J.
Bradburn, A. M.
Pte. Buchanan, J- G.
Pte. Burns, D. H.
Pte. Camp, G. W.
Pte. Caron, F. R.
Pte. Chappell, W- G.
cJ?te. Clark, L. H.
Tte. Code, W. J.
Pte. Coggrave, H.
Pte. Corbett, J. D.
Pte. Crone, T. J.
Pte. Curran, E.
Pte. Carnachan, W. R.
Pte. Dalton, T. W.
Pte.
Pte. Dooley, J. J.
Pte. Duncan, A. D. •
Pte 0 Eades, H. L.
Pte. Eagleton," W.
Pte.oEasterbrook, B. S.
Pte. Eaves, H.
Pte. Edge, J. B.
Pte. Edge, E. G.
Pte. Everett, J. L.
Pte. FarSgher, E. G.
Pte. Field, T. L.
Pte. Fields, J.
• Pte. Ford, J. C. •
Pte. Fraser, I. C.
Pte. Geary, F. C.
Pte. Gethin, J.
Pte. Gray, J. R.
Pte. Griffin, W. J.
Pte. Gudex, H. C.
Pte. Hamilton, W. D.
Pte. Harre, CM. A.
Pte. Hartle, W. J.
Pte. Hopkins, W. N. H-
Pte. Hopper, N. W.
Pte. Hood, W. R. E.
Pte. Horn, J.
Pte. Hunt, J. A. I.
Pte. Jennings, J. J.
Pte. Johnson, F.
Pte. Jones, E. D.
Pte. Kellahan, T. A. L.
Pte. Kelly, W. E.
Pte. Kennard, A. F.
Pte. Kirkby, K. W.
Pte. Kyle, J.
Pte. Leigh, J. H.
Pte. Lilley, H.
Pte. Litchfield, S. D.
Pte. Lobb, W- H.
Pte. Looker, Y. W.
Pte. Long, W. R.
Pte. Long, L. J.
Pte. Lowe, J- L.
Pte. Lucas, W. E.
Pte. Magee, J. D.
Pte. Maguire, D.
Pte. Maroney, E.
Pte. Mahon, L.
Pte. Mason, T. A. J.
©
"THE REMUERIAN"


Pte. Mills, E.
Pte. Mills, E. H.
Pte. Mitchelson, C. L.
•Pte. Moore, S. E.
Pte. Morris, G. W.
Pte. Mowbray, M.
Pte. Murdoch, J- J.
Pte. McClue, M. A.
Pte. Mclnnes, M. W.
Pte. Mclntyre, A.
Pte. McKay, J. P-
Pte. McLeod, A.
Pte. McLaughlin, A.
Pte. Newton, L. W.
Pte. North, C-
tPe. Nicholls, C. W.
Pte. Ottley, G. A.
Pte. Oulton, H.
Pte. Outrod, A. C-
Pte. Pahi, A.
Pte. Painter, P. E.
Pte. Palmer, C. E. T.
Pte. Parr ; s, H. E.
Pte. Percy, V. G';
Pte. Phelps, F. W.
Pte. Piagi? G.
Pte. Porteous, W. J.
Pte. Power, W. J.
Pte. Proudfoot, E.
Pte. Pervis-Russell-
Montgomery, B.
Pte. Reader, L. F.
Pte. Robb, H. F.
Pte. Robertson, W. A.
Pte. Robertson, A.
Pte. Russell, R. M.
Pte. Ryan, W.
Pte- Sampson, W. J.
Pte. Selman, L. E.
Pte. Shortt, F. D.
Pte. Smith, D.
Pte. Smith, G. D.
Pte. Smith, F. H.
'Pte. Smith, W.
Pte. Smith, W. J. «
Pte- Stephens. C. F.
Pte. Stock, H. C.
Pte. S'ullivan, F. J.
Pte. Sutton, P. J. C.
Pte. Sinclair, D. A.
Pte. Tait, W. L. S-
Pte. Tangney, P. W.
Pte. Thomas, C.
Pte. Trayes, R. S.
Pte. Tuohey, J. L.
Pte. Walker, C. L.
Pte. Walker, J.
Pte. Walsh, P.
Pte. Welsh, N.
Pte. Wheeler, A.
Pte. Whitehouse, A. B.
Pte. Wicksteed, C. P.
Pte. Williams, A. L.
Pte. Williamson, A. C.
Pte. Wilson, W. T.
Pte. Wrathall, C. B.
Pte. Wren, N. H.
Pte. Wright, A.
SPECIALISTS.
2nd Lieut. Christophers,' R. G.
2nd Lieut- Pountney, E. R.
2nd Lieut. Rice, S. D.
C. S. M. Wylie, R. W.
Q. M. S. Watchorn, F. M. G.
Sergt. Cameron, A B.
Sergt. Patterson, H.
V>ergt. McQuarrie, G. G.
Sergt. Poole, P. A.
Corpl. Chapman, R. R?
Corpl. Ferner, B. W. H.
Corpl. Ferner, R. F. H.
Corpl. Hopkins, A.
Corpl. Norton, F. P.
Corpl. Payton, E. A.
Corpl. Stewart, H* F.
Corpl. Speck, E. W.
Corpl. S'ylvester, S. J. H.
L. Corpl. Gwynne, G. M. §
L. Corpl. Loney, G. F.
• * ; L. Corpl. Pannell, W. B.
L. Corpl. Robinson, A. C.
L. Corpl. Sherratt, Z. O.
L Corpl. Watts, G. R.
L. Corpl. Weld, A. G.
Pte. Anderson, A.
Pte. Anderson, L. J. R.
Pte. A. B.
Pte. Armstrong, C. S.
Pte. Baigent, H. R.
Pte. Baker, A. V.
Pte. Bateup, E.
Pte. Bath. L. A.
Pte. Becker, L.
Pte. Bennett, A. S.
Pte. Braithwaite, J. R. F.
Bug. Brenton, L. V.
Pte. Brotherhood, W. C.
Pte. Curks, E. J.
Pte. Catho, L. E.
Pte. Clouston, N. B.
Pte. Coakley, R. J.
Pte. Collins, A. K.
Pte. Couch, W. A.
Pte. Coulter, J. L.
Pte. Craigie, R. J. V-
Pte. Croll, D. G.
Pte. Davis, N.
Pte. Dench, J. R. A-
Pte. Dunlop, J.
Pte. Flint, F. H.
Pte. Garden, W. H.
Pte- Goldsmith, C. W.
Pte. Goodman, W. G. A.
Pte. Hall, W. H.
Pte. Handley, H. W.
Pte. Hargreaves, H. H.
Pte. Harland, G. C.
Pte. Hearn, H. C .G.
Pte. Hindmarsh, A. F.
Pte. Holloway, W. S.
Pte. Home, T. H.
Pte. Jackson, S. G.
Pte. Jordan, A. V.
te. Kibblewhite, J. H.
Pte. Kibblewhite, R. E.
Pte. Law, M» H.
Bug. LePetit, E. G.
Pte. Lynch, D.
Pte. Maclver, F. N.
Pte. Marley, A. W.
Pte. Marten, G. W. S. *
Pte. Matheson, D. M.
Pte. Matheson, L.
Pte. W. H.
Pte. McCulloch, A. A.
Pte. Newsome, W. H. S.«
Pte. H. A. C.
Pte. Olson, A. W.
Pte. Pat&rson, W. L.
Pte. Paton, B. R. •
Pt,e. Patterson, W.
Pte. Rice, A. J.
Pte. Richardson, P- I.
Pte. Ricketts, R. S.
Pte. Sage, D. R.
Pte. Shepherd, R. W.
Pte. Sherwood, G. C.
Pte. Skam, A. E.
Pte. Stace, E. L. '
Pte Stewart, R.
Pte. 'ullivan, L.
Pte. Sutherland, R. A.
Pte. Syendsen, A. P.
Pte. Tarr, A. D.
'Pte. Taylor, H.
Pte. Thom, W. H.
Pte. Thompson. G. JD
Pte. Tolmie, E.
Pte. Walker, B. G.
Pte. Worrall, E.
Pte. Worsley, C- H.
Pte. Wright, D. C-
N. Z. ENGINEERS.
Sergt. Englefield.
L. Corpl. Prince, A. V.
Sapper Barnes, F. C.
Sapper Becker
Sapper Henwood, C. C.
Sapper Hollobon, A.
Sapper McCarthy, P.
Sapper Park, R.
S'apper Thomas, O. H.
Sapper Watson, H. S.
Sapper Whetton, W. H.
SHIP'S OFFICERS
Commander I. A. Sutcliffe
Mr. H. J. Wilde, Ist Officer
Mr. A. Smith, 2nd Officer
Mr P. W. Dunlop, 3rd Officer
Mr. F. Robinson, 4th Officer
Surgeon, Mr. C. G. Learoyd
Chief Engineer, Mr. W. R. Sneddon
Mr D? Corbett, 2nd Engineer
Mr. J. L. Mollison, 3rd Engineer
Mr H. F. White, 4th Engineer
Mr. A. H. Booker, sth Engineer
Mr. A. Skene, 6th Engineer
— •
Mr. W. Singer, Ist Refrigerating Engineer
Mr. J. A. Canning, 2nd Refrigerating Engineer
Mr. J. C. Budge, Electrician
Mr. P. Bowen, Chief Steward
Mr. J. Budge, Mr. S. Brown, Wireless Operators
"THE REMUERIAN'


if
.
• •
• • •
• • •
«
• t • • •
• *1
I • •
• • t •
►
• •
• . • •
. • • .
I
«
• I
• •
i.i;,. I ■ iv. J- "i
y*


CLUBS, CANTEENS, ETC., IN BLIGHTY
NEW ZEALAND SOLDIERS' CLUE, 17, 18, & 23, Russell Square,
London, W. C.
Open at all hours for the reception and accommodation of N.Z. soldiers.
Fine billiard-room, reading and writing rooms, and every convenience and
comfort. Beds for 200 men. Canteen for light refreshments open day and
night. Run by N.Z. ladies. Tariff: Dinner Is.; bed, breakfast and tea, -
Bd. each. R. H. NOLAN, Hon. Sec.
NEW ZEALAND SOLDIERS' CLUB, Endless Street. Salisbury.
Billiards, reading, writing, music, baths and meals. Open from 9a. m.
to 11 p. m. Commandant: MISS N. HAY.''
• "AO-TEA-ROA CLUB," Codford Camp.
Billiards, reading, writing, music, games and meals. Commandant:
MRS. SHELLSHEAR.
"MAHUTONGA CLUB," New Zealand Convalescent Hospital,
Hornchurch.
'Billiards, reading, writing, music, games and refres 1 mints.
"KIA ORA CLUB," Brockenhurst
Billiards, reading, wrung, music, games and refreshments. Command-
ant: MISS HAMERTON.
"HAERAMAI CLUB," No. 2 New Zealand General Hospital, Walton-
on-Thames.
Billiards, reading, writing and music. Commandant: MRS. CAPPEL.
"TE AROHANUI CLUB," Oatlands Park, Weybridge.
Billiards, reading, writing and music. Commandant: MRS WILDER.
"KOREF.O CLUB," Harcourt Road, Boscombe Park, Hants.
Billiards, reading, writing, music, games and refreshments. MRS.
McCALMONT, Hon. Sec.
"TE WHAREPUNI," Hornchurch Room.
Billiards, reading, writing, music, tennis-court and refreshments. MISS
ALLAN in charge.
CLUB ROOM, 11, Southampton Row.
Reading, writing and refreshments. Kits replenished. Theatre tickets
issued. Excursions arranged, etc. Every New Zealander welcome. General
information dispensed. MRS. EMPSON in charge. Telephone Museum
3190.
Engraved and Printed at
HALIFAX, CANADA
by the
ROYAL PRINT & LITHO LIMITED
