

Reuoious WHS
Box ll
THE THIRST FOR GOD
§ec m o n
( Preached in the Temperance Hall , Melbourne , 6th September , iSBp)
REV. CHARLES STRONG
[published by request]
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE
PRICE SIXPENCE.
[surplus proceeds for charitable purposes.]




THE THIRST FOR GOD
(Preached in the Temperance Hall, Melbourne , 6th September , iBBp )
REV. CHARLES STRONG
[published by request]
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE


“ Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us.”— St. John's Gospel.
“ God shall be all in all.”— St. Paul.
“ O God ! light of the hearts who see Thee, and life of the souls that love
Thee, and strength of the thoughts which seek Thee, grant that with a holy love
I may cleave to Thee.”— Augustine, Manual of Devotion.
“ It is this capacity of transcending the finite, this affinity to that which is
universal and infinite, which constitutes the latent grandeur of man’s nature, and
has been the secret impulse to all that is great and noble in the individual
life, and in the history of the race.”— lntroduction to Philosophy of Religion,
by Principal Caird.
“ The tendency to see beyond all moral laws an eternal sanction, and to find
beneath the vision of the world an all-comprehensive life, is as irrepressible, and
surely as true to the significance of the universe, as the craving of the eye for
colour, or of the ear for beautiful sounds.”— Mystery of Matter, J. A Hanson
Picton.
“It is the office of a true teacher to show us that God is, not was ; that He
speaketh, not spake. The true Christianity—a faith like Christ’s in the infinitude
of man—is lost.”— Emerson.
“ There are moments in our life when those who seek most earnestly after God
think they are forsaken of God ; when they hardly venture to ask themselves,
*Do I, then, believe in God or do I not?’ . . Their despair may be better than
many creeds.”— Hibbert Lecture, by Max Muller.


THE THIRST FOR GOD.
Psalm XLII. 2.
“ My sojil thirsteth for God , for the living God."
The man who wrote this forty-second Psalm is
unknown to us by name. Like the writer of the
eighty-fourth Psalm, he seems to have been a
captive Israelite, who, amid the taunts of those
who had taken him prisoner, sighed and longed
for the temple-courts and the happy days when
he went up with a multitude that kept the joyous
festivals. The plaintive cry of both of these most
beautifully pathetic Hebrew songs is the same—a
cry for the presence of Him who to His worship-
pers was the Living God, the True One amid the
false divinities of the heathen, the Righteous One,
the God of the nation of Israel. “My soul longeth,
yea, even fainteth for the courts of Jahveh. My
heart and my flesh cry out for the living God.
Yea, the sparrow (more fortunate than the pining
captive) hath found her an house, and the swallow
a nest for herself, where she may lay her young;


even thine altars, O Jahveh of hosts, my King and
my God. ... I had rather be a doorkeeper
in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents
of wickedness.”—So sings the writer of the eighty-
fourth Psalm. “My tears have been my meat day
and night while they continually say unto me,
Where is thy God ? ” —So sings the author of the
forty-second Psalm. This God is not a mere local
God—a God who dwells in Jerusalem or Palestine
alone. Even in a foreign country “Jahveh will
command His loving-kindness in the daytime, and
in the night His song shall be with me, even a
prayer unto the God of my life.” Yet in Jerusalem,
in the temple, He is thought of as specially
dwelling. “ When shall I come and appear before
God ? ” Or, as it is expressed in the forty-third
Psalm, possibly by the same poet —“ O send out
Thy light and Thy truth : let them lead me : let
them bring me unto Thy holy hill and to Thy
tabernacles ; then will I go unto the altar of God,
unto God my exceeding joy.”
Now, brethren, the question may arise in your
minds, was there anything universal in this deep-
drawn sigh of the Hebrew poets ? That there was
something temporary and local in it we cannot
deny. Palestine, Jerusalem, the Hebrew nation-
ality, the temple, the altars, the sacred festivals—
these were all local, temporary elements in their
religious conceptions. But was there not at least
the germ of something wider and more enduring
wrapped up in what was local and temporary ?


There was. They sighed for a living One amid the
idols—or nothingnesses, as the word in Hebrew
means—of the heathen nations. They sighed for
One who was the righteous God, a place at the
door of whose temple was better than dwelling in
tents of wickedness. And they sighed for One who,
with the higher spirits of the day, they believed to
be near them even in a foreign land.
It is in this permanent element of thought and
feeling that we find a point of union with this
Hebrew singer. Palestine and Jerusalem, the
Hebrew nationality, the temple, the altars, the
sacred festivals—these things have dropped away.
But the poet’s words, like the words of all true
poetry, find an echo far beyond his land or age.
From Greece and Rome, from Asia and Europe,
from America and Australia, there come echoes
loud and faint, “ God, the living God.” From the
men of thought and the men of action, from
philosopher, and poet, and practical philanthropist,
there comes an echo, even though that echo is
sometimes borne as by the winds of a dark Job-
like or Ecclesiastes-like despair.
“ Upward tending all though weak,
Like plants in mines which never saw the sun,
But dream of him, and guess where he may be,
And do their best to climb and get to him.”*
Yes, even in the denial of God may we not see the
demand for Him in disguise ? Much so-called
Paracelsus. ” — Browning,


atheism is but the denial of Jerusalem, and Hebrew
nationalism, and temples, and altars built by human
hands and fenced round by priests and presbyters
—the local and temporary elements which are
inevitably mixed up with all religions, even the
purest. Much of it is the denial that men’s souls
long for the God of Calvin or Laud, or the Christ
of Mediaeval theology. Much of it comes in the
name of indignant truth, which even in its negation
affirms ; while even the melancholy and despair of
pessimism, which have clouded the hearts of some
to-day, seem to bear witness to a faith and hope of
which (may we not say ?) they are but the reversed
motion—the force in dissipation. The man who
protests that the world is a sham, and bids us quit
it, is really bearing witness to truth and reality
which, rather than be without, he would have us
commit suicide and sink into the bliss of extinction.
Denial may thus be but affirmation in another
form. Melancholy and despair do not spring out
of disbelief, but out of the faith which is the
strength of such disbelief, as light gives meaning
to darkness, and good to evil. The atheist may
thus in reality be nearer to the religious life than
the easy-going believer. The despair of Job
expressed in that notable chapter which we read
this morning,* when he cries out in his utter
misery, is a higher thing than the superficial
theology of the friends who sought to console him
* Job xix.


witn their religious platitudes. There was more
faith in Job’s despair than in his self-complacent
friends’ beliefs.
Now let us try to understand what is the
meaning of man’s longing for God.
Let us understand first what it is not. Some
people long for God to give them corn and wine,
to destroy their enemies, to gratify their selfish
desires. It is not only in a barbarous age that He
is thus longed for. Many Christian prayers are
little else than this. “ Thou hast put joy into my
heart,” said a psalmist, “ more than when corn and
wine abound.” “ Heart and flesh faint and fail,”
says another, “ but God is the strength of my
heart and my portion for ever.” But this of which
we speak is cupboard love. It is not God that is
desired, but what God is supposed to give. Some
long for God to deliver them from suffering. “ Save
me from pain, from curse, from hell. Good Lord
deliver us.” This may be a natural cry, but it has
nothing necessarily sacred or divine in it. It may
be but the sigh of slaves to be delivered from a
hard taskmaster. This is not, properly speaking,
the longing for God, though it may be intimately
associated with it. I long for pleasure ; I long for
happiness ; I long to be delivered from punish-
ment ; I long for the pearly gates of heaven ; I
long for salvation from hell. This language is not
equivalent to “My soul thirsteth for God.” One
might desire the happiness of eating, and yet have no
hunger. There are gluttonous people who lament


that they cannot eat any more, and the intemperate
drinker may wish that he could feel the sensuous
thrill of intoxicating liquor. But this is not exactly
natural thirst or hunger. So people may call upon
God who have yet no thirst or hunger for God.
How, then, shall we describe the thirst for God?
It may be described in the first place as the
longing of onr thought for an Infinite Mind. “ Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God,” we read, “ with all
thy mind.” The mind has its love. It springs to
the embrace of thought. It yields itself captive to
thought. Its joy, and even rapture, is to mingle
itself with thought. A modern writer tells us of
the solemnity and impressiveness of the moment
when he watched the transit of Venus. I think he
speaks of an intensity of emotion which brought
tears to the spectators’ eyes. What affected him
so profoundly was, says he, “ the wonderful coinci-
dence between the numerical laws governing the
movement of the heavenly bodies, and those facul-
ties of the human mind which had been able to
discover them and to predict their operation.”*
And the feeling is natural. Can you not imagine
the rapture of a great discoverer, as, after long and
earnest search, the light flashes across his mind,
and the grand law of gravitation, or of the circula-
tion of the blood, or of the electric spark, comes to
him as a revelation ? Such a moment might well
bring tears to his eyes. This love of truth, this
surrender of a man’s mind to it, to be filled with it
Duke of Argyll in Good Words, April, 1885.


to mingle with it as the ray in the sun, as the drop
in the ocean, as the note in the chord of harmony,
is the satisfaction of the mind’s thirst for an Infinite
Mind. To this it reaches forth in intellectual faith.
From its longing it takes for granted that there is
satisfaction for that longing, as thirst implies water.
Destroy this faith that there is an infinite intelli-
gence, reason, thought, in which it may bathe and
lose itself as in an ocean, and you strike at the
root of all rational progress, and leave the mind
drifting like a broken spar upon a waste of chaos.
What is all true Science, all true Philosophy, all
true Art, but the sigh of the soul for God—a sigh
which becomes in religion conscious of itself, or
rather conscious of its Object? The thirst for God
is thus the thirst for Truth—for oneness with that
Mind in which we all think—for an Eternal
Thought in all, through all, above all.*
Or, to put it otherwise, the thirst for God is the
longing of the human mind for an Ultimate Reality.
All here is change. All here seems incomplete.
We have but “ broken lights,” and see as “ in a
mirror darkly.” But the mind of man is miserable
and restless until it finds reality. It cannot bear to
be incomplete and to entertain the thought that
the great Mind of the Universe is a cheat and
a deceiver, a phantom, a will o’ the wisp—that
the stream has not its source in hidden heights,
* A suggestive article by G. J. Romanes, F.R.S., in the Content •
porary Review for July, is worth reading in connection with this
view of religion.


and its end in a boundless ocean. In our brightest
hours let the thought steal over us, all is but a
bubble—there is no reality—and it is as though a
cloud had stolen across the sun, or night crept over
noon-day. In our intellectual joy and pursuits of
science or philosophy, in our deepest studies of art,
let us feel for a moment there is no eternal truth,
no home for the human mind, all is but “ a snow-
flake on the river,” and it is as though winter had
suddenly appeared in the garden of summer. In
our love let us feel there is no root deeper than that
of the fleecy cloud in the azure sky, and it is as
though apples turned at a magic touch to ashes.
For completeness, for a meaning, a goal, an end we
thirst. And what is the thirst for this, but the
thirst for a living God ? The intellectual and
rational are sometimes supposed to be incom-
patible with the longing for God. If what I have
been saying is true, they lie at the root of that
longing ; for the love of God is the love of mind
for mind, of the incomplete thought for the Perfect,
and all rational life and progress is the endeavour
to reach the Real.
Once more, my friends, we may say that the
thirst for God is the desire of the soul for reconcilia-
tion with Ideal Goodness and Righteousness. Recon-
ciliation is the key-note of Christianity— ?wt pardon
merely— not freedom from a penalty— not a heaven
of golden streets and endless harpings, but oneness
of soul with eternal righteousness—growth into “ a
perfect man ” —“ a new man ” —“ a second Adam.”


The cry of the Christian soul is not for rewards of
virtue or merit. To it there is no such word as
merit, and to speak of reward for goodness and love
may be as insulting as to speak of a reward for not
picking pockets, adulterating goods, or falsifying
accounts. To be true, to be righteous, to love, a
good man will tell you, is its own reward, and makes
its own heavenly music, its own shining city of pure
gold and fairest precious stones. The prayer of
religion is—“ Create in me a clean heart. Let me
be one with righteousness, goodness, charity; let
the ideal in me become the real; let Christ be
formed in me ; let me be one with Christ ; let me
be buried with Christ, crucified with Christ, risen
with Christ, clothed with the wedding garment of
Christ’s righteousness.” We have given a purely
legal meaning to some of these phrases, thus
emptying them of their spirituality. But they are
only dry bones until we feel breathing upon them
the breath of religious desire to be one with “ the
new man,” and to escape from the bondage and
corruption of the lower nature. Read your doc-
trines of atonement in this light—the light of the
Spirit—and the purely forensic and fictitious—the
bald, lifeless dogma—becomes like a cathedral
whose windows are suddenly lighted up at mid-
night from within, and whose cold masonry seems
to pour forth warm melody of faith and love.
Now, what is this longing to be one with the
ideal goodness and righteousness but the longing
to be one with a Divine Order—the Divine Order


as manifest in the moral and spiritual life—one
with the Spirit of the highest life—one with the
Spirit of moral truth, and right, and love—shall we
not say, one with God, even when God is not
named ? Is not religion morality become conscious
of itself, or, rather, conscious of its real root and
aim ? In all the higher religions the thirst for
God is a longing for a life in Divine Thought
revealed not merely in the speculative, but in the
practical sphere also, and made man’s through
surrender of the will and endeavour of the life to
realize it. Thus Judaism culminates in the prophetic
anticipation of a law of righteousness written on
the people’s heart, and Christianity in the union of
men with a Messiah after the Spirit—with God
manifest in a life of purity, goodness, self-sacrifice,
filial love.*
Or look at this from still another point of view.
Not only for himself, but for others also, does a
good man desire reconciliation with “ the new man
who after God is created in righteousness and
holiness of truth.” Hence Jesus said not only
“ Be perfect as your Father,” but also “ Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God;” and taught His
disciples to pray first, “Thy Kingdom come.”
The root of true social enthusiasm for the progress
of man—true philanthropy—is the thirst for a
Divine Order, for the fulfilment of the ideal beauty
and righteousness among men, that is, for God.
* On the relation between Morality and Religion a suggestive
chapter will be found in the “History of Religions,” by Reville.


“ Behold,” sang - an ancient prophet, “ the days
come when I will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel. I will put my laws in their
minds and write them on their hearts, and they
shall be to me a people and I will be to them a
God.” In the minds of the ancient Hebrew
prophets the Messianic hope was always bound up
with the thought of a Divine Order manifested in
a more perfect national life. And so, too, is it
with the Christian. Our Utopia, our Heaven, our
Kingdom of God, is a more perfect social state.
Our Christian statesmen labour for it; our
Christian political economists are thinking for it ;
our Christian philanthropists are sacrificing them-
selves for it; our Christian prophets and poets are
singing of it.
“ Ring out a slowly-dying cause,
And ancient forms of party strife
Ring in the nobler modes of life,
With sweeter manners, purer laws.
“ Ring in the valiant man and free,
The larger heart, the kindlier hand ;
Ring out the darkness of the land,
Ring in the Christ that is to be !”*
“ There shall come a time when each shall to another
Be as Christ would have him—brother unto brother;
When the bars of creed and speech and race, which sever,
Shall be fused in one humanity for ever.
But not for us, who watch to-day and bum ;
Thou shalt come, but after what long years of trial,
Weary watchings, baffled longings, dull denial !”t
* “In Memoriam. ” — Tennyson.
f “ Songs of Two Worlds.”


Now, this longing for social justice and righteous-
ness, for a true brotherhood, for a reformed world,
for the law of free, enlightened, unselfish Manhood
rather than of the animal what is this but the
longing for God to dwell in man and man in Him?
for the New Jerusalem, which is described in the
Apocalypse as descending out of heaven with a
cry, “ Behold the tabernacle of God is with men ! ”
Cut off the thought of a Divine Order, and all our
philanthropies, and social reform schemes, and pro-
phetic poetry, wither like Jonah’s gourd. These
must be regarded as but modern forms of the soul’s
longing for God, the living God —a longing not
always conscious of its own deepest meaning
“ groaning” whose full meaning “ cannot be uttered,”
but in whose depths God abides.
Again, the thirst for God may be described
as the desire of a child for a Father. “ Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God,” we read, “ with
all thy heart,” Man is terribly solitary.' Sur-
round him with the marvels of the universe,
the starry heavens above with their unfathomable
oceans of beauty and mystery, the earth beneath
with its wonders of mineral and plant and animal,
the blushing dawn and the tranquil night, the
music of wind and stream and gently lapping wave.
Let it be spring-time with its rush of new life, or
summer with its ripeness, or autumn with its tints,
or winter with the fallen leaf. Surround him even
with the companionship of his fellow-men, and yet
in the depth of his soul—let poets sing as they will


that “this is not solitude”—is not man solitary?
You may recollect that passage in one of Tyndall’s
addresses, where the natural philosopher, standing
amid the sprouting blade and life of spring-time,
asks himself if he is the highest being in the
universe.* In that wonder was there not the sigh
of man for God—of the human spirit for the Divine
—of the son for a Father ? Perhaps you say the
word “ Father” is anthropomorphic. Granted that
it is borrowed from an earthly relationship, it is not
necessarily false. It may come short of the reality,
as what word which we can use does not ? but this
may be because the reality is greater and grander,
not less than the earthly word. This, at least, is a
word which suits the heart, and so long as we do
not make an idol of it, may be a mirror in which the
truth is reflected. It carries with it the thought
that the Most High is not less than we. We are
personalities. That is the deepest consciousness of
our natures. Take away my consciousness of self
—that which no induction or deduction can prove
or disprove, and without which to start from there
could be no induction or deduction —without which,
indeed, there would be no world thinkable—and I
slide down into an animal or a stone. The biggest
word in the dictionary is a word of one letter— l.
And all progress is this I developing, assimilating
truth, moral, intellectual, spiritual, making that
truth a part of itself. As men become great they
* Belfast Address.


do not lose self-consciousness. Their self becomes
wider. The mind brings in a new world, and the
conscience and the heart bring in new worlds, and
the self takes them up into itself, and so grows and
expands into a great and a greater personality, with
a wider and yet wider self-consciousness. Philoso-
phers have thus sought to argue that the highest
Being is not, as is sometimes represented, the im-
personal, but the personal, and that God is best
spoken of in philosophical language as the Absolute
Self-Consciousness —not less, but more personal
than we.* However this may be, we cannot love
or trust or worship that which we conceive of as
impersonal. We must have One to worship to
whom we may use the language—Thou and Thee,
imperfect though we may think such language is.
Do you recollect that remarkable passage in one
of Carlyle’s Letters,*J* where, in answer to Sterling,
who had upbraided him with not believing in a
personal God, he writes, “ It is frankly said with a
friendly honesty for which I love you. A grave
charge, nevertheless—an awful charge—to which, if
I mistake not, the Professor, laying his hand on his
heart, will reply with some gesture expressing
the solemnest denial.” Yet he adds, “In gesture
rather than in speech, for the Highest cannot be
spoken of in words. Personal ! Impersonal! One !
Three ! What meaning can any mortal (after all)
* This is well argued in a little book, entitled “ Evolution and
Involution,” by George Thomson (Trubner). “ Perfect personality
is only in God.” (Lotze.)
f “ Carlyle’s Life and Letters.”


attach to them in reference to such an object ?
Wer darf Ihn nennen ? (Who dares to name
Him ?) I dare not, and do not.” Furthermore,
we must have One to worship who is not far
off. A cold Deism will not satisfy. A great
mechanician does not meet the desire for God.
Hence philosophy and religion, from early times
down to the present, have sought for a God who
“ is not far from any one of us ; ” “in whom,” as
Paul says, in that grand speech which we read
to-day,* “ we live and move, and have our being
and of whom, quoting from a Greek poet, he de-
clares that we are the offspring. Here is the charm
of Christianity. It proclaims not a God afar off, but
One near to all—Spirit dwelling in man—Father
of spirits, to whom our natures are akin, and of
whose nature men are made partakers through the
indwelling of the Spirit of Jesus, of whom we read,
“ He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father.’’
Now, these two longings for One to worship who is
not less than we, and One who is not separated
from man by an impassable gulf like that between
clay and potter, are satisfied in the word which
Jesus ever used—“ Abba,” Father ; and, so far as
we can see, that is the highest word in religion. It
expresses better, perhaps, than any other (though
we repeat it must not be made an idol of), the
aspiration of the human soul, the thirst of the soul
for God, the living God. And it is the professed
* Acts xvii.


satisfaction of that cry, “ Show us the Father,” in
Christianity, which is its power over human hearts.
This, as I understand it, is the heart of the great
dogma of Christ’s Divinity the faith that God
was, and is, in man manifest in the flesh reconciling
the world to Himself. Whatever may be our
speculative conceptions as to such things, it is the
desire for the Father, and the satisfaction of that
desire, which are the spring and strength of these
conceptions. Thus the Divinity of Christ may be
truly said to be the heart of Christianity when
looked at not as a dogma of the schools, to be
swallowed down after the manner of the Athan-
asian Creed, but as words of “ Spirit and life.”
“ My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God.”
This is the voice of humanity, heard in the cry of
the mind for truth and reality beneath the shows of
things, in the desire for reconciliation with ideal
goodness and righteousness, for a higher social state
and a reformed world, in the longing which finds
expression in the words of the fourth Gospel,
‘ Show us the Father, and it sufificeth us.”
Is this the thirst for God ? Then how different
must religion be from what we have sometimes
pictured it! We have pictured it as apart from
our reason, if not indeed contradictory to it,
and some have even gloried in the thought of
crushing out their minds. The more irrational a
creed, the more credit it has been thought for
believing it. And so the stones of the incredible,
and even the unintelligible, have been presented to


us in the name of the Lord. lam far from saying
there can be no such thing as mystery, or “ know-
ing in part ” and “ seeing in a mirror darkly,” but
if you present me with the unintelligible and
incredible, and bid me receive it, even in the name
of the Lord, in the name of the Lord of truth and
reason I reject it indignantly. If God has given
me a mind to long for truth and reality, then I will
not believe that when I ask for bread the Author of
that longing gives me a stone. Let Him say, how-
ever, “ My child, you cannot know all ; wait, trust,
hope ;it is best so ” —I answer from my heart and
soul, “ Amen. ” Sometimes, too, what is repugnant
to our best moral feelings is presented to us in the
name of religion. Representations of God are given
which shock our instincts, doctrines of eternal tor-
ture, teachings as to God’s mode of dealing with man,
representations of the meaning of atonement and
sacrifice, which belong to a low and childish stage
of thought. You must accept these, it is said, or
be damned. “ Then let us be damned ” is the
only reply. Representations of social abuses and
tyranny and wrong, as being part of the Divine
Order, have sometimes been given. The burning
of witches, the execution of heretics, the slavery of
woman, the right of kings to tyrannize, the right of
priests to do the same, the right of the white man
to make a slave of the black—all this has been
taught in the name of the Bible, in the name of
the Most High. All which we reject in the name
of Him who has given the moral and spiritual


longing for reconciliation with truth, goodness and
righteousness, and a divine society. Sometimes
religion has been presented, also, as obedience to a
taskmaster, as a matter of rewards and punishments,
a mechanical or commercial transaction.* This
also we reject. Religion is either the surrender of
the mind and heart in trust and love to a Spirit
with whom ours are kin, to a Spirit whose dwelling
is in man, to a heavenly Father such as Jesus
spoke of, or it is nothing. It is God in man, and
man in God—it is the endeavour to realize our
highest being, individually and socially, as sons
and daughters of God, or it is nothing.
* This, it is to be feared, is too much the popular notion of what
is called “ salvation.”
George Robertson and Company, Printers, Melbourne.




