

« A MOST EXTRAORDINARY MAN.”
THE LIFE
EXTRAORDINARY CAREER
JOHN GULLY,
BUTCHER-BOY ,
FMII FI&STEE,
GREAT BETTING-MAN,
'E 3 TJD3IjIO-A_lsr
M.P. FOR PONTEFRACT,
&C., &C., &C,
LONDON,
ALLEN, 20, Warwick Lane ; KELLY, Gray’s Inn Gateway,
Holbom ; ELLIOT, Shoe Lane ; HARRIS, Blactfriars Road-
FARRAH and DUNBAR, 47, Booksellers’ Row, Strand;
W. JENKINSON, 16, Shoe Lane; CORNISH, 10, Red Lion
Street, Holborn, and PURKISS, Compton Street, Soho.
Price ONE PENNY,


THE LIFE
EXTRAORDINARY CAREER
JOHN GULLY
John Gully, the well-known sportsman,
died at Durham, on Monday, March 9, in the
80th year of his age. His health and strength
had been gradually failing for some time past,
and his decease was; consequently by no means
unexpected.
In all the crowd of “characters” that have
ever made up the Ding on a racecourse there
were few more famous, and no one whose
career has been so much of a romance, as that
of John Gully. He was, indeed, essentially
one of the,men of has time, and the tryo or
stranger visitor would crave for a look at him
long before his hero-worship centered on the
Jockey Club Lord or the leviathan leg. And


jet Mr. Gully was by no means a remarl able
man in his appearanpe; or, rather, in no way
noticeable for the mere emphasis of his tone
or the quaint cut of his coat.
With a manner singularly quiet, and almost
subdued, he associated the air and presence of
a gentleman, while his fine frame and . com-
manding figure gave an intimate dignity to
his deportment that none who knew him
would care to question. In fact, as your gaze
rested on him, it was almost impossible to
identify the man with the earlier stages of his
history —the Butcher’s Boy, the Prizefighter,
the Public-house Landlord, or the outside
Betting Man. It was easier far to recognize
him as a country squire of good estate, the
owner, of along string of race horses, of the
honourable member of a Reformed Parlia-
ment. In a new country, like America or
Australia, we can hardly imagine that the
Fighting Butcher might in due time develop
into the stately senator; but here, in old
England, Mr., Gully’s success is far unpa-
ralleled. And he owed this not merely to his
great wealth, but far more to his keen judg-
ment, Ms good sense, and a certain straight-
orward respectability about everything he
did. “ The gentlemen ” from the very first
took kindly to Gully, for they felt they could
do so without any of the danger or disgust
but too often resulting from the society of a
self made man .
It must be our business here to trace how


lie achieved! that trying ascent in the world
before him.
Mr. Gully, then, was bom at Bristol, and,
we have ; already intimated, some time in the
year 178$. He was brought up to the trade
of,a Butcher, but very soon [evinced a handle
ness in taking care of himself in sundry fistic
tourneys with the joskins about home. This
ledto his yisting the metropolis, though with
np definite object beyond the practice of his!
trade, in which, however,; he was not very
fortunate, for soon after reaching his 21st
year he was languishing in one of our London
Lock-ups as -a prisoner for debt.' His,fellow-
townsman, Pearce, better known as “ The
Chicken," came to see him at this happy
establishment, when, to beguile the time, they
put on the gloves for a bout or two. Gully
did so well in this set-to that it came to be
talked about, and ultimately he was liberated
by the payment of the claims against him, and
a match made with the Chiken, the latter
staking £6OO to £4OO.
The fight came off, after a disappointment
in the July previous, at Hailsham, in Sussex,
on October 8, 1805, when, after a very game
battle, in which Gully received some fearful,
punishment, his friends interfered, and he was
taken away in the 59th round, after one houy
and ten minutes hard fighting,
Alth on gh beaten Gully was by no means
disgraced, and, in fact, he became, not only a
still giu'utor favorite with the public, but on


Peaece’s retirement, was offered tlie title of
Champion of England , which, however, he de-
clined. Prior to this offer, Gregson, a Lan-
cashire man of immense size, and Gully’s
superior in height and weight, was bold enough
to dispute the Bristolian’s pretensions, and
they met on October 14, 1807, in Six-mile
Bottom, Newmarket, to contend for 200
guineas. Thirty-six rounds were fought with
equal gameness on either part, and with almost
equal punishment, but Gully got the last rally,
and another knock-down blow rendered Greg-
son totally incapable. It was, however, a
very near thing, and naturally enough the
beaten man was anything but satisfied.
Another match was consequently made for
200/. a side, which was decided on May 10 in
Sir John Sebright’s park, in Hertfordshire,
but after nothing like the struggle which sig-
nalized the first meeting of the men, as Gully
from the first had it all his own way, his
science and coolness completely out-generalling
the wild rushes of his adversary. Seldom had
any such an event attracted more interest,
and on the Monday before the fight the good
people of Bedfordshire, when they saw the
crowds of strangers invading them, fancied
the French had landed, and called out the
Volunteers!
At the conclusion of this battle Gully pub-
licly announced his intention of never fighting
again, his left arm having received a perma-
nent injury in his first and more formidable
encounter with Gregson.


BOXIANA thus sums up his merits sis a
boxer;—
“Gully as a pugilist, will long be remembered by the
amateurs of pugilism as peculiarly entitled to their respect and
consideration, and if his battles were not so numerous as many
other celebrated professors have'been, they, were contested with
decision, science, and bottom rarely equalled, and perhaps never
excelled, and justly entitled him to the most honourable mention
in the records of boxing. His practice in the art it was wel}
known had been veiy confined, and his theoretical knowledge
of the science could not have been very extensive, from the
short period he had entered the lists as a boxer; but hi? genius
soared above these difficulties, and, with a fortitude equal to
any man, he entered the ring a most consummate pugilist. In
point of appearance, if his frame does not boast of that elegance
of shape from which an artist might model to attain perfect
symmetry, yet, nevertheless, it is athletic and prepossessing.
He is about 6 feet high.”
On leaving the Ring Mr. Guilt, like most
successful pugilists, inclined to the public life
of a Boniface, and was for some time the
landlord of the “Plough,” in Carey-street,
Lincoln’s-inn-fields. At the bar of which may
be seen, at the present day, a full-length
portrait of Mr. Gully.
Another ring found attractions for him,
and he very soon devoted himself to the
business of a betting man, though not always
as a better round, or layer against horses.
Indeed, at the Newmarket Craven Meeting, in
1810, when Lord Foley’s Spaniard was got
at by some of the Dan Dawson crew for the
Claret, Mr. Gully was among those who
turned round and laid the long odds on the


favourite, upon whose defeat, it is said, his
backer burst into tears, and declared he was
a ruined man. However, in only two years
subsequently, in 1812 that is, Mr. Gully had
horses of his own, Cardenio being the first
that ever ran in his name. He worked on
gradually, still betting round, and at one
period residing at Newmarket, with such cattle
as Brutus, Truth, Rigmarole, Forfeit, Cockrobin
and others, until 1827, when he came to the
fore by the purchase of Mameluke, a horse
that he gave Lord Jersey 4,000 guineas for
after winning the Derby. How his new owner
backed Mameluke for immense sums for
the St. Leger, and how he was beaten by
Matilda after a fearful scene at the post, where
Mr. Gully had himself to flog his horse off, are
now matters of history. But heavily as he had
lost, the first man in the rooms and the last to
leave—never thinking of going, in fact, until
every claim had been satisfied —was Mr. Gully.
Sam Chifney, it will be remembered, rode the
crack against Robinson on the mare, and Sykes
had the care of the Derby winner at Hamble-
don. A year or two subsequent to this Mr.
Gully became the confederate of Mr. Risdale,
and they opened well with Little Red Rover,
who, in 1830, ran second to Priam for the
Derby. Thirty-two, however, was their great
year, when the confederates won the Derby
with St. Giles and the St. Leger with Margrave,
John Scott having the preparation of the latter.
Success, however, did not tend to cement the


friendship cf tie two, and tlieir quarrel came
a t last to a personal encounter in the hunting-
field, upon which Mr. Risdale brougt an action
that terminated,in a verdict, with 500/. dama-
ges, against Mr. Gully for the assault. This
was not by any means the only serious alter-
cation the latter was ever engaged in, as Mr.
Osbaldeston once had him “ out,” when the
Squire sent a ball through his opponent's hat;
but “ Better through my hat than my head,”
said Mr. Gully, as he coolly looked to the
bullet’s course.
During this era in his history Mr. Gully had
purchased Upper Hare-park, hear Newmarket,
of Lord Rivers, where, as we have said he for
some time resided; but he sold this, in turn,
to Sir Mark Wood, and bought Ackworth-park
near Pontefract, an accWsion which somewhat
unexpectedly led to his representing that bor-
ough in the Radical interest forsome sessions
in Parliament. He was twice returned, and!
on the first occasion without a contest!
During his long sojourn here he also figured
as a good man over a country, and as one of
the chief supporters of the Badsworth Fox-
hounds. But the Turf, after all, was his
ruling passion, and in 1834 he was heart and
soul with the Chifneys in their vain endeavour
to win the Derby with Shillelagh, Gully offer-
ing Mr. Batson on extraordinary sum for
Plenipotentiary as the horse was being
saddled. He shifted later on, and for the last


lived for some years at Marwell-hall, near
Winchester, though he had still property in
fortunes of Old John. There was the Ugly
Buck to begin with, with which they won the
Two Thousand in 1844; and then, in the
next year but one, Pyrrhus the First and
Mendicant, with which Mr. Gully won both
the Derby and Oaks. Old Sam Day was his
jockey, and we can recollect no more graceful
illustration of the poetry of motion than that
elegant horseman going up on that sweet mare
Mendicant. Everything was in unison, from
the figure and style of the jockey and the
beautiful look of his filly, down to the very
colour of his cap and jacket—the delicate
violet blended or mounted with white. They
had brought out Weatherbit and Old England
O O
even before this ; and in a few seasons more
Mr. Gully matched them with another such a
pair in The Hermit and Andover, the one a
winner of the Two Thousand and the other
of the Derby.
Rarely has any man enjoyed more signal
success in his favourite pursuit; but, as we
have said already, Gully owed much of this
to his fine judgment, especially noticeable in
the way in which he could reckon up a race
horse, or pick out a young one.
Latterly, what with increasing years and
failing strength, he had gradually declined,
and, having sold Ackworth to Mr. Hill, had


time, when he sent his horses to Danebury,
where they did wonders for the rather falling
the North, including, we believe some coal
mines, hence his death occurring at Durham,
while he was buried at Ackworth, on Saturday,
March 14. He leaves a family of five sons
and five daughters.
THE FUNERAL.
Mr. Gully was interred on Saturday, March
14th, at Ackworth Park. His remains arrived
at Knottingley Station from his seat, near
Durham, a little before 11 o’clock, and were
conveyed to Pontefract. The minute bell was
told, and about twelve the procession passed
through the borough as follows ; —The mayor,
corporation, and the inhabitants (two abreast),
hearse drawn by four horses, mourning coaches
and private carriages.
FINIS.
LONDON:
f dated by M‘CALLUM & CO., 13, Eolls Buildings, Fetter
Lane, Fleet Street, E.C.


Gulley's Fibst Public Fight.- In those days
the fistic art was regarded as a science, and patronised
by the great and wealthy of the land. There always
existed a jealousy between the cities of Bristol and
Bath as to the pre-eminence of the heroes of pugilism,
and it was always the custom to test their respective
qualifications by a passagc-at-arms, or a tournament
pugilistic, on the evening of the fair-day before men-
tioned. On that day there was a trial of skill be-
tween the Bath and Bristol champions. The Bath
man was called The Flying Tinman, a fine, well-put-
together young fellow, ranging from eleven to twelve
stone. The Bristol man was a monster of eighteen
stone; his cognomen was Sixteen String Jack. The
combat took place, and in the course of twenty mi-
nutes The Flying Tinman was polished off. The
shouts of the Bristol men were terrific, and the hero
was carried round the ring in triumph. After that
ceremony the brttte made a speech, saying, if there
were any more Bath squirts that wanted polishing off,
he was quite ready for a dozen of ’em, and that he’d
send ’em home to their mothers in his cart, for he was
sure they wouldn’t be able to walk. Among the spec-
tators were a father and his two sons, as lino speci-
mens of the human form as eyes e’er gazed on. The
father’s name was Gully, and his son John said,
“ Father,let me have a set-to with that great brute.”
“ No, John,” said thefather, 1 supposeheshould kill
thee, boy, ’twill be the death of thee dear mother.”
“ Never mind, father,” said John, “ I shall know
when I have got enough and with these words he
threw his hat in the ring, which betokens the ac-
ceptance of challenge. When this fine young fellow
stripped, he was a model of the human anatomy.
The monster saw this comparatively fragile figure
before him, and the brute cried out in derision to his
man Jack “ to get the cart ready, for in ten minutes
he should send this habby home to his poor mother
a crying.” Well, the fight began, and it resulted in
the defeat of the Bristol brute, who had to be car-
ried to his own cart, amidst the joyous shouts of the
people, who were bearing on their shoulders young
Gully round the ring in triumph. The father
of the hero was a country butcher and inn-
keeper at the beautiful village of Wick, seven miles
from Bath. The fame of young Gully in having de-
feated Sixteen String Jack, the Bristol champion,
soon reached the great metropolis, and emissaries ar-
rived with tempting offers to induce him to visit
London and enter the prize ring. For a time all
temptation was rejected, in deference to the feelings
of his parents. At last, however, he obtained per-
mission to visit London, aad his most brilliant
achievements were in defeating the giant Qregsoa
twice. His straightforward jand manly conduct ob-
tained for him the patronage of the highest of the
land, by whom he was introduced to another and
much more agreeable ring—l mean the racecourse—
and where, by his honourable conduct’, he became
the most distinguished member of the Corner —com-
monly called Tat’s. He bought racers, lie bred
racers, and truly ran the beautiful animals, whereby
he amassed a splendid fortune, ultimately becoming
member of parliament for Pomfret, in Yorkshire.—
Recollections and Wanderings of Paul Bedford.
