

ms@$Q& - ■ .?■, :- ; $£5?■;■ *& 'grafo* ■>- ■: aft*.
wmM ifeaS ■
’ fesg :
fepipiS
? t-;\ ■*
SsSpJK;.,
W0$$&y + I ■
t* cv
tSBBsi0^t
$#$$$£:
V-. $3§
»H^;
FJM's i-? 5 .
y >„ i . #' Tc « w r * t ' - <j* " ‘Jr.** ' a*
;SS I jj» J i«ii^«
■ >r •. • -.. r W$f- Mtyn-Wm > .■
| Mm gmt:
'••fe
1 *■■ <■ '■'■. ■ • v:-- - • •-' •■■ iv •:-y:^*'c Z^.\u » '. « - v • J‘ w :/ r^? ; v : •■■V^-
& i; ; > ; |I#slSS sif
<.
•■•;•;*iifc*£p: / *;'^ , --4'>‘ ; ,' •'. ' ' V>
‘L* : & ■£*'>+
3‘fe- V T VV ' ’ -
mM m 1 ' -*■
"?t?- - f ’•£
“ •'■
xS : . J SS - ■ ■' , ■' 1 .■
»*r- - •-’
vi ?$$$&
• V*^* ’’fi' » J '
1", jfegiftl*'':'- •«
: X : -V : ;




THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY
WEST AUSTRALIA.
WITH A MAP.
PERTH, WEST AUSTRALIA:
Printed by authority, by Stirling, Shell, & Co.
1864.




'Trtfjj
FI Hl*
K] ccpvj




THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY
WEST AUSTRALIA.
WITH A MAP.
PERTH, WEST AUSTRALIA;
Printed by authority, by Stirling, Sholl, & Co.
1864.




CONTENTS.
Page.
Introduction ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 5
Northern Territory of West Australia opened for occupation ... ... 7
Further explanation of Government Notice on above subject ... ... ... 7
Bonus to parties driving stock overland from settled districts ... ... 8
Description of country between Hanover Bay and Glenelg Eiver, by Captain
Grey, 1838. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
Description of Country in the Glenelg Eiver district, by settlers, 1863 16
Do. do about Camden Harbor, Glenelg Eiver, Eoebuck Bay, Dampier
Land, &c., 1864 ... ... ... ... ... 20
Do. do. on Fitzroy Eiver ... ... ... ... 30
Bedout Island ... ... ... ... ... 21
Caffarelli Island and Treacherous Eeef ... ... ... ... 22
Brecknock and Camden Harbors ••• ••• ••• ...• 23
King’s Sound ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Climate, winds, and seasons of North-West Australia ... 14
Beagle Bay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Summary of Lands explored ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
Doubtful Bay and George Water ... ... ... ... l6
Glenelg Eiver ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
Eesources and capabilities of North-West Australia ... ... ... 26




O/ 7-
INTRODUCTION.
The want of additional pasture lands for the increasing flocks and herds of West
Australia, having induced the Local Government of that Colony, in December, 18G2,
to open up for occupation on favorable terms, the northern and eastern portions of its
Territory; a small party of settlers proceeded, in June, 1863. to examine in person
the region of fine country to the southward of Hanover Bay, discovered in 1838 by
Captain Grey, (now Sir George Grey, Governor of New Zealand). This country lies
between the parallels of 15£ deg. and 16£ deg. of South latitude, and on the meridian
of 125 deg. East longitude.
A similar expedition, and for the same purpose, followed in March, 1864 ; and extended
its researches to the country around Eoebuck Bay, in latitude 18 deg. South.
The results proved highly satisfactory, by the discovery of several million acres of
first-rate land, in both of the localities named ; and the probable existence of vast tracts
of similar country beyond the limits explored, and to an unknown extent.
The following particulars are published, for the information and guidance of parties
who may be disposed to avail themselves of these valuable discoveries.




OCCUPATION.
Colonial Secretary's Office,
Perth, 23 rd December, 1862.
It is hereby notified that, from and after the
Ist January, 1863, new portions of the Territory of
Western Australia will be open to general selection
for lease and purchase under the following Regula-
tions, which will be more fully explained in a future
notice.
The portions of Territory affected by these Regula-
tions will be designated; —
First —The North District, bounded on the West
and North by the Sea Coast, including the Islands
adjacent to it, and on the South by the River Mur-
chison, and by a true East line through the summit
of Mount Murchison.
Second —The Past District, comprised between
the longitudes 121 and 129 degrees East, and
between the latitude 30 degrees South and the
South Coast, including the adjacent Islands.
2. The Land in these Districts will be divided
into Classes A and C ;—Class A Lands being for
Annual license, and those in Class C for more ex-
tended occupation. Class A will comprise all land
within two miles of the Sea Coast, including the
adjacent Islands; and Class C will be the remainder.
3. Permission to proceed to the North or East
District for the purpose of occupying Land under
these Regulations, may be obtained by application
in the form S in the Appendix hereto. Such per-
mission will be valid for twelve months from its
date.
4. Free pasturage for the Stock enumerated in
an application, and for their natural increase, will
be allowed on the unappropriated Lands of the Dis-
tricts referred to, for the space of twelve months from
the date of their arrival therein; and within this
period, runs not exceeding (100,000) one hundred
thousand acres for any one establishment, may be
selected in one uniform shape, and be reported in the
form T, for approval.
5. A license (not transferable) will thereupon be
issued for the occupation of any such approved
selection for the space of three years, free of rent;
such three years to commence from the end of the
twelve months last mentioned.
6. At any time within the three years named,
the lawful occupant of any run will be permitted to
select within such run, lots of land not exceeding
twenty thousand acres each. Any such selections of
Class C land will, on approval, be granted on pastoral
lease for 8 years, to commence from the Ist January
next following the date of application: and similar
selections of Class A land within a run will be
granted on annual license, subject to renewal from
year to year, at the option of the Government.
7. Class C leases will be chargeable with one fee
of £5 each at their commencement, together with
five shillings per 1000 for the acreage therein, for
NORTH AND EAST DISTRICTS OF WEST AUSTRALIA OPENED FOR
the first four years, and ten shillings per thousand
acres for each of the second four years. Class A
licenses will be charged at the same rates for acreage,
but no license fee. All payments to be in advance.
8. Leases and Licenses will be transferable while
chargeable with rent, on its being shown to the
satisfaction of the Governor that they have been
properly stocked.
9. Runs or Leases may be resumed either wholly
or in part, for public purposes; or for sale, on giving
twelve months’ notice; but compensation will in such
case be given, according to valuation or agreement,
for any lawful improvements effected on a lease
chargeable with rent previous to such notice.
10. During the free occupation of a run, and
during the first year of a lease, the lawful occupant
of the same will be allowed a right to cultivate; but
no claim for damages by trespass of stock will be
admissible, unless the land trespassed upon shall
be properly fenced.
11. In all other respects, the disposal and tenure
of the Crown Lands in the North and East Districts
will be governed by the provisions of the existing
Land Regulations.
12. No protection or government establishment
will be guaranteed to the public, until deemed ex-
pedient by the Government.
By His Excellencv’s command,
FRED. P. BARLEE,
Colonial Secretary.
Free Stock Runs in the North and East
Districts or Western Australia.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Perth, 23 rd June, 1863.
PERSONS desirous of proceeding with stock to the
North and East Districts of Western Australia,
under the Regulations published on the 23rd of
December, 1862, are hereby apprised that the free
runs of 100,000 acres each, referred to in Clause 4
of those Regulations, will not be sanctioned by the
issue of the licenses mentioned in Clause 5, unless
the applicants for such runs shall forward with their
applications for the same, a certificate by some
credible person, of the date on which the stock enu-
merated in the Governor’s permission to proceed to
such District actually arrived therein, either by land
or by water.
2. On such date will depend the duration of the
first year’s free pasturage mentioned in Clause 4,
and the duration of the free license referred to in
Clause 5. No such license can therefore be issued
until, in each case, the date required shall be fur-
nished in the manner herein pointed out.
By His Excellency’s command,
FRED P. BARLEE,
Colonial Secretary.


i
3
<1
E
0
1
43
O
|
§
3 i
s !
i :
I :
£ :
S :
2
I
in
I
C 3 *-• t
.m 03 o 5
§ll*
S|a
£g»
:?s
m
fc-ga
w S
g
C fe § g
5
g 's&a
1 111
I I*"
® «
■" u
pa
a
|3
II
•a §
2 ®
o>
S 3
C 3
2 c*
•d o
*g c
d o
c 3 >
*<§
o c 4
1-3
«3
.23
si
sa
g 3
If
c3^
if
*-«
»- , f o
s'Ss
a s .2
-II
c Ss
.§-3|
m B
.2 d^
p »- H
Hi
Tfel
2°2
►.f S
>. :.p
I i|
■a-S
w :5
• C
:??
« f
C3.M
Wft
o.
2 S
i «
The North District.
Colonial Secretary's Office,
Perth, 20 th July, 1864.
It is hereby notified for general information that,
■with a view to establish a practicable overland route
between the settled districts of this Colony and the
newly discovered lands on the North-West Coast,
the first person who may drive stock from any part
of Western Australia, not within its North District,
to any other part of the same, situate to the North
of the Tropic of Capricorn, will be entitled to a
remission of all rents which may accrue, in respect of
: i
: i H
: : °.a
. : 2^
•; a i
• • jq •
I * *cg !
• • .2 ®
si i gs
I! I as
•a: ® 'g-3
o.: s °5
■* < sts
Cm * c 3
si I o
l : I
la 's f
I ||
.2 S
i *? H
§ ; it
* : 1.8
3 i =2
• _ • oS
: § i
:g :
: m g
: ~ S>
: - a a
l & S*s
I e *1
S * .s a
I a S -I
g < M §3
« $ £5
A fi sa
£2 ; *i
OJ OT <« S*g
8| I I
25 ti *
,S 5 I
s § a
J£ S'
8 •> s
e 1.,
M «a
d fig
w «1:
s §3
** ®t«
o 0 °
H §
ft
any lands he
'.e, such district, i
July, 1864 her, 1862, to i
Drmatlon that, P erson
overland route ie ac t ua %
olony and the * °f
h-West Coast, proportion of (
from any part hirthe
forth District, ° n application
to the North Bv Hi
58
■3l
||
|-3
S”i
=*- ra
000 &:
s
8 :2
: :s
Nl
•
: ef.2
jll
-s :g
3 |S
C «Jt3
§
l2s
cr. ..9
S I
£OO 8.
-II
ft "H
2 ;
:g
ft<e §
63 t>v
>.S?s
S : o
h i g
:l
His Excellency’s command,
I| ! *
s | : :
£§ : :
il I :
• • •
t 2 ; ; j U
•• 2 2
gg : • s S
■<§ : : g g
II JI
|a j 111
Ii I i
|l 2 : : :
2-S o : : :
§. g : : •
:| I * : :
if S| i i
: S w q : ►
ft) • o
58 : S.
•S| i *
fl
oS
•M **
2 1
I
a 2
O -S £
£ U m
S* 1
W
0
od g
H
g §
M *3
w a
1 -* 1
any lands he may take np for pastoral purposes in
such district, under the regulations of 23rd Decem-
her, 1862, to an extent not exceeding 100,000 acres.
No person to be entitled to this privilege, unless
he actually drives to the Country indicated, at least
100 head of horses or cattle, or 200 sheep, or a due
proportion of each, prior to the Ist August, 1865.
Any further information required will be afforded
on application to the Hon. the Surveyor General.
FRED. P, DARLE E,
Colonial Secretary.


COUNTRY BETWEEN HANOVER BAY AND GLENELG RIVER,
BY CAPTAIN
Captain (now Sir George) Grey records the fol-
lowing testimony as to the nature of the country in
that part of North-West Australia situate between
Hanover Bay and the River Glenelg, of which he
was the discoverer and first explorer. (Grey’s Travels
in N.W. and W. Australia, vol. 1, page 109, Ac.): —
“January 6, 1838—I made an excursion this day
for the purpose of examining the land lying between
Port George the Fourth and Hanover Bay: it con-
sists of a low neck which connects the peninsula
terminating in High Bluff Point, with the main.
Thus it is bounded on two sides by the sea, and on
the other two by rocky hills, which are perfectly
precipitous, both towards the main and the penin-
sula ; but a natural terrace runs along under the cliff
in the direction of Camden Sound, which I believe
would form a good road to that harbour. The tract
thus enclosed appears to be very fertile. Pophyry
and basalt are the common rocks. The soil is rich
vegetable mould, mixed with gravel, and covered
with the most luxuriant grass. The trees were in
general small. We only found three springs here;
these, however, were sufficient to prove that it was
well supplied in this respect. A plant w r as observed
here which, in appearance and smell, exactly resembles
the jasmine of England. This neck of land is un-
doubtedly of the first importance; for, lying as it
does, between Port George the Fourth and Hanover
Bay, it commands two excellent harbours, and its
soil is, moreover, fertile. I conceive that a point
nearer Camden Bay would he of greater consequence
to the Mother Country ; but, after such a spot, this neck
of land is the most important position on the North-
West coast of Australia. We made Prince Regent’s
River afterwards about Half-way Bay, and then
followed its course, keeping a mile or tv/o inland. A
considerable portion of the land in the neighbourhood
of the river was most excellent, consisting of rich
meadow plains. The general proportion of good
country compared with the bad was, however, but
small.”
On the 27 th February, the explorers reached a spot
10 or 11 miles south of Hanover Bay, and 6or 7
miles east of Camden Harbour, and had then an
extensive and gratifying view of the surrounding
country. It is described as follows : —“ About 2
p.m. we reached the southern extremity of the sand-
stone ridges, and a magnificent view hurst upon us.
From the summit of the hills on which we stood, an
almost precipitous descent led into a fertile plain
below; and from this part, away to the southward,
for 30 or 40 miles, stretched a low luxuriant country,
broken by conical peaks and rounded hills, which
were richly grassed to their very summits. The
plains and hills were both thinly wooded, and curving
lines of shady trees marked out the courses of nu-
GREY, 1838.
merous streams. Since I have visited this spot, I
have traversed large portions of Australia, but have
seen no land, no scenery to equal it. We were upon
the confines of a great volcanic district, clothed with
tropical vegetation, to which the Isle of France bears
a greater resemblance than any other portion of the
world which lam acquainted with : the rocks in
both cases are identical; many of the trees are also
the same; and there are several other close and
striking points of similarity. The descent into the
low-lands being very difficult, occupied us nearly two
hours \ we then gained the bed of a ravine, in which
ran a clear stream; the ravine gradually widening
out as we reached the plains. I proceeded directly
down it, in the direction of a lofty peaked hill, which
bore to the westward of south; and having gained a
shoulder of this hill, we halted for the night. Im-
mediately above us, a perfectly conical peak raised its
head to the height of at least 500 feet ; this hill was
covered with rich grass, and there could he no doubt
that it was of volcanic origin, for the rock of which
it was composed was vitrified lava, resembling that of
Ascension. The horses and sheep revelled in the
luxuriant pasture. The hill we had encamped on
formed a sort of plateau; behind us stood dark
mountains, and in our front lay fertile plains, from
which green hills rose one behind the other, until
they were lost in the distance, without any percep-
tible change in the character of the country. To the
eastward the prospect was similar, as well as to the
westward, except that in this direction the hills were
more lofty, and behind these the tropical sun was
hurrying down with a rapidity of movement never
witnessed by those who live in the gloomy climes of the
north. I painted in fancy the rapid progress that
this country would ere long make in commerce and
civilization.
“ February 28.—About mid-day we started for
a large sheet of water which had been seen in a S.
by W. direction, but had not proceeded more than
half a mile, when two or three of the men suffered
severely from exposure to the sun, and I was com-
pelled to halt on the bank of a stream, shaded over
by dense trees. When the sun began to fall, we again
moved on, following the course of the stream, which
ran through a fertile valley, about 3 miles wide, and
bounded on either side by gently sloping hills, ex-
tending through a country thinly wooded. We did
not halt until after sunset.
“ March I.—This morning we resumed our route
along the banks of the stream, which continues
gradually to increase in size. The marshy ground
now extended further from its banks, and in order to
free ourselves from this, I ascended some rising
ground to the eastward, along which we pursued our
route until we fell in with another rapid stream.


running from the eastward, and were again involved
in marshy land, which delayed us for some time ere
we found a place where loaded ponies could pass. At
length, however, having succeeded in getting clear of
these obstructions, we continued our southerly course
till we came to a deep stream, running from S.S.E.;
hut not being able to cross it there, we travelled
along its banks until a ford was found; and as soon
as we had passed over, I halted for breakfast.
“We had traversed a most beautiful country this
morning, composed of basaltic rocks and fine alluvial
soil, whilst from the size and number of the streams,
it must be as well watered as any region in the
world. Before we had completed our breakfast,
violent tropical rains set in; these were so cold that
some of the men got into the stream, the waters
of which were comparatively warm, and they thus
saved themselves from the painful feeling caused by
very cold water falling on the pores, which had been
previously opened by profuse perspiration. The
heavy rains continued without intermission for the
remainder of the day and night; and two of the men
were, on this occasion, attacked with dysentery,
cause.d, I believe, by cold and exposure.
“ March 2.—We started at dawn, crossing aperies
of low ridges, which ran out from a chain of hills to
the eastward of us, and increased in elevation as we
proceeded to the south. We passed numerous streams,
and the country generally continued of a very rich
and fertile character: at last, from the top of one of
these ridges, there burst upon the sight a noble river,
running through a beautiful country, and where we
saw it, at least 3 or 4 miles across, and studded with
numerous verdant islands. I have since seen many
Australian rivers, but none to equal this either in
magnitude or beauty. I at once named it the
Glenelg. My anxiety to reach this stream was too
great to allow me to pass much time in looking at it,
so after I had taken a few bearings we wound down
the steep descent in front, and continued our advance
towards the river, but were still at least 5 miles from
it, when we became involved in low marshy ground,
traversed by slow sluggish streams, the banks of
which were encumbered by a dense vegetation. Such
a country, though admirably adapted both for com-
merce and agriculture, offered almost insurmountable
difficulties to first explorers, at least to such as were
compelled to move rapidly. We at last became so
completely entangled in a marsh, that further pro-
gress w T as hopeless, and we halted to prepare break-
fast, whilst a party searched for a path by which we
might be enabled to proceed. At length a route
was found, and until sunset we continued our jour-
ney over a very difficult but fertile country, and then
halted for the night on a small elevation, embosomed
amidst conical hills, which rose from verdant meadows,
watered by several streams. The country was thinly
timbered, and thickly tenanted by mosquitoes.
“ March 3. —Before the first dawn, I called some
of the party, and we started off to visit the banks of
the river. The first part of our journey lay across
rich grassy flats, thinly wooded with large shady
trees, or over gently rising grounds, on which grew
an abundance of young grass, which appeared to be a
species of oat. These rising grounds were thinly
wooded with a small sort of gum-tree, called in the
Isle of Trance, the Bois noir. We soon reached low
marshy land, intersected with large diy mud flats;
and ‘as it was impossible, from the nature of the
country, to get my pony further, I tethered it, and
made an unsuccessful attempt to reach the river on
foot.
“ March 4.—By sunrise I had gained the foot of
the highest hill near our encampment. It is a very
remarkable rocky eminence; in height above the
immediate base it was only 250 feet, but it rose by a
regular steep slope from the river, which was distant
about 4 miles. Ido not think, therefore, that its
height above the level of the sea was less than 800
feet, I was unable to ride up this hill, from the
rocky nature of the ground, which was composed of a
basalt, resembling that of the Isle of France; its
sides were slightly wooded, and clothed with a fine
grass, nearly as high as myself. From the heaviness
of the dew, walking through a river would have been
about as agreeable as walking through this grass;
but when I had summit, the view amply
repaid me for the trouble of the ascent. The river
flowed through a rich and fertile country at the base
of the hill, having in some places here abouts, a triple
channel, formed by large and apparently fertile
islands, and its width must have been at least 3 or 4
miles. I had a good view of the valley for 10 or 12
miles, in an easterly direction, over a country still
very fertile.”
March s.—This morning, an exploring party
started on foot, to examine the country towards the
river.
“ March 6. —This afternoon, Mr Lushington and
the party returned, having found the northern bank
to consist of low marshy ground, covered with a
luxuriant vegetation, and in some places with such
forests of mangrove trees, that it was impossible to
approach the stream. They, however, succeeded in
reaching one of the channels of the river, which was
upwards of 400 yards wide; the rise and fall of tide
was here about 20 feet, and the current, of course,
extremely rapid. They reported the river as being,
to all appearance, navigable, and that the tide only
set in from the westward. As the southern bank
was bordered by high rocky hills, they saw nothing
of the country in that direction. Their report was,
on the whole, satisfactory ; for it appeared that the
good country still extended along the northern bank,
and that we were upon the main land. A good idea
may be formed of the size of the river where the
party made it, from the circumstance of their seeing
a large shoal of porpoises.
“ March 7. —Tins morning we started early, in a


north-easterly direction, and travelled all day through
a very fertile and picturesque country. On our left
lay hills covered with grass, and on our right exten-
sive plains, through which ran the Glenelg. The
vegetation in these was so luxuriant that it choked the
fresh water up; and whole plains were sometimes
thus inundated ancle deep. The country was thinly
timbered, but in general the trees were of a very
great size: one particularly took my fancy, having
very large leaves, about the colour of the horse-
chesnut, and which cast more shade around them
than any other which I have seen in Australia.
« March B.—We made but little progress to-day,
on account of the denseness of the vegetation, which
was so luxuriant that we found great difficulty in
forcing' our way through it; in several instances,
indeed! it was wholly impassable; and after making
an attempt to penetrate through a jungle, we were
obliged to turn about, and coast round it. The
numerous streams we met with were also a serious
impediment ; for many of these were so muddy and
deep, that we had great difficulty in finding a place
where we could cross. Wd halted for breakfast near
a stream of this kind, under the shade of a large group
of the pandanus. This was evidently a favourite
haunt of the natives, who had been feeding upon the
almonds which this tree contains in its large complex
fruit; and to give a relish to their repast had mingled
with it roasted unios, or fresh-water muscles, which
the stream produced in abundance. The remains of
some old spears were also lying about, but the natives
themselves were not visible. Immediately after
breakfast I ascended a hill, to see if we could in any
way get clear of the deep stream on the banks of
which he had breakfasted. The Glenelg was distant
about 3 miles to the south, and I found that in order
to disengage ourselves from the waters which almost
encompassed us, we must turn off to the N.W., and
thus almost double back on our former track, as
there was no other resource. We spent the rest of
the day in crossing two deep streams, and then pro-
ceeded about a mile to the eastward, where we halted
for the night, on the bank of a rocky water-course,
but not containing a drop of water. The timber
to-day was larger than I had yet seen it, affording
many new kinds, and one in particular, resembling
in appearance and quality the English oak.
“ March 9.—We moved through a low country
densely vegetated, and still abounding in deep slug-
gish streams, almost unapproachable, on account of a
dwarf bamboo, and other tropical plants which
clothed their margins. Some of these streams were
20 feet deep, and upwards, and looked more like
canals than water-courses. The place where we
halted for the night was not very distant from the
river, for its roaring, as it forced itself over a rapid,
could be distinctly heard. As it was important to
ascertain if it ceased to be navigable at this point, as
well as whether it could be forded or not, I ordered a
party to proceed at daylight and examine it, and in
the interim we laid down to enjoy such repose as
myriads of mosquitoes would allow us.
“ March 10. —The party started at dawn, and
returned in the afternoon. They arrived at low
water at a point where the river formed a series of
rapids, and was apparently broken into several chan-
nels ; the one which they reached was not more than
50 or 60 yards wide, the tide at low water being full
7 or 8 feet below the level of the rocks which formed
the rapids, but at high water it rose, judging from
the marks on the rocks, as many feet above them.
This channel would, therefore, cease to be navigable
for vessels at this point, but large boats could pro-
ceed up it at high water. There was no apparent
possibility of our being able to pass it hereabouts, on
account of the great rapidity of the current. The
river continued fresh below the rapids, and their
account of the character of the country they saw
was most satisfactory. Almost immediately after
they had entered the camp the rain began to fall in
such torrents that it was impossible for us to move;
this was unfortunate, for where we were halted was
unfit for a dav’s resting-place. These rapids were in
latitude 15 deg. 41 min. 8., and longitude 124 deg.
53 min. E.”
From this time commenced a series of wet stormy
days and nights; the tropical rain pouring down in
torrents, and filling the numerous watercourses to a
degree which greatly impeded the progress of the
explorers. By dint of perseverance they reached the
foot of a lofty peak about 4 miles N.E, of the rapids,
and there formed their camp of March 12. This
peak was named Mount Lycll; and early next
morning, a party started to ascend it. Captain
Grey writes: —“ When we gained the summit of the
hill, I found that in the mists of the morning we had
ascended the wrong peak. The one we stood on was
composed of basalt, and at least 1200 feet high ; but
Mount Lyell, on the same range, and not more than
a mile to the eastward, must have been four or five
hundred feet higher. It was, moreover, distin-
guished by a very remarkable feature, namely, a
regular circle, as it were, drawn round the peak,
some 200 feet below the summit, and above this
ring no trees grew; the conical peak which reared
its head above the region of trees being only clothed
with the greenest grass, whilst that on which I stood,
and all the others I could see, were thinly wooded
to their very summits. The peak we had
ascended afforded us a very beautiful view: to
the north lay Prince Regent’s River, and the good
country we were now upon extended as fur
as the inlets which comnunicated with this great navi-
gable stream; to the south and south-westward ran
the Glcnelg, meandering through as verdant and
fertile a district as the eye of man ever rested on.
The luxuriance of tropical vegetation was now seen to
the greatest advantage, in the height of the rainy
season. The smoke of native fites rose in various
directions from the country, which lay like a map at


our feet; and when I recollected that all these natu-
ral riches of soil and climate lay between two navi-
gable rivers, and that its sea-coast frontage, not
much exceeding 50 miles in latitude, contained three
of the finest harbors in the world, in each of which
the tide rose and fell 37* feet, I could not but feel we
were in a land singularly favored by nature. We
had not made more than 2 or 3 miles, fertile
country, on our way to camp, when the rain again
fell in such torrents that we were compelled to halt ;
indeed none hut those who have been in tropical
countries can at all conceive with what suddenness
and force these storms burst upon us.”
After a severe struggle with lofty basaltic mountains,
whose slopes were of the richest description, and
streambeds of considerable size, swollen by frequent
torrents of rain, the party came again on the Glenelg
at a sharp turn, where it was fed by a large tributary
from the north, 5 or 6 miles eastward from the
rapids; the approach to this turn having been through
an uninterrupted succession of rich flats, thinly
wooded, but luxuriantly grassed. The river was
quite fresh, and running at the rate of more than 6
knots an hour; the bed was composed of fine white
sand, and even close to the margin it was 2* fathoms
in depth. The trees which bordered it were of a
gigantic height and size, whilst it was almost im-
possible to get down to the stream, from the dense-
ness of the vegetation on its banks. The persever-
ing explorer writes —" I stood for some time watching
this dark turbid stream, sweeping rapidly along, and
could not but wonder where so great a body of
water could have its source. I had then seen no
other Australian rivers ; but judging from description,
this differed widely from them all, I have since
visited many of the most noted Australian streams,
and found this distinguished by many peculiar cha-
racteristics ; nor would I hesitate to say, that, with
exception perhaps of the Murray, it will be found
the most important on that continent; and taking
into consideration its geographical position, the fer-
tility of the country on its banks, as far as it is yet
known, and the rise and tall of tide, it may perhaps
not yield in consideration even to the Murray.
“ On going down to the Glenelg the next morning
I found it so swollen by the heavy rain of the pre-
ceding night, as to render it impossible to get near
the main bed. The river was now far beyond its
banks, and in the forks of the trees above our heads,
■we saw drift-wood, reeds, dead grass, &c., lodged at
least 15 feet higher than the present level; and which
could only have been left there during some great flood.
Whether these had frequently recurred we had of
course no means of judging, but during such floods,
the whole of the very low country which we here
saw to the S, W. of us must be inundated. I need
scarcely add, that in a tropical country no ground
could be conceived better adapted to the growth of
rice than the extensive levels which border the
Glenelg.”
Above the sharp turn referred to, the river took a
general S.S.E, direction, and was fed by numerous
deep streams, coming from lofty basaltic hills and
precipitous sandstone ranges, 5 or 6 miles to the east
of it. The intermediate valleys, and the broad plains
towards the river, were of the richest and most fer-
tile description, being covered with the most
luxuriant grass, and producing in many places sound
useful timber of great size. A succession of stormy
wet weather, however, now set in, and continued
until the 23rd; torrents of rain poured down as it
can only pour at certain seasons within the tropics,
and rendered the country very marshy, and almost
impassable. It was consequently traversed with the
utmost difficulty, and a fortnight was occupied in
penetrating to a spot only 10 miles in a direct line
S.E. from the bend near which the party had camped
on the 14th. Here they crossed a considerable tribu-
tary from the eastward, 100 yards in width, and
containing several deep but narrow channels.
Beyond this, in an average S. by E. direction, the
same description of fertile country prevailed for 6
miles; when a sandstone range was crossed, and at
its southern foot the Glenelg was again met with,
in rapids, 250 yards wide, and emerging from a rocky
gorge in the elevated sandstone ranges to the east-
ward.
Crossing the river at one of these rapids, where'
the average depth of water was only three feet, the
country on the other side was found to be sandy;
and the farther the party proceeded, the more they
became entangled and embarrassed amongst high
sandstone ranges of a barren and precipitous charac-
ter; until, at the end of six miles in a S.E.
direction from where the Glenelg had last been
crossed, they were brought to a stand-still among
rocky impassable hills. Here, in latitude 16 deg.
Omin. 45sec. S., and longitude 125 deg. llmin. E.,
the explorers formed their most southern camp,
finding it impossible to proceed farther, on account
of the increasing weakness of the majority of their
number, and the shortness of the remaining supplies.
The country 12 miles to the south of the camp was
therefore examined by a small party on foot, wha
did not report favourably of it; and on April 4, the
return route was commenced towards Hanover Bay.
Kangaroos were abundant, and not so wild as in the
lower parts of the Glenelg. Native dogs were also
occasionally seen, but they were generally supposed
to be domesticated, and to be not far from their
masters ; for the whole district was found to be very
populous, although the natives were seldom seen.^
In order to avert the consequences which might
arise from a repetition of the heavy rains which had
so retarded the outward progress, by flooding the
numerous streams aud marshes which the expedition
had encountered, the return route was confined in a
great measure to the track already traversed.
Several important deviations from it were neverthe-
' less made, for the purpose of shortening the distance ;


especially in taking a north-westerly route from
Mount Lyell along the south-western base of the
MacDonald Range. The country traversed on these
occasions was found to be of the same fertile
character as that which has been already described.
Without any further disagreeable adventure, the
indefatigable explorers, and their intelligent leader,
returned in safety on the 15th April, to the vessel
which was awating their return in Hanover Bay.
As a parting legacy to this splendid country, in the
examination of which so much toil and suffering had
been endured, all the small Rottee ponies which
bad survived the wearisome journey were sent adrift.
These amounted to eleven in number, and included
two valuable mares.
ON THE CLIMATE OP NORTH-WEST
AUSTRALIA, BY CAPTAIN GREY*
«I conceive the climate of North-West Australia
to be one of the finest in the world ; and my reasons
for thus thinking are grounded upon the following
circumstances: —
“ I was resident there from the beginning of the
month of December, 1837, to the middle of the month
of April, 1838; a period of four months and a halt:
and during the whole of this time, the men under
my command were exposed to great hardships and
privations. On one occasion three of us slept in the
open air, without any covering or warm clothes, for
five successive nights, during three of which we had
constant showers of heavy rain, and yet did not in
any way suffer from this exposure. Other detached
parties were on various occasions subjected, for a
shorter period, to exposure of a similar nature; and
no instance occurred of any individual suffering in the
least from it. One or two cases of slight diarrhoea
occurred, but they could be always traced to some
food that had been eaten the day before, and never
were sufficiently violent to delay us for a single hour.
“ Whilst this perfect freedom from disease existed
amongst the party, they had not only to bear ex-
posure of the nature above stated, but the provisions
with which I was enabled to supply them, were some-
times very insufficient for their wants. During the
whole month of March, and part of April, their daily
full allowance of food was about 15 lbs. of flour, first
made into dough, and then baked in the form of a
fiat cake upon a large stone. This low diet, at the
same time that they were compelled to work very
hard, naturally rendered some of them extremely
weak, and several were, on our return to the coast,
in a very reduced state. I should here state that we
were (perhaps fortunately) unable to carry more than
one pint of brandy with us; hence no spirits were
issued to the men, and the non-appearance of diseases
of an inflammatory nature, may perhaps in some
measure be attributed to this circumstance.
» YoL 1, p. 248.
“ The opinion of Captain Wickham, R.N., com-
manding H.M. ship Beagle, is perfectly in accordance
with my own. He was upon the coast the same time
that we were, and in a letter to me writes thus s—
“ Our cruize has been altogether a fortunate one, as
we have been enabled to examine the whole coast
from Capo Yillaret to this place (Port George the
Fourth) without any accident; and the climate is so
good that we have had no sick.”
A short statement of the weather and range of the
thermometer during parts of December, January
and February, is annexed. Although at times the
heat reached 136 deg. in the sun, yet by avoiding un-
necessary exposure to it in the heat of the day, no
inconvenience was suffered.
The mean temperature in the shade at Hanover
Ray, at six different periods of the day, was as
follows; —
1837, December 26th to 31st —82i to 9li deg.
1838, January Ist to 19th —78i to 85J deg.
„ February 19th to 36th —77 to 94 deg.
The number of days on which rain fell at Hanover
Bay:—
1837, December, the last 6 days.
1838, January, 19 days; the greatest quantity
between 15th and 30th, with storms of thunder and
lightning.
1838, February 7, 19 days; the greatest quantity
in commencement of the month; for several nights
in middle of February thunder, lightning, and
strong gusts without rain.
1838, March 12, 19 days; the greatest quantity
between 17th and 23rd,
1838, to April 12, 2 days.
“ The riversin North-Western Australia much resem-
ble in character those of the south-eastern parts of the
continent. They rise at no very great distance from
the sea. Near their sources they are mountain
torrents, but in the lowlands they become generally
streams, with slow currents, winding through fertile
and extensive valleys and plains, which are to
sudden and terrific inundations, caused, I conceive,
by the rain which falls in that part of the mountains
where the rivers take their rise ; for at one period,
when we had our encampment on the bank of the
small stream near the sea at Hanover Bay, I was
myself distant about 14 miles in the interior, in the
direction of its source, where we had heavy rain; and
on my return I found that the party at the station
had been surprised by a sudden rising of the water,
for which there was no apparent cause, as there had
been no rain where they were.
« The Glenelg River, in like manner, is subject to
sweeping inundations, rising sometimes to the height
of 14 to 15 feet above its usual level, as was evinced
by the weeds and other substances we saw in the
trees on its banks.


“To shewthatthese arecharacteristicsoftheFitzroy
River, I shall quote the authority of Captain Wick-
ham, from a letter addressed to me just before our
meeting at Hanover Bay“ The Pitzroy appears to
be very similar to the rivers on the S.E. side of
New Holland, subject to dreadful inundations,
caused by heavy floods in the interior, and in no way
connected with the rainy season on the coast. _ Our
visit to it was in February and March, immediately
after the rainy season on the coast, without our
seeing any indication of a recent flooding, although
there were large trunks of trees, and quantities of
grass and weeds, lying on the bank, and suspended
from the branches of trees from 10 to 12 feet above
the level of the river. The bed is entirely of
sand.”
“ It will be clearly seen how nearly this corresponds
with what we observed about the same season on
the banks of the Glenelg. I have therefore little
doubt, that the Fitzroy takes its origin from the same
mountain chain, and that the inundations described
by Captain Wickham originate in the causes which
I have here assigned.”
ON THE WIND I AND SEASONS IN NORTH-
WEST AUSTRALIA;
fugm; eaul’3 handbook.*
« The north-west monsoon, which may be looked
for towards the close of the year, brings a change in
the weather. When the monsoon is strong, which
happens usually at intervals of three years, it sots in
with a fresh breeze and heavy rain-squalls, and
advances steadily into the interior, thoroughly moist-
ening the surface of the earth. In milder seasons, the
monsoon produces little effect far beyond the coasts ;
indeed the heavier clouds do not appear to rise to a
very great height above the surface of the earth; for
in some years they are so obstructed by the mountains
of Java, that the rains do not reach even the south
side of that island; on which occasions the north-west
coast of Australia gets the monsoons from West to
W.N.W., but with a diminished amount of moisture.
“Mr A. C. Gregory and his party were at the
Victoria River, or in its immediate neighbourhood,
from September 15, 1855, to the end of June in the
following year —a period of more than nine months,
including the hottest season of the year. Mr Elsey,
the surgeon of the expedition, who resided constantly
at the camp, gives the following particulars of the
seasons and climate, in his medical report:—“As
far as our observations extended, there seems to be
three seasons in North-West Australia, viz.,—the wet
season, commencing about December, and lasting to
February; the spring, or cool season, from March
to July; and the dry or hot season, from August to
November. Our first arrival at the Victoria was in
September. The whole country was parched, the
vegetation dried up, and bush-fires were frequent.
The heat of the day was not followed by a cool night.
Though the maximum heat was not excessive, rarely
* a handbook for Colonists in Tropical Australia, by Q. W. Earl; printed at tho Fencing Gazette Press.
exceeding 114 deg., the minimum was very high,
seldom falling below 84 deg. at any time; and I
have known the thermometer, suspended in the air,
to stand at 98 deg. at sunrise. During these months
there was scarcely any dew; lightning was constant
to the E. and N.E., and was rarely absent for six
months. There were occasional thunderstorms
during the month of October. For vessels, the
best season on the coast would be from about the 10th
April to 15th of October.
“The rains commenced towards the end of Novem-
ber, and by the middle of December had fairly set in.
On the 18th the freshes had raised the river some
4or 5 feet. From the 2t)th to the end of December
the rain was incessant, and on the 7th of January
the river was 11 feet above its average level. This was
the greatest height attained. There were, however,
indications of its being a very dry season. The
weather during this time was very oppressive, and
the excessive moisture rendered the heat most
trying to the party, many of whom were actively
employed. By the end of January the rain had
almost entirely ceased; and at the end of February
the air had regained its usual dryness. From March
to July there was a constant succession of beautiful
weather. The noonday heat seldom exceeded 95 deg.,
and was tempered by a delicious S.E, breeze, which
blew uninterruptedly for nearly five weeks; and with
slight intervals, for four months. The days were
bright and cloudless, the nights clear and cold,—the
thermometer generally below 50 deg. at sunrise, and
sometimes below 40 deg. The weather had a most
beneficial effect on us, and its influence was
specially felt by those of the party who were for so
long a time resident in camp, at one spot, and without
any active employment or exercise.”
“ Notwithstanding the cool season, the climate will
not seem highly attractive to Europeans, but experi-
enced bush men will not hesitate to face it, with an
important object in view. A better description of
dwelling than a teat will reduce the temperature
indoors very considerably; but those whose business
may be with shipping will prefer residing nearer to
the coast, where the westerly breeze blows
almost continuously during the hot season in
the interior. Although the temperature at
the camp, which was 150 miles inland from the
mouth of the Victoria, was occasionally high, the
general sanitary condition of the party appears to
have been good. The only ailments experienced
were an irritable state of the stomach, which yielded
to quinine, and a disorder of the eyes, which lasted
usually for twelve hours, and may have been caused
by contact with insect or vegetable poison. Mr
Elsey was able to report that “ there was no case of
diarrhoea or dysenteric affection, no rheumatism, nor
any injury arising from the very considerable ex-
posure to which we were unavoidably subjected.”
The above-mentioned depot camp of the North
Australian Expedition having been established only


90 miles outside of the eastern boundary of West
Australia, (longitude 129 deg. East), and in a splen-
didly-grassed country, it may reasonably be inferred
that the same conditions of climate, temperature and
country will be found to exist throughout the inter-
vening space of 360 miles in a W.N.W. direction to
Doubtful Bay, and 450 miles in a W. by S. direction
to Roebuck Bay ; in both of which districts, and in
the intermediate region drained by the Eitz Roy,
the country is reported to be of the finest descrip-
tion, It may also be inferred, on equally good
grounds, that the rich and well-grassed land around
Roebuck Bay will be found to extend with undi-
minished fertility over the 150 miles which intervene
to the equally valuable region about the River De
Grey, in latitude 21 deg. S.; for the limits have not
yet been ascertained of the good and available land in
either of those localities; and the good country in one
of them is known to extend towards that of the other.
Should this be verified by actual exploration, _ West
Australia will be found to comprise within its
North-Western territory, between the meridians of
117 and 129 deg. East, at least 46 million acres of
first-rate and well-watered country, even on the low
estimate of its breadth not exceeding ICO miles.
A general description of the Victoria River having
been found to apply to the Glenelg, it is probable that
any other rivers which, like them, may discharge the
copious tropical rains of North-West Australia, will
not be dissimilar in character.
Of the Victoria it is said—“ Above the camp, the
bed of the river becomes tortuous up to a point 50
miles due east, when it curves to the southward, and
continues in that direction up to its source, which
was found in a sandstone table-land, 1200 feet high,
in latitude 18 deg., longitude 130 deg, 40 min., run-
ning N.W. and S.E. The region of the Upper
Victoria consists chiefly of extensive valleys of good
soil, well grassed, the sandstone of the lower region
being varied with out-crops of basalt, and
jasper. Mr Wilson, the geologist of the expedition,
says—‘ In no part of the world have I seen grass
grow so luxuriantly; and Mr H. Gregory observed to
me during a journey often days, when 1 accompanied
him and his brother to the Upper Victoria, that he
had seen more grass laxld than during all his life
before.’
“ This beautiful country is, however, liable to floods,
sometimes rising to an enormous height in contracted
valleys; so that settlers will do w ell to examine
narrowly the level of former floods before erecting
their stations. These floods do not appear to be
caused by the regular monsoon rains, but rather by
water- spouts or such like phenomena, during the
periodical commotions that take place in the atmos-
phere of this region.
“ The soil on the jasper plains of the Upper Victoria
is a rich clay, frequently very deep, and is derived
from the decomposition of the shale rock after being
left bare by the removal of the sandstone. The lime-
stone frequently protrudes ; and in such localities the
soil is more calcareous. Trap plains occur in the
higher part of the tabic-land. This rock is generally
of more recent date than the sandstone, and seems to
have flowed over depressions, or hollows, worn out of
the latter. It is extensive on Roe Downs, occu-
pying 60 miles from East to West, and computed
by Mr Gregory to extend over a million of acres.
“ I have said that North-West Australia is a grassy
country; and this character is due, not only to the
great abundance of grass with which it is covered,
but also to the luxuriance and variety of the grasses.
A few of these, however, are predominant, and in
most instances afford excellent pasture. Perhaps the
most extensive is a variety that resembles wild oats,
and grows from the height of 3to 6 feet. This grass
attains its greatest perfection on the stony slopes, and
at the base of the ranges. It grows in many places
on the top of the table-land, and on dry gravelly
patches. Bordering this grass, but on better soil,
another variety, growing close and fine, and not often
exceeding three feet high, might make excellent hay.
'J his grass covers extensive tracts on the plains, and
when ripe it is very difficult to travel through on foot,
as it lies, broken by the wind and parted from its
roots, in a tangled mass, a foot to eighteen inches
deep, and clings round the feet and legs while passing
through it.”
EETTIT, VEGETABLES, AXD GEAIIf.
All the productions of a tropical country can be
grown with facility and success in North-West Aus-
tralia ; and, on its more elevated lands, many of those
which require a more temperate climate. The fol-
lowing are the most prominent in a long catalogue—
Banana and Plantain Maize, of excellent quali-
Pine apple ty.
Papaw Bice, on the low grounds.
Water melon Pumpkin
Custard apple Turnip radish
Guava Sweet potato
Orange Tam
Lime Tomato
Cocoa-nut Capsicum
Peach, apricot, grape. Sugar-cane
&c., on elevated land. Cotton
Wheat and other grain, Spices
EXPOETS.
Amongst the numerous natural and cultivated pro-
ductions of the country, the following may be calcu-
lated upon as exports: —
Timber Pearls
Mimosa bark Mother o’ Pearl
Gums Morses
Lichens Cattle
Hay Sheep


Copper
Whale oil
Dugong oil
Wool
Cotton
Spices
Trepan g
Sharks’ fins
Turtle shell
Perfumes
Essential oils
ACCOUNT OP A VOYAGE TO GLENEIG RIVER, IN NORTH-WEST
AUSTRALIA, IN JUNE & JULY, 1863.
CHAMPION BAY TO DOUBTFUL EAT.
An expedition having been organized by some of
the settlers of Western Australia for the discovery
of new pastoral land in the vicinity of Glenelg River,
or in any other part of North-West Australia
situate to the west of the Victoria River; a party
of four, well armed, provisioned for four months,
and otherwise duly stored and equipped, sailed from
Champion Bay (in south latitude 28f degrees) on
the 6th June, 1863, in the schooner Flying Foam,
Cooper, master. A depot party of six persons, with
provisions for 12 months, and a few horses, sheep
and dogs, were also embarked. To Mr. James
Martin, one of the four explorers, the public are
indebted for the details upon which the following
condensed narrative of proceedings is based.
With a fair wind at S.S.E. and smooth sea, the
North-West Cape was passed on the 13th, and on the
following day the islands off Nickol Bay were seen;
the sea being so smooth that, although the rate of
sailing often exceeded 8 knots per hour, the vessel
glided through the water with scarcely perceptible
motion. A right whale and calf were here seen; as
also several sharks. At sunrise jof the 18th, part of
Dam pier Land became visible, consisting of low and
gently undulating hills, with occasional sand-patches,
surmounted by green-topped hummocks. Twelve
distinct bush fires on the the coast were counted
between Cape Boileau and Point Coulomb. On nearing
the land farther to the north, it was observed to be
wooded, and the vegetation appeared exquisitely
green; but between Gape Leveque and Swan Point,
rocks and sandhills were piled confusedly together,
and the latter only sparingly covered the most
stunted vegetation. In the first tide-ripple marked
on the chart the water shoaled rapidly to 5 fathoms,
and the vessel was obliged to stand off to the north,
with a current of at least 2 knots per hour accelerat-
ing her speed. With a strong flood tide and no
wind, the vessel was afterwards drawn in amongst
the numerous rocky islands in the entrance to King’s
Sound, and drifted many miles up the latter,
surrounded in a most uncomfortable manner by
whirlpools and eddies, in water too deep to afford
anchorage. On the return of the ebb tide towards
evening, the vessel was ejected from the Sound in the
same unceremonious manner, and was frequently
turned round and round in the whirlpools, in
spite of a good breeze which by that time had
sprung up. A good berth should be given to this
Sound by all vessels which do not desire to enter
it.
Passing next day to themorth of the McLeay and
Cockle Islands, a strong flood tide to the south
carried the vessel between Montgomery Island and
the main to the eastward, and then to the mouth of
Doubtful Bay. Finding the passage into the Bay
between the two larger islands at the entrance barred
by a reef, the vessel stood off again, and ultimately
sailed towards the wider passage to the south of the
largest island. Here a tide w'as met running out at
a rate exceeding 4 knots an hour; and notwithstand-
ing a fair wind, the schooner could only just hold
her own for four hours, in a position one mile
westward of the centre of the passage—a conical hill
on the eastern shore of Doubtfnl Bay just appearing
above the water, and being in a line. Shortly
after sundown a little headway was made against
the tide, and at 10 p.m. the vessel passed safely
through the passage, but without any reliable
soundings being obtained. This entrance was named
Foam Passage. An hour before midnight, the
Foam was anchored in 15 fathoms water 5 miles
N. bv W. from the conical hill,
A search along the intricate shores of Doubtful
Bay for the mouth of the Glenelg, occupied the boats
of the vessel for a whole week; at the end of W’hich
time it was discovered in the north-east part of a
fine inner sheet of water about 9 miles in length
north and south, and 6 miles broad, which the dis-
coverers named George Water. It proved a
magnificent harbour, and had a depth of 15 fathoms
water. The entrance to it from the bay was,
however, not more than a quarter of a mile wide;


and the tide, which here rises 36 feet, rushes through
it with great velocity, The mouth of the Glenelg
was entered by the vessel with some little difficulty;
a reef bars the entrance, but there is a deep channel
near the southern end of the reef. The mouth of
the river is about a quarter of a mile in width, and
numerous islands, rocks, and mud-flats, are met with
in the progress upwards. These and the great
strength of the tides render the navigation both
difficult and tedious. With watchful care and
perseverance, all impediments were, however, safely
overcome, and on the Ist July the vessel was
anchored just below the first rapid mentioned by
Sir George Grey, the original discoverer of the upper
part of the river; the live stock and stores were
landed, a depot formed, and preparations commenced
for exploring the country to Camden Harbour.
Mount Lyell bore from the depot N.E., miles
distant, and Camden Harbour should be 18 miles
distant, in the direction W. 33 degrees N.
July s.—Mr. Martin writes—“ At 8 a.m. walked
to a hill about 3 J miles W. 11 i degrees N. to seek
ground for the measurement of a base line, but no
suitable locality was found. The hill proved very
rugged; in some places the stones had sharply
cutting edges, in others they were rounded and
loose, piled in heaps; in all cases, owing to the
luxuriant clothing of grass, they were seldom seen
before they were felt. There is no great variety
of grasses on our route of this morning, but all are
thickly growing, and in height run from 3 to 7 feet.
Nearly all the hills appear grassed to their sum-
mits.
LAND EXPLORATION TO CAMDEN HARBOR.
July 6, —“ At 9.30 left camp with two others,
taking 3 saddle and 2 packhorses, carrying a fort-
night’s provisions, with a view to reach Camden
Harbour. I should describe the country between
our starting point and our noon camp as well fitted
for sheep, especially after the present growth of
grass has been burned—as for feeding it dowm it
would be impossible. The riding over it now is very
rough work, because we keep as near as possible to
our proposed course, N.W. by W., over hill and
valley; but if the object was to find an easy road, I
see no difficulty whatever. Pitched our camp at
5 p.m. on the western branch of the Gairdner River.
The afternoon’s march has been much easier than that
of the morning, and we have passed over a greater
distance (6 miles) with less fatigue to our horses.
The whole of this day’s track lies through a splendidly
grassed country; few birds have been seen, but
kangaroos and turkeys have been noticed beyond
range. During the night a heavy dew fell.
July 7. —“ Started at 7 a.m.; country good at
first, and easy to travel over. Rode 2 miles to the
foot of a double-cone hill, 500 feet high; then turning
westward 3£ miles round the base of two hills, one
of them 700 feet in height, and 2£ miles north of fine
country to another hill 800 feet high, from which
we had a magnificent view of the sea and islands in
Brecknock and Camden Harbors, with arms of the
sea both N. and S. From the hills to our
camp (1 mile) the country w r as exceedingly
rugged, with steep hills coming almost to
an edge up and down. The grass was rather
coarse and rank, like coarse wheat straw; the country
more rugged, but still easy, and well grassed; noticed
some poor sandalwood, also acacia, baobab and palms,
and a rose-like vine. Good water, probably per-
manent, is found wherever palms are seen. Camped
near the southern arm of the sea, which terminates
in mangrove swamps running towards a remarkable
coned hill nearly due south.
July B.—“ Travelled over a country with perfectly
easy succession of undulations, then crossing the
heads of several tidal creeks with mangroves, one
of which we attempted to cross, but failed, found a
particularly easy country, with gravelly soil, stretch-
ing quite across the neck of the peninsula towards
Camden Harbor. It was singular that our route of
yesterday should have been so remarkably rough;
w t c chose it because it appeared the better of the
two; but our march of to-day, although only a short
distance from it, might be considered quite easy and
well grassed. At 1 p.m. ascended a hill, and took
bearings; pack-horses and all w'ent up here; we had
a magnificent view of Brecknock Harbor; the
green islands studding it, and its silvery unruffled
surface, from the position in which we stood,
could only be compared to emeralds in a broad setting
of silver. The view was so enchanting that I
unwillingly ceased gazing at it to resume the dry
work of taking bearings. Formed camp 7in a w’ell
grassed and w atered locality. During the night some
heavy four-footed animal trotted past at no great
distance from our camp, to the great terror of Peter,
the pony; lam curious to know what creature it
could be; it was evidently a heavy beast, and its
motion I noticed very carefully, and can only compare
it to a distinct trot.
July 9.—“ At 8 a.m, en route, passing over a par-
ticularly easy country, chiefly with a gravelly soil.
Here and there this easy country was cut by belts of
strong country with coarse grass, but still not so
rough in any place that a bullock or horse team
could not travel all the way. Passing south of the
double-coned hill, we made a course E. by S., cutting
all the little streams that drain the MacDonald
Range, under which we camped at noon on the most
eastern bend of the Gairdner. Under the range there
was fine grass and large timber; the river has per-
manent water; in some of the pools was a carpet of
lilies in flower; palms abundant, waiter excellent.
At 3.30 p.m. resumed the march 4f miles to the
first of the streams rising in the MacDonald Range
and flowing into the Glenelg, over magnificently
grassed downs, gently undulating, but elevated 240
feet above mean sea level, which I propose calling


Hampton Downs; they divide the streams falling
into the Gairdner and Glenelg. Exquisite palms all
round our camp.
July 10.—“ To the depot camp. All the country
we passed over is beautifully grassed, but as we
approached the depot the grass became coarser; tbe
soil is a rich alluvial nearly the whole distance. We
found all w T ell in camp. The parties seeking for
land seem disinclined at present to leave a depot
party here, but this is a magnificently-grassed and
well-watered country, with a practicable natural dray
route all the distance from Camden Harbor to this
depot. The whole of our route during the past
week is fringed by timber of sufficient size and in
sufficient quantities for all building and pastoral
purposes for many years to come; we have already
seen 300,000 acres of land of the finest quality for
grazing, and at present, although it is now drawing
near to the close of the dry season, clothed with grass
of the most luxuriant growth. During our march of
this morning there were places where, as we rode
along, we could not see each other for the grass, in
fact the grass seed w'as at least three feet above our
heads. It is the opinion of us all that the lowest
estimate of the carrying power of this district is a
sheep to an acre, therefore 300,000 sheep might be
fed upon it; but in this estimate of land we do not
include the sand-stone ranges we have seen, which,
although so precipitous as to be impassable save on
foot, are still well-grassed and available to the
depastuiing of sheep ; and in process of time, as the
more easily traversed land becomes stocked, would
naturally be included in the runs. But to what
extent the ranges would increase the pastoral lands
of the district N. and E.W. of the Glenelg, it is
impossible now to conjecture; it is very easy, how-
ever, to foresee that in a short period after tbe
settling of the country, ramblers in search of game,
or shepherds would discover easy passes through them,
and feeding valleys to their summits. Another
matter worthy of notice—we have not yet seen one
of the many poisonous plants, the bane of the south
of this colony; and to eyes so well accustomed as
ours to the various kinds, they would, if here, before
this doubtless have become apparent.
July 11. —“ During the last night the mosquitoes
prevent all chance of sleep, in spite of smoke or any
attempts at covering ourselves up. In the morning
a shooting party left for the lagoons on the south
side of the Glenelg, returning at noon with a goodly
supply of game, One of the silver-grey cranes
measured 7 ft. 6 in. from tip to tip of wing, and 5 ft.
10 in. from toe to beak.
July 13.—“ Went to the depot, as it is proposed
to start this day on the S. and W. exploration; on
our way up in the long boat, saw eleven alligators on
the mud banks; some w r e estimated at 6 ft.,others at
25 ft. in length. Left the depot with Mr K. Brown
at 2.30 p.m. with two saddle and one pack-horse,
carrying a fortnight’s provisions. By a direct course
steered for Mount Lycll, distant 4j- miles from
depot, and visible all the way; reached it an hour
before sunset, camped, and then ascended to the
summit: it has changed its appearance very much
since Grey described it, and is now clothed with
grass and trees ; from a clump of huge stones in the
apex we had a magnificent view of the surrounding
country, extending over the Prince Eegent Eiver on
one side and the Glenelg district on the other.
July 14.—“ Left our camp at the foot of Mount
Lyell and steered a course generally of 3. 20 deg, E.
until noon, 4£ miles; the first mile was over very
rough hut well-grassed country, with the largest
timber we have yet seen, and w r atcr everywhere; the
last camp was our first experience of w ater without
palms, there replaced by three species of acacia. The
second mile was over an excellent grassed and w r ell
watered country, the third and fourth the same but
with larger timber; the last half mile was over
sandy and rod y country, very difficult to travel over,
having deep creeks and w 7 ater-holes, equally difficult
to cross. When W'e struck the Glenelg it was at a
fine deep reach one-eighth of a mile broad, with little
current in it; and its sides W’ere fringed with lofty
eucalyptus and cajeput trees, with fine grass down to
the water's edge. Many new flowering trees were
passed to-day, and kangaroo seen several times.
Palms everywhere around us. In the afternoon,
after two hours’ particularly difficult travelling both
for selves and horses, we only made one mile, and
camped in a gully running into the Glenelg; we
ascended the hill out of which the gully runs; it was
nearly all stones, piled loosely, and spinifex here and
there, but with a fair proportion of feed. I was
astonished to find a very fine acacia growing among
the pile of stones on the top of the hill, sufficiently
large to enable us both to climb it, and sitting among
the branches, to take bearings. Here are rapids in
the Glenelg, which in the rainy season must afford a
magnificent landscape, as the fall in the rocky bed is
not less than 60 feet. Pish in the river, and the
water extremely good.
July 15.—“ En route, steering a general course
of S. 20 deg. E. After travelling an eighth of a mile
we entered what we may well call“lhe happy
valleythis was a valley running to the southward,
of no great breadth (say an eighth of a mile in the
widest), clothed with a very carpet of green grasses.
The first pines we had seen here fringed our
track and formed, with the old red sand-stone walls
bounding the valley on either side, picturesque
clumps of eights and tens, intermingled with palms,
acacia, eucalypti, and melaleuca, of great variety and
beauty. A deliciously cool and clear stream of water
flowed everywhere copiously along the valley; we
disturbed birds of varied hue, but mostly of brilliant
colors; one kind of parrot struck me as peculiarly
beautiful —the head and tail of bright green, the
wings of a silvery grey hue; pigeons were numerous
but small; at the upper end of the valley two stately


emus, afc different intervals, gave us first an in-
quiring and suspicious examination, and then in
turn afforded us an opportunity of observing their
powers of retreating. “The happy valley” ter-
minated in a happier circular plain of about halt a
mile diameter, covered with the most luxuriant
grass, not less than three feet ' in height, and per-
fectly level; this plain was bounded by timber of
different kinds and a wall, broken here and there,
of old red sand-stone behind the trees; the first
bauksias we met with grew here. Prom the plain
we ran up a creek bounded by rocky walls to its
source in the dividing range, the route being over a
chocolate-colored sandy detritus, and had been lately
burnt, easy to travel over, well watered and grassed,
and abundance of fine timber. Our afternoon course
was over exceedingly difficult country for J of a mile,
then branching westward to a gully running parallel
to that ofthe morning, we continued our course over
a similar country until we arrived at a large flat,
where we camped for the night. Just before making
camp we saw extraordinary proofs of the recent
presence of some very large and, I should say from
the tracks, five-toed herbivorous animal; daring the
day wo saw a large stone-colored snake, black
cockatoos, and numerous kangaroo.
July 16.—“ As the country S. 30 deg. W., pro-
mised easier travelling, we started on that course;
after crossing the Glenelg and a most important
tributary, at a spot which we denominated “ Rocky
Springs,” we camped. Native fires sprung up in all
directions towards sunset; it is evident the aborigines
are close to us.
July 17. —“ Ascended a hill 1,300 feet high.
There are between this range and the Prince Regent
River, three distinct high ranges; one about 12
miles S. 20 deg. E. appeared clothed with grass of
the color of that on Mount Sturt, and apparently
as coarse. All the country within this radius of 12
miles, I should describe as second rate compared
with the country N.W. of the Glenelg, but still
well grassed on the stony ridges, and magnificently
grassed on the flats; it is equally well watered, and
possesses finer timber. Clumps of spiuifex appear
towards the apex.
July 18.—“ Returned to the last camp, a
more southerly route. Thence N. 30 deg. 10 min.
W. to the Rocky Springs, passing through some
rich alluvial flats, having on our left a stony range
well grassed and timbered. We have several
climatic nuisances—flies by day, mosquitoes by night,
and ticks manifold both by day and night; beyond
these trifling discomforts the climate since we passed
the N.W. Cane, may be described as heavenly, only
just warm enough in the middle of the day to make
shade preferable to sunshine, and the nights delight-
fully cool but not cold.
July 19.—“ Started, and by picking our way
carefully up and down the gullies, crossed the Gle-
nelg, by cutting down the palm jungle; after an hour’s
hard work, camped U miles farther on, having only
accomplished 4j miles direct, owing to one of tho
horses having been severely cut the previous day.
All the ground passed over during the last three
days has been recently burned by the natives. The
bed ofthe river here is drift sand, indicating a river
bed in summer of 3 to 400 yards in width, fringed
by lofty cajeput, eucalypti, acacia, and occasionally
dense palm jungle. I noticed one fine white gum
tree. In places here the white ants are very nume-
rous, and their hills are frequently from 5 to 6 ft. in
height, with a diameter almost equal to the height,
July 20.—“ The period of sunrise here is a daily
feast: a cloudless sky, not a zephyr stirring with
sufficient force to move the smallest leaflet, and a
temperature perfectly enjoyable, even clad in our
travelling garments, which are simply our usual
underclothing, boots, trousers, and outer Crimean
shirt, a silk neckerchief, which serves as a cap at
night, a light cloth cap, with calico cover, cut after the
Indian mode, with a well projecting peak to protect
the eyes from the noon-day glare, and a veil about
10 inches square rolled round the cap, except when
flies and mosquitoes are troublesome; these, with
stout leather gloves, only worn on state occasions,
such as breaking a road through prickly bush-rose
vine, acacias, or palms, complete our toilet of every
day and Sunday. Started at 9.15 a.m., and after
crossing two broad reaches of water, at 1 pm.
crossed our southern track, and thence pursued our
route down the Happy Valley, whence we passed
over two miles of stony ridges and 2| miles of
easy well-grassed country, and camped on the
Glenelg.
July 21.—“ Travelled over easy grassed country as
far as Mount Sturt, where we were long delayed in
crossing the Glenelg, and by a reedy swamp running
into the broad stream near Mount Sturt, reached the
depot about noon. Since our departure all hands at
the depot have been occupied in cutting grass for hay,
any quantity of which is at present to be had for
the cutting, and it is of good quality, and in such
profusion all around us that ships might obtain
cargoes of it as quickly as it would be cut, made, and
pressed into bales. One of the first objects that met
our eye was a tolerably neat press, erected in the
midst* of the camp, after the manner of a primitive
wool press; close beside the press lay six wool bales
of well pressed hay, and about a ton of loose.
July 22.—“ The party propose to send some of the
hay on board to-day; from this I presume it to be
their intention to reship some, if not all of the
horses, which I cannot think a wise proceeding,
for these reasons: first, because a district of unsur-
passed fertility has been found and traversed, pos-
sessing abundance of feed and water for half a
million of sheep, together with timber in
far larger quantities than will ever be required for
building and fencing purposes; a district blessed
with a climate which, at this season of the year.


a joy to live in, with evidences of continual and
periodical summer rains of sufficient amount to
warrant us in the supposition that this is no
exceptional year of fertility, but that an annual
supply of grass of a like quality and in no less
quantity might reasonably be predicated; a district
having a fine and securely land-locked harbour in
Brecknock Bay, with a country of almost unequalled
fertility immediately adjoining, and fit, without
road making, to drive a bullock or horse team over
it at once so far as even the very centre of the
district; a district having a river leading from the
southern harbour, in Doubtful Bay, to the very
heart of the grazing country—a river I should de-
scribe as safe and easy to navigate with cargo
boat, or a small steamer, from George Water to
the rapids, and south of the actual river-entrance
in the N.E. corner of George Water, perfectly
secure for vessels of any class or size, especially if
the S.W. opening of George Water to the sea,
should prove, on our return trip, to be wider and
less tortuous than the entrance through which we
sailed from Doubtful Bay, Here I must admit
that, although the Flying Foam came safely through
the passage, and the actual river-entrance from
George Water, still the work was hazardous (doubly
so then from the fact of ours being the first
soundings taken there), but even now, viewed
from the most favourable point, a work fraught
with visible dangers to any vessels larger than
cargo boats of 10 to 15 tons. During the whole
day it was exceedingly sultry; being on a low
mud-flat only just above low-water mark, without
wind or cloud, we certainly felt the heat more
than on any day since we landed in the Glenelg
district. Towards sunset two of the horses and a
party arrived from the depot, and were got on
board preparatory to leaving the river. I am
lost in amazement at this resolve, for granting the
cost of leaving a depot here, I ask myself—can
they expect to find 500,01)0 acres of land in any
part of the world, capable of carrying perfectly half
a million of sheep, at a cheaper rate ? However
our Exploration will open to some future occupants,
this tract of superb grazing country, certainly in-
ferior to none in the world that I have seen; and
I have travelled much.
“ July 24.—This morning an alligator was caught
by one of the sailors; it was 6ft. in length, 2ft.
in circumference, and weighed 80 lbs,”
Next day, the exploring party and their
equipment were re-embarked, and the Flying Foam
commenced to descend the Glenelg from her an-
chorage below the rapids; but on account of the
strong tides and the uncertainty of the navigation.
Doubtful Bay was not reached until the 28th, when
the vessel emerged from George Water by a wider
and safer channel than that by which it had been
entered a month previously.
The shores of Collier Bay were next visited by
the schooner; but, as time pressed, very little of
the country could be examined, and the vessel re-
turned to Champion Bay on 13 th August.
ON THE RESOURCES OF NORTH-WEST AUSTRALIA,
IN THE DISTRICTS BETWEEN
COLLIER BAY AND CAMDEN HARBOR,
AND ABOUT
ROEBUCK BAY.
A party of settlers, aided by the Local Government about Camden Harbor, and In such other localities
of West Australia, and well equipped for four months, as might be practicable. The expedition was led by
started from Fremantle on 2nd of March, 1864, in Mr, F. K. Panter, Inspector of Police at Perth; and
the hired schooner New Perseverance, W. Owston, the services of Mr. James Martin having been engaged
master, for the purpose of exploring tho country as its surveyor, naturalist, &c., the vessel sailed from


Champion Bay for her ultimate destination on the
10th of March,
With a fine breeze at S.S .W. and smooth sea, Dirk
Harto"' Island, in front of Sharks’ Bay, was passed
next day at the distance of 5 leagues, and the North-
West Cape was rounded on the 13th at a somewhat
less distance. On the 15th the wind veered round
to S.E. and E.N.E., preceded by a gradually falling
barometer. Although the winds were usually very
light, and sometimes altogether absent, the tempe-
rature never exceeded 85 degrees, and heavy dews
were experienced at night. Whales began to appear
off Rosemary Island, and it may generally be said
that the sea off the North-West coast of Australia
teems with marine life, including very fine turtle,
which frequent its numerous sandy islands. After
passing Dampier Archipelago, the winds varied very
much, both in direction and force, and a current was
experienced setting a mile an hour to the westward.
On the 21st March, the schooner being near
Bedout Island, anchored 3 miles to the south of it,
in 6 fathoms at low water. Mr Martin’s account of
it is as follows “ From careful observations made,
the position of the highest land seems to be in
latitude 19 deg. 40 min. 45 sec. S., longitude
118 deg. 56 min. 20 sec. E.
“ By the Admiralty Charts, latitude 19 deg. 36 m.
20 sec., longitude 119 deg.
“ By Norie’s List, latitude 19 deg. 29 min. 0 sec.,
longitude 118 deg. 52 min. #
« These data show an extreme difference in the
position of the island amounting to 8 minutes of
longitude, and 11 of latitude. Ships sailing in this
direction, therefore, should approach the island
cautiously. The island is about a mile in length : its
mean breadth is half a mile. It appears to be formed
as islands are usually formed in the centre of circular
coral reefs; it is merely a heap of coral sand up
upon a sandstone point of elevation. Ibis
has gradually become clothed with soil of
supporting a coarse and stunted vegetation, Ihe
diameter of the encircling reef is about 3 miles;
the space between the reef and the island is not more
than 6 or 7 feet below low-water mark, in any place.”
A rocky spit extends 5 or 6 miles in a W.S.\V.
direction from Bedout Island, and another, vyith
dry rocks upon it, 2 or 3 miles to the eastward. The
anchorage was good, but at % flood the tide ran 4
knots an hour to the eastward; high water at lull
and change of the moon being at 10b. 50 m. a.m.,
and the rise of spring tide 24 feet. The island was
covered with a coarse but good grass, about 2 feet in
height, growing in large tufts, with patches of the
same kind of prolific edible bean as that growing on
the shores of Collier Bay (1863). It abounded in
green turtle, from 70 to 200 lbs. in weight, pelicans,
snipe, quail, &c., but was destitute of fresh water.
On the encircling coral reef many specimens of
the trepang were found “ of a jet black colour, from
*Thc same as
18 to 24 inches in length, and from 1 to 2 inches
in diameter. This marine radiated animal is very
abundant on the North-West coast of Australia;
indeed, it is the chief attraction to the Malay fisher-
men, who periodically visit these parts of Australia
in order to supply the Chinese markets with this
gelatinous esculent. When properly prepared, tho
Chinese pay a high price for the Trepang, using it as
a principal ingredient in restorative soups.
“ Many fine specimens of Tridacna, nearly 12
inches in length, were passed, of greater value in
pearl seeking, in my opinion, on account of the size
of the pearls, when the shell is found to contain one
more, than the oyster of Nickol Bay. It is true the
shell of the Tridacna itself is of no great value, for
it contains no nacreous substance of commercial im-
portance. But, if this fishery were carried on, the
Tridacna gigas might sometimes be met with.
Specimens have been obtained in the Indian Ocean
weighing 5 cwt., and measuring 2 feet 6 inches in
length, and 4 feet in breadth. 1 hese are of value
in Europe: they are used as benitiers in Continental
Cathedrals, and have been purchased for this purpose
at an enormous price. We did not find any
pearl oysters of sufficient size to warrant more ex-
tended search,”
On the 28th March, while passing between the
low sandy Lacepede Islands and Cape Baskerville,
numerous native fires were observed on the mainland.
‘‘At sundown we had yet some 8 or 10 miles to
before passing Port Emeriau. The higher ranges of
the peninsula named Dampier Laud, abreast and
to the southward of our present position, are thickly
wooded, though the trees appear by no means large.
The coast is indented with a succession of large bays;
where the points project they may be described as
rocky cliffs of a dark red color, alternating with
sand-hills composed of the detritus of these ciiffs,
varying in colour from slightly tinged with red to
sand of a deep red ochreous hue, here and there
covered with patches of vegetation. The actual beach
we were not near enough to see, but the line of still-
water of about a mile in breadth, within the reef,
which seems nearly continuous the whole length of
the peninsula, was again as clearly seen as upon the
occasion of my last voyage, in 1863. After dusk the
whole coast-line was illuminated by native fires at a
short distance apart. The southern and middle part
of Dampier Land, judging by the number of native
fires seen last year, as well as at the present time,
would lead me to suppose it to he thickly peopled
with native tribes: and if so, then a luxuriant vege-
tation, at a very short distance from the sea-coast
line, may be safely predicated. Vivid but distant
lightning was seen on the north horizon at 8 p.m.
The north cape of Dampier Land was passed on the
29th, and “ during the afternoon we had a heavy
squall from the eastward, the wind being from the
same quarter and light. The sky has been obscuicd
the French charts of 1803.


nearly all day by dense and low clouds; showers have
been seen falling all around, hut none have reached
us. At sunset we were steering a course about mid-
way between Caffarelli Island and the Brue Rock.
Lightning on both the north and south horizon at 6.,
30 p.m. Two hours afterwards a low dark line was
seen across the ship’s course ; it was at first thought
to be a tide ripple; the night was so intensely dark
that until we were a cable’s length, or thereabout,
the error was not discovered. But only 5 minutes
after the dark appearance became an object
of anxious doubt, the mate, who was in the bows,
ordered the helm hard down, the master had just
before given the word for shortening sail, when the
land was clearly made out, and in a few seconds the
vessel struck a reef; the blow, although of consider-
able force, was not sufficient to give rise to a fear of
any immediately fatal result. After striking, the
vessel at once drifted into 25 fathoms. The pumps
were instantly manned, but gave no evidence of
damage. In a quarter of an hour after striking, the
anchor was let go with 60 fathoms of chain, in ap-
parently good holding ground; but the squalls in-
creased so rapidly in force that a second anchor,
with 60 fathoms of cable, was let go about half an
hour after the first,” and both held well.
March 80.—The early morning was squally, with
rain-showers. “At 7 a.m., when sufficient light
struggled through the lead-colored cloud to afford us
a view of the horizon, we found ourselves about one
third of a mile from the reef on which we had struck.
This reef is not laid down upon the charts; through
the mist we could recognize the outline of Caffarelli,
about 5 or 6 miles distant. The reef, of a flattened
horse-shoe shape, extends as far as we can see to-
wards the western point of Caffarelli; and breakers
can be traced for at least a mile beyond the N.N.W.
end of that portion of the reef visible at low water.
According to the charts there should be a passage
of 14 miles here, between the Brue Rock and
Caffarelli, with soundings of 15 to 25 fathoms.”
In this perilous position the vessel was compelled
to remain and ride out a severe gale of 14 hours’
duration, from S.S.E., dragging her anchors, and
losing one of them, when heavy rollers came over the
reef at half tide. Early on the next morning the
wind happily abated, the barometer rose, and at
midday, the remaining anchor having been recovered,
but without its stock, the vessel cleared the end of
the reef and proceeded on her voyage, with a light
S.S.E. wind and quite smooth water.
On the evening of April 2, the vessel anchored off
the mouth of Brecknock Harbor; and next day, “ a
few minutes after 11 a.m. we had crept up to the
southern entrance, with a light but favourable wind
aad a still sea. Slate island, Battery Point,
and the coast-line between, may be described as
extremely rugged ; pointed rocks, coarse grass, tufts
o bright green triodia, with stunted stragglingbushes,
include all that is visible at a distance of a third of a
mile from the shore. The entrance is not quite half
a mile in width, but there is a depth of 15 fathoms
at i ebb in mid channel. Just inside the entrance,
near the southern shore, is a little rocky patch with
one upright block of dark red sandstone, not less
than 14 or 15 feet in height. This I have named the
Pinnacle. The south bank is of a rocky precipitous
character, attaining an elevation of from 100 to 300
feet, with occasional streams of water pouring and
dripping out of it, and flowing into the sea. About
a mile within the entrance, on the south shore, a
beautiful stream of water came foaming and fretting
in its rocky bed, here and there forming miniature
cascades, or a series of rapids, on its way to the
harbor. At 1.45 p.m., in 6 fathoms, shallow water
seemed to extend from the southern end of a sand-
stone reef, whose tops are well above water for at
least a mile to the S.S.W, of Green Island, to a
small mangrove island about half a mile from the
base of Mount Lookover; thus barring our entrance
into Camden Harbor, until careful soundings have
been obtained. The anchor, therefore was cast in 5
fathoms, with soft muddy bottom.
“ At 2.30 p.m. the whaleboat, with the master and
a crew of 7 hands, left with a view to obtain the
required soundings. The dingy, shortly afterwards,
with a party of 4, left to examine the reef itself.
At 4 p.m. the boats returned. The reef does extend
across from island to island, having upon it at low
water a depth of about 1 fathom. The second boat
party report the presence of recent drift upon the tops
of the reef, from which we may infer that it is
covered at highwater. Some pretty pieces of coral
were brought on board, and a plentiful supply of
excellent oysters.
“April 4.—At sunrise, Mr Panter and myself,
(with the master to take soundings) and a crew of 8
men, left the vessel to seek first a passage from
Brecknock into Camden Harbor; then a landing place
for the horses, a depot near water, and a suitable
place for beaching the vessel, together with suitable
spots at which to replenish her stock of water and
firewood. By noon these questions were decided.
Camden Harbor was found to shoal, by a succession
of steps of about half a fathom each, from 8 fathoms
at the entrance to 1 fathom at the head, at high
water, neap tides Consequently, as there is tolerably
compact mud bottom, the vessel may be brought up
nearly to the head, where I know there are four
fresh-water creeks, on two of which we camped in
1863. A landing place for the horses was also found;
it is rather stony, but there does not seem to be a
better in the vicinity of the northernmost of the
creeks upon which we have decided to establish our
depot. No better spot was found for beaching the
vessel than the sand patch on the mangrove island
near to which we anchored on the 3rd. At the
depot creek there is an abundance of fresh water,
the softest and purest man could desire; firewood,
too, is lying about in plentiful store. The hills.


down to the line of high-water mark, are at this
season of the year, covered with the most luxuriant
grass, of an average height of from 2to 6 feet, ac-
cording to the species. The same sort of rugged hills
as prevail near Doubtful Bay, obtain here; how
amongst such piles of loose stones so> rich a growth of
grass can be supported, is a subject of wonder. A
few ripe black grapes were tasted, and' pronounced
excellent; they were found in small bunches, 20 to
40 in the bunch, of about the size of the black
cluster, and approaching that grape in flavor.”
Many sweet-smelling grasses and herbs were met
with; amongst the former the broad-leaved lemon-
scented grass was the most plentiful. The trees here
are all more or less stunted. On the mangrove
stems there were great quantities of oysters, and a
liberal supply of them was taken on board.
At noon the vessel was moved to an anchorage
close to the spot chosen as a landing place for the
horses. Here the 5 horses were safely landed; the
depot and travelling party quickly followed, and en-
camped for the night. When the horses were landed,
the vessel was aground in 4 feet water, so that no
difficulty was experienced; such horses as pleased
walked ashore.
“ Brecknock Harbor, area nearly 20 square miles,
is so thoroughly land-locked that a ship once at
anchor need fear no wind. The coast-line within the
harbor is everywhere indented with beautiful bays.
There are several picturesque islands, on nearly all of
which is fresh water; every valley of the main has
its rippling brook of the purest water running down
to the beach. Ships entering from Camden Sound
have but two dangers to avoid; one is the bank ex-
tending northwards from the Pinnacle Rock, the
other is the rocky bar between Careening Island and
the Circular Reef. Until further surveys have been
made, Rogers’ Strait is considered a very dangerous
entrance, (from the N.E.), on account of the reefs,
and Camden Harbor a hazardous anchorage, by
reason of its terrace-like bottom, which at some tides
has not more than £or f of a fathom of water.
Brecknock Harbor is an excellent place for watering
ships, and drift-wood is abundant near the line of
water; but timber fit for spars and the repairs
of ships, grows at too great a distance inland to be
available.
“Vessels entering from Camden Sound should do so
only with the flood tide, and with a fair wind; the
rocks to the S.W. of New Island, to be seen at all
times, may be passed in mid-channel; but on
sighting the Pinnacle, which is close to the southern
shore, a course about £ of a mile distant from New
Island will command the deepest water, running from
13 to 14 fathoms at the narrowest part of the
entrance. When the Pinnacle bears South, a course
E. 10 deg, N., may be sailed for 2| miles, when the
northern entrance opens out into Camden Sound,
bearing N.W„ all bearings true; thence, a course
E.N.E. of 3 miles may be steered, with 6 and 7
fathoms of water, either towards Green Island or
Camden Harbor. Vessels above 100 tons register
may select any spot within these limits, and obtain
safe anchorage. Vessels of less than 100 tons regis-
ter, or with a draft of about 10 feet, after crossing
the rocky bar which extends N. E. by N. from
Careening Island, may find a perfectly secure ancho-
rage, anywhere in mid-channel, as far as the entrance
to Camden Harbor, with not less than 3 and 4
fathoms of water; all these soundings being at low
tide. For beaching a vessel on a soft bottom, it would
be difficult to find a better spot than the sand patch
on Careening Island; whilst if a hard even bottom
be desired, for repairs of keel, &c., the deep bay
whose head bears S.E. from Mount Lookover, dis-
tant i a mile from the base of the mount, will be
found convenient and safe. The time of high water
within Brecknock Harbor, at full and change of the
moon, or the Establishment of the Port, is at noon;
that is, 40 minutes later than in Camden Sound.
Spring rise of tide, 30 feet; neap, 12 feet. The
tides rush through the entrances with great force;
it would not be advisable for any vessel to attempt
the passages under sail, with an opposing tide.”
LAND EXPLORATIONS FROM CAMDEN
HARBOR.
April 5. —At 2 a.m. a thunder storm passed about
10 miles to the northward; and towards evening
another passed from East to West; a mass of water,
resembling a dispersed water-spout, crossing Breck-
nock Harbor near Rogers’ Strait.
The necessary provisions and stores having been
safely landed, a depot was formed in a picturesque
spot on the side of a beautifully grassed hill, with a
brook of the purest water at its base, winding its
course into Camden Harbor, Latitude of the camp,
15 deg. 29 min. 45 sec. S., longitude, 124 deg. 3 min.
52 sec. E., and its height above the sea 15 feet.
Next morning, Messrs. Panter and Martin, with
the mate of the schooner, who was an old gold-dig-
ger, and a native of the Champion Bay district,
started from the depot with 4 horses and 6 days’
rations, for Mount Double-Cone, bearing E. 23 deg.
S., at the distance of 6 miles. The intermediate
country in a direct line being stony and difficult,
the party travelled round to the southern side of
Camden Harbor, and then by a succession of tole-
ably easy gravelly flats and gentle rises, in 10 miles
reached the basin between the two cones, after a
march of four hours. All the country passed over
was splendidly grassed, with sufficient shade for
sheep ; the timber light, and of no great value, ex-
cept for fencing and firewood. Amongst it was one
remarkable specimen of the baobab tree (Adansonia)
of great antiquity, about 50 feet in diameter, and
only 25 feet to the branches. The interior substance
of the fruit of this tree is said to have an agreeable
acidity, and when boiled with sugar, to be of material


service in scorbutic complaints. After camping, at a
spot 145 feet above sea level, the beat became ex-
tremely oppressive for an hour or two, and in the
evening there was much lightning to the eastward
and northward. No natives or fires were seen, but
to the north of the camp the remains were observed
of an old native encampment, with upwards of 200
fires. Around the latter no relics were found except
some pieces of greenstone of concboidal fracture,
broken thin, so as to use the flint-like edges for
sharpening spears, and some fragments of carbo-
niferous limestone, probably used for making the
white paint with which the natives occasionally adorn
themselves. The subsequent proceedings of the
explorers are narrated as follows :
“ April 7. —At dawn of day, leaving the native
in charge of the camp, we started off to climb the
eastern cone. The ascent was not made without
many a pause to take breath; for although the
height of the summit above our camp is only 705
feet, (height above mean sea level 850 feet) the sides
are so precipitous and clothed with such high grass
grow ing amongst loose stones, that walking without
a load was a matter of no slight toil; in our case,
that toil was increased by the weight of instruments,
arms, and the necessary appliances each one had to
carry. Before we had taken many paces through the
grass, we were wet through to the waist, each blade
of grass bending under its load of dew-drops. This
was not, however, a source of discomfort; for the
sun shone with dazzling splendor through a cloudless
sky, causing such an amount of evaporation from
our drenched clothes, as to lower the temperature of
our bodies a few degrees. Arrived at the top, we
were rewarded with a magnificent view of the
country away to the eastward as far as Mount Lyell,
with the Glonely stretching towards Mount King in
reaches here and there visible, and thence over the
country to the westward: all of which, at this, the
spring time of the year, is splendidly clad in ver-
dure. The country drained by the Gairdner likewise
appears of surpassing richness. After taking various
angles to verify my triangulation of last year, we
descended in a N.W. direction, and observed several
positive indications of the presence of copper. We
returned to camp at 9 a,tn.; the solar radiation
thermometer reading at that hour 1274 deg.,
although the thermometer in shade only stood at
804 deg.
“We resumed our journey at 1 p.m. As our object
was the discovery of an easy rather than a direct
route for the horses, our course was anything but
straight. The first two miles were through well-
grassed flats and gentle rises, with a gravelly soil.
We then crossed twm creeks ; the first takes its rise
northwards of camp 2; the second, the larger of the
two, winds round the eastern base of Mount
Double-cone, in a southerly direction, and after
receiving the first creek, flows into the River Gairdner.
This second stream we named Dunedalc Creek; in
both the water is beautifully pure; crossing places
are numerous and good, for the beds of both are either
pebbly or rocky. After crossing Dunedale Creek the
first time, a series of rich alluvial flats, the soil of a
black color, —basalticdetrituspredominating,—brought
us by a line of travelling exceeding 4 miles, to a
chocolate soil on a flat through which Dunedale
Creek again flows. Travelling as we have done this
afternoon, over easy ground, the length and close
growth of the grass is such as to greatly retard our
progress, and shorten our inarches. Soon after swe
camped 2 miles S. 12 deg. W. of camp 2; the
accomplishing of these 2 miles having cost us 10
miles of travelling. Here for the first time we
sustained a vigorous attack from those murderers of
sleep, moschitoes. Numerous and brilliant fire-flies
glittered amongst the dark foliage of the trees and
shrubs. Height above the sea 145 feet.
“ April B.—ln the morning our start was delayed
until 7 a.m. by the straying of “ Tommy,” one of
the horses. The search for him was not by any
means 'an agreeable occupation; half a dozen steps
in the long grass so liberally bedewed, sufficed to wet
us through to the waist. On leaving camp we
travelled first over a mile and a half of flats of rich
alluvium, with dense coarse vegetation. Then crossing
a nari'ow belt of sandy loam, and bearing away a
little easterly, we skirted a low white sandstone ridge,
running nearly north and south. This ridge has no
soil except between the crevices of the blocks of stone;
and so, contrasted with the fertility of the flats on
either side, appears desolate enough. About a mile
to the north of our 4th camp we passed a track where
there were traces of a recent hurricane ; all the trees
being uprooted and lying in a line from B.E. to N.W.
This, from the state of the leaves upon the fallen
trees, I should suppose to have occurred about 10
days since; it was in all probability the same hurri-
cane we experienced on the 30th ultimo, the day
after we struck on Treacherous Reef. Even tavelling
on the ridges, although our progress was slow, I
could not describe as difficult; wo marched along,
leading our horses at a steady rate of 24 miles an
hour, but making only 2 miles of actual course by
10 a.m., when our progress was stopped by a tributary
of the Gairdner, flowing in a rocky bed from west
to east. As it was now getting very warm, wo
camped at a spot a little more than 2 miles N. 10
deg. E. from Mount King; there being fine grass all
over the flat. Height above sea level 45 feet. By
spending the middle of the day here we may find
some easy ford for the horses; the south bank being
steep, and covered with mangroves. In a shallow
pool by the side of the river w r e caught a fish
weighing 31bs., which at dinner was pronounced excel-
lent, In the afternoon a thunderstorm passed over
from the eastward, whilst the lower stratum of wind
w'as from the westward. It divided, one part settling
over Mount King, and the other northwards towards
Camden Harbor. At 1,30 p.m. we walked down


to the river again ; hut in the interval the tide had
risen 10 feet, and it now presented itself as a placid
stream of more than 50 yards in breadth, the river
bed being about 30 yards in breadth, and rocky. At
low water there are rapids, falls of 1 or 2 feet, and
deep still pools. This bed is fringed by a narrow
belt of small mangroves, outside of which, on either
side, there is a series of pools about 10 yards in
breadth, hounded by another mangrove belt; but we
can see abundant traces of the rainy season, at a
distance of at least 200 yards from the actual river
bed. The river positively swarms with fish;
two were caught in a few minutes with a piece of
cooked kangaroo for bait. Bait failing us, some small
fish were shot; but before we could get them, a
larger fish, not less than two feet in length, made his
appearance, and swallowed those floating, with the
voracity of a pike. We propose to name this
stream Fish River, and the flats on the northern
bank Mosquito Flats; the latter is, by our experience,
a most appropriate name.
“April. 9. —This morning it was high water in
Fish River at 5 a.m. Resting the horses to-day, we
walked to the top of Mount King, and had a magni-
ficent view of the country. At our feet, displayed
as on a map, lay that portion of the Glenelg district
drained by the Gairdner and its many tributaries.
The flats between the rugged hills, the Gairdner.
and the line of swamps outside the mangrove belts
fringing the Glenelg, being flooded, presented a vast
sheet of water, with a few hill-tops appearing above
the water like so many islands. Into these swamps
the Gairdner and Fish Rivers flow, thence by the
Glenelg and George Water into the sea. The same
fertility, vegetation, and light timber, characterise this
mount and the country around it, as already described
of the country passed over yesterday. On the top
itself there was a rich brown soil, but a tangled
mass of creepers and vines made walking exceedingly
difficult. The height of this summit above mean sea
level is 900 feet. The temperature at 9 a.m. in the
shade was 88 deg. To the westward, of a mile
distant, there is another peak 50 feet higher than that
we first made. From its summit we obtained an
excellent view of George Water and the Glenelg; but
the tangled mass on this summit was even more dense
than that of the first. The whole mount is now
covered with the richest grass.
“Whilst on the summit, we heal’d a rumbling
noise, apparently within the mount fat 9.25 a.m.)
like the subterranean noise so often heard in countries
within a narrow zone of the earthquake lines. The
mate of the Perseverance, who w r as with us, has
travelled in New Zealand; without any inquiry on
my part, at once, on hearing the noise, he exclaimed,
‘ that is like a New Zealand rumbling.’ Whether
this noise was really of subterranean origin or not, I
cannot confidently assert; this part of the coast of
Australia, however, does lie within the limits of the
terrestrial movements, and evidences of not remote
antiquity are not wanting in this vicinity. I noticed
at the time there was a perfect calm and a cloudless
sky.
“Although I describe the whole of the country
passed over as luxuriant, still the vegetation between
the bases of Mount King and Fish River, except
the grasses and adansoniao, is slightly less so than
northwards towards Camden Harbor. The flats, on
our homeward route, to the westward of the white
sandstone ridge, are rather of a sandy nature, owing
to the disintegration of the white sandstone; but now
and then we met with tracts of the same soils as
those already described. All the hills to seaward,
that is, to the westward of our course, seem of the
same general character as those between Mount Lyell
and Camden Harbor. In short, all this district
westward of the dividing range between the Glenelg
and Prince Regent’s River, I consider well adapted
to the purposes of the sheep farmer ; but the country
is neither fitted for cattle nor horses, except they be
paddock-fed; the former—cattle—could not be mus-
tered after they had left the plains, owing to the diffi-
cult nature of 'the hilly ground; the latter—horses—
as any one accustomed to the breeding of horses will
perceive at a glance, would not thrive here, because
of the stony ridges, so productive of splints. There
is no deficiency of the best materials for roadmaking,
but the amount of skilled and unskilled labour
requisite will be great. Materials for bridge-making
and building materials of every kind abound. Some
of the flats would grow rice and similar grain;
other spots I think suited to the cultivation of spices,
sugar, tea, coffee, and even corn at high altitudes.
When we returned to camp at 1.15 p.m., the ther-
mometer in the shade was at 88 deg., and in the sun
135 deg. There has been -a thunderstorm every
afternoon since we landed; this one came from the
east, whilst an under current of wind and scud was
coming over from the west. The two winds struggled
for the mastery immediately over our camp, dis-
persing the storm south of Mount King and north of
Camden Harbor, between which places no rain fell,
but beyond these limits, there must have been a
down-pouring rain. Ducks, cranes, and the most
brilliant colored parrots fly over our tent frequently;
but, as a rule, beyond the range of our guns.
“ April 10. —At sunrise we bade adieu to Mos-
quito Flat, travelling westward for a mile up the
flat on the north bank of Fish River, We then
made a succession of richly grassed flats directly on
our course; for the first five miles the soil was black,
it then changed to a chocolate color, with an oc-
casional sandy patch. We re-crossed Fish River at
miles, and Dunedale Creek at 3 miles on our
course. All along our route the flats were lightly
timbered with eucalypti, acacia), palms,—and baobabs
everywhere. We camped at 1 p.m. on a stream
running into Camden Harbor, not more than 2 miles
from our depot, but with too rugged a series of
little hills between, to undertake at the end of a


good day’s journey. Height above the sea, 100 feet.
More seed of the baobab was procured on our way;
and a snipe, a pheasant, and several red and grey
kangaroo, were either shot or seen. At 5 p.m. the
daily thunderstorm gathered, to the southward this
time, so that we escaped without a drop of rain once
more. The night was very warm, and little sleep
was obtained by any one, by reason of our old
enemies, the mosquitoes and sand-flies.” Next
morning the depot was reached by a circuitous route
of nearly 3 miles. While the leaks of the schooner
were being sought out and stopped, by laying her
ashore on Careening Island, and on the beach of the
small hay on SE. side of Mount Lookover, a
thorough examination was made of the four groups
of islands westward of Brecknock Harbor. “ All
the islands may be described as rugged in the
extreme, but well watered, and tolerably well wooded,
with abundance of grass. On one of the Heywood
group there were some natives, but they would not
shew themselves. Two turtles’ nests were found:
one yielded 60 and the other 62 most delicious eggs.
Another pheasant was shot there; these birds ap-
pearing to be more numerous on the islands than on
the main. The bean grows on all the islands; and
when cooked is pronounced good by every one.
‘‘April 19.—1 n the afternoon I climbed Mount
Lookover, which will yield to none in the district for
ruggedness and steepness. Although not more than
650 feet in height, the ascent is as fatiguing as that
of Mount King. It is another instance of old red
sandstone, of a conical outline, broken only by preci-
pices. On the summit I obtained an extensive and
charming view, eastward as far as Mount Lyell, and
southward to Mount King. Brecknock Harbor,
with its beautiful bays and islands, formed a picture
that years will not efface from my memory. For two
hours I was engaged in taking a series of angles and
a complete outline of the Harbor in which we are now
lying, as well as the inner or Camden Harbour.
From what I could see of Rogers’ Strait, I do not
think there is a passage for vessels, except at high
water; for I could see two reefs stretching across,
with their black rocky tops projecting several feet
above the water. Around the north and east base of
Mount Lookover there is a dense thicket or jungle of
vines and creepers, difficult to pass through, and
swarming with the active green ant. Shot a tur-
key, several pigeons, doves, and a curlew. I could
see a great number of native fires between Mount
King and the GFnelg. There is a stream of beauti-
ful water at the eastern base of the Mount, where
the older mangroves attain an enormous growth;
one, to which the vessel was moored whilst under-
going repairs, has a girth of 24 feet, and height of
30 feet, 18 of which are immorsed in every high
tide.”
The climate, extent, pastoral resources, and general
capabilities of the soil of the Glenelg District, so far
as explored, are thus described;—“ Partially sur-
rounded by sea, and deeply indented with noble har-
bors, this district, so far as longitude 1254- deg. East,
may bo said to enjoy a sea-climate. The two periods
during which meteorological observations have been
made, are far too short to admit of any precise con-
clusions ; but our experience of the weather, and the
appearance of the country, rivers, and vegetation, all
confirm the supposition that there are two rainy and
one dry season in the year. The first wet season
commences about December, and as we find the
country everywhere clothed with the richest vegeta-
tion of about a month or six weeks’ growth, whilst
young leaves of such trees as the eucalypti are parched
with the sun, it is probable the first and heaviest
rains end in February; to these succeeds a period of
warm clear weather, lasting until the end of March,
when the sky again becomes cloud-bearing, but at
this season with thunderstorms only. The mornings
of April were almost always cloudless; but in the
afternoon or evening dense banks appeared generally
upon the eastern horizon, working up against a west-
erly or sea-breeze, and terminating nearly every day
in a thunderstorm with rain. These storms rarely
lasted more than an hour; they travelled quickly.
In the months of June and July the sky is again
cloudless, and the various grasses ripen slowly; the
heat of the noon-day sun being tempered by exceeding-
ly heavy dews and cool sea-breezes. On one of the
hottest days in July (19th) 1863, sitting in the sun or
in the shade during mid-day bivouac, was a matter
of indifference, although the thermometers at the
time stood at 122 deg. in the sun and 94 in the shade,
at a distance of 45 miles from the coast-line, and at
an elevation of 200 feet above mean sea-level. This,
the hottest season of the year, lasts until the heavy
rains of December. During the latter wet and the
succeeding dry season the mean temperature appears
high; this is caused by the high readings of the
minimum thermometers: they seldom register less
than 80 deg. in April and 65 deg. in June and July,
yet the nights rarely feel oppressive. Lightning to
the E. and N.E. occurs nearly every night in March,
April, and May, In June and July the days are
bright and cloudless; the nights cool and refreshing.
The health of the party has in no case suffered from
climatic causes; there has been one case of diarrhoea,
and one of dysentery; both yielded to a single dose
of chlorodyne; and one attack of fever, of a typhoid
nature, which was successfully treated with quinine.
“ The extent of the known portion of the Glenelg
district, that is, from the meridian of 1254 deg. E.
to the sea coast, and from the parallel of 164 deg. S.
to the latitude of Camden Harbor, includes only 2925
square miles; of which area, deducting one-third for
stony ridges, an excessive amount, and the sea inlets
Doubtful Bay, George Water, &c., 1,000,000 acres
are suited to the depasturing of sheep. Of these
million acres, about 100,000 acres are adapted to the
cultivation of rice and similar grain; 250,000 acres
are especially favorable to the growth of spices, sugar,


tea, and coffee; even cereals at high altitudes, and
at certain seasons of the year, might be grown, at any
rate in sufficient quantities to meet the requirements
of a pastoral and agricultural population. It is
essentially a wool-growing country; it would be
difficult to conceive a more luxuriantly grassed and
watered territory; at the very lowest estimate it
would carry a sheep to an acre, but in some picked
spots there would be no risk in quadrupling that
number of stock per acre, especially if sheep farming
were here practised with such intelligence as may he
found in the tropical and subtropical districts of the
eastern colonies of Australia. The district, however,
is fitted for neither cattle nor horses, except they be
paddock-fed.
“ The chief mineral resources of the country
explored are copper and iron. Indications of copper
lodes are met with in several parts of the Glenelg dis-
trict ; but whether these lodes will be found hereafter
to yield sufficient quantities to be profitably worked
remains to be seen. Ores of iron are in vast
quantities; scarcity of manual labour alone can pre-
vent their becoming an important resource to the
district when occupied. The principal building stones
are basalt, and sandstones of various kinds, and in
vast quantities. An argillaceous variety of the latter
is a flagstone, well fitted for street-flagging, steps,
&c.; it would likewise be found effective in ecclesiasti-
cal architecture. Limestone, yeilding lime for
building purposes, is found in several localities; the
specimens obtained from the range of hills to the
westward of George Water contained the highest
percentage of lime. In grouping the timber trees
according to the products afforded by them, the
variety, abundance, colossal size of many and the
durability of some, first attract the attention. By far
the greater number of trees, valued for their timber,
may be included among the Eucalypti, several species
of which here attain a height but little inferior to
the E. Globulus, or blue gum of Victoria. The
flooded gum-tree, the white gum, and the ironbark
tree, are all to be found here in situations where,
although too distant from the coast to export, they
will prove invaluable to the future settler. Other
species of Eucalypti, besides their notable service in the
bush as ample shade-givers, will all prove useful woods
to the settler and to the artizan. Upon the dividing
ranges between Prince Regent’s River and the
Glenelg, and in many other localities, a pine not un-
frequently met with throughout the interior of
Australia, here attains a size rendering it an object
of great value. It is fitted for all the usual purposes
to which deal is applied in buildings generally; and
it occasionally reaches dimensions that suffice for the
making of masts and spars of moderate size. The
wood is nearly of equal value to the well-known kauri
pine. Perfectly straight trees of the following ad-
measurements are common: circumference at the base
8 feet; 5 feet from the ground 7 feet; approximate
height of the whole tree 100 feet. Sir George
Grey speaks of this tree (vol. 1, p. 275) as “fit for
the purposes either of building or making spars for
vesselshe adds, it “ is abundant and good, and could
be readily and cheaply exported, it they were cut in the
vicinity of the streams, and floated down to the sea
in the rainy season, whereby all land-carriage would
be avoided.” A melaleuca, very closely allied to if
not identical with the M. leucodendron of India, from
whose leaves the cajeputi oil of commerce is extract-
ed grows abundantly, and attains an enormous size.
There are many other trees yielding timber in every
respect suitable to the requirements of the cabinet-
maker, whether of plain or ornamental works.
Amongst the edible indigenous fruits, those of the
“ quandang,” or native peach-tree, deserve first
mention; the fruit, notwithstanding its thin peri-
carp and strong acidulous taste, is grateful and
largely available for food. Other fruiting bushes of
the same order yield berries of a pleasant flavor.
Three species of cissus are found; two run along the
ground or entwine among shrubs, the third is ar-
borescent. All bear fiuit in size, appearance, and
flavor like the small black cluster grape, and in
bunches from 10 to 40. The baobab tree yields a
drupe as large as a cocoa-nut; the pulp and seeds of
this fruit are very palatable; the bark and spungy
inner wood, when soaked in boiling water, afford an
agreeable mucilaginous drink, not unlike maccaroni
in taste. These trees attain an enormous diameter;
(50 feet in one instance) but they rarely exceed 25
feet in height. The young leaves and seeds of the
palm fruit are of an excellent flavour; when green,
the seeds or nuts are not dissimilar to the English
filbert. Amongst the indigenous plants available as
culinary vegetables, the fine bean which grows so
abundantly on the sand-hills of the coast, offers, when
boiled, a nutritious diet. The pea is plentiful all over
the district; its valuable properties as a legume are
recognized even by the aborigines. Horses eat
greedily the branches, ripe seeds and leaves. Several
small herbaceous plants may be regarded as substi-
tutes for spinach; and the “warrein,” “yun-jid,” or
“ adjico,” are here, as in the southern parts of Wes-
tern Australia, important articles of vegetable
food of the natives. Of fibres, the lemon-grass is
pretty generally distributed throughout the district;
this and one of the liliacese, not unlike a dwarf
phormium tenax, yield a fibre from which the abo-
rigines manufacture a strong and well-made twine.
But of all the indigenous fibre-yielding leaves, that of
the palm deserves especial examination; it grows
near to every stream; its leaf, even if the fibre prove
useless for cordage, will be valuable for the manu-
facture of hats, umbrellas, &c,, suited to the climate;
it might even be employed in the making of any
coarse kind of paper.”
Various medicinal and perfume plants, barks,
roots, gums, &c., were discovered ; and many of them
“ may be indicated as proximate objects of commercial
value when this luxuriant country may become the


home of an intelligent people.” Kangaroos of various
kinds were abundant; as were also emu, geese, ducks,
the native turkey, guowoo or native pheasant, the
jungle-fowl, the lyre-bird, and very many other
birds, valuable either for their flesh, brilliant plu-
mage, oil, or eggs. “ The waters of the district, both
fresh and salt, are rich in products which await en-
terprize alone to raise them. Foremost among these
ranks the dugong (halicore), a marine herbivorous
animal included in the cetaceac, observed both in
Doubtful Bay and Camden Sound. Its flesh alone,
which is not unlike beef, would make it a welcome
visitant; but regarded as the source of an invaluable
oil, superior in nearly a two-fold ratio to the best cod-
liver oil, its annual visit would give rise to a
fishery attended with greater profit, ontlay and other
things being taken into account, than that of the
sperm whale, The pearl oyster of commerce, the
species valued for its nacreous substance, is un-
doubtedly to be found here plentifully; for the abo-
rigines, who would not be likely to undertake any
excessive labour to procure them, very commonly
wear them as an ornament suspended round the
neck. The Tridacna, a conchiferous mollusca, found
upon any point of the coast between North-West
Cape and the Prince Regent’s River, might be
included in the pearl-oyster fishery; for although its
shell has no valuable nacreous lining, in it pearls of
great beauty and of considerable size are not unfre-
quently obtained. The trepang fishery could not be
profitably carried on by Europeans. Whales and
seals have been more than once seen within the har-
bors of this district. There are fine beds of oysters
for the table in Brecknock Harbor; turtles, crabs,
cray-fish, &c,, abound. Deep-sea fishery would in all
probability be a profitable occupation. The fresh-
water streams teem with fish of large size, and of
excellent flavor.
“ The district of the Glenelg is especially rich in
bays, river-harbors, and sheltered anchorages. Along
its western shore, from Collier Bay to Camden Sound
inclusive, a vessel may at all times select a safe
position, with good holding grouud in 15 fathoms
water, and shelter from either the islands or the
great coral reef known as Montgomery Shoal.
Doubtful Bay, into which the Glenelg flows after
receiving the Gairdner and Fish rivers, both con-
siderable streams, and almost an innumerable host
of minor tributaries, any one of which in the settled
districts of Western Australia would be called a
river,—is a magnificent sheet of water, 9 miles in
length from north to south, and 6 miles in breadth
from east to west. Although in the summer vast
quantities of water may from all sides pour into the
Bay, and the tides gain additional force thereby, yet
as it is thoroughly protected from every wind, and
from a heavy sea, by a range of islands and reefs] to
seaward, and the natural breakwater of the Mont-
gomery Islands and the coral reef, 14 miles still
further to the westward,—as the holding ground
is of the very best, —and as there is an abundance
of room in which to work the largest ship.
Doubtful Bay, when this portion of the Aus-
tralian coast is colonized, will prove a harbor of
refuge second to none. From the great rise and fall
of the tide also, 36 feet, this Bay is a good site for
works necessrry to the repairing of ships. A better
terminus to the system of Australian telegraphs,
when connected with those of Europe and Asia, it
will be difficult to find. About the centre of a large
mangrove swamp on the eastern side of the Bay,
there is a red conical bill, which vessels entering by
“ Foam Passage” should get in a line with the centre
of the Passage; at a distance of 2 miles westward
of Foam Passage, the summit of the red cone will
just appear above the horizon within the Bay (bearing
true E, by S.); this course should be kept for 2 j
miles within the bay, when Success Channel, the
western entrance into George Water, will bear due
north. The anchorage is safe anywhere within the
bay; but in the vicinity of the spot indicated by the
above bearings, a vessel at anchor will feel the tidal
effect to a much less degree than elsewhere. There
is but one known shoal within the Bay, and that is
situated at a distance of 4 miles from the red cone
on a line bearing N, 31 deg W. from the hill. At
spring tides this sand-bank was seen dry at low
water. Soundings through Foam Passage, and to
the anchorage recommended are not less than 10
fathoms at low water, sand and mud bottom Wood
and water are to be had without difficulty in
Doubtful Bay.
“ Success Channel, the N.W. passage from Doubt-
ful Bay to George Water, is safe for vessels of any
draft, provided the. flood tide be made use of; and
anchorage in George Water or Maitland Bay is
good ; thence, to the lower rapids of the Glenelg,
distant 40 miles from Foam Passage, the river
Glenelg may be described as safe and easy to navi-
gate with cargo boat or small steamer. Above the
rapids cargo boats might ply, for fully half the year,
to a distance of 25 miles; but this last-mentioned
navigation would be uncertain between the months of
May and November. The Gairdner and Fish Rivers
have a tide of not less than 10 feet; water com-
munication to a limited extent, therefore, could be
depended upon in these rivers for the same period as
in the case of the Upper Glenelg.
“ With regard to the internal communications of
the district, it will suffice to state that there would
be no great difficulty in the construction of roads ;
but lines of railway would in several directions entail
great engineering difficulties, owing to the natural
precipitous character of the hills, and deep stream-
beds of the rivers and gullies.
“Dampier Land, north of the parallel 16f deg.
S., to Swan Point, is correctly described on the
charts as low sandy land, with stunted vegetation.
Viewed from several anchorages at short distances
from the caast, all the land south of Point Emeriau


as far as the latitude of Point Gantheaume appears to
be verdant and fertile. Towards the southern part
of this peninsula a series of well-wooded hills rise
gradually from the coast until the highest summit
attains an altitude which renders it visible at a dis-
tance of 10 leagues. In many places the grass comes
down to the water’s edge. There is every reason to
believe the country now described to be but little
inferior in the luxuriance of its vegetation to the dis-
trict of the Glenelg. It is certainly of a less precipi-
tous character, and it is thickly peopled. If after-
exploration confirm this supposition, Dampler Land
will add 2,400,000 acres- of grazing lands to the
explored district of Roebuck Bay, which it im-
mediately adjoins.”
Similar testimony as to the apparent fertility of
Dampier Land is recorded by Captain Stokes, R.N.,
in his account (vol. 1, p. 83) of the visit of H.M.
surveying ship Beagle to this part of the Australian
coast, in January, 1838. That officer gives also the
following description of portions of the coast there-
abouts, which came more particularly under his
notice;—
“ January 22, 1838.—Towards the afternoon we
discovered a small inlet, being then abont 30 miles
northward from our former anchorage in Roebuck
Bay. We steered directly for it, and when within
half a mile of its mouth, we had, at high water, 6
fathoms. From the westward I could trace dis-
tinctly the course of this inlet, which at this state of
the tide appeared of great extent; but the bar
which locked its mouth, and over which the sea was
breaking very heavily, rendered it impossible to take
a boat across without evident risk, by which no real
good would be obtained, as the rise and fall of the
tide, 18 feet, on this low coast, was more than suf-
ficient to account'for the imposing but deceptive
appearance of this opening. The shore, like the
south side of Roebuck Bay, was fringed with man-
groves, while to the N.N.E. lay an extensive plain,
over which the water seemed, at certain seasons of the
year, to flow. The country around, for miles, wore
the appearance of an Interminable and boundless plain,
with an almost imperceptible landward elevation, and
thickly wooded with stunted trees. We found be-
tween the ship and the shore 6,4, and 2 fathoms,
but as the mouth of the inlet was filled with breakers,
apparently on a bar extending out mile, we re-
turned on board. It appeared at low water to be
nearly dry, and to be a collection of mud and sand
banks.” Beyond Point Coulomb the mangroves grew
down to the water’s edge, and the spring tides
appeared to inundate the country to a considerable
extent, the land being lower than any previously
seen. Sandbanks and breakers front the shore, and
effectually prevent all approach to it from sea, ex-
cept under the most favorable circumstances. This
is Carnot Bay. Foul ground was met with 5 and 7
miles W, by S. from Cape Baskerville, where the
water shoaled to 3 and 5 fathoms. “ The land over
the Capo rises to an elevation of nearly 200 feet,
and then again becomes low and sandy, opening out
a bay, wherein we afterwards fiyjnd good ancho-
rage. This was named Beagle Bay. It was found
to be about 3 miles broad, and 7 deep, the
country around being low and open. During the
night the wind veered round to S.W., and blew
fresh; thereby favorably testing the value of the
anshorage,” It was deemed worthy of remark that,
here there was no squall, nor any dew; the latter
having been found to fall most copiously on cer-
tain nights, without any apparent indication; and
being considered to constitute the principal nourish-
ment and support of the vegetation of the country.
Here the party had friendly intercourse with some
of the natives; and judging from the number of
native fires constantly to be seen, the coast be-
tween Roebuck and Beagle Bays was thought to
be thickly populated. The tide rose here 18 feet.
The ship anchored on the 27th of January, in 7
fathoms water, li miles S.S.W. from Point Swan,
and was detained there until February 10 by a
continuance of bad weather. “ The rain during the
first three days of that month was at times of the
most monsoon-like character, while the wind, con-
stantly blowing very fresh, kept veering from N.W.
to S.W. Every now and then, a squall would take
us from S.S.W., though more commonly from
W.S.W. The only certainty that we could calculate
upon was, that at N.N.W. the wind would remain
when it got there, stationary for a few hours. The
thunder and lightning, the former loud with a long
reverberating peal, and the latter of the most
intensely vivid kind, were constantly roaring and
flashing over our heads. The rain cooled the atmos-
phere, and diminished for a time the number and
virulence of our winged tormentors, the flies,
moschitoes and sand-flies.
“On February 13th it blew a violent gale th®
whole day from W.S.W., coming on quite unex"
pectedly, for neither the state nor appearance
the atmosphere gave the least indication of it s
approach. This gale departed as rapidly and mys-
teriously as it had appeared.” A few days afterwards,
“a heavy squall burst upon us from E.S.E., and
blew very hard indeed for about an hour, veering
round to, and terminating at N.E., and then all was
calm again; partaking of the general characteristics
of previous visitations of the same kind, to which
we have been subject since our arrival upon this
coast, it lasted for a much less time, as hitherto
their average duration has been about three hours.
It brought the thermometer down to 80 deg. All
was quiet by midnight.”
Similar squalls from the S.E. and Eastward,
with sudden changes to the opposite directions,
were prevalent in King’s Sound during the remainder
of February, and until the sun crossed the equator
in the following month. After that, the weather


became settled and fine; the temperature ranging
between 72 and 89 deg.
Part of the months of February and March, was
occupied by the officers of the Beagle in the dis-
covery and boat-examination of the Fltzroy River,
which was explored by them to the distance of 22
miles in a S.S.W. direction upwards from its mouth
at the head of King’s Sound, Further progress in
the boats was impeded by small islets and sunken
trees, which nearly choked the river’s bed in latitude
17 deg. 44 min South, longtitude 124 deg. 34 min. East.
The banks were in that locality 20 feet high, and
covered with grass. The river ran through a low
level couutry, of rich alluvial character, and in places
thickly timbered. The same description of country
prevailed as far as could be seen from the place at
which the boats commenced their return. The trees
most common in the vicinity of the river consisted
chiefly of two species of palm, three of the eucalypti,
acacia, and stunted banksia. The birds seen were
wholly those belonging to the land, and were chiefly
black and white cockatoos, and a variety of finches.
Fish were neither seen nor caught; and the absence
of water-fowl led to a supposition that they were
scarce. The tides in the river were strong, and rose
to a great height. It was by their aid alone the
boats were enabled to proceed so far, as the bed was
mostly broad and shallow, and occupied extensively
by flats of mud and sand. Indications of floods were
observed many feet above the height of the ordinary
banks.
The leaks of the schooner having been effectually
stopped and the horses and stores embarked at a con-
venient spot very close to the depot, the party bade
adieu to Brecknock Harbor, and sailed from it on
25th April, discovering on their way out, a low-
water channel of 4 J fathoms over the bar at Careening
Island, close on the southern side of Circular Reef.
In the offing, and while coasting along the west-
ern shore of Damp'er Land, the tides and current
were strong, and thunderstorms from S.E. or S.W.
were of almost daily occurrence, the lightning being
vivid, and the thunder confused. Sailing closer to
the shore of Dampier Land than on the outward
voyage, there was every evidence to favor the opinion
then formed of the prevalence of rich verdure on the
hills and tablelands; from Point Eraeriau southward,
the grass and trees were observed to grow down to
to the line of sandhills and red cliffs.
A good anchorage in 10. j fathoms water was found
midway between the Lacepede Islands and the
main; those islands and their encircling reef forming
a good breakwater to seaward.
At 3 miles S.S.W. from Cape Baskerville, a bank
of 4 fathoms was passed over, the water being a
fathom deeper immediately to the N.W. and South.
With variable winds, sometimes fresh from the
westward, and a current to the north, progress was
slow; and it was after noon of the 4th May before
the schooner anchored 7 miles N.N.W, from Cape
Yillaret, having cruised for 3 days in front of
Roebuck Bay, without finding any deep channel into
it. Within its headlands of Point Gautheaume
and Cape Yillaret, the soundings were less than 5
fathoms, and the same depth within 5 miles of either
shore. At the anchorage, which was by far the
most exposed of any that had been taken up since
leaving Brecknock Harbor, a swell setting with the
tide, even without wind, caused the vessel to ride
uneasily; and it was considered that, in the event of
a westerly gale, the position would have been highly
dangerous. It was high water at full and change
at 10 a.m., and the rise of tide was 20 feet. Next
day the tide rose 23 i feet ; but while at anchor off
the centre of Roebuck Bay on the 3rd, it rose only
12 feet.
In the early morning of the 6th a very strong
S.E. wind, with a flood tide, produced a heavy sea.
In the afternoon, the wind having changed to S.W.
after a calm of two hours, the vessel finally anchored
in 3 fathoms water at low tide, half a mile from the
beach to the eastward of Cape Yillaret. This head--
land presents a remarkable appearance from the sea,
being formed of red and white sandstone, with de-
tached pinnacles from 15 to 60 feet in height at its
base. About 1J miles north of the Cape, the
depth of water at low tide is not less than 12
fathoms; whilst for 20 miles in the same direction
extensive shoals are formed, over whieh in no part
is there more than 3 or 4 fathoms water, A small
detached rock, uncovered at low tide, lies about
one mile N. by W. from the cape. The channel
from Cape Yillaret was found by boat to shoal
rapidly from 12 to 3 fathoms, within a distance of
7 miles. Above this. Roebuck Bay was occupied
by shoals extensively dry at low water, and the
shore was thickly lined with mangroves, with ex-
ception of that on the north side. “Lagrange
Bay, as a harbor, is of still less value than Roe-
buck Bay. It is only an indentation of the coast
line to the extent of 4 miles at the deepest part.
There was no opportunity to sound the bay, but it
appeared shallow. From the hummock on Cape
Latrouche Treville, 180 feet above mean sea level,
an excellent view of the bay was obtained; and
no considerable stream, perhaps not a creek, falls
into it.
COUNTRY ADJACENT TO ROEBUCK BAY.
Having established a depot at a native well of
good water, about 2f miles E. i S. from Cape
Yillaret, on a little lightly-timbered and well-
grassed flat, just inside the double range of
sandhills on the coast, —a party of 5, with a pony,
and three packhorses, carrying a fortnight’s
supplies, was organized for exploring the
couutry. The result of their proceedings, and of
the researches of other parties around the depdt,
are thus reported


“ The country explored to the eastward of
Roebuck Bay, between the 17 and 18 deg. of
south latitude, and along the sea-coast from the
head of Roebuck Bay to Cape Latouche Treville,
although only 150 miles to the southward of
the Glenelg District, offers a remarkable contrast
in point of climatic phenomena. The mean
temperature in the shade is here only deg.
lower than in the Glenelg district, and the solar
radiation 50 miles eastward of the sea-coast,
although generally 5 deg. lower, is occasionally
a few deg, higher,—yet, notwithstanding, the
amount of humidity in the atmosphere is here
very greatly decreased. In May, the weather is
found to resemble that of the Glenelg district
in July. Clear cloudless days and nights pre-
vailed, and only such winds, a few miles inland,
as serve to keep the air in a perceptible motion ;
so that the days, although the thermometersVead
high, are not so warm but that a man can walk
20 or 30 miles without inconvenience from the
heat; on one occasion, indeed, our exploring
party walked 45 miles, of course between the
hours of 6 a.m. and 9 p.m. The dryness of the
atmosphere is like that of the Champion Bay
district in the month of October or early in
November, when a man can work 8 or 10 hours
of day in the open air without suffering on
account of heat. May seems to be an early
spring month : the trees are just coming into
flower, and the grass is everywhere green; the
natives take considerable trouble to burn their
hunting grounds, to entice the game with young
feed; but so speedily does the grass grow again,
that in a few days the burnt place is once more
green, before the ash of the former grass has
been displaced by wind or showers. For nearly
a week before the party landed, showers were
occasionally seen to fall over various parts of the
country; but during the period of the land ex-
ploration no rain fell. There was more or less
dew every night, but an hour after sunrise it had
all disappeared. The mean atmospheric pressure
between the Ist and 23rd of May was 30.139
inches, and mean temperature in the shade
81.1 deg., the mean extremes of the latter being
69.6 deg. and 85.7 deg.
“ The extent of explored country within the
limits referred to, as far eastward only as the
meridian of 123 degrees, includes an area of 3,300
square miles; but from what has been seen at
the most distant stations from our depot, there
is every reason to believe that the same kind of
country extends eastward at least as far as the
Fitzroy River, in longitude deg. east; and
southward we know not to what extent. The
of known portion, however, contains 2,112,000
of acres of perfectly level country,—so level that,
he with the exception of the sea-coast range of
le, sand-hills and three little hummocks near Cape
of Yillaret, no spot traversed eastward of tbe dpeot
ist exceeded 50 feet in altitude. Of these 2,112,000
an acres, perfectly level well-grassed and almost
;g. treeless plains occupy 80,000 acres, the one-half
ar of which lie round the south and east shores of
st, Roebuck Bay, and the remainder inland from or
ily East of Lagrange Bay. These plains possess
he chiefly an alluvial soil, capable of growing many
;re tropical productions; they are fringed with belts
is of moderately large cajeputi trees. In the native
ict wells, which are found on these plains at intervals
•e- of not more than a mile, water is obtainable
id, within 16 or 18 feet, whilst within the belt of
n ; cajeputi trees it is found plentifully within 4or
ad 5 feet of the surface. The rest of. the country
dk consists of grassy plains, with shrubs and small
he timber, not growing so thickly as to impede
ng rapid riding, except where thickets occur. These
he thickets are rather difficult to traverse, on account
he of the mass of dead wood, the accumulation of
ay years, not because of the density of the vegeta-
in tion; once burnt thoroughly, as thickets they
irs would disappear. The grass is fine, sweet, and
on plentiful; our route crossed no sand-plains or
•ly barren plains ; in May the grass averages one
ito foot in height, and it is quite green. A dis-
he tinguishing feature between the grass of the
nr Glenelg district and that found here must be
jg mentioned, as upon it is based the comparatively
n, low estimate of sheep-grazing capability. The
re grass grows in tufts. (This is also the case in
as certain highly valued parts of the already settled
ly districts of Western Australia.) For this reason,
re as it is as well to under-estimate the.carrying
he capability of a newly discovered country, a
x- deduction of one-half its supposed carrying power
iss is now made, although it is more than probable
ad that the experience of the future settler will
re declare the amount to he greatly underrated.
19 This premised, the known parts of the Roebuck
de Bay district, within the limits already mentioned,
ig may be safely asserted to be capable of carrying
upwards of one million of sheep,
be “No evidence of mineral resources was dis-
be covered in sufficient quantities to warrant more
)0 extended research. Building materials do not
at abound. The indigenous vegetable resources are
re very similar to those of the Glenelg country,
of The baobab, palm, and pine do not occur here,
he and the timber generally can only be described
id as affording an ample supply of firewood and an
ie inferior material for fencing. With respect to


District,
Area in acres 1
Estimated car-
rying capabili-
bilities (sheep)
Glenelg .. ••
Augustus and other islands
Boebuck Bay .. ..
Dampier Land (?) ..
1,000,000
80,000
2,112,000
2,400,000 (?)
1,000000
80,000
1.056.000
1.200.000 (?)
Totals
3,336,000”
perfume plants, however, the whole district is
particularly rich. Nearly every tree and plant
in flower, yields a strong and grateful odor; the
Swarf myrtle, so common here, perhaps has the
most powerful odor; but some of the acacise and
small shrubs possess scents exquisitely beautiful.
The perfume of the heliotrope, the violet, the
clove pink, the rose, the stock, were all recog-
nized ; but many others, although delicious, were
such as could not be likened to that of any
commonly known plant or flower. Such animal
products as are found here were also included
■within the list as those seen in the district of the
Glenelg.
“ Throughout the country explored on this oc-
casion there is an entire absence of rivers, and
even creeks, except a number of very short ones
between Cape Yillaret and Cape Dußoulay.
Land transit, however, is exceedingly easy, for
the country is perfectly level, the soil, at a greater
distance than 2 miles from the sea-coast, is a red
sandy loam without stones, and only rarely
shewing a very fine gravel upon the surface. It
is sufficiently hard for heavy drays to traverse it
in any direction : nor does it seem likely to cut
up much with continuous traffic.
“Summary of pastoral and other lands ex
plored on the North-West coast.: —
The aborigines are numerous in the country
about Eoebuck Bay; but a very friendly inter-
course was maintained with them, and the tribes
of the interior were observed to be superior, both
in physical appearance and in intelligence, to
those who inhabit the country about the sea-
coast.
about the sea-






00333883


ItsKgSg Tr>l
,/ 'Si/: : ’
t’4 wgj?f X'-'’
‘ I * , g| f&8 r v ft- I I||i® 1.4 ag, mg&fc I
" -■ ’ -
i fess-’jg.*
** t ' 1 *%£ J ft ft ' ft - ftft iT n . -’'- ; ’ft ' Jt}» I. ft f ;;> r\ U
■•'■••'3*>-* ? x;. ft s -,. : . 7 ’•■•' :• .* . =>-!i!'-®iS - ■ :-'v>‘ft-''>r -’- ’ ,£3»-ft* ...■ ft v -.ft.. rft£s£ft ft-S&ftV ”.*
:■■ %■' v• ■■ , *S® ..>■ , T jj.”iv ?•; -V -r\Si *%,-; * v-. ■- ’■'- , ~: &*>
/,. •'-'. '*'•>• -■*,.-u,rVJ.- , y . >sr-v vV.a* ; >■■■• ■ ••,/’.■ *►< r ' y -‘< % v .. w *‘ •'. .-• . '•■ ■*■ •■• ~. -V' >* ■
- * aSK* ■; * %*£%%; IS 4 * lip -' ’•/“*
::' W ■ ' 7r ’• i •■ ? .W- ■ ».*:
,■: & i -V% SSL? .v’; -•'!'>' ’f, ’ s
-A "* ■- S
$OO
0 S s
SBg|#fc^
Xij>, iT* - ' |p * ||||| * & £|| i |||
-vrf
#iq:^:V?v:; 7 ■:-t'.'.v '--v • 'Sri,: 55 :: : ■■• _
I i
* v yV‘' v - r k * i$ /. -r‘ y '.£*' $$ ' ? “-i : v.;.'&
.. - • ■ .... ■•Cif'JViJ ■js-ii .r - ' ' ■',?. 1 < .■ *‘-- ■;-•■•..
r ftS^s ? ¥^-ll|K T ' v




00845149
'TAw
rB 4-13
Nl cO
