



THE TREASURE CHEST
DAY as Willie Wombat was beginning to think that
nothing exciting was ever going to happen to him again,
he received a message from his old friend, Mrs. Tuppy, asking
him to come and see her as soon as possible. Of course he
went immediately.
She was very glad to see him and told him that she was
worried and needed help for her husband. Captain Tuppy had
gone away some time ago to find a lost treasure and had
not returned or sent her any word. Before he left he had given
her a packet of papers and told her to guard them carefully
for they were copies of the maps of the lost treasure s location.
Now, as she knew Willie was very trustworthy she was going to
give them to him to keep.
Willie could see that she was upset about her husband so
With the aid of these maps he
island for which Captain Tuppy
he offered to try to find him.
would be able to locate the
had set out. He had just repaired his old sailing ship, so it was
in good order and ready for a long sea voyage. Mrs. Tuppy
was ever so tha-nkful and gladly accepted Willie's offer.


C17024
( vgMft i
Next day Willie worked hard. First of ail he had to find men
to man the ship. It was not long before he had collected a
good crew together and they were ail busy getting everything
ready to sail. They filled all the holds with stores so that they
would have no shortage of food on the trip, and soon were quite
\
ready to start on their expedition.
They set out and keeping to instructions on the map Mrs.
Tuppy had given Willie, were soon far out to sea. They travelled
for days without sight of land. The crew became restless and
bad tempered, while Willie was wondering if there really was
such an island or if he had not followed the maps correctly.
Then, just as he was about to order them to turn back, he saw
what at first appeared to be a big rock in the middle of the
ocean. As the ship drew nearer to it he could see it was the
island at last. Willie quickly ordered his crew to bring the ship
as close to the shore as they could, then to lower the small
boat for him.


\ — ——
\ — ® — © ©
-■ ♦ / "
Willie climbed down into the boat and rowed off, while the
crew watched and wondered what he would find when he
reached the shore. As far as they could see from the ship
there were lots of palm trees and rocks, but they could not see
any people about. Willie was so excited as he approached
the beach that he pulled the boat up on the sand and did not
wait to tie it up properly. He looked around him and could not
see anything but palm trees. Still he set off to investigate
further and find out if Captain Tuppy had reached there. He
wandered off amongst the palms, but though he went a long
way inland did not see any sign of life. At last he wended his
way back to the shore and you can imagine his dismay when he
found that his boat was not where he had left it. The tide had
come up while he was away and had washed it out to sea.


He sat down dejectedly by a rock and wondered what he
would do now, for he had no way of getting back to his ship and
he was already very tired and hungry. The Island seemed so
still and quiet, too. Little did Willie know that while he was
sitting there thinking a fierce black figure had crept up behind
the rock, while there were others watching from the bushes
nearby. Suddenly Willie looked up and saw the horrible black
face peering down at him. As he jumped up the others came
from behind the trees. He wondered what was going to happen
next, but the native behind the rock, who was evidently the
leader, motioned with his spear towards a pathway through the
trees. Willie could see that he meant him to go along it.
Though he did not like the look of them there was nothing else
he could do but obey them when they had him surrounded and
their ugly spears pointed at him. So with the natives following
behind, he went along the path* ' His one hope was that they
were leading him to where he could find Captain Tuppy,


M ■
The natives followed close behind him with their spears in
readiness if he should make any attempt to escape. Poor Willie
was very frightened, but kept walking along the winding path.
At last they came to what appeared to be a native village, and
here the blacks who had captured him marched Willie over to
a big hut in the centre which he could see belonged to their Chief.
The King of these natives was sitting outside his hut and when
he saw Willie he began to lick his lips. The three blacks with
Willie bowed to him and spoke in their own language. Suddenly
Willie noticed human skulls attached to the posts of the huts
and realized that these natives were cannibals. He made a dash
for the pathway, but was soon captured by the blacks again,
and dragged to a post where they tied him up to wait until they
were ready for him.


Mk iT/lV
Poor Willie watched as they prepared a big fire under a
huge pot of water. They waited until the fire was well alight and
then the blacks came across to Willie and, untying him, took
him over to the pot and placed him in it. Willie could do
nothing to help himself, but suddenly a strange white figure
came running from what appeared to be a temple at the other
side of the village. The natives bowed down to the ground
and Willie could see that this queer old man must be their god.
He had a long grey beard and bushy white hair. His only
clothing was a leopard skin and sandals made of grass. He
rushed over to Willie and pulled him out of the already steam-
ing pot. The natives had run away in fear when he spoke to
them, and now the two of them stood alone. Willie thanked
the old man for saving his life, but he did not seem to take any
notice of what Willie was saying.


Suddenly Willie realized that the old man the natives of
this island called their white god was none other than the Captain
Tuppy for whom he was looking. He immediately tried to
explain to the Captain, and told him that his wife had been very
worried when he was away so long, and that he had offered to
take his ship and go and search for him.
But after all the years on the island the poor old man had
lost his mind and he kept saying, "How can I be Captain Tuppy,
when I'm dead. I even buried myself a long while ago."
Willie tried and tried to make him understand, but without
success. He still insisted that he was dead, and even told Willie
that he would take him to where he had buried himself to prove
it. It really seemed useless to try and talk to him, but Willie
felt sure that once he could convince the Captain that he was
not dead he would be all right again.


Will ie told him how he had left home a long while ago in
his ship to look for the lost treasure. He showed him the maps
Mrs. Tuppy had given him, but still the Captain could
remember anything about it and kept repeating that he was
dead. It seemed as if Willie would never be able to convince
him that he was really alive, and had not been buried. Then the
thought occurred to Willie that perhaps as he was so sure of
burying himself, he had buried something, and if he could find
out what it was their troubles would be ended. So he asked
the old man to lead him to the place where he had buried him-
self. They started oft through the palms and over rocks until
they came to what appeared to be a sacred native ground,
where the natives were praying before a big pile of rocks in the
centre. It was built like a pyramid and stood very high.


Captain Tuppy pointed at
this and said, "There, that is
where I am buried. Isn't it nice?
Willie said, "I think that is where the treasure will be found
myself. Ask your blacks to pull those stones down and we shall
see."
At first the Captain did not want to have his wonderful
monument pulled down, but in the end Willie managed to per-
suade him and he ordered the natives to lift the stones away.
Willie was so excited he could hardly wait to see what really
was buried there, for he felt sure that Captain Tuppy had founo
the treasure and that was what he had so carefully put away
before his mind had gone. /
The natives seemed to be very slow about their task, but
gradually the pile of rocks grew smaller and smaller while both
Willie and the Captain anxiously watched them. The rocks at
the bottom were much larger than those on top and took longer
for the men to move and Willie was becoming very impatient.


At last they began to uncover what at first appeared to be
a big box and then as they pulled more of the rocks away Willie
could see it was a beautifully carved chest with gold hinges and
clasps on it. Now he knew he had been right and that they
had found the treasure. He opened the chest and showed all
the wonderful jewels and gold it contained to the Captain and
said, "See, Captain Tuppy, that is what you buried so carefully
and not yourself."
The sudden shock of this discovery brought back Captain
Tuppy's senses and he could remember everything quite clearly.
He told Willie how his ship had been wrecked and all his crew
lost, while he himself had been washed up on the shore and
captured by the natives, who made him their white god. He
remembered finding the treasure in the f’rst place and hiding
it there, but after that his senses went, and he had forgotten
about the treasure, and had thought it was himself he had buried
away so carefully.


Meanwhile, back at the ship, Willie's crew had begun to
wonder why he had not returned and some of them decided to
take the other boat and row to the shore to see if they could find
him. As they reached the beach they called out and Willie
heard their cry as he was speaking to the Captain. Hurrying
down he told them that he had found Captain Tuppy and the
treasure chest. Now they must all get away as quickly as they
could before the natives realized that Captain Tuppy was no
longer their god.
So carefully carrying the chest they made their way back to
the boat and were soon on board the ship.
The crew had the sails unfurled and the ship on its way in
no time.
Soon they were home and you can just imagine how happy
Mrs. Tuppy was to have her husband back again sate and sound.
She could not thank Willie enough. The treasure was divided
amongst everyone in the village, for there was enough wealth in
it to keep them all happy and contented for ever.
Copyright 1944
Published by FRANK JOHNSON 350 ge s °£ g nel treet
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by The Pinnacle Press. 431 B Kent Street, Sydney.
