

The
Royal Charter
With an Introduction by
Philip John Pond, B.A.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by James Irwin at
the office of the Daily News, Palmerin Street, Warwick, Q.




Treatise on Royal Charter
JtJf i- JAMES IRWIN, Editor of the “Daily News,’’ Warwick, who
rendered valuable service in a special effort to preserve to pos-
terity the full issue of Mr. Clow’s literary labours, discovered this little
biographical letter in a parcel of the author’s papers, and being pleased
with it set it in type. When it was submitted to the author he was shy
to authorise its publication, as it contained references to his own
people. I am pleased to give this explanation as to the reason for
my name becoming attached; for this letter is too valuable to be lost.
In the days of his activity Rcbitt Jon Clow was regarded by his ad-
mirers as one of the ablest men, in literary expression, that Australia
has produced. The reason for this admiration is revealed in the excel-
lence of this little treatise on the Royal Charter. Might this story been
impressed by a fearful storm Mr. Clow ran into when crossing the Aus-
tralian Bight on his return to Adelaide from Fremantle, 1902 —when
mountainous seas prevailed day and night for the whole voyage, threat-
ening the lives of all on board. Yet it may be that another voice still
speaks from the deep. Among those won for Christ by Mr. Clow during
his term at Coolgardie was Jean C. Ashworth—like the saint referred
to, Acts 16-14. She was the head of the millinery department in a large
drapery firm trading on the goldfields. A young woman of exceptional
personality, and dressing in a manner becoming the trade she re-
presented, commanded more than usual notice. Responding to an in-
vitation to meet Mr. Clow, she decided in one interview to be burled
with Christ in baptism. When this was accomplished they saw each
other no more on the goldfields, for Mr. Clow’s term there closed. In-
cidentally they met in Perth, and immediately repaired to a refresh-
ment room, and there partook of lunch, and had a twenty minutes
conversation. As they stood up from the little table to shake hands,
never to meet again, Miss Ashworth overwhelmed the Evangelist by
her personality, and words—they were impressive moments. She up-
braided Mr. Clow in that he was too retiring in manner, and did not
thrust himself forward enough. “Many,” she said, “are filling important
posts in the world to-day who have not the talents, nor the natural
ability you possess, and it is only their cheek and self-assurance that
carries them through.”


May be that this sharp rebuke from Miss Ashworth contributed
something to the thrill he imparted to his work immediately afterwards
in South Australia —where, by tome means that is new forgotten, he
discovered the lady was in Africa. He caused a note to appear in a
magazine that circulated in that part, with the hope that disciples
meeting there would find her. This had the desired result, and John
Swan, of Brisbane, introduced Miss Ashworth to the Church cf Christ,
Johannesburg. Here during the next seventeen years she remained,
and made her fortune in the millinery trade. Then, intending to retire
in a cottage in Melbourne, where her mother lived, she boarded an ocean
liner at Capetown. But after being so long resident in the interior the
sea air proved too strong for her, and she suddenly collapsed and died
on the voyage. The captain placed the body of Miss Ashworth in a
casket, and committed it to the blue deep—where it now rests on the
floor of the Indian Ocean. This incident was recalled by the gracious
act of a lady now resident in Sydney. Having frequently seen Mr.
Clow’s name in the Press she wrote to ascertain if he were identical
with one of the name in Coolgardie thirty-five years ago. Mr. Clew re-
plied that he was, but confessed he had forgotten who his correspondent
might be. At his request the lady drew a plan of the town which re-
vealed the lady, when a girl, met the Evangelist at Nelson’s House, and
conversed with him at this same place as he conversed with Miss
Ashworth. The lady is Mrs. Louie Cocks, Charlotte Street, Ashfield,
Sydney. Her maiden name was Louie Case, and while a child was
called “Casey.” In her letter she says: “I was fourteen years old, and
with Mary Howarth I visited your residence after the Bible School—
you showed much interest in us, and helped me I know to make a
decision for Christ. Perhaps that is why I have never forgotten you.’’
Though history speaks chiefly of the deeds of man we can net be
unmindful of the spiritual influence of noble women. It may be of
interest for me to add that the Mrs. Fanny Clow mentioned in this
treatise was well-known to me in Victoria. She was baptised by Edward
Lewis, one cf the pioneers of the Enmcre Church of Christ. During
her last illness she was visited by James Edward Thomas, Minister of
the Gospel, Balwyn, Victoria. In 1932, to prepare the memoir of the
lamented Stephen Cheek, Mr. Clow went right through my old circuit
in Queensland, finishing up at Killarney, and there baptised Miss
Mason in the Condamine. There was a bleak change in the weather,
and a fresh in the river caused by recent rains made the water icy
cold for the ordeal; but a little band of the faithful to Jesus prayed


and sang hymns together on the bank of the stream to mark the
occasion by a spiritual service to God. After this the Evangelist, with
Frank Keable, visited the old home of John Carey—where he was shown
some interesting photographs. There are many names of enduring
interest made precious to memory by the kindness they bestowed on
servants of Christ who passed through that district as they travelled
on their way to immortality, and among the early evangelists of
Queensland no name was more fondly cherished than that of John
Carey. During the conversation Mr. Clow had that evening with the
family the present master of the home said he could recall all the
disciple preachers who had been there back to Fred. Troy. He said:
“The last of them was Mr. Pond.” Mr. Clow said, “How long ago is
that?” Mr. Carey answered: “It is just thirty-four years since Mr. Pond
was in this house.”
PHILIP JOHN POND,
Church of Christ, Young People’s Department,
242 Pitt Street, Sydney.


The Royal Charter
All*. I.csiie William Glow,
llahvyn. Victoria.
Kind Xcphew,
In nnsivpr fo your letter to me enquiring for particulars relating to the
fiimily. mill early life of your dear grandmama. I liojk- the following will
lie of interest t» you—it is nil I can remember.
Your affectionate I'nele.
Frances Edwards was born May 7th, 1838. on her father's sixty-first
birthday; that is to say. her father was born May 7th. IJ7T. Her father
be loused to the British Xavy and fought In thirteen battles under Lord
Nelson. He was on board the “Victory" and was present at Trafalgar when
Xelson was shot. He was the son of Owen Edwards and Ann Parry, and
he had an entailed inherited right to eight acres of land “for as long as
grass grows and water runs. - ’ This place was in Aglcsey. Xorth Wales, and
was called Urynthenog. The Parry family changed this with William Ed-
wards for a similar amount of farming land In Blandanlel, and it was In
the place removed to that Frances was born. The district mime of the
place where the family first resided was Penrosligwy. Moelfrc. Anglesey.
The ancestry of Frances Edwards on the mother's side Is of greater
literary interest Her mother's name was Susan Owain and was the
daughter of Matthew Owain and Ann .Jones. Ann Jones was born in 1781
and lived Until 1884—she cleared 10S years. Matthew (twain wrote a num-
ber of valued poems, and an interesting biographical account of his own
life; in which he made many references to the important events of his
own time. To understand Welsh ancestry it |« necessary to remember that
children did not receive Ihe names of their parents but were most fre-
quently named after came remote ancestor, and sometimes the child was
given the father's Christian name as a surname. Thus Matthew Owain
was the son of Owain Hughes and Elinor Goronwy—her father was Gor-
* nwy Goldsmith; his sister was the mother of Goronwy Owain. the famous
Welsh poet. So Matthew Owain and Goronwy Owain were cousins. Goronwy
Owain was born in the year 1733 • an Anglican curate who thrilled Wales
with beautiful song. His ’ bay of the l,asi Judgment" was considered a
mighty production. The following is a tsirtion translated:—
All blameless they their course In virtue run
Have for I heir brows a crown of glory won;
Their Saviour’s voice, a sound of heavenly love
Admits them smiling to the realms above;
"Approach, ye faithful, to the heaven of peace
Where worldly sorrows shall forever cease;
Come, blessed children, share my bright abode.
Rest in the bosom of your King and God.
Where thousand saints in grateful concert sing
f-oud hymns of glory to the Eternal King.
For you beloved I hung upon the tree.
That where I am there also ye might he;
The Infernal god (yc trembling sinners quake)
Shall hurl you headlong on the bunting lake.
There shall ye die nor dying shall expire.
Rolled on the waves of everlasting fire.
Whilst Christ shall bid His own lov'd flock rejoict
And lead them upward with approving voice.


While he was? minister in Bangor, (Jroronwj owain carved his name on
the pew of the Cathedral in the year 174 U. it still remained there till the
year 1817—when the Cathedral was rebuilt. Taking this as an opportunity,
while the rebuilding operations were proceeding. Matthew Owain took the
portion of wood from the seat that contained the poet's n one, a>:e he at-
tached it to a piece of mahogany, and boiled it in linseed oil. and he said:
"Jt looked very smart." Because he was proud of the re.-eot he sent it to
a noted Welsh family, who were resident in London, when* he had some
difficulty in recovering it after it had been away for three years, but he so
treasured it that he would not allow it out of his family again.
Of this family there was still another much greater in Welsh history—
Jon Klias. His first name somehow came to be written "John.” lie was
burn on May fith, 1774. His lather was Klias Jones, and Ills mother, Jane
Joseph. Klias Jones was a brother to Ann Jones. The last-named was
mother of fc'usau Owain, and she was mother of eleven, children—Frances
being the youngest, and the mother was forty-five years old when she was
born. Though she was but three years old when he died, Frances retained
a recollection of Jon Elias. At an advanced age he died from a malady
that settled in his heel, caused by an accident in a cab capsize. Frances
remembered him standing in the pulpit and reaching a climax in his dis -
course he cried: “There is something the matter with my heel —They say it
is ‘something’ but the root of it is death." When he died his funeral pro-
cession was more than ten miles long, and "a Sabbath quietness reigned
throughout the whole district." The leading ministers of Mona rode on
horseback before the hearse, and behind it twelve ministers on horseback,
two and two. Then thirty-five gigs, then one hundred and fifty horsemen,
two and two. All the long route from Llangefni to Beaumaris people kept
joining in the procession by the way. By the time they reached JVlenai
Bridge it is estimated there were ten thousand people marching, and from
here on huge crowds that no man could number, kept Joining in and travel-
ling with it. That day an Anglican minister made the following entry in his
diary: “This day, June 14th, 1841. was interred the remains of the greatest
preacher in Wales during his day-—perhaps in the Kingdom, especially in
certian respects. May the Lord have mercy on his Church, and favour her
again with such a minister as Klias. appearing like a burning seraph in the
pulpit—dispensing the word of life in abundance. ’’ Before he died
Biographies of Jon Klias began to issue, and for a hundred years Wales has
continued to issue them —and still more and fresh versions of his illus-
trious life continue to come. Klias was converted when a lad. In his early
youth he commenced to preach. He took up the cause of John Calvin, and
popularised Calvinism throughout the Principality, Wherever he was
announced to speak he could raise an audience of from two to five thou-
sand people, at any time. The depressing side of his life as one studies
it, is financially, he was in very struggling circumstances all the days of
his life. His earnings as a preacher never amounted to more than thirty
.-hillings a week, and he lived with a constant dread that he would one
day bring disgrace on Christianity by not. being able to meet his very slender
financial obligations. Yet he attached no importance to worldly possessions
and repudiated them when they were offered to him. A public meeting was
to take place in Mona to raise funds for the London Bible Society, and the
Lord Lieutenant of Wales was to preside. His Lordship, perhaps jealous of
the influence of Elias in the Principality, had a prejudice to Elias, and on
looking over the programme of speakers who were to take part, he assigned
to Elias an unimportant place on the list —to move a vote of thanks to the
other speakers at the close of the meeting. The vast assemblage let the
rest of the meeting slip by and eagerly waited to see what Klias would say,
for they realised he still would be the event of the evening. When the
Lord Lieutenant called upon him. he arose. Once on his feet no man in the
land could take a meeting out of his hands, and to the discomfiture of his
THE ROYAL CHARTER.


Lordship, ho commenced to address tiio audience in allegorical language
in tho art of which Elias was very skilful. His Hardship fidgeted, anil
turning to the secretary of the society who sal beside him —stud, with an
apparent uneasiness: "What's this he is saying now." The sec-clary whis-
pered in his ear; "Ho is dra’.v.ng a comparison between lb-' way you re-
reived King Ceorge (IV. ) and the way we should receive the Lord Jesus,"
Noticing the hold Elias had of the people, next day his Lordship sent an
invitation to Elias to come and take dinner with him; but Elias declined,
lie sent him hack a polite note saying, it would be of no more interest for
him to dine with the laird Lieutenant of Wales than it would be for him to
Lake dinner with a working man in the ordinary walk of life. We would
commend the sermons and essays of Elias to the Australian public, but
in a small treatise we can make no attempt to produce them here. We
can, however, say this, that the idea that Galvanism teaches that the elect
are fore ordained and the number of the saved can be neither added to
nor diminished, is bosli —they hold the same views on salvation as the other
evangelical religious bodies.
The mother of Frances died when she was eleven years of age, and her
father, when she was thirteen, and at that age she was left in the world to
shift for herself. She went to .Manchester and took situations where it
was impossible for her to do the work—working as a domestic servant from
6 in the morning till 10 and 11 o’clock at night, for eighteen pence a week
and her keep. She did, after a time, find one or two situations that were
easier, but they took some searching out. and her brother, uneasy for her,
came and took her back to Wales. In her native place she dwelt’for some
time with her father's sister, and then took a situation at the Royal Oak
Lodge, Bangor. Her son wrote a treatise on her life in Australia, that was
published sixty-four years later. When it appeared and was circulated in
Wales, a copy was taken to the Royal ()ak Lodge, and remarkable to
say, there was a man still at that place who remembered her, after 64 years
had passed away. He was a little boy in the house at the time Frances was
there. Francos and her brother saw the wreck of the Royal Charter oft
the Welsh coast.
The Record of the Royal Charter has an important hearing on Victorian
history. She left .Melbourne at a time when the golden period of Ballarat
and Bendigo were at their most prolific output, and the Melbourne buying
inice for gold was much below the London market value. Thus many
possessed of means came from England, visited the goldfields, bought huge
quantities of gold, and in many cases returned to the Homeland with the
same ship as they came out in. A great number of these successful gold-
buyers boarded the Royal Charter, while she was berthed in Melbourne,
and designed to return to the Old Country with small fortunes —the total
value of which possibly in the neighbourhood of half a million pounds
worth. Together with this the boat shipped as cargo £750,000 worth of
bullion, and a very largo cargo of valuable merchandise. She was possibly
one of the richest ships that ever left an Australian port. The Royal Charter
was a screw steamship—one of the first of her kind to plow the ocean. A
magnificent vessel of 2756 tons —fitted with life saving and every equipment.
She left Melbourne for Liverpool, Friday, August 26th, 1859, with 388
passengers and a staff and crew of 100 hands. She made an excellent
voyage, and put in first at Queenstown, Ireland —where two or three people
got off, and a few fresh people got on. Taylor, the captain—here made an
unfortunate mistake. The sky became overcast, and a severe storm was
threatening, and while the vessel was yet tied up to the wharf the harbour
officials-tried to prevail upon the captain to await till next day, till the
seas abated, or until they saw what it was going to be. But the captain,
l>oor fellow, over-conlident in his own powers, said: ‘Til take the vessel
straight on to Liverpool, or I'll carry her to hell.”
THE ROYAL CHARTER.


When they put out into the Irish t'hannel. the sturm burst. Becoming
••nveloped in black darkness in the midst of mountainous seas, and con-
trary currents, the grave peril could no longer be concealed I'rum the pas-
.-.engers. lor they were already in a state of consternation. Xo one on board
knew any longer where they were, or when* they were going. At 2 o’clock
in the morning the passengers were gathered in the saloon, and Captain
Taylor ordered coffee to be served to them—he advised them to all retire to
bed. and lie assured them that all would be well. Km they eould not be so
persuaded. Xow there was on board another ship's » aptain- travelling as
a passenger, whoso name was Adams, and the passengers demanded that
he should be given right to speak. At their request he came forward: but
the truth is the position was hopelessly lost before the right to command
was extended to him. Adams directed that they burn a blue light, and fire
off guns to see if they could attract a pilot. 'This was done, but alas, there
were no pilot boats patrolling the seas for a Job. such a night—they were
all well away under shelter. 'The report;; of ihe guns, however, were heard
ashore, and awakened the inhabitants of the village of Moelfre, and the dis-
tress lights on the Koval Charter were observed, and understood, on land.
Xow the Calvinistic faith enjoined upon its members that in case of ship
wreck every sold was expected to exert his utmost endeavours lo both rescue
the passengers and save Ids goods against theft or destruction. In the local
church these words were upon the wall: ‘While sitting by your happy
hearth, beside your mother’s knee—n think upon poor sailors, and the dan-
gers of the sta.” The value <q‘ ibis teaching proved itself that nigh;,
The I loyal Charter ran aground in Moelfre Hay on October 2Gtb.
at 2.30 a.m. Kvcn then hop;* had nut wholly vanished, for it was at first
thought the vessel would hold, together for at least two or three days, and
that (nice daylight came they would get ai! the passengers and tlicit lug-
gage ashore; but tile action of the sea soon revealed there was no such
chance. In the meantime an alarm was.raised in the village of Moelfre, and
despite the discomforts. misery, and exposure occasioned by such action,
every aide man of the neighbourhood left Ids bed and fled as fast
as legs eould carry him. to the cliffs that overlook the sea. Mere hundreds
of able young men gathered, in ihe hope that they might prove useful if
their help was required. Many of these men were sailors and fishermen,
but all had some knowledge of the danger and safety zones of the fore-
shore. which, in ease of emergency, might prove useful, iin the ship, despite
tin 1 darkness and inclement conditions, some immediate action was de-
manded. In such a sea. to launch a boat was unthinkable. There was
aboard a cabin boy named lingers—he was a Malay native*, and he volun-
teered to swim ashore with a hawser line. Xow it was nothing for this boy
in tin* calm, warm waters of the tropics. t .n a clear day, to dive to the bottom
of the ocean for a penny; but the position here was very different. Would
he be benumbed with the icy waters, stormy skis, and unknown shoals —
what of them? I Resides, there was danger of the hawser line drowning
him. Hut he was willing to try, and the captain accepted his offer. This
blight gem of the vessel look the line and with it. he plunged into the
mighty deep. With the life-line ho rode the tempestuous seas with the ease
of a sea-gull, and be cut through the billows like* a scooter. The signal
lights of the intended rescue parties on the shore showed him the best
place to effect a landing, and bis approach was observed by them, lie and
his line wen* seized with joy by the rescue men. and a multitude of men
on to the hawser line were sufficient to have towed the vessel ashore, had
she not been stuck fast. They look the line and made her secure on the
highest cliff, and lifted it right clear of the water. From lingers they re-
ceived particulars how matters stood on the vessel, and signalled the ship
they were ready for action. ()n the ship the hawser-chair was placed on
the cable, but a fool of a woman got into it. and having gone part of the
way. became terrified, and would neither go on nor return to the ship, till
THE ROYAL CHARTER,


sumo one climbed the cable to her and threw her out of the chair. By this
means twenty minutes of v‘*ry valuable time was lost. Once they got the
hawser-chair well working, twenty-five passengers were in a very short
Lime safely landed, and had the ship held together for any length of lime,
every soul on the boat would have been saved, but fate was against them.
The ship grounded nose on. and every wave behind her either drove or lifted
her further into the floor of the sea. Allowing- she could have been held
stern aseu, she would take little further harm, but there was no means of
doing- that —she was bound to swing to the sea. Once she commenced to
broach, and she was full side on to the heavy waves, she went to pieces
like a pack of cards. When once that happened the hawser line was use-
less; for there was nothing- left to/ fasten it to: neither wan there a plat-
form from which to operate. AH goods went flown, and passengers and
crew alike were thrown into the waves. As the boat broke up the mast was
seen to fall on Captain Taylor, and he was seen no more. All hands freed
fmm the wreckage, struggled, or were carried by the waves, towards the
shore, but only three passengers and eleven of the crew were saved, and
these were helped to safety by the rescue parties. 350 of the passengers and
SO of the crew were drowned.
The splendid efforts of the would-be rescue parties were thwarted by
the adverse conditions of the night. Scores of people were carried by the
waves right up to the cliffs, and then dashed tu death on the rocks, or
swallowed in the waves. Many came within speaking distance of those on
the ledges of safety, and did speak to them, and then sank beneath th«
surf. The rescuers tried to throw ropes to the distressed. But they from
the ship—looking into the darkness, could see nothing, but the glow on
the water, enabled those on the cliffs to see their unfortunate fellows dis-
tinctly. The danger zones under the cliffs could mil be ventured; but to
meet this difficulty the fishermen present suggested the formation of a
living net to catch the stranded, as they would catch fish. This suggestion
was tried, and with much perseverance, but without any success. The
young men joined hands, and went into the water, but when they got into
deep water the surging of the sea broke their lines and hurled the surfers
in aU directions. They tried it both by envelopment (circling) and a flank
movement, but in the darkness, midst rough seas, the chain was powerless,
and in constant peril of total destruction. A delicate hold of the associate's
wrist in a long line was unsafe —a firm grip might pull some one in two.
Notwithstanding this risk, it, was well tried. By the time day dawned all
chance of rescue was past, for those in the sea, then were dead, and their
bodies only could be brought ashore. These were laid in rows on the floor
of the local church. This mishap filled England with horror, and during the
next few days correspondence from all parts poured into Moelfre. The
writers, poor things, would say; “My sister had blue eyes,“ ; and another,
“my brother's eyes were brown." Alas! poor souls, they did not realise
that by the time they spent a night in the. sea all shades of colour in the
eyes were gone.
There is nothing in maritime history more appalling than the wreck of
the Royal Charter. It was a combination 6f adverse conditions that pro-
duced the result. The same night as she went aground, three schooners
wore wrecked on the English coast. Though every effort was' made to help
the unfortunate, the people of Wales were much grieved that they had
not been able to dr) more for these Melbourne people, cast helpless on their
shores. A little monument was raised by the local Church. Penrhosligwy
Mona; which is close by. This monument stands still, for it is carefully
preserved within church. Frances went to the wreck with her brother.
Owain said to his sister: ‘ Speak English. Fanny’' for all present were talk-
ing Welsh, and she spoke to one who seemed depressed. But he replied:
“Dim sasnic.” That is. “1 can't speak English,” for they call English Saxon
in Wales, butf the man addressed, with deep emotion, poured out a volume
THE ROYAL CHARTER.


of sympathy for the English—supposing Frances to lie one, not realising that
she understood every word he said; for she could speak both languages, al-
though her brother could not. It was, however, important that Frances was
there, for she was able to gather at first hand, and she preserved many
particulars of the disaster, which, only for her, would never have been
known in history. She reared a son in Australia, who said he could never
hear that well-known hymn: "Throw out the Life-line'' sung in a church
but the whole scene of the wreck of the Royal Charter would come before
his mind —with the different scenes portrayed as the congregation pro-
gressed line by line:
‘'Boon will the season of rescue be o'er,
Boon will they drift to eternity’s shore,”
The following year Frances shipped by an emigrant vessel from Liver-
pool to -Melbourne. The boat was named the “VVanatta" —the voyage oo-
cupied four months and fourteen days. She went to see her aunt before
leaving Wales to say “good-bye.’' As Frances walked down the path from
the door her aunt, following at the rear, suddenly stopped and placing
her hands together she looked up to the sky and exclaimed in a deep tone
of anguish: “Oh Christ, go with her.”
Meanwhile, her brother had married, and he and his wife were in
possession of the old home. Owain's wife was a bit of a cat, and did not
care for her husband's relatives coming to the place as if they might take
something. Frances went to; see them, that she might tell them she was
going to Australia, but observing the coolness of Owain’s wife towards her,
she did not long stay. As' she was going her brother followed her outside
and as she rounded the end of the house, Owain dipped his hand in his
pocket for his purse —which he opened. From it he took a shilling and
when about to give it to Frances, his wife rounded the corner, and with a
gesture of the hand, said in Welsh: “Come thee in, Owain —thou be gone
Fanny.” I guess she would have been more careful had she only realised
there was a recording angel looking on. This shilling was the total in-
heritance Frances got from her father’s home, and it was all the money
she had; tor she had spent all her earnings in service on her outfit for
Australia. Frances changed this shilling for a stamp for a letter, and all
she had left when she boarded the “Wanatta” was a tew coppers. The
voyage out was uneventful. It was afternoon when they entered Port
Philip Bay. and quite dark when they cast anchor at Williamstown. A
pilot came on board, and as he could! not see, he asked the captain the
name of the ship. The captain answered, the “Wanatta.”
The pilot replied; “The long-expected ‘Wanatta’—we all thought you
had gone to the bottom.”
There were three hundred emigrant girls on board, and when they
heard the pilot say this, many of them wept. The doctor said to Frances:
“Now, it you have any relatives in the colony we will do our best to place
you in communication with them.” She replied: “1 have a cousin at Wan-
garatta.” The doctor drew out a map of Victoria and he found on it “Won-
nangatta,'’ in Gippsland. Thinking this was the place her cousin was,
he sent her there. A boat was leaving for Port Albert next day, called the
• Storm Boat," and Frances just stepped off the "Wanatta” on to it —thus she
did not see Melbourne at all at the time she arrived in the colony, but was
transferred direct to Gippsland. She landed in Port Albert, November Bth,
1860. Frances was a smart, fine-looking young woman, and as she walked
round the place she attracted much interest amongst people, but she was
young, and childish dreams came back to her. She saw children playing in
the street, and she tried to make friends with them, and the last of the few
coppers she brought from Wales she distributed among these little folk.
Thus she started life in Australia at scratch. Mr. Webb, the lawyer, had
sent word to Port Albert that his wife wanted a help, and Frances immedi-
ately entered his service. While here she met William Clow, to whom she
THE ROYAL CHARTER.


was married on May 7th, IStil. Though Clow hart been in the country prac-
tically from the beginning of the colony, he hart made no headway. He
belonged to a very noble family, but he lucked push. He imposed on the
Welsh maid, as to his age —giving it as twenty-eight, whereas he was
thirty-nine, all out, at the lime of his marriage—but anything is fair in
love and war. H<( was a kind-hearted, cultured, well-mannered gentleman
—liked and respected by everyone, but he had no dash, or energy to cut a
figure in the world. Indeed, Frances was by far the better man of the two,
and the whole responsibility of shaping the destiny of the family fell on her.
The day following their marriage Clow took his young wife with him on a
trip to the gold diggings. Frances rode side-saddle, and they drove it team
of pack-horses with provisions for the miners. Frances had never been
on a horse before. There was a fresh in the stream —the Crooked Kiver —
and the river was running bank-and-bank, and on the journey they had to
cross itj eleven times. As they were nearing the settlement, Frances was
pulled out of the saddle by the limb of a tree, and the horse, without her,
galloped into the settlement. The miners became excited when they saw
a horse with a side saddle on, for no woman came that way, and they left
their work and all ran to see who the woman was. Frances was married in
Sale, and the first night of this trip was spent at O'Mearer's Hotel. Strat-
ford. The second night at Stockyard Creek. The third night in a flve-
roomed hotel at Hulgaback. It was built of stringy bark. Mclntyre was the
licensee. The good wife laid a clean cloth upon the table. The lamp placed
niton the table was a pannikin of fat with a rag wick tied round a stick
placed in the centre, supported by earth in the bottom of the vessel. The
tea consisted of beef steak, and a damper about a yard in width, was laid
upon the table. It had been baked in the ashes, and the crust was so
hard that one would need to take the axe to it —that is if he were particular
as to the, precise size of slice he needed. The bed they occupied was four
undressed, round pieces of wood, driven in the ground, supporting cross
pieces. On top of these was laid a plain sheet of bark —the smooth side
up. There was no mattress of any kind, it was winter time, and all this
couple had was plain calico sheet under them, and one blanket over them.
Such were the honeymoons of those days, and it was not every couple that
had that, for even this accommodation had to he paid for. On Monday
they reached Foster’s station, and the next day brought them to Dargo
Flat, and from there on; as has been mentioned.
On leaving the mines William Flow was two years stockman for Angus
,M<-Milieu—the founder of Gippsland. Then six months with Mr. Smith, at
Tinamha. The solicitor for whom Frances worked previous to her mar-
riage, paid her wages with cattle—this form of settlement was common in
Ihoso days. Mr. McMillen had allowed these cattle to graze on Bushy Bark
station free of charge, and the herd had considerably increased. For one
cow Frances purchased a block of land from Denny O'Brien, at Heyfleld.
and the sale of some others proved sufficient to erect a moderate residence,
in answer to the marriage, six dear little children came along. Clow, in
the year 1874, went to Wangaratta to see his wife’s cousin—Daniel Hugh
Evans, and there he died soon after.
Another gentleman came along who was in the service of James Clow —
the pioneer Presbyterian minister of Vietoria. This man was really no
relation to the Clow family, but he came to be regarded as an adopted
son of the pioneer minister, because of his early service with him. His
name was Robitt, and the Welsh maid of whom we are writing, continued to
sign herself “Fanny Susannah Clow,” throughout her entire life. The second
marriage took place at Heyfleld, June 27th, 1576. and on June 11, 1877, Robitt
Jon, the only gift of the second marriage, arrived. This boy became an
author. He composed first the “Story of Station Life,” It is easy to see
where he got the inspiration from. Indeed, take all his literary works, the
hand of the Welsh maid is plainly discernible, in every one of them; for
THE ROYAL CHARTER.


they are all upon subjects Frances Edwards instructed her little son upon.
To give him a start she composed as much us she could on these matters,
and with her poor crippled hands, she wrote them in an exercise book for
him. She never saw James Clow, the Gospel pioneer of Melbourne; but
she instilled the inspiration in her child to compose his biography. Had
it not been for this Welsh maid the life and labours of James Clow would
have been entirely lost to history. Her son became a moulder of Aus-
tralian literature, and bis literary works are as well known to-day in India,
Scotland, and Wales as they are on these shores. His “Evangelism in
Australia” has been extensively read and appreciated, and his work on
the Australian bushrangers has been voted one of the most remarkable
works in blank verse that has ever appeared in the English language.
Tu record the events in the career of a pioneer woman in Victoria
could not i)o attempted in a brief treatise, but the results of the life of
Frances Edwards will reach to the shores of eternity. She lived and en-
joyed good health until she reached the age of eighty-two. when she was
seized with a stroke, and was confined to her bed. This was in the home
of her daughter. Fanny Watts Coburg, on January 27th, 1021, she took a
very bad turn, and the doctor advised her daughter Fanny, to prepare for
the worst. Her daughter stayed by her bedside and repeated the Scriptures
to her, and she sang to her: “I heard the voice of Jesus say come unto Me
and rest,” and "Son of my Soul. My Saviour deai —it is not night if Thou
!»<* near.?’ ■ • She remained sensible to the last minute, and the last was a
brief conversation with. her daughter. >Her daughter said:
“She knew me. all the time, and God gave mo strength to lift her to
the last. I said 'You are going to Heaven, mother.’ She answered. ‘Yes,
my child, and I'll hold out a hand for you.’ She called her grandson,
‘John.’ He rushed into the room. She spoke to him, and then my dear
mother was gone. At half-past one o’clock she gave two short sighs and
her breathing just ceased.”
At the time of death she had sixty-four descendants. Ten of her
grandsons took part in the European War. Frances Edwards was a Vic-
torian pioneer of sixty years standing.
THE ROYAL CHARTER.




