

i =
s i
| Melbourne;
s Ruskin Press =
| 1927 |
—
KOS£* A*
• !■
: i
The
Workless Home and
The Workers’ Army
■i
■
An Industrial Policy
For Australian Workers
WILL CRAIG
(Author of “ No More Poverty”)
and J. M. ALEXANDER
This, that they call Organisation of Labor is, if
well understood, the problem of the whole
future for all who will in future pretend to
govern men. Carlyle.


The Workless Army
The Breakdown of the Capitalist System. Work and
Wages. Why there is Poverty and Unemployment.
What is the remedy for Industrial Chaos?
By WILL CRAIG (Author of “No More Poverty”)
and J. M. ALEXANDER.
Australia To-day.
At the present time Australia is in a state of
depression. This may appear strange, seeing that
there are abundant signs of wealth and prosperity
in all our great cities. Motor cars flit through the
streets; the great shops are filled with articles of use
and luxury; and thousands of pounds are spent every
day in sports and amusements. New factories, shops,
and dwellings are being erected on- every hand. Yet,
side by side with all these signs of prosperity, we
see hundreds and thousands of men out of work,
and vainly seeking employment. The workless army
grows larger day by day; men from overseas are
landing in the great cities on our coast without any
assurance of employment, and adding to the problem
now facing the community. It appears that Australia
is unable, or unwilling, to provide work or mainten-
ance for tens of thousands of willing workers who
depend on wages for a living. Without work they
can get no wages; and without wages they cannot
secure food, housing, and clothing.
Work and Wages.
Under the present system of social life most men
have to work for wages in order to secure a liveli-
hood. This seems so natural a system to them, that
few question its wisdom. Work, of course, is neces-
sary, for without work applied to the land we could
not get the food we eat, the clothes we wear, and the
articles of use required in everyday life. Now as it
is work which supplies man’s needs, and there are
thousands of men now out of work, it is clear that
an industrial system which allows of working men
being idle when they need food and clothes and
shelter, and may have children dependent upon their


earnings, is stupid and unjust. If these idle men
could secure the basic needs of life without working
for them, there would be no complaint. Nor if they
were entitled to work on the ground that, as citizens
of a Commonwealth, all able-bodied men and women-
should be employed, for a time at least, at some
occupation useful to the State, would there be any
reason to complain. But the system, if it can be
called a system at all, is not devised for the common
good. It is so arranged that for most men and
women the social law, the first law of social life as it
now is, can be summed up in these words: no work,
no wages. As Nature ordains work, there can be
no complaint against work as a law of Nature, nor
can it be said that Nature fails to reward labor
properly applied to the storehouse of all wealth—
the land. All wealth usable by man is derived,
directly or indirectly, from the land by means of
labor. Without land and labor, no wealth can be
won. In this great continent there is abundance of
land, which only needs labor applied to it to produce
in abundance the food and other needs of life. But
this land is not available to all those able and will-
ing to work it. Hence we find the amazing state of
affairs confronting our Workless Army: no work, no
land to till, no wages to buy the needs of life. What
would an inhabitant of Mars think of such a system
were he to come to earth and see an army of men
seeking work and denied it; barred from access to
the land; hardly allowed to live except on fitful doles
and charity served out by an unwilling hand by
officials of the State, the while there was a crying
need for labor —labor to redeem the bush lands, to
abolish houses unfit for habitation, and to produce
the needs of life for the tens of thousands of men
now allowed to roam through the streets seeking work
or bread, and finding it almost impossible to get the
one or the other? He would think Australia was
governed by lunatics, or that the people had sunk
into a state of temporary insanity. He would regard
. it as a joke if he were told that Australians boasted
of being freeborn Britons, sons of the race whose
patriotic hymn had as chorus, “Britons never, never,
never shall be slaves.”
The Fraud of Wage Hahor.
Now' this question of work and wages is a very
complex one, and has given rise to many theories.


Keduced to its simplest terms, however, the wage
system, otherwise known as capitalism, is a gigantic
fraud. It keens the wage-earner in a state of servi-
tude, and denies him the rights of a freeman or a
citizen. The wage system has been the cause of social
misery and poverty; slums and their attendant evils;
depopulation of the rural districts;, centralisation in
the capitals; wars and rumors of war. At the begin-
ning of the industrial era in England, the people
were driven off the - land so as to provide cheap Labor
in the factories, which were worse than the slave
plantations. They were given wages so that they
might live and reproduce their kind, being regarded
as mere machinery, their labor being estimated as
one of the costs of production. Never did humanity
sink lower than it did under the inhuman system
that attended the rise of industrialism in England.
Thus it will be seen that the wage system, as it
exists to-day, is a modern system of paying for labor.
It belongs to our times in a very special sense, for
although there existed a wage system previous to the
rise of modern industrialism, the craftsmen in past
ages were not so completely dependent on the wage
system; they had their guilds, which were powerful
organisations, and the result was that they had a
large control over their means of livelihood, greater
than that now possessed by unionists. Indeed, in
the best days of the old guilds, the conditions of
labor alike as regard wages and hours were better
than they have been in modern times.
Now, wages are given to the workers not on their
own account only. Wages are given so that the
workers can be cheated out of their earnings by a
cunningly devised system which first makes the work-
ing people of a State virtually paupers, depending
for their bread on the labor of their hands. But
working folk must have homes, food, and clothes.
So that they have to work for wages to secure these
things. When they pay for shelter, food and clothes,
and a few sundry needs of life, there is nothing left.
Thus, while most working people are under the delu-
sion that they woik for themselves, they really work
for their employers, who make a profit out of their
labor, and also for the landlord, the storekeeper, and
the moneylender. What would the man from Mars
think if he were told that an educated people like


the Australians for the most part had no land of
their own, had to work with their hands for othei
people, and even were glad to get work on condition
that they slaved for their taskmasters the landloids,
shopkeepers, and moneylenders—to say nothing of the
financier and usurer over the seas who take toll of
millions of money a year from Australian industry?
He would not call them slaves or fools, of course.
He would be too polite. But "what would he think
of them? That, as Hamlet said, is the question.
It seems like stressing the obvious to point out
that men work, not for themselves, but for their
employers; yet the truth is this fact, as plain as the
sun at noonday, cannot be too often repeated. So
accustomed are working folk to the existing system,
that they can hardly imagine another; and the tyranny
of habit has begotten a state of mind which makes
it hard for the manual workers to realise that so
long as the wage system lasts, so long are they virtu-
ally serfs or helots. For without work they are help-
less, and sink rapidly to the condition of paupers.
They have no legal right to work; the State, which
could not exist without their labor, denies them any
right to a job; they are given work only so long as
they can secure an employer who will find them a
job. This means that when the labor of the manual
workers is no longer necessary or profitable to the
employers, they can be denied the right to work.
This means that an Australian citizen at the present
day (A.D. 1927) has no property right to the land
that gave him birth; his birth on Australian soil
does not give him a share in the land, nor the right
to live, to labor, and to enjoy the fruits of his toil.
As in older lands, the land has been parcelled out
amongst private owners; the tools of production are
in the hands of profit-making companies; and the
majority of the people are allowed to live only on
condition that they shall work for those who find
their labor profitable, and for the landlord, the shop-
keepers, and the moneylender. Again we might appeal
to the man from Mars. It is possible, of course,
that Mars may be inhabited by people as mad as the
dwellers on this earth; certainly they could not be
worse, and the chances are they are better.
This is the twentieth century of the Christian era.
when wealth can be made at a rate greater than ever
i


■
before—yet the economic value of an able-bodied man,
with two hands cimning in a craft, able to provide
himself with all the needs of life, is precisely nothing!
This is what the Industrial Age and the science of
political economy has brought us to! If our system
of production had been invented in a lunatic asylum,
things could not have been worse.
Paying Wages to Parasites.
It is not the worker alone who is interested in the
wage system. Over and above the landlord and the
other people who take toll of the workers’ earnings,
wo have many high and mighty people, all of whom
live on the wage system. They live well, too, so it
is quite to be expected that they have a firm belief
in the wage system, and indeed go so far as to say
that civilisation could not get along without it. The
labor paid for in wages keeps the Royal Family, and
the men of title from Old England who condescend
to govern the Australian States. No work, no wages;
no wages, no high and mighty princes of the blood
royal and aristocrats to lay the foundation stones of
our charitable homes. For these Superior People
must live; and although not in receipt of wages, the
simple truth is, that without wages they would have
to find work. If the working man thinks this strange,
let him puzzle it out. on the wage system that
these people live; but whereas they only do orna-
mental work, the manual workers earn the bread they
eat. and supply them with all the luxuries they
consume.
Nor is this all. We have lawyers and politicians
keenly interested in the wage system. The Arbitra-
tion Court judge is dependent on wages, although he
gets a huge salary. For again, like the other Supe-
rior Persons, if work were not paid for by wages,
he would have to do something else for a living.
That is to say, if there were no wages, there would
be no means of paying the landlord, the shopkeepers,
the interest sharks, and the Superior Persons; gene-
rally, all of whom get their share out of the workers’
earnings. So that, if the men and women who work
for wages worked for themselves only, the whole
complicated and fraudulent system of modern industry
would fall to pieces. Its insanity would be apparent
to a first standard schoolboy if it were not that it is
covered up ’by all manner of specious reasoning, use
and wont, and the general stupidity which is fostered
> *


by the Press and the Pictures, the great dope-doctors
of modern times. Again it has given rise to a system
of political economy which is barren of fruits, and
has never made two blades of grass grow where only
one grew before. If the men who work with their
hands knew that on their labor depended all these
superior persons who do not work with their hands,
but live very well on their wits, and rather look down
on working folk, they would realise a mighty truth
one that would mean a mental revolution. In fact,
they would learn a lot of things, such as these:—
Words of Wisdom for Workers.
All wealth is the product of labor applied to the
land or goods derived from the land.
Wages are paid to the workers in order that, by
means of rent, profit and interest, they can be
cheated out of their earnings.
The land is stolen from the people so that they
cannot earn a living without paying toll to land-
lords, or find homes for themselves without pay-
ing rent.
The instruments of production being in the hands
of people who use them -for making profit, the
workers are obliged to work in order to find
profit for their employers, rent for the landlord,
money for the shopkeepers, and taxes which go
to supnort the financiers and aristocracy of .Old
England.
The State, then, virtually has disowned the great
mass of the people, who are really denied the
rights of citizens, and when not employed are
virtually outlaws.
That as the Law admits no obligations to men out
of work, the unemployed owe it no respect.
That all the machinery of law is used to protect
the property of landlords, profiteers and others,
who live on the taxes wrung from the earnings
of the people.
That lawyers, magistrates, ministers, policemen,
professors of political economy 7 , and other super-
numeraries of a civilisation run to seed, are de-
pendent upon the wage system.
That if the workers refused to work for wages,
the whole system of spoliation and robbery ren-
dered possible by the vicious and immoral wage
system would fall to pieces.


That the workers must refuse to work for their
employers, or for landlords, profiteers, politicians,
lawyers, magistrates, princes and plutocrats, and
do their duty as men and citizens—that is, work
for themselves and their wives and families.
To do so they must unite to free the land, redeem
themselves from wage slavery, and use their
labor to provide a decent living for themselves
for life.
To do this is possible when they will to do it, and
unite in their strength to overthrow the wage
system, and enter into their heritage.
The Idle Poor.
Much has been written by social reformers about
the idle rich; nothing about the idle poor. Here is
another absurdity of our system. In Australia there
are a few Idle Rich, .and tens of thousands of Idle
Poor. It is not that the rich are doing the work of
the idle poor; they may spend their time at golf,
playing cards, or making a hobby of politics. Yet
they all live on the Wage System. The idle poor,
of course, are not living on wages; yet, strange to
say, are a direct product of the wage system, which
makes both Idle Rich and Idle Poor. No wages, no
idle men, either rich or poor. It appears, then, that
wages ari* the curse of humanity, the badge of human
slavery. It is true that at present without work there
would be no wages; but the converse does not follow.
We could do very well without wages, and provide
work iu abundance even for the poor relations of the
Royal Family and all the superior persons of the Law,
Politics, and the Professions generally. All these
people are never unemployed, although dependent on
the wage system; another contradiction of capitalism;
although their work provides not food nor clothes
nor shelter to the working class, on whose labor they
live. Is it not a marvellous system this—based on
labor, yet which denies work to the laboring man,
and has constant employment for politicians, police-
men, and professors of political economy, State gover-
nors, and other superior persons who do not work
with their hands, yet whose needs of life are actually
procured for them by the same class of men who now
wander the streets of our cities in idleness and
despair, because society has no place for them, no
work and no wages for them? It is only a little less


marvellous, perhaps, that these same Superior Persons,
who do not work with their hands, and are not
remarkable even for intellect, are all firm believers
in the wage system, and cannot imagine that a man
should work for himself and not for an employer,
should work to find himself a home, food and clothes,
and the needs of life generally, instead of being con-
tent to take a few scraps of dirty paper each week
from his employer in return for his labor. It is these
same scraps of paper which do the trick for the class
which does not work with its hands. Sooner or later,
the scraps of paper pass out of the hands of the
slave; and he realises that, like Esau, he has
sold his birthright for a mess of pottage.
No More Wages.
If the workers took it into their heads to refuse
wages, and to work for themselves, what would be
the result? To be able to work for themselves they
would require access to the land and the tools of
production. That means they would have to demand
and secure the right to work for themselves. That
is, they would refuse to work for wages; and would
lay down the terms on which they would work for
the common good. If these were refused, the superior
persons would have to work for themselves. The
working class has a monopoly of labor. It must use
this monopoly as any man of business would use a
monopoly—to the best advantage. Thus, by means
of a Labor Army Trust, the workers could bring to
their senses exploiting classes, who live on the wage
system, yet refuse work or maintenance to the useful
classes when it does not suit them to provide these, and
oblige them to take a hand in the real work of produc-
ing the basic and indispensable needs of life. This would
complete their education, and give them right ideas
of the nature of work and wages. Thus the manual
workers could use their powers to hold up the present
system, to stop the supply of motor cars until bread
was found for all, and to insist that the industry
of Australia was used to provide food, shelter, clothes,
and other needs for the working people first and
foremost. When these were found, the production of non-
essentials would be permitted, under social control. Such
a policy on the part of the Australian workers would
mean a Social Revolution, and could be achieved with-
out bloodshed. Who would defeat the workers in this


fight? There is no standing army here; the lawyers,
politicians, and other supernumeraries are few in
number, and could he brushed aside. Nothing could
withstand the Army of Labor united to seize their
heritage, and redeem Labor from the shackles of' a
soulless, cruel, and unjust system that enslaves them.
Let the workers see to it; let them unite as workers,
brothers and citizens, and declare Australia an Indus-
trial Commonwealth, where the only title to citizenship
is the performance of useful social service by the
citizen. Nothing but sheer ignorance can prevent
this being done; nothing but the mists of prejudice,
false education, distrust of their fellows, and the self-
seeking of so-called leaders, will stand in the way of
Labor’s deliverance from the galling and abject servi-
tude involved in the wage system. From this day
forth let the workers of Australia take this as their
slogan in the Class Struggle; The Wage System must
be destroyed!
Ways and Means.
In the present crisis the workers of Australia must
stand together, or assuredly they will fall together.
Their on© hope is in themselves, not in political
parties or Acts of Parliament. If they but knew it,
the power they have in their own hand and brain
is stronger than any other human power. They can,
if they will, make their own laws, fix their own
conditions of labor, and see that the land is thrown
open to the real producers of socially necessary wealth.
Let them take counsel together, and draw up a
Charter of Rights. This may be used as the basis
of a new Social Contract. So long as they let them-
selves be fobbed off with paper money as a return
for their labor, which supports the whole structure
of Society, so long will they have to pay toll to the
landlord, the profiteer, the usurer, and maintain the
supernumeraries of a hollow civilisation which cheats
and enslaves its wealth-makers. It is the machinery of
paper money and the wage system that keeps the
workers an ignorant and subject class, unwilling to
throw off a galling yoke which grinds them into the
dust, denies them the right to life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness.
The Workers’ Charter.
To meet the present crisis, the Workers’ Charter
should contain these demands:—


Work or maintenance for the unemployed.
A tax on all profits made hy joint-stook companies;
also a super land tax, to provide for the resump-
tion of land for the creation of Farm Colonies
for the unemployed.
State Farms to provide labor and food for the
unemployed, and absorb all migrants.
Rations to be supplied to all families of unemployed
men on a fixed scale by the Government.
Heavy super taxes to be imposed on all imported
articles of luxury.
The nucleus of an Industrial Army to provide the
basic needs of citizens for life—food, clothes,
shelter, fuel, tools, transport, education, medical
and nursing services—to be formed by means of
the unions, in conjunction with the Farm Colo-
nies and State Farms.
A Labor Army Trust.
In addition to these demands, the unions should
combine in a grand strategic move, by means of a
Labor Trust, to overthrow the existing Constitution
and replace it by an Industrial Commonwealth, in
which every citizen shall be of equal status, with the
duty and right of working for the common wealth,
and poverty and unemployment shall have no place.
The aim is to socialise, first, the basic needs of life,
using labor monopoly to enforce the demands of the
unionists, whose first effort would be to form guilds of
land or rural workers, home-builders, clothing makers,
transport workers, machine tool-makers, teachers, and the
medical and nursing services; also all other workers
deemed necessary to form the Industrial Army, to be
organised to provide for life the basic needs of all citi-
zens. The principle of the Industrial Army is that all
citizens should be liable for service therein for a fixed
period of years, necessary to provide for the existing
generation all the basic needs of life; all other ser-
vices and goods to be left in the hands of private
citizens.
As a means to this end, the Labor Army Trust
would aim at creating industrial guilds, for the purpose
of supplying these basic needs, first for all unionists,
so that when strikes were necessary there would be
no possibility of starving the strikers into submission.
The funds of the guilds should be so used that, as an
integral part of the Labor Trust, co-operative stores


could be opened up in each district, so that the needs
of life would be procured in times of industrial
dispute. The Labor Trust would use all the means
at its disposal to secure control over the industries
and services providing the basic needs, and organising
these on the principles of an Industrial Common-
, wealth, in which the wage system would be replaced
by the supply of all basic needs to every citizen, in
kind and unconditionally. This would mean that when
the Labor Trust had won control over the essential
industries and services, it would be possible to draw
up a Social Contract to replace the existing Constitu-
tion, and organise industry so as to provide the. basic
needs of citizens, leaving all else to individual effort.
Once the needs of life were secured for all by means
of the Industrial Army, into which all citizens would
be liable to serve for a fixed number of years, and
which would serve also as the educational system and
training for citizenship, including technical and cultural
education, the wage system would be abolished,
and capitalism would cease to be the controlling force
In society. The working class would have achieved
economic freedom and full rights of citizenship. Thus
the new social system would mean that staple industry
would be a social function, and comforts and luxuries
be provided by private enterprise under social regulation
organised for the common well-being. In working
towards this great end, it would be possible to use such
tactics so that the present system would be gradually
amended. Thus, outside of the workers necessary to form
an Industrial Army, also migrants and unemployed, all
citizens would be left free to follow what occupation
they chose, but every boy and girl, after reaching a
v fixed age, would be liable to serve in the Industrial
Army for d period of years. For this they would
receive maintenance in kind, with a certain allowance
in cash; but at the end of their service they would
be entitled for life to basic needs. The Industrial
Army would be organised and controlled so that the
basic needs of all citizens would be provided for life.
In the initial stages of the scheme, of course, these
would be provided, first of all, foi* the workers in
the Industrial Army. The Labor Army Trust would
be the means of destroying exploitation and capitalism.
The Wage System Destroyed.
When the Labor Trust, by means of tactics directed
to win a monopoly over all essential industries and


services, had brought into being the Industrial Army,
the workers could proceed to amend the Constitution,
and claim a new Social Contract. This would be a
contract between workers and citizens, whereby each
worker and each citizen would contract with the
Commonwealth, as reorganised, to uphold their com-
mon rights, and to work for a period in the Industrial
Army, after which the worker would be a full citizen,
entitled to basic needs, and free to engage m any
occupation free from exploitation and sanctioned by the
State. If the employing class refuse to yield to the ulti-
matum of the workers, then the Industrial Army would
use all its power to defeat the exploiters, and create a
Dictatorship of Labor, dissolve the existing constitution,
and conscript every citizen for the Industrial Army. This
could he done without bloodshed; and no more vio-
lence should be used than was necessary. Those who
opposed this policy of social reconstruction would be
declared criminals, and held in check until they
mended their ways and were prepared to become use-
ful workers and free citizens of the Industrial
monwealth. The result would be a real Common-
wealth, in which social economy would replace the
costly and mischievous' political and economic systems
of the day. It would mean a society organised for
its own benefit; in which useful service formed the
only claim to citizenship; and in which the moral
code was based on the sanctity of human life and the
sacredness of labor. Production would have consump-
tion for its end; first the basic needs of life, then
comforts and luxuries. No class privilege; equality
of opportunity, education, and the right of every
citizen to aspire to every post of honor and public
service; these would be the result. To supply the basic
needs would be the right and duty of the workers, the
First Estate of the realm, organised in groups forming
the corps of the Labor Army—a life-giving> life-sustain-
ing, and life-saving army. A Salvation Army which
would free the bodies and souls of the wage-earners
from serfdom, unemployment and poverty, and lead
them into the Promised Land of peace, progress, and
prosperity.
Australia Facing the Dawn.
. Thus the existing chaos and competition, caused by
greed and the inhuman system which wastes and
despoils and degrades human labor, would dissolve
and pass away like a dream, and be remembered only


as a hideous nightmare. No nation in the world is
so fitted by natural resource, social advantage, and
labor power, to usher in the New Civilisation, in
which Labor shall be Lord of All; and each citizen
shall be a worker with hand and brain, whose labor
will yield him all the needs of life, and be the means
of creating wealth and happiness for all, and abolish-
ing want, waste, unemployment, and all the evils of
our present unsocial system of industry, which is
rooted in human greed and injustice, lacks a social
aim and purpose, and is destitute of ethical principles.
A. system that breeds poverty and want, disorganises
industry, leads to luxury on the one hand and desti-
tution on the other, is condemned alike by the moral
sense of mankind, is repugnant to reason, and is its
own condemnation, its fruits being not peace and
progress, but class struggles and all the evils that
flow from misdirected labor; a society which exists
for the benefit of a class that enslaves the manual
laborers; robs them by means of the .wage system.;
and even fails to give the worker the natural right
to work for his own subsistence. This unholy system
must be destroyed; with it will go the poverty and
unemployment that it breeds, also the artificial classes
and all the evils that spring from the degradation of
human labor.
Workers of Australia, citizens of the Common-
wealth, friends of humanity and social progress, arise
and unite in the bonds of a social union with a
social purpose. Awake from this nightmare of a
life, and behold the dawn arise over the hills of
freedom! The red glow of Revolution lights up the
horizon; the Army of Labor is on the march. The
spirits of our forefathers, who crossed the seas to
find a new home in these new lands under the
Southern Cross, urge us onward to our glorious task
and destiny. They say: Arise and hew out a path
through the social wilderness to the New World,
where Labor shall fulfil its glorious purpose, and
want and poverty be banished from the homes of
men for ever. Nature calls you to your destiny;
Labor, destined to be the Saviour and Ruler of Society,
must face its heaven-appointed task; the hour has
come to strike for human freedom and pioneer the
way for the nations of the earth to the Millennium
of happiness foretold by the prophets of the ages.
If you shirk this task, if you lose your great oppor-


tunity, you will go down to posterity as cravens and
poltroons, unworthy the trust which Nature has re-
posed in you. Workers of Australia, Citizens of the
Commonwealth, friends of peace and progress, rise
from your evil dreams of toil and sorrow, unite in
a Holy Brotherhood of Labor, swear to redeem this
great land from its bondage to human greed and
injustice, and offer up your lives, if need be, a willing
sacrifice, in the war of human liberation.
Fill up the ranks! We march in steadfast column.
In wavering lines yet forming more and more,
Men, women, children, sombre, silent, solemn.
Rank follows rank, like billows to the shore;
Dawnwards we tramp, towards the hills and light.
'On, on and up, the Army of the Night.
THE LABOR ARMY MOVEMENT—ITS STRATEGY
AND TACTICS.
With scheme for the formation of a Labor Trust
as the nucleus of an Industrial Army on a State
basis, being the first step towards the constitution
of the Industrial Commonwealth.
What is the Labor Army?
The Labor Army is the name given to the Labor
Guilds or Corps whose duty it is provide (for life)
the basic needs of citizens of the Commonwealth.
These are food, clothes, housing and fuel, education,
medical and nursing services, also tools and transport.
Service in the Labor Army would be obligatory on all
citizens for a fixed period of years. The term of
service would be such as to provide the basic needs,
on a fixed standard; payment for work done in the
Labor Army would be in kind —that is to say, in
goods and services, with a cash allowance for sundries
not included in the basic needs. All workers, after
serving in the Labor Army, would be entitled to the
rank of a free citizen, and would receive basic needs
for life from the State. All young people of both
sexes would be educated and trained for trades and
citizenship in the ranks of the Labor Army.
Socialisation of the Needs of Life,
In the foregoing paragraph the strategy of the
Labor Army movement is set out. It means that the


object to be achieved is the socialisation of the means
of life (the basic needs). To provide these would be
the first duty of the new State, this being a territorial
division of the Commonwealth which would allow of the
Labor Army principle being carried out with the least
amount of effort. There would be only two classes in
the new State —workers and citizens; workers being
those employed in the Labor Army, and citizens those
who had earned the right of citizenship by service
for the common good in the Labor Army. The rights,
duties, and relations of the two Estates (Workers
and Citizens) would be defined in the Social Con-
tract, which would replace the existing Constitution.
The whole efforts of the organised workers and citizens
now in favor of an Industrial Commonwealth should
be to wrest industry from its present hands and bring
it under the control of the Workers’ Army, so that
all citizens and workers in the New Commonwealth
could be assured of the basic needs of life while they
lived, and the fear of want, poverty, and unemploy-
ment would be banished. All industries other than
those affecting the basic needs would be left in private
hands as at present, but be liable to taxation to meet
the needs of the State.
Recruiting the Labor Army.
The nucleus of the Labor Army should be set up in
the form of a Labor Army Trust or Combine, which would
consist of the primary producers, transport workers,
clothing trades, teachers and educators, medical and
nursing services, also home-builders. All unionists
in favor of the movement would contribute to the
setting up of a Guild of Farmers, a Guild of Transport
Workers, a Guild of Home-builders, and so on. These
Guilds would be under the direct control of an Indus-
' trial Executive, representing all unionists, pending the
changes in the State machinery to give effect to the
Social Contract.
Migrants Absorbed.
The fearful British surplus of one and a quarter
million people displaced by international machine mass
production can be profitably absorbed in Australia only
by a compulsory Industrial Army scheme. This would
mean that migrants would be drafted at once into the
ranks of the producers, assured of basic needs, and
also incorporated as self-respecting and self-supporting
citizens into the life of the community.


The Guilds at Work.
The duty of these Guilds, in the initial stages,
would be to render all needful services to the pioneers
of the Labor Army, including all unionists out of
work or on strike. In addition, co-operative stores
should be established in every district of the new
States, so that the whole resources of unionism would
be behind the pioneers of the Labor Army, who would
be the shock troops used to attack and overthrow
the wage system, and pave the way for the new
Social Contract to form the basis of the New Common-
wealth of workers and citizens.
The Labor Trust.
As the forerunner of the Industrial Army, the Labor
Trust would be the unions organised for the purpose
of abolishing the wage system, by means of tactics
devised for that purpose. Thus the strike, the boycott
or “black” veto, and moral suasion would be em-
ployed. The aim should be, as far as possible, to
use purely industrial tactics, and ignore Parliamentary
manoeuvres. In addition to these tactics, it would be
necessary to have an Intelligence Corps, a Scouts’
Service, also a General Staff. The first would have
for its duty the organisation of all propaganda, re-
search work, and the like; the Scouts would be em-
ployed to reconnoitre and keep headquarters well
posted up in all movements; and the General Staff
would be the whole of these services in council when
any strategic move had to be made. The controlling
body would be the Industrial Executive, comprising
delegates from each industry, selected from an In-
dustrial Council which would be constituted of repre-
sentatives of workers and citizens in corps of one
hundred. Thus workers would be the term employed
to denote all male and female unionists, and citizens
would be those not members of a - union, but in sympathy
with the movement. The Council would elect the
Executive, which would control the funds, elect all
officers, and be responsible to the rank and file for
the proper carrying out of their duties.
During the transition from the old to the new
system of industry, all workers in the Guilds who
elected to be paid in goods and services would have
their term of service credited as part of their time
in the Labor Army; and at the end of the period
fixed for service, should be entitled for life to basic
needs.


The Two Estates.
The policy of the Labor Trust would be to force
the issue of an Industrial Commonwealth on the
people; industrial politics and tactics being the means
to the end, the aim being to abolish for all time the
traditional political State, and replace it by an Indus-
trial Commonwealth based on mutual service, and
recognising no classes but Workers and Citizens, the
first being all those employed in the Industrial Army,
and the second those who had served their period of
labor service. The new Constitution will comprise
two estates —the Workers and Citizens —whose rights,
duties, and relations shall be set forth in the Social
Contract, the basis of the Industrial Commonwealth.
Representative bodies, comprising the two estates, will
form the industrial and political executives.
The New State and the Social Contract.
The existing system of political representation by
districts would give place to industrial representa-
tion; local affairs outside industry would be under
the jurisdiction of local bodies, subject to the general
executive. Supreme authority would rest in the
people, with group representation based on each
hundred citizens and workers, who would have power
to call for amendments of the Social Contract, declare
war, make provision for defence, initiate reforms,
and have the right to demand a referendum on all
matters of vital policy; also to recall representatives.
All existing laws inconsistent with the Social Contract
would be repealed. Arbitration courts for the settle-
ment of disputes between citizens, also between man
and wife, would replace the existing law courts.
Prisons, charitable homes, and all such relics of capi-
talism would be abolished.
Ultimatum to Exploiters.
The tactics of the Libor Trust would be, in general,
to follow the lines of least resistance, with due regard
to the possibility of ensuring in our time (within a
generation) the setting up of an Industrial Common-
wealth; leaving all non-essential industries in private
hands, but reserving the right to withdraw labor from
any industry constituting a menace to the Labor Trust
movement. When it was possible to form a Labor
Army, an ultimatum to capitalists could be issued,
demanding that the new Social Contract between
workers and citizens be given effect, on penalty of a
general strike, and the withdrawal of labor from all


services. The taking over of all machinery, land and
goods for basic needs would follow. In this way the In-
dustrial Army could be brought into being as the First
Estate in the New Commonwealth, for the Guilds would
be able to support all the workers obliged to strike to
compel the surrender of the capitalist rebels.
Public Works Without Borrowing.
The future of Australia depends upon public works
being carried out, and to borrow additional money is
not only -madness, but probably impossible. The Labor
Army Scheme is the only other way out.
ft,
1 «
The Labor Army Scheme, which provides for the
creation of its own credit and sustenance, can carry
out these undertakings.
The Workers Win Their World,
Thus by using their labor power as a monopoly
(the only effective weapon they have), organising the
forces of the workers, and being able to maintain
a constant frontal attack in the field of industry
against the forces of capitalism, the organised union-
ists could set about the reorganisation of the Com-
monwealth of Australia, on the basis of mutual ser-
vice, and the right of ©very citizen to life, labor,
liberty, and the development of his personality. This
achieved, Australia would have given to the world
an example of Socialism in our time, without chaos
or bloodshed. The aim should be to avoid, as far as
possible, interfering with industry not essential, and
leaving adults not in the ranks of the workers or
sympathetic with the movement free to act out their
own career; and make a start with the young people
in establishing the Industrial Corps. This would
mean that all boys and girls, irrespective of class,
would be liable to be enrolled in the Labor Army,
so that the future citizens of the Commonwealth
would be trained for their life work and for citizen-
ship, side by side, as comrades in the service of the
Commonwealth. Thus when the existing generation
had passed away, a new generation would arise to
whom the new system was familiar; citizens would
be free and equal in status, enjoying the same rights
and performing like duties; knowing they were mem-
bers of a community organised for its own benefit,
where want and poverty were unknown, and there
was enough for all, and human life was redeemed
from needless drudgery.


Labor Lord of All.
Thus Labor in the New Commonwealth would be
the new Chivalry, and the work of man’s hands re-
deemed from its age-old degradation, and applied for
the common wealth and health and happiness of all.
Labor would be the fraternal bond binding man to
man in a Holy Brotherhood; and the work of man’s
hands would be seen to be the great conquering
power, building up instead of destroying States, and
enriching the nation more surely than the spoils of
the battlefield.
Let Labor arise, exert its power, declare its holy
mission as the Redeemer of Mankind; overthrow the
unjust and unrighteous system that robs the many
of their birthright, degrades man’s noblest powers,
and creates struggles in society, war among the
nations, and discord between man and man. Labor
is the true and only Saviour of Society. The WAGE
SYSTEM MUST BE DESTROYED. That is the duty
and the policy of Labor, organised to secure its divine
right to rule the world. Let the workers of Australia
rise to the height of their great destiny as pioneers
of the New Civilisation; turn their back on the Past,
face the Dawn, and press forward to realise their
high calling among the nations of the New World.
All the past we leave behind,
We debouch upon a newer, mightier world, varied
world,
Fresh and strong the world we seize, world of labor
and the march.
Pioneers! O Pioneers!
Printed by the Buskin Press, Russell Street, Melbourne.
