

THE
GREAT STATESMAN
A FEW LEAVES FROM THE
||istoriT of Au%citrca.
By CAN C, N.S.W.
ANNO DOMINI 3000.
.Sgttneg:
EDWARD LEE, STEAM MACHINE PRINTER,
(Late Lee & Ross,)
53 Market Street.




THE GREAT STATESMAN
A FEW LEAVES FROM THE
mkhnnbr m mmmmm&t
CHAPTER I.
It was in the latter part of the eighteenth century (nearly twelve
hundred years ago) that the Government of Great Britain—
finding the jails of the country getting overcrowded, owing to the
successful revolt, and final separation of the Columbian colonies
—determined to found a settlement, and transport the bulk of
the criminals to the distant and then almost unknown land of
Antipodea, feeling assured that if they could manage to get them
to the other side of the world, they would be effectually and
finally disposed of, and that the old country would not be troubled
any more with their unpleasant propensities.
The experiment succeeded so well, and proved such a relief,
that shiploads of exiles, “ who left their country for their
country’s good” were despatched in such numbers, that quite a
large community was soon planted on the soil. It must not be
concluded, however, that the exiles—though convicts—were
altogether bad : in the days when a man was liable to be hanged
for shooting a rabbit, and when men were actually hanged for
advocating political reform—it may well be supposed that many
offences, considered very venial in after years, subjected men and
women to a sentence of transportation : many also were political
offenders, whose private character was irreproachable, and who
carried with them to the land of their exile no other taint of
criminality than a too strongly pronounced difference of opinion
with the ruling powers.
The settlement was increased by the accession of numerous
members of the military and civil service, who attracted by the
genial climate decided on making the country their home, and in
the course of time the British Government, by the offer of grants
of land, induced intelligent farmers to immigrate, and teach the
settlers how to manage their holdings, while soon after a system
of free immigration was organised, which rapidly increased the
population of the colony.


Meantime the settlers experienced their full share of the
vicissitudes attendant on the “ breaking in” of a new country.
As there was in those days no inter-ocean trade to speak of, the
settlers were almost entirely dependent for food on what they
could manage to grow for themselves. As they naturally
cultivated the rich illuvial flats along the banks of the rivers—
wet seasons, accompanied by heavy floods, frequently destroyed
their crops and reduced the community to the verge of starvation,
while dry seasons and severe droughts followed the floods,
bringing with them a still more serious train of disasters, indeed
it is on record that in one of these droughts—although there was
unlimited pasturage land available, so wretchedly poor were the
cattle that survived, that the settlers had to use the marrow out
of the dead bullocks’ bones, to feed their lamps.
In spite of these adverse circumstances, the colony steadily
progressed, the energetic spirit and “ peculiar tenacity of tooth ”
of the Anglo Saxon race—not only held their own, but made
rapid advances in fulfilment of the divine command, “to subdue
and occupy the earth.” An enterprising settler discovered that
the climate and pasturage were admirably adapted for breeding
the fine woolled Merino sheep, and this industry became, as it has
remained ever since the leading permit of the country. Cereals
of all sorts were found to do well and amply repay the cultivator,
and trees, and plants, and flowers, were imported and acclimatised
from all parts of the world.
At length the time came when the community felt that the
transportation of convicts should cease, and the Home Government,
yielding to the remonstrances of the colonists, the stain of
convictism passed away for ever. Unfortunately, at the same
time the interests of the country were sacrificed in favour of
those of another colony founded by a private company ; the price
of land was raised far above its current value, thereby causing a
complete cessation of immigration, which combined with the
breaking up of the Government establishments consequent on the
cessation of transportation, together w T ith a long continued fall in
the value at the great export of the colony—caused a period of
depression, that came near to a state of utter ruin.
During this period, cattle were sold at a pound a head, and
sheep were even given away—for a noxious disease infected the
flocks, and the expense of curing them was greater than the profit
returnable. The markets of the country were either glutted or
bare ; when good seasons occurred, the settler could get no sale
for his produce, when the reverse was the case, he had nothing to
sell. Of money, as a circulating medium, there was next to none,
the Government could not get in its quit-rents, for there was no
cash to pay them with, landlords had to take their rents out in
kind, and it was not uncommon to see professional men returning


from their visits, with fowls and geese and such small cattle
strapped on behind —the only representatives of fees to be got
from their impoverished patients.
So long did this period of depression last, and so gloomy were
the future prospects of the colony, that many settlers became
disheartened, gathered together and sold the wreck of their
property for what it would fetch, and departed to commence life
again in distant and foreign lands: many started afresh in other
■colonies of the old country, but the larger number, attracted by
the recent gold discoveries in the western districts of Columbia,
crossed the ocean and helped to swell the heterogeneous multitude
assembled there from all parts of the world.
Among these Antipodean emigrants there was one who—either
more observant than his comrades, or less intent on accumulating
wealth—noticed a remarkable similarity between the geological
features and conditions of the Columbian goldfields with those of
certain districts in Antipodea with which he was acquainted, and
so strongly was this similarity impressed upon his mind, that the
•conviction grew upon him, that gold was to be found in paying
quantities in the country he had left, by those who knew where
to look for it. Acting on this conviction he threw up the work
he was engaged in, and returued to Antipodea, resolving to make
it the object of his life to test the truth of his presentiments.
His efforts were soon —much than he anticipated—
crowned with abundant success ; and the announcement that rich
gold-fields existed in the interior thrilled through the heart of the
community like an electric shock,
A general disorganisation of every industry of the country was
the first result of the discovery, men threw up their engagements
and rushed off to the new El Dorado with a recklessness that
amounted to a mania. The fields were left untilled, and the flocks
and herds untended ; seamen deserted their ships and left them to
rot in the harbours, the towns were denuded of their population,
and clerks and shopmen, who had never handled a pick in their
lives, left their employers in the lurch, and started off in hot haste
for the diggings.
The news of the gold discovery was quickly disseminated
throughout the world, and fleets of ships flocked into the harbours,
laden with crowds of adventurers eager to participate in the
alluring quest for gold. The distress and misery that ensued was
immense. Owing to the universal exodus of the labouring classes,
the production of the home-grown necessaries of life had been
suddenly checked, while the producers themselves had been
converted into consumers, consequently goods of all kinds went up
to famine prices. It was impossible to find accommodation for the
increasing multitudes, in the way of house-room, that every fair
wind brought into port. Delicately nurtured men and women had


to make shift with flimsey tents, exposed to all the vicissitudes of
the weather, only too glad to obtain any employment, however
menial, that gave them a scanty supply of food. The universal
disturbance affected every class. Wealthy graziers had to submit
to the indignity of being offered berths as cooks by successful
diggers, formerly their own shepherds and stockmen, while learned
barristers kept body and soul together by improvising and tending
infant schools ; in vivid contrast to this state of things, returning
miners celebrated their success and dissipated their earnings by
lighting their pipes with bank notes, and washing their feet in
champagne.
Order, however, was soon evolved out of this chaos, for, if there
was plenty of gold it took plenty of silver or its equivalent in
hard and constant labour, to obtain it, there was no royal road,
no short cut to the accumulation of wealth on the gold fields,
more than on any other branch of industry, a few gained rich
prizes, many settled down to a steady course of mining labour,
but the greater part returned to their original avocations, poorer
and considerably wiser than they went. Vacant places in offices
and stores were soon filled up, and agricultural and pastoral
labourers found out that comfortable cottages, easy work and good
wages were preferable to the constant toil, anxiety, and hardship
inseparable from a digger’s life.
Meantime the general effect of the gold discovery had been in
the words of a veteran statesman of the day, to “ precipitate the
colony into a nation,”
The constant influx of population, together, with the
corresponding increase of wealth, caused in the first place by the
production of gold, enabling large sums to be invested in
profitable industries, and warranted the Government in effecting
improvments, which would otherwise have been impossible for
years to come.
Notwithstanding the high price of labour, a system of railways
connecting the coast with the interior (all the more necessary
because at that time there existed no water carriage of any sort)
was successfully inaugurated and gradually carried out. A Land
Act was passed for the purpose of giving the settlers greater
facilities for acquiring the State lands. Another act effectually
stamped out the disease in sheep that had so long troubled the
flock owners. A comprehensive Education Act was also passed,
that brought the inestimable boon of education to the doors of
the poorest in the land.
New industries were created ; the sugar-cane was found to
thrive in the tropical parts of the country, and large sums of
money were invested in the growth and manufacture of sugar.
In the colder districts, the cultivation of the vine rapidly
increased, and the winegrower was fairly renumerated for his


labour. Fresh discoveries of minerals were made, and silver,
copper, and tin, figured largely in the exports, while the coal mining
industry received a new impetus, and cargoes of Antipodean coal
found their way to all parts of the Southern Hemisphere.
When the traffic at last became too great for sailing ships, lines
of powerful steamers were laid on, and the duration of the
passage to the old world, was reduced from months to weeks.
New processes for keeping and curing fresh meat were discovered,
and the growers availed themselves of the discovery, by exporting
their surplus beef and mutton to the other side of the world.
In short, from the period of the gold discovery, the material
prosperity of Antipodea, advanced at a constantly accelerated
pace—affected only by those occasional disturbances that affect
the operations of the human race, as meteorological disturbances
affect the operations of nature. Her productions were valued and
sought for in every land, and ships from all nations thronged into
her ports. A constant stream of wealth circulated through the
masses of her population, the returns of her revenue exhibited
an annually increasing surplus, while the wages of the labouring
classes were higher, and their comforts more assured, than in any
other part of the world.
But, though the material prosperity of Antipodea was
unrivalled—though commerce increased to such an extent that
more shipping repaired to her ports, than had entered those of
Great Britain at the commencement of the century, though
every enterprise was prospering, and though there was plenty of
work and good wages to be got, by all who chose to earn them—
there was a terrible cancer growing and spreading in the bosom
of society, that threatened—if not effectually arrested, a complete
disintegration of its constituent elements, vast as had been the
increase in material prosperity—lawlessness and crime had
increased in far greater proportion, the grim features of the
“ Red Spectre ” often indistinctly seen, had assumed a definite
shape and a tangible existence ; and the power of the law was
found quite inadequate to extinguish the growing evil, or even
hold it permanently in check.
Unheard of outrages were committed on defenceless women and
children of tender years. Bands of lawless ruffians traversed the
streets of the cities by night, rendering them unsafe to the
unarmed wayfarer. Brutal assaults increased ; burglaries were
of daily occurrence. Forgery and embezzlement figured more
largely in criminal statistics, while arson, reduced to a science,
became a common means of gratifying a man’s desire, either for
fraud or private revenge.
There was a total disregard and defiance of all authority by
large classes in the State. Liberty had degenerated into license'—
i.e., the liberty to interfere with the liberty of others. Agreements


between employers and employed were broken with impunity,
and were not worth the paper they were written on. Parental
authority was either not maintained, or abused, and the rising
generation, in spite of superior advantages, ran wild in the great
cities, and lived in reckless defiance of the law.
This state of things, if must be remembered, was not in any
way to be attributed to poverty or destitution, for there was ample
employment to be obtained by all, and it was a man’s own fault
if he suffered any bodily wants—indeed, the very nature of the
crimes showed that the offenders were not impelled by poverty or
destitution ; it was rather caused by the very wantonness of
prosperity, acting on their undisciplined minds—giving away to
their lusts and appetites without restraint.
At length, at the commencement of the twentieth century,
things had come to such a pass, that the orderly part of the
community were compelled to band themselves together in
vigilance committees, for self-preservation, and life and property
became so insecure, that many resolved to realize their property,
and seek in foreign lands the peace and security denied them in
their own.
CHAPTER 11.
It was at this time, when the whole fabric of society seemed
about to be dissolved, and lawlessness reigned supreme, that the
man (who from his great legislative capacity, the boldness and
energy with which he enunciated and carried out his measures,
and the success that invariably attended them) was known to his
own and all following ages by the honoured name of the Great
Statesman, was called by the unanimous voice of his countrymen
to take the head of affairs, and invested with almost dictatorial
power, to put down with a strong hand the evils that afflicted
the State. Born and brought up on his patrimonial estate the
Great Statesman was experimentally acquainted with all the
plans of Antipodean country life ; and from his extensive travels
in foreign lands, could intelligently compare the excellencies and
defects of their social institutions with his own.
Fully recognising the fact that human institutions possess no
immunity from the operations of time—that perfection or finality
is no more an attribute of things political or social, than it is of
things natural—that the reforming process is as constantly and
inevitably necessary in the one case, as training and pruning is in
the other—the Great Statesman was prepared to use strong
measures, even to the use of the knife, to excise tumours and
excrescences that threatened to become incurable.


He had scarcely donned his legislative harness, when he was
■called on to settle two questions that had fruitlessly occupied the
time of the “ House ” during the last session. The first of these
was a demand by a fraction of the electors for the payment of
members. To this he replied that, as there was no law to prevent
any body of electors from remunerating their member for his
services, the remedy for the grievance lay in their own power;
they had only to exercise the courage of these opinions by diving
into their own pockets and alloting their member any salary they
pleased.
The next was a demand for woman suffrage. To this the
answer was that, from time immemorial, it had been justly and
reasonably considered that only those who were liable to the
blood tax in their own persons, i.e., to be called on to bear arms
in the defence of their country, were entitled to decide how and
where that blood tax should be raised or spent. The mission of
the gentler sex was to bear babies and not bayonets, and, as the
two avocations were quite incompatible (the age of the Amazons
having long since passed away) the demand was clearly
inadmissable.
Before proceeding to reform the institutions of the State, the
Great Statesman found it necessary to reform the rules by which
the Legislators themselves were guided in their deliberations. So
much time was constantly wasted in useless talk, so many trivial
questions were intruded to delay and obstruct the course of
legislation, and so many aggrieved individuals claimed the right to
ventilate their personal wrongs and salve their wounded dignity
in public, that it had at last become unbearable. Buies were
accordingly made limiting the speeches of members, with certain
exceptions, to twenty minutes. A standing committee was
appointed to take cognizance of all trivial questions and personal
grievances (of the nature of which the speaker was empowered to
decide without debate) which were at once referred to it by a vote
of the “ House,” and members, more distinguished for volubility of
tongue than capacity of brain, ceased to obstruct the business of
the country.
It will be necessary before describing the remedies adopted to
cure the evils that afflicted the State, to describe the causes of the
evils, and the way in which they affected society. ’
Classical writers were in the habit of representing “Justice’
as blind—in the twentieth and many preceding centuries, she
must have been afflicted with chronic paralysis as well, and have
been impotent as to at least half her natural faculties, for in the
criminal Jurisprudence of those days —“Justice” in the strict
meaning of the word, i.e. “doing right betwixt man and man,”
was studiously and tentatiously ignored. The balance was fairly
struck between the criminals and the State —but between the
criminal and his victim —only feather-weights were employed.


So soon as the State had secured the evidence of the injured
party—it knew him no more—he might languish out the
remainder of his life a helpless cripple, or be dragged down from
the heights of affluence to the depths of poverty, according as
the injury he received affected his person or his property, but not
the slightest effort was made by the State to compel com-
pensation or restitution. While exhausting the ingenuity of its
philanthropists, to devise schemes for the reclamation of the
criminal, it “ let the stricken deer go weep,” and reserved its milk
of human kindness for the rogue.
The classification and nomenclature of crime, in those days,
were only equalled in their complexity and incomprehensibility,
by the sentences awarded to the criminals. Offences, which to
the public seemed comparatively venial, were severely punished,
while unprovoked assaults, that left the injured party maimed for
life, were considered to be sufficiently atoned for, by the endurance
of a few weeks’ imprisonment, the officiating judges themselves
not unfrequently complained that the law compelled them to pass
sentences utterly out of proportion to the offence —sentences that
erred either by the excess of severity, or the reverse, but their
complaints received no attention from the Executive.
The jury system, hitherto considered one of the great bulwarks
of liberty, had fallen into such disrepute, owing to verdicts being
returned in direct opposition to the evidence, that action was
being taken to get rid of it. The fault however, lay not in the
system itself—but in the way some of its provisions were abused.
Even honestly worked, the system of trial by jury was quite
sufficiently in favour of the prisoner, seeing that while one juryman
could secure an acquittal, it required the unanimous agreement
of twelve, to convict the prisoner. But, the accused was allowed
an almost unlimited right of challenge, and by this means could
exclude from the box, all the more intelligent and respectable
jurymen—just those able and willing to weigh the evidence
impartially ; as it was not uncommon to find the names of men
on the list, who had themselves recently served a criminal
sentence, perhaps for the same offence for which the accused was
to be tried—it was very easy by judicious challenging, to get —if
not a friend—at least a sympathiser, on the panel, with the certain
result of an acquittal.
To “ set a thief to catch a thief,” may occasionally prove good
policy, but to set a rogue to try a rogue, empowering the former
to neutralise the opinion of the rest of the panel is a phase of the
system of “ trial by peers” certainly not contemplated by the
original framers of the jury laws, and as certainly, not justified
by results.
Here again the Judges had frquently called attention to, and
commented severely on the practice, but the leadenlike cope of


supineness and apathy that appears to descend on officialism on
its induction to office effectually closed the ear of the Executive to
the voice of complaint.
When, in addition to these obstructions, the legal phraseology
that delayed, and the endless technicalities that interfered with
the action of justice are taken into consideration, it will be quite
understood that something more than partial reformation was
required, to enable her to exercise her rightful functions with
energy and decision.
Nor were the means used for the reclamation of the criminal,
by any means successful in accomplishing their object. Large
sums of money had been spent in the erection of what might
justly be called palatial prisons for the accommodation of the
breakers of the law. Within those walls they were well housed,
well clothed, well fed, with ju«t sufficient of enforced labour to
give them a healthy appetite, for their somewhat coarse, though
nutritious food. Many of them considered themselves better off
within, than without the walls. They weighed the loss of liberty
against the cares and anxieties of life, and struck the balance in
favour of the former ; proving the courage of their opinions by
committing offences, to obtain the privilege of incarceration.
Successive generations of philanthropists had exhausted their
ingenuity in devising various systems for bringing about the
reclamation of criminals, and giving them once more a fair
start in life, and every plan had been tried, except the only
one that might have reasonably expected to succeed !
Examination of criminal statistics showed conclusively that the
ranks of lawbreakers were mainly recruited, not from the industrial
classes —from men who had acquired, and practised the habit of
steady daily labour, but from those who either had no avocation,
or who worked only by fits and starts : obviously, therefore the
best, and certainly the most likely way of reclaiming the criminal,
have been to endue him with habits of steady labour, not only by
enforcing them— but by encouraging voluntary efforts on his part,
and making it to his interest to acquire them.
This, however, formed no part of prison discipline, as at that
time established. Though general good conduct had the effect of
shortening his term—so far from steady industry forming a main
factor in the case—it was just the reverse, for the usual effect of
prison discipline was to thoroughly ground the prisoner in that
synonym for utter laziness, known to the outside world as the
“ Government stroke,” and he left the jail with less appetite and
aptitude for work than he entered it with.
Another circumstance against the rehabilitation of the dis-
charged prisoner in the good graces of society was, that having
little or no money, and no character to speak of, he was unable
to procure work on his exit from jail, and was almost necessarily


thrown back on his old course of life—the public knew that he
had sinned and suffered, but it had no means of knowing whether
he had repented.
In fact criminals in those far-off days appear to have been
regarded and treated as a species of royal game—stags of the
first head—to be grandly and solemnly hunted down, with all
the pomp and ceremony of law, every possible loophole being left
them for escape; when captured, to be penned up until
thoroughly recuperated, then turned out to repeat the perform-
ance in the sight of the public, who dutifully admired the
spectacle, and paid all expenses.
CHAPTER 111.
The remedies proposed by the Great Statesman to aid the
administration of justice, and to render her action more efficient,
consisted, not in the introduction of new principles, but by the
restoration of very old ones, the chief of which may be briefly
and concisely summed up in the one word “ reparation.”
This was the pivot on which the machinery worked and turned,
the principle that permeated the whole system. The immediate
effect was the complete reversal of a venerable maxim hitherto
considered as necessary to the well-being of society as the law
itself, and instead of justice being administered according to law
—law in the future was administered according to justice ?
The Procrustean operations hitherto so ruthlessly performed on
the limbs and members of Themis were now transferred to the
robes in which she presented herself to the public ; and her free
action was no longer impeded or hampered by the garments of
the law.
Every case was tried on its own merits, technicalities were
no longer allowed to interfere with the course of justice—-
blunders and omissions and lachis of any sort, were visited on the
heads of those responsible for them, and not on the heads of the
suitors in the courts.
The way in which the principle of “ reparation” was managed
and worked out, was as follows : The old involved and compli-
cated classification of crime was abolished—all crimes were
included under three heads—crimes against the person—crimes
against property—and crimes against both combined. As every
crime comprised two offences—one against society or the State—
the other against the individual—justice required a double
penalty. These penalties were calculated by money fines, to be
worked out as hereafter described by the prisoner. General rules
were laid down for the guidance of the officiating judge, as to
12


that portion of the fine adjudged to the State, and he had the
power of raising or lowering it, in proportion to the heinousness
of the offence, while it was the duty of the jury to assess the
compensation due to the injured party. Where the loss sustained
was so great that full restitution was impossible, a certain
percentage was allotted, involving a considerable period of
incarceration.
By the adoption of this system, the judge had always an
intelligible principle to go upon, a principle applicable to any case
that could come before him.
As to the means of exacting the penalties, there had never been
any valid reason why remunerative work should not have been
performed within the walls of a jail as within the walls of a
factory, provided the stimulus of self-interest was equally present.
There are only two ways of working on the susceptibilities of
an habitual criminal; one by operating on his back, the other from
the precisely opposite direction; as the use of the lash (save in
special cases) had been discarded from its tendency being found to
indurate, rather than to soften, an appeal through the medium of the
appetites and the sense of comfort or discomfort was the only one
left. This was managed as follows :
To every jail a certain number of different trades were taught
and worked, so that nearly every trade could be followed in some
particular jail; where convenient, brickfields and coal pits were
attached to the jail, to afford employment to those who had no
trade of their own.
A prisoner, when sentenced, was forwarded to that jail where
his own or a kindred trade was carried on; for the first week he
was dieted free on the usual prison fare, after that time all that
the State allowed him was bread and water. The hours of
enforced labour were fixed at eight per day, and the prisoner was
credited with exactly the same amount of wages that his work
would have brought him outside. The bulk of the sum earned
went to pay the respective fines, first to the injured party by way
of compensation, secondly to the State, and the contingent
remainder—contingent on his own industry and good behaviour
—went to mend his own fare.
But, and this was the essential point of the system, the prisoner
was allowed and encouraged to work overtime; he could, if he
pleased, increase his hours of labour to twelve, thus increasing his
earnings by one half. Of the money thus earned, one half went
to reduce the compensation fund, reducing his term of
imprisonment in proportion. A small portion was allowed to
accumulate for his own use on his discharge, and the remainder
was his own to spend as he pleased on tea, coffee, sugar, or that
greatest desideratum of all to his class—tobacco, in fact anything
but intoxicating liquors.


By this treatment, combined with the ordinary moral and
religious discipline of the jail, every possible means of reclamation
was brought to hear upon the prisoner. Not only had he the
power of materially shortening his term, and making things
generally more pleasant for himself by acquiring and maintaining
habits of steady industry, but he had, on his discharge, in
addition to a sum of money to aid him in a fresh start in life, a
character to show that he was worth his wages, for society would
look with very different eyes on a man who had, by his own
voluntary exertions—to a great extent—earned his freedom, from
what it did on him who gained his freedom merely by the
effluxion of time.
But the great recommendation of the new system was that
it really carried out the essential principle of justice ; it did right
between man and man.
As to that large section of the criminal class who never did
and never would work, who looked on all forms of labour with
intense disgust, medical stimulants were effectively employed to
cure the “ chronic inertia” of which they were the victims.
It may be laid down as an uncontrovertable axiom that man
was sent into the world to work—it is his normal condition to be
a labourer, therefore it is clear that an ablebodied man who would
not work must have something wrong with his constitution,
either mental or physical, under the supervision of the medical
attendant of the jail, a few shocks from a powerful galvanic
battery, given diurnally until a cure was effected, was found to
be a certain remedy for the disease.
(In these modern days, when all the discoveries of Science are
utilised to the utmost, in every possible way, and are indeed
looked upon as providential gifts to the human race, intended to
aid them in the fulfilment of their great mission to “ subdue and
occupy ” the earth, it seems strange to us that our forefathers
should have hesitated to adopt a means, so well suited to attain
the desired end, the wholesome infliction of pain, without either
degrading the mind, or injuring the body.)
To meet the case of the juvenile ruffianism of the towns, from
which the ranks of adult criminals were mainly recruited, a
machine which had been unwisely discarded half a century before,
was reintroduced, but out of deference to the aesthetic tendencies
of the age, instead of being called a tread-mill, was re-baptised
under the name of the “ Foot Motor.”
A Foot Motor was erected in every jail to which a dyarama
machine was attached, whence light, or heat, or power, could be
supplied to the jail, and the surrounding precincts ; all fines at
Police Courts (after a first conviction), were worked out on the
Foot Motor, at so much per hour, estimated at just what the
labour was worth, if the fine required more than a day’s labour,


the prisoner had to work out the value of his food as well, as
both the people and the Government had quite determined that
the rogues should no longer be supported by the honest men.
The principle of parental responsiblity, long ignored, was
revived and acted upon. It was reasonably and legally held that
the man who turned a vicious or untrained quadruped loose upon
the street, or even permitted it to escape, was answerable for all
the mischief it might do—and it was equally reasonable, that the
fact of the animals being a biped, of the citizens own begetting
and rearing, so far from lessening his responsibility, rather
increased it, as least up to the age when the law allowed the
creature to be its own master. Therefore, when it was proved
that a parent, either by bad example, or by the abuse of parental
authority, had contributed to the degradation of his offspring, the
parent was held a co-partner in the son’s offence, and with him
expiated it on the “ foot motor.”
There were necessarily one or two exceptions to which the
principle of “ reparation,” would not apply. Wilful murder
was one of these, and was invariably punished with death.
Experience had amply proved that the human tiger, like his
four- oo* ed congener—having once tasted blood—could never
afterwards be trusted as the appetite grew by what it fed on.
Many valuable lives had been lost by letting convicted murderers
loose, after even many years of incarceration ; and as human inge-
nuity had never succeeded in building walls so high, or dungeons so
deep, that human ingenuity had not found a way to escape from
them, it was agreed that the only certain way of preventing a
repetition of the crime—was to render it impossible.
With some important alterations in the jury laws, the Great
Statesman’s labours in this direction were brought to a close.
Provision was made for a more thorough revision of the jury list,
for striking off objectionable names, the right of challenge was
limited to six, and reasons for the challenge, satisfactory to the
presiding judge, were required in each case, otherwise the
challenge was not allowed. A verdict of “ not proven” which
neither acquitted or condemned the prisoner, but left him liable
to be tried again for the same offence, was also admitted.
CHAPTER iv.
Having so far settled the criminal jurisprudence of the country
on a just and satisfactory basis, the Great Statesman turned his
attention to stemming that foul tide of commercial immorality
that threatened the submergence of the community. Eor many
years the practice of adulteration and the forging of brands and


trade marks had continuously increased, until, at the time referred
to, the commencement of the twentieth century, these “ curious
arts” had attained to such perfection, that it was next to impos-
sible to ascertain the genuineness of any article whatever.
Not only were goods themselves adulterated, but the substances
used in the process were also sophisticated ; it was an endless
exemplification of the “ big fleas and little fleas,” and so ad
infinitum , only the two-legged fleas —in addition to their bite—
left a venomous sting behind.
Brandy made from petroleum, wine that did not contain a
single drop of the juice of the grape, beer concocted of all sorts of
deleterious ingredients, were vended to the public with impunity,
and not only scattered wholesale the seeds of disease, but con-
ferred on the genuine article their own evil reputation.
Not a single article, whether for food or clothing, necessaries or
luxuries, escaped the manipulation of the adulterator. Textile
fabrics, employed for clothing the body or decorating the dwelling,
were loaded with noxious pigments injurious to health, while
tools and machinery manufactured of unsound metal, gave rise te
numerous accidents, and loss of life and limb.
It was not only “ death in the pot,” but death in the raiment,
and in the dwelling too. To crown all, the drugs used te
alleviate pain and cure disease were themselves so infamously
drugged, that no vendor could guarantee the genuineness of the
articles he sold.
Taken altogether, these “ Triumphs of Peace” were quite as
fatal to the human race as the “ Triumphs of War,” and infinitely
more degrading.
The practice of “ brand forging” was still more iniquitous, for,
while equally cheating the public, it swindled the honest trader or
manufacturers out of their legitimate profits, and in addition
inflicted an indellible stain on their commercial character, by
selling spurious goods in their names. In fact the ordinary
forger’s offence was in reality the more venial, for his offence was
often committed under the influence of a sudden temptation, and
with the inward determination and hope of refunding the money ;
while the brand-forger’s was the result of cool and deliberate
premeditation.
For neither of these dishonest practices had the law provided
any efficient remedy ; indeed, it threw its weight rather into the
opposite scale. It could not well help acknowledging the crimi-
nality of the proceedings,' but the penalties awarded were so
ridiculously inadequate, that they served rather as stimulants
than deterrents. People were quite willing to part with a
percentage of their illicit gains to secure possession of the
remainder, and looked upon a small fine rather in the light of an
insurance conferring legality on the transaction.


Just as “ faint praise” is the accredited way of neutralizing the
action of “ Fame,” with regard to literary productions, so do
inadequate sentences neutralize the efforts of “justice” with
regard to criminal transactions.
As to brand-forging, the law seemed to look upon it as merely
a slightly equivocal mercantile transaction, patted the offender on
the back—like a naughty boy—and gave him an injunction “ not
to do it again !”
It was the constant prevalence of these practices that blinded
men to their iniquity, for
'‘Vice is a monster of so foul a mien
That to be hated, needs but to be seen ;
But seen too oft—familiar with her face,
We first endure, then pity, then embrace.”
Was it to be wondered at that under such circumstances vice and
crime should increase 1 that the practices indulged in by the
employer of labour, should be improved upon by the employed ?
With what face could the merchant prosecute his employee for
forgery, when the goods he imported were marked with forged
brands 1 or how could the tradesman indict his shopman for fraud*
when the goods in which he dealt were fraudulently adulterated ?
Could not the delinquent reasonably plead that he was merely
taking a leaf out of his employer’s book, or following the example
of his master.
In looking back from these modern days and comparing the
state of things as they existed in what were called the “ dark
ages,” with that of the twentieth century, we cannot help feeling
that the boasted progress of society was in some respects rather in
imagination than in fact. If summed up, the proportionate
amount of “ Black Mail ” levied on the industrial classes would
be the same, the mode of exaction only being different. The
plunder secured in the former age by open violence and the use of
the strong arm, was in the latter extracted by chicanery and sleight
of hand.
It must not be supposed that this state of things was by any
means peculiar to Antipodea, or that she had attained to such a
pitch of perfection in it as elsewhere. The old country had
achieved a much more unenviable reputation in this regard, and
had, indeed, lost an appreciable portion of her foreign trade from
the malpractices of certain of her manufacturers and traders.
It seems strange to us in these days that our ancestors, the high-
spirited natives of Britain, so sensitively alive to their national honor
abroad, should be so supinely indifferent to national degradation
at home; so regardless of disgraceful facts, that were constantly
forcing themselves in a most unpleasant way on their attention
by the stigmas cast upon their commercial integrity, and the
restriction of their exports in consequence, or should have hesitated


in using the most stringent means for the prevention of the evil.
The tact was vested interests were too strong—had been allowed
to strike their roots too deeply into the soil to be easily
eradicated; the honest men were in the minority, and as the
State virtually threw its weight into the opposite scale, they were
hopelessly over-matched.
It had come to be accepted as an unwritten law, that it was not
the duty of the State to interfere between the vendor and the
purchaser, so long as the latter was not poisoned right off, he had
to look out for himself—the law took no efficient action in the
matter.
Happily for Antipodea, vested interests had not had time to
acquire the firm hold they had in the old country; she was young
and plastic, and responded appreciatively to the action of the
reformer.
The remedies adopted by the Great Statesman were brief,
concise, and thoroughly efficient. Allowing one year’s grace, all
parties convicted of selling spurious goods for genuine, were
found guilty of obtaining money under false pretences, and
punished accordingly ; while forging a brand or a trade mark,
entailed as heavy a sentence as forging a signature.
It was not intended to prevent the manufacture or sale
of spurious goods, but to insist on their being sold for
what they really were. A merchant might still import brandy
made from petroleum or a mixture of white lead and barytes, but
then he had to show on the face of it, that the one was petroleum
brandy and the other sophisticated white lead, with the names
and proportions of the adulterants given ; a retailer might still
supply his customers with packets of pepper and ground cocoanut
shells, provided the label on the packet, correctly gave the
composition of the article.
The Great Statesman, as may be supposed, encountered a good
deal of opposition, in passing these measures. I ions, in the shape
of vested interests, sprang up like rabbits on the path, the roaring
at times was terrific, to be succeeded by moans of anguish when
he announced his intention of solving the question at issue, by
the expeditious process of “ cutting the gordian not” instead of
untying it. The people, however, had suffered so long and so
severely that they were willing and eager to support any measures
that promised them relief.
Nor had the Great Statesman much difficulty in bringing the
greater part of his opponents over to his own views. He
conclusively showed that, even as a money speculation, protected
honesty would be found to pay better than protected roguery,
that though there would doubtless be some immediate
loss, there would be infinitely greater gain in the end. So long
indeed as justice and law were at cross p -rposes, and exercised


•conflicting claims, fraud and dishonesty appeared to have the best
of it, but, when justice and law acted in unison, when the
dictates of justice were strictly carried out by the administrative
energy of the law, dishonesty showed itself a loosing game.
Great consternation was occasioned in the old country and
abroad, when the adoption of these measures became publicly
known. Colonies had been considered the natural receptacle of
experimental exports ; goods that could not be sold elsewhere,
were shipped off to them, and the colony had to pay pretty
handsomely for them. The new measures completely altered this
state of things. Shipmasters and importers were held responsible
for the introduction of unsound goods, as they had hitherto been
for unsound cattle, with the addition that all fines for breaking
the law had to be worked out in person, instead of, as hitherto,
being paid out of the profits—a fact that showed that the
Antipodeans were terribly in earnest.
When the whole scope and consequence of the recent legislation
came to be understood abroad, and it was realised that there was
at least, one spot in the world where honesty was protected, and
fraudulence adequately punished—one solitary country where the
proceeds of a man’s ingenuity and industry were really secured to
himself, and where one-half of the profits were not dissipated in
securing the remaining moiety—numerous high-class manufacturers
from all parts of the world settled themselves in the country,
followed by the most energetic and intelligent of the artisan class,
eager to participate in the high wages and constant employment
always obtainable for good work.
It was owing to these circumstances that Antipodea acquired
later on, that commercial and manufacturing supremacy that she
has ever since retained. Her brand upon goods was a guarantee
of their genuineness, and they consequently attained a ready sale
at the highest prices. The staff of analysts and experts
maintained in every seaport examined all goods entering or
leaving the country with rigorous scrutiny, and the penalties for
infringing the law were so severe, and the chance of evading them
so hopeless, that those who were so inclined found it convenient
to shift the scene of their operations to other lands. The high-
toned commercial morality of the employers of labour reacted
beneficially on the working men, good work was conscientiously
returned for good wages, and the idle, the shiftless, and the
improvident, were purged out of their ranks by the men
themselves.
The Great Statesman was greatly assisted in passing his
measures by two several powers that held great influence in the
State. The first of these was old and well established—the power
of the press—the fourth estate in the realm. The press of Anti-
podea, partly from the way in which it was conducted, and


partly from the social circumstances of the country, occupied a
high position in the estimation of the people.
The leading journals were honourably distinguished by the
fairness of their criticisms, the absence of personalities, and that
impertinent gossip on the domestic affairs of private life, than
which nothing more vulgarises a people and destroys its self-
respect. The buzzing of those carrion flies of society, that assist
in creating the filth in which they delight, was but faintly audible
in their columns.
The local circumstances of the country, too, tended to give to
the chroniclers of public opinion a greater influence than else-
where. From the isolated mode of life, and the long distance
that separated many of the communities, they naturally chiefly
depended for their knowledge of passing events, and for making
their own wants and opinions known to the public, on the
columns of the newspaper.
After examining and criticising the measures of the Great
Statesman, the press almost unanimously threw its weight into
the scale of reform.
But the weightiest factor in the reformatory scale was a rising
power hitherto unknown, and even undreamptof in former ages of
the world—the political power of the newly enfranchised, wage-
earning classes.
CHAPTER V,
From the general spread of education, and the increased
diffusion of intelligence, acting on the numerous unions and
societies established throughout the country, the artisan and other
labouring classes had become perfectly competent to take a dis-
criminating interest in the questions of the day, and were
sufficiently united to bring the weight of their power to bear on
those questions that vitally affected themselves.
Bringing to bear the practical common-sense characteristic of
the Anglo-Saxon race—untinged by sentimental ideas on the one
side, or revolutionary visions on the other—they viewed matters
from a standpoint of their own, rather than from the time-worn
grooves of precedent and tradition, and examined things with
their own native powers of vision, rather than through the tinted
medium of professional spectacles.
They had for many years feelingly realised that the evils above
referred to pressed far more heavily on their own class than on
those above them, and also that, being destitute of all political
weight, that hitherto they had been perfectly helpless in the
matter. The wage-earner—the man who earned his living by the-


work of his hands, whose capital consisted solely of his time and
his labour—could not afford to waste either the one or the other
in seeking out the best commodities for domestic use, but had to
avail himself of the most convenient, and consequently suffered
most from the practices of the adulterator and the brand-forger.
Neither the labelled name on his beer or coffee, or the branded
mark on the tools he bought, were any proof of their genuineness,
as indeed was the case with every article he had to purchase, and
he felt himself victimised in every possible way; whoever gained
in the dishonest race for wealth—he bore the brunt of the loss.
He now realised that he had both the right and the power to
make his voice heard on the political arena, and was not slow to
make the most of the opportunity. Action was in fact forced upon
him by the supineness and apathy of the governing class;
plodding along in the old timewarn grooves, officialism had not
energy enough to raise itself up, look over the edge, and mark the
significance of the seething intensity of the life beyond. The
roar of the railway, the tick of the telegraph, fell unmeaningly on
its ear ; clinging to the old “ Let-a-be ” system, it failed to see that
the increased vitality imparted to modern life by the discoveries
of science, required corresponding efforts on the part of the
Executive, and while acknowledging the prevalence of abuses,
excused itself from action by an apathetic “ Non Pass umus.”
Even the measures of reform that had been secured, had been so
“ whittled down,” that they had either lost all their verility, or
carried out the intentions of their authors in much the same way
that Dean Swift’s Irish Bishops carried out the intentions of their
supposed originals.
The power of the working classes soon made itself felt, abuses
that had withstood the reformatory “ tickling ” of many legislative
sessions, went down at once before the sledgehammer blows
delivered by the united action of the political “New Model.”
It may be mentioned here that it is to the persistent demands
of the newly-created power, guided by the tact and sagacity of the
Great Statesman, that we owe the simplicity of land tenure laws.
As the prosperity of the working classes increased, and cheap
and expeditious means of locomotion became available, the old
custom of crowding together large masses of the population in
confined and unwholesome dwellings, gradually died out; railways
and tramways radiating from the cities and towns in every direction,
created a constantly increasing suburban belt, enabled the workman
to travel from his home four or five miles to his work, at very little
more expense, and a greater saving of muscular power, than in
former days he could have walked a fourth of the distance. At
the same time, there was a concurrent cause that rendered it
expedient that he should become the occupier of a piece of culti-
vateable land. As the production of the manufacturing and


commercial world every now and then overtook and surpassed the
consumption, slack time and half time (meaning for the working
man proportionate reduction of wages) became necessary, and the
only way of meeting the constantly recurring difficulty, was to
enable him to make up for his reduced wages by the produce of
his garden.
The consequence was that there became a great demand for
allotments of land in the vicinity of towns ; numerous estates were
cut up into lots and put into the market to supply the demand, it
was soon found that the conveyancing expenses were so great that
very little profit accrued to the vendor, while the purchaser had
to pay an enhanced price for his holding.
What made the matter worse was that an act had been passed,
which, if it had been carried out according to its author’s
intentions, would have pretty well met the difficulty, but so many
obstructions occurred in the way of working it, that it was
practically of very little value. Things in this respect were, in
fact, following in the wake of the same matters in the old country,
where the climax of absurdity had been about reached, inasmuch
that many estates could not be sold, as the cost of the conveyance
was greater than the value of the property.
This was one of the cases where the Great Statesman felt
himself justified in “ cutting the knot,” rather than go through
the dilatory and unsatisfactory process of untying it.
An Act was passed, requiring all owners of land to send in the
title deeds and a plan of their properties, to an office appointed
to receive the same, within a certain fixed date, the Goverment
guaranteeing to issue new titles, within a certain specified time,
all flaws in deeds to be covered, and titles rendered indefeasable,
by proof of twenty-five years possession. In the future all lands
were to be held direct from the State, fresh deeds of a short and
simple character, being issued with every succeeding transfer, the
fees for the same being in proportion to the sworn value of the
property. By this act, the transfer of land was rendered cheap
and convenient, and the question was set at rest at once and for
ever.
CHAPTER VI.
The next undertaking of the Great Statesman was the revision
of the Education laws, and the bringing them more into
accordance with the necessities of the country. In the matter of
Education the State had been very liberal, not to say lavish, in
its expenditure ; taken proportionally, the sum annually voted for
Education in Antipodia was equivalent to the sum of thirty
millions in Great Britain, The system of instruction pursued


and the knowledge taught, were very good of their kind, but
unfortunately they were not of the right kind to meet the
requirements a large portion of the population, more especially that
of the country districts.
In starting and carrying out a hitherto (in its universality),
untried system of education ; in a country but recently broken
into western civilization, it was evident that mistakes would be
made, that would take the experience of some years to rectify.
The great mistake in the matter of education was that the course
of instruction was confined to what may be called “ Book learning”
to the entire exclusion of technical training.
It was obvious enough that by far the greater portion of the
population would have to get their living by manual labour, bnt
the system of education, as at that time carried out, so far from
giving the youth of the country a bias or taste for manual labour,
had just the opposite effect, acting in every way antagonistic to
the course of life they would have to follow.
More especially was this the case in the country districts where
the children had been in the habit of assisting their parents in
their daily labour. The rule requiring children to attend school
six hours a day for the long period of eight years, was found to
have disastrous effects both on the parents and their offspring.
On the children because, ceasing to assist in the labour by which
their parents earned their living, they naturally lost all taste, but
acquired a contemptuous aversion for it, and ultimately drifted
into the towns (already glutted with their own surplus population,
in the vague hope of securing some means of livelihood that would
place them above the dreaded necessity of hard work. To the
parents, the deprivation of the help of those who should naturally
have been their assistants, was a source of constant irritation and
loss.
In the towns, where the mechanic and artisan were not
dependent on their children’s labour, the effect of the system was
to destroy all sympathy between parent and child. The
knowledge acquired by the latter, which, if wisely directed,
would have proved a bond of sympathy between them, acted in
the reverse direction—elevating the youth to an imaginary height,
whence he looked down on the paternal calling as something
infinitely beneath him—in both cases, all interests and sympathy
with their parents’ pursuits was destroyed.
It took some years to make these truths sufficiently obvious,
but when production was checked from a dearth of the natural
supply of labour, while the towns were swarming with hosts of
half-educated youths, ashamed to work in one calling, and unable
to find room in another—society awoke to the conclusion that it
had made a great mistake, and that the sooner it was rectified,
the better for all parties.


It must be remembered that at this time a great change was
taking place in the mode of working out most of the occupations
of men—a change affecting all classes, both employers of labour
and the operatives themselves. Science was rapidly elevating
“ trades” into professions.” The play of individual intellect
was everywhere affecting the old system of routine. The small
farmer was no longer an uneducated boor, ploughing his land, and
sowing his seed according to the traditional rules of his ancestors.
If he was to hold his own in the battle of life, he must know
something of chemistry and geology, and be able to apply his
knowledge in a practical way, must make himself acquainted with
the nature of soils, the value of manures, and a host of things
nndreampt of by his forefathers. He had also to become versed in
the use of complicated machinery that required skilled hands to
manipulate and guide.
In the same way the urban employers of labour were compelled
to adopt the new discoveries if they wished to hold their own,
and those improved inventions involved a much greater degree of
skill than was requisite in former days. In no cases, however,
could manual labour be entirely dispensed with, it was merely
that the most arduous part of it was transferred from the labourer
to the machine, the machines themselves requiring more skill to
work them. It was therefore deemed advantageous that technical
training should form a recognised part of the public school
system, for there could be no doubt that those who were earliest
taught to use their fingers, acquired the most deftness and hardi-
ness with them.
The alterations adapted to remove the defects of the law were
carried out in accordance with two axioms laid down by the
Legislature : Ist. That the duty of the State as regards the free
instruction of the people is concerned, is confined to the
rudimentary elements of education, i.e., a thorough grounding in
reading, writing, and arithmetic, so far as regards book-learning.
2nd. That it is the duty of the State simultaneously to impart the
rudiments of technical training, as far as possible to teach the
hand to keep pace with the brain, and to make training as
important a part of the work as teaching.
The old rhyme—
The children of Holland took pleasure in making,
What the children of England took pleasure in breaking—
contained a very suggestive truth. It was no more difficult to
train children to become constructives, than to allow them to
become the reverse, provided the training commenced sufficiently
early.
In accordance with the new scheme, the country schools were
reduced to half-time, each master having charge of two schools,


while technical training was combined with the ordinary course
of instruction; to carry out the former, gardens —or rather
miniature farms—were attached to each school, in which all the
operations necessary for the cultivation of the soil .were explained
to the pupils.
The varieties and conditions of soil, its suitability for different
crops, the application and effect of manures, were practically
taught and exemplified, while a good microscope, included in the
furniture of each school, was used to illustrate the phenomena of
plant life, and to discover the different insect pests that preyed
upon the same. The scholars were encouraged to raise plants and
flowers at their own homes, by the gift of prizes at the annual
school feast ; and at certain fixed periods an exhibition was held,
attended by all the schools in the district, when valuable rewards
were distributed to successful competitors.
The system was greatly improved by these means —the parents
secured the help of their children for half the day, and the ten-
dency of the course of instruction was to beguile the latter to
take a continuous interest—“ keep touch” as it were of their
future occupation.
The same principle was applied to the town schools ; a room
attached to each contained models and specimens of the machinery
and appliances used in the industrial arts in those days ; these
were used to familiarize the youthful mind with the mechanism
of their component parts, and their peculiar uses. The rudiments
of all the trades were taught at one or other of the city schools,
and the boys could attend the one that suited them best. The
system was in fact remodelled almost on the plan of the industrial
schools, which had proved such a success in the old country.
CHAPTER VII.
In his legislative capacity the Great Statesman could not do
much by direct action, to further the cause of Christianity, he
managed however, to assist one denomination materially by
abolishing the ecclesiastical courts, with all their cumbrous and
antiquated machinery. Henceforth there was no inducement for
erratic clergymen to defy the law and pose before the world as
interesting martyrs for conscience sake; failing to fulfil their
pledges they were simply sued for “breach of contract,” just as
the members of their flock might have been ; the action of the age
however, so energetic in all the phases and departments of life,
acted also on the religious world by drawing closer together all
those denominations that agreed upon main principles, but,
had allowed themselves to drift into ungenerous antagonism, on
questions of comparatively unimportant detail.


Up to that time the different denominations that composed the-
Christian Church had held very much aloof from each other.
Old rivalries and jealousies, though gradually dying out, still
retained sufficient vitality to he a source of disagreement between
them.
As a first step to conciliation, a contemptuous little word, with
which in moments of irritation they were accustomed to taunt
one another, was amended by the addition of a syllable which,
while scarcely altering the intrinsic meaning—-entirely took the
sting out of it; and the sections of the Church no longer
stigmathised each other as “ Sects.”
Just as the army of an earthly monarch, though bound by the
same oath of allegiance, and banded together to carry out the
same behests—may be composed of the most heterogeneous
materials—of divers tribes and nationalities, equipped with
different weapons, and made up of different brigades ; of whom
some would be highly disciplined, while others evidenced more
the characteristics of irregular troops —yet each adding to the
general efficiency by the possession of some qualities lacking in the
rest —so the Christian army recognised its division into several
denominations, differing, indeed, in outward forms and formu-
laries, but all owning allegiance to the same Divine Head, all
animated by the same aspirations, and all included under the
distinctive designation, the Christian Church.
The hard and fast line drawn by Ecclesiasticism between
religious works on the one hand, and secular or profane on the
other—died out and disappeared, in the light of increasing
knowledge. Men were placed upon the earth to occupy and
subdue it; this commission was full and ample, extending to and
covering every sort of legitimate work or labour that could be
performed, and therefore, as acts of obedience to the Divine
command, honest work of any sort was raised to the dignity of
a religious act; consequently it was not the act itself, but, the
spirit in which it was performed, that decided its character.
Theological subtleties, those titbits so sweet to the Ecclesiastical
palate, completely lost their savour, and election, predestination,
final perseverance, sacramental grace, precision, &c., dogmas
that no mortal man had ever yet succeeded in comprehending
himself, much less explaining intelligently to others—were quietly
dropped from pulpit and platform.
The Laity claimed and secured an authoritative voice—not
only in the ritualistic, but, in the doctrinal formularies of their
respective denominations : conceiving that as constituting the
major part of the Church, they were simply regaining primitive
rights.
Unauthorised restrictions were removed from both Clergy and
Laity. When a man undertook a ministerial office, he did not


therefore, cease to be a man—the unction, he received did not
destroy his natural tastes, or his very human appetite for
relaxation and recreation; the harder he worked—the more
conscientiously he did his duty—the more need was there that
he should break the current of his daily cares by joining
occasionally in the pastimes of his flock. Elders were in future
allowed to dance at their daughters weddings, or any other
wedding they pleased and it was no longer considered a
profanity for a pastor to indulge in an evening pipe.
A conclave of the clerical and lay members of the different
sections met together periodically to discuss and settle questions
bearing on the best means of guarding and spreading their
common faith : among others, one question came to the front that,
though seemingly simple, occasioned a good deal of debate, The
question was, “ What form of words would be most appropriate to
describe a really religious man ” 1 The old word “ saint,” in its
ordinary acceptation, was not only indefinite, but appeared to be
appropriated almost exclusively by the religious orders, as on one
roll of “ saints,” containing some fifty or sixty names, there were
only two laymen, the rest were either ecclesiastics or virgins !
Nor were the phrases “ holy man,” or “ devoted man,” any
more definite. The popular notion of a holy man was that of a
man principally occupied in performing outwardly devotional
duties in particular places at certain specified times. This
notion, regarded as a test of character, was obviously fallacious,
as experience showed that many devotees who had passed a life-
time in these observances were, to put it very mildly, no better
than they should be.
The “ Spirit of Truth,” the legacy left by the Divine Author of
Christianity to comfort, guide, and leaven the lives of his
followers, was intended, as He Himself emphatically declared, to
“ guide them into all truth ” —in other words, make them honest
and truthful men—the salt was to permeate the whole system,
and evince its antiseptic qualities in the whole course of life.
To limit the operations of the “ Spirit of Truth ” to doctrinal
dogma, or devotional duty—to place them in one category, and
the ordinary duties of life in another; or to imagine that
strictness in the one would atone for laxity in the other —was to
entertain a very different doctrine from that laid down in the
rule of Faith. Therefore, to be “just and true” in all his
dealings was a more satisfactory guarantee of the genuineness of a
man’s Christianity than any amount of outward profession.
Bearing this in mind, it was decided that the definition given
by the Great Master to His followers would meet the difficulty,
and that “ Christians indeed ” were those “ in whom there was no
guile ” —in other words, truthful and honest men ; only as there
were many honest men, in the restricted meaning of the word,


who were not Christians, and many Christians in the same sense
who were not honest men; and as, moreover, Christian honesty
implied a good deal more than the ordinary quality, seeing it
included duty to the Creator as well as to the fellow-creature, it
was decided to use two adjectives instead of one, and let the
phrase stand thus—honest Christian men.
While this phrase seemed rather commonplace, it had the
advantage of being strictly practical, and also of including in one
brief sentence both Works and Faith, and as it is certain that no
man who aspires to be religious could be less than the phrase
involves—so it is difficult to see how he could possibly be more,
inasmuch as works of supererogation are impossible to a created
being.
Having secured a satisfactory ideal, the pulpit power of the
whole Church was focussed steadily on the crying sins of the age
—the fraud, deceit, and shameless trickery that were eating out
the moral heart of the nation, and destroying all trust and
confidence between man and man.
Leaving dogmatic generalities, it came to practical particulars,
and grappled with the great spiritual enemy—the Father of lies,
as its countrymen were in the habit of doing with their material
foes.
All those who accumulated wealth by fraudulent means,
however skilfully disguised, or defiled their souls with illicit gain,
were unmistakably informed ; that notwithstanding the reputa-
tion for piety they had secured, and the respectable position they
had attained in the eyes of the world by the investment of a
portion of their profits in deeds of charity, yet they had no title
whatever to be considered honest Christian men. On all it was
sternly impressed that to “do right ” was an essential preliminary
to “ doing good,” and that the children the Great King would
acknowledge were those, and those only, who would not lie either
in word or deed.
CHAPTER vm.
Hitherto the efforts of the Great Statesman had been mainly
directed to the reformation and improvement of the laws of his
country—they were now to be exerted in bringing out the latent
capabilities of the country itself.
Allusion has been made in a former chapter to the constantly
recurring droughts that at intervals of a few years desolated the
districts of Antipodea, inflicting incalculable loss on the different
classes of settlers, more especially the graziers and farmers,
though even the miners had frequently to suspend their opera-


tions in consequence of the supply of water failing. In fact,,
during the time that the drought and its effects lasted, the whole
of the producing classes were seriously affected—the graziers from
the losses among their livestock by thirst and starvation, the
farmers by the destruction of their milch cattle and the failure of
their crops, while the miners had to spend months of enforced
idleness while waiting for water to carry on their operations.
The losses and forced inaction of the producing classes naturally
reacted on the consuming population of the towns ; the prices of
the necessaries of life went up enormously high; the wages of
the working classes fell, while many were thrown out of work
altogether, and Government works had to be extemporised to
enable them to tide over the bad times.
The disastrous effects of these droughts was not, however, by
any means irremediable. The terrestrial conditions and the
nature of the Antipodean climate were admirably adapted for an
extensive and permanent system of irrigation. Over the whole
continent, with some trifling exceptions, the climate was so mild
and equable, that the greatest degree of midwinter cold, was
represented by a hoar frost, ice, congealed by the cold of the
early morning, melted away before the noontide sun, and over by
far the greater part of the country, snow was an unknown
phenomenon.
As a consequence of these favourable conditions of climate,
grasses and clovers grew just as well in winter as in summer,
provided they had a good supply of water; there was no necessity
of feeding the livestock or housing them during the winter months,
a little shelter from the cold winds being all that was required to
keep them in condition.
The average amount of rainfall exceeded that of most countries
in the same latitude, and even during seasons of drought there
was generally a fresh in the rivers and creeks once in the year,
quite sufficient to replenish the dams, had any been in existence.
The lay of the land, too, was equally favourable to the practice
of irrigation. Large flats of rich alluvial soil, almost perfectly
level, stretched away from the watercourses, requiring but a
minimum of labour to lay them out for irrigation.
Taking all these circumstances into consideration, it is a matter
of intense surprise to us in these days, that the laws of our
ancestors—instead of encouraging the conservation of water—
were so framed and worked as absolutely to prohibit it !
In cases where men, more enterprising and progressive than
those around them, constructed dams for the retention of water
that would otherwise have run to waste, their neighbours lower
down, when from their own improvidence they ran short, backed
up by the power of the law, broke away the dams, on the plea
that their water was unlawfully retained.


The settler might see the water flowing through his land to the
sea by millions of gallons, an utter waste, feeling that if he had
been allowed to retain it, it would be the means of saving him
from ruin, yet was he utterly powerless to arrest a single gallon
more than he could get into his tanks 1
The truth was, the laws relating to reparian rights had been
imported unaltered from the old country, and no attempt had
been made to bring them into harmony with the necessities of
the new, where the conditions were totally unlike.
For, in the first place, there was no necessity for the conser-
vation of water in the mother country, as they had too much
natural irrigation, to require to supplement it by artificial means,
whereas in Antipodea, irrigation was a vital necessity.
In the second place, the surface supply of one country
consisted of perennially running streams, the water power of
which was largely utilised by industrial establishments ; conse-
quently stringent laws were required to protect the rights of the
same ; whereas in the other there were very few running streams,
and not a single water power in use throughout the whole extent !
The principal objection hitherto raised against the erection of
dams was, that they restricted the flow of water, and deprived
the settlers lower down of their fair share of the benefit. This
reasoning, though to some extent correct, and doubtless plausible
to those unacquainted with the matter, had really very little in
it to those who from long residence in the country were qualified
by experience to give an opinion on it.
For, the first fresh that came down the dry bed of a creek was
mostly absorbed by the soil, the water deposited in deep holes,
quickly going off by filtration and evaporation. Had a dam been
erected, it would no doubt have arrested and retained the flow,
and so far as the “ first fresh ” was concerned, the settlers lower
down might have had reason to complain, but from the second,
and all succeeding freshes, they would in all probability have
received a larger supply than if no dam had existed, from the
fact of the upper part of the watercourse having been thoroughly
saturated and partially filled; in heavy freshes, of course, the
dams would make no difference, as the water would flow round
them.
However, there were very simple and effective ways of
meeting the difficulty, either by making the surplus flow under
the bottom of the dam by means of culverts and sluices, or over
the top by means of siphons, by either of which the flow of water
could be regulated to a nicety, and a fair share of the benefit
yielded to all.
There remained the objection that holding back the water
might increase the height of floods. No doubt this might have
been the case to a limited extent, though in a country whose great


■characteristic was extreme flatness, with unlimited spaces for
floodwaters to spread, the probabilities were, that if every water-
course in the country had been dammed level with its banks, the
water of an ordinary flood would not have been raised above a
few inches, so that the damage done would be rather imaginary
than real, and would affect only a few persons, while the benefit
conferred by the power to irrigate the land at will would be a
priceless boon to the whole community.
This was one of those cases where the vested rights of a small
minority constituted the wrongs of the vast majority. The
conservation of water was, more than any other, a national
question, a question vitally affecting the interest of every member
of the community. Already millions of money had been lost,
and numerous individuals ruined, from the disastrous effects of
the constantly recurring droughts. The droughts had as yet,
however, even at their worst, been only partial; while one district
was suffering, others were experiencing good seasons, so that
there had always been a chance of saving some of the stock. But
there was no reason why droughts should not occur simulta-
neously over the whole continent, in which case the loss and ruin
that would ensue would be almost incalculable.
The question of the “ conservation of water ” had long
occupied the anxious thoughts of the Great Statesman, but he
felt that on the grand scale he meditated—a scale that would
make it both a universal and permanent benefit to the country,
and raise its productiveness tenfold—the time had not yet come.
So great was the supineness and apathy of his countrymen that
though many wealthy settlers living along the rivers thought
nothing of expending thousands to introduce fresh blood into
their flocks and herds, they would not lay out as many hundreds
in irrigation to secure their imported stock from starvation !
To arouse the interest of the settlers sufficiently to gain their
hearty co-operation in carrying out the extensive, and conse-
quently expensive, scheme he considered desirable, required the
occurrence of some great disaster to bring home to every hearth,
not only the desirableness of it, —but also the imminent peril in
which the country stood from neglecting it, —and the disaster
arrived sooner than he anticipated.
After an unusually hot and dry summer, a dripping autumn
■set in, constant showery days alternated with sultry nights ;
although the rain was incessant, it penetrated no depth into the
soil, and did nothing in the way of replenishing the nearly
exhausted creeks and waterholes. The growth of vegetation was,
however, exceedingly rapid owing to the heated state of the soil,
proceeding unchecked until a dense mass of luxuriant herbage
covered the surface of the land; so thick a dense was it that
sheep could scarcely make their way through it, and herds of


cattle were lost for days together, in the sea of grass that
extended every where to the horizon.
There was nothing exceptional in this, as the growth of
vegetation in Antipodea under favourable circumstances, was
almost tropical, the peculiarity was, that the same description of
season prevailed simultaneously in all the districts of the country ;
everywhere throughout the length and breadth of the land,
whereever grass could grow, the scene presented to the spectators’"
eye, was a boundless ocean of luxuriant verdure.
The same weather continued through the winter and spring,
forcing a rank new growth through the remains of the old, but
never giving water enough to make any impression on the creeks
and waterholes, which still continued to shrink and dry up. At
the commencement of summer, the weather suddenly changed in
that right angular fashion peculiar to Antipodea, for weeks there
was not a cloud in the sky, while strong dry winds swept day after
day over the country, drying up the waterholes and reducing the
herbage to a state of tinder. The inevitable result followed,
strong hot winds set in, starting numerous bush fires all over
the country, the winds increased day by day in force and
intensity, until the flames, driven with the speed of a hurricane,
and the intense heat of a hot blast furnace, swept the whole
country with a sea of fire. The watercourses being all nearly
dry, there was nothing to check the progress of the flames ; in the
open country the speed of the swiftest horse was unequal to-
keeping pace with progress of the flames, while in the timber
belts the fire ran up the trees, igniting the loose bark, which
borne away in blazing sheets over the forest, started fresh fires
wherever they fell.
The destruction and loss caused by this terrible calamity was
incalculable ; not only were herds of cattle and flocks of sheep
roasted to death, but extensive homesteads, with all the improve-
ments that had taken the labour of a lifetime to erect, were
converted into heaps of ruins ; thousands of miles of fencing
were destroyed, and the greater part of the small landholders
were completely crushed; some few of the settlers managed to
save their homesteads by burning round them before the fire
came down, but in most cases this was impossible, as machines
for burning off strips of grass before the mass became inflamable
had not then been invented.
In fact from the dense cloud of smoke that hung over the
whole country for weeks after the catastrophe, from the charred
and blackened ruins of what once were smiling homesteads, from
the smouldering logs and burning trees that kept thundering
down like minute guns as the fire reached their vitals, and from
the countless carcases of half-roasted cattle and sheep, mingled too


often with the bones of the horse and his rider, struck down by
the intense heat, the traveller might have surmised either that a
tremendous volcanic convulsion had occurred, or that some ruthless
conqueror had swept the country with fire and sword, after the
fashion of Tamerlane or Gengis Tehan.
Nor was the disaster confined by any means to the direct action of
the fire ; the thunderstorms that fell shortly afterwards caused a
quick spring of grass upon the burnt land, and as in consequence
of the fences being destroyed the remaining stock could not be
kept on the unburnt parts of the runs, they herded together on
the young grass, where numbers of them perished from inanition.
This visitation, in which it was calculated that fully three-
fourths of the livestock perished, cither in the bush fires, or from
thirst and starvation in the dreadful months that succeeded them,
known to after ages as the “ Black Drought,” fell with stupendous
force on every class of society, paralysing for a time every
industry, and bringing ruin to many a household.
The exports of the country dwindled into insignificance as a
consequence of the forced cessation of productive industries ; the
warehouses were glutted with imported goods, for which no sale
could be found ; long lists of insolvencies filled the papers; the
railway traffic was almost suspended, and with the working
classes in the towns it was no longer a question of high wages, or
any wages at all, but of bare food and clothing ; in short, a
general state of stagnation prevailed.
So great was the consternation and despondency that the
energies of the Great Statesman were at first fully occupied in
raising the spirits, and restoring the confidence of his partners in
misfortune. He pointed out that though the calamity was
grievous, it was not by any means irretrievable; experience
showed that a series of good seasons generally followed the
droughts, which would restore them in time to a state of
prosperity ; their credit was unimpeachable, the industry and
integrity of the Andpodeans being acknowledged throughout the
world ; he argued also that there could be no safer, more
permanent, or more remunerative investment for the large
accumulation of surplus capital in the old country than that of
quadrupling the productive power of the grandest appanage of the
Empire by a wise system of water conservation.
He reminded them that there was no security, that a calamity
that had once occurred might occur again (and although it
was not in their power absolutely to prevent droughts, still they
had the power to greatly mitigate their disastrous effects) and
that then was the time when the State must find employment for
the vast body of men thrown out of employment through no
fault of their own, to utilise their labour by the construction of


such reproductive works as would reduce to a minimum the
effects of drought in days to come.
He then placed before them his national scheme of water
conservation, and demonstrated how favourable the conditions
both of country and climate were for such an undertaking.
The plan he proposed consisted first in utilising the natural
features of the country by the universal erection of dams bank
high across the larger creeks and water-courses, and weirs two
thirds bank-high across the rivers, at such respective distances
that the water impounded should stand at least half the height
of the upper dam, the distance being fixed by the grade or level
between the two (the capacity of many of the creeks being equal to
30 million of gallons to the mile.) Secondly, where there were no
watercourses available, to excavate large reservoirs, to be filled
partly from the watershed, and partly by canals or flumes
•conveying water from adjacent rivers and creeks when in fresh,
and lastly to sink deep bores in the more arid districts, to bring
to the surface any subterranean supply that might be available.
The object of the measure was not merely to obtain a per-
manent supply of water for live stock, but to give to every
landholder the power to irrigate a sufficient portion of his land so
that he might be able to secure at least a part of his crop or stock
from destruction.
It had been proved in the old country by actual experiment
that six acres of land would keep four hundred sheep in condition
for the six summer months, under a judicious system of irrigation.
As the seasons in Antipodea were all summer months so far as
the growth of grass was concerned, and as the few isolated
attempts at irrigation in the country had already demonstrated
the wonderful rapidity of the growth of some descriptions of
pasture under its influence, it was reasonable to infer that the
same quantity of land, treated in the same way, would carry even
a greater number of stock throughout the whole year.
In his arguments on the subject the Great Statesman reminded
his hearers that he was advocating nothing new—nothing that
was not justified by the experience of countless millions of the
human race. Had the Egyptians allowed the waters of their
bounteous river to run to waste, the far-famed delta of their
beloved Nile would have been as uninhabitable as the sands of
the desert. It was true that Antipodea possessed no Nile, but
it had what Egypt had not—an abundant rainfall, spread over
different seasons, while the Egyptian supply arrived but once in
the year.
He alluded to the arid kingdom of Persia, which though almost
destitute of rivers, and with a very scanty rainfall, managed to
support a large population by utilising subterranean supplies of
water obtained from wells; and he pointed to the example of


their own cousins in Western Columbia, who with their exhaust-
less energy and fertility of resource, were at that very time
carrying irrigation streams for miles through the wilderness, and
with a scantier rainfall and more barren soil, were dotting the
desert with oases of beauty and fertility.
Again he reminded them of the fruitless efforts of successive
legislators to concoct a Land Act that would settle down a class
■of substantial yeomanry on the soil, and how hitherto they had
found their efforts futile, and their labour lost, in proof of which
he referred them to the records of the Lands Office, which
showed that a very small minority of those who originally took
up the land were the bona fide owners of it.
And he reasoned that under the circumstances it could not
have been otherwise, —for when a man undertook the arduous and
protracted labour required to convert uncleared bush lands into
grazing or agricultural farms, not only were all his energies
employed in the undertaking,—but all his cash was necessarily
invested in it; he could not lay by money to meet the exigencies
of bad seasons.
When therefore the drought set in—and it came at least once
and sometimes thrice in every decade—and his crops failed and
his stock died, he was compelled to borrow money on his land to
replace them, which was scarcely accomplished and a fresh start
made, when the same experience had to be gone through again,
with the result of leaving him hopelessly in debt.
He worked in fact with the sword of Damocles constantly
suspended over his head, and the question was not whether it
would fall, but when. It was only a question of time.
The Legislatures had in fact thrown down the gauntlet to
Nature, and Nature as she invariably does, had gained the victory.
If instead of regarding her operations with supine indifference,
they had enlisted her as an ally, availed themselves of the
resources she had so bountifully bestowed, things would have
worn a very different aspect. If every small proprietor had had
his eight or ten acres of irrigated land, the larger landholders in
proportion, they would have tided over the drought with com-
paratively little loss. The harrassing element of uncertainty
would have been to a great extent eliminated, and the grazier and
farmer would have settled down on the land with an assured
prospect of success.
Even in ordinary seasons the power of irrigating a crop, or
forcing green food at any time, would have been of great value to
the farmer and grazier, and would often double the amount of
his earnings.
The Great Statesman next turned to the town population, more
especially the working classes. As the measures he propounded


would materially affect their interests, he wished to gain their
hearty assent and co-operation.
It must be remarked that some years before large numbers of
Asiatics had migrated to the country, and by their cheap labour
competition had reduced the ordinary wages of the working
classes. To this the latter reasonably objected, and an act was
passed prohibiting the wholesale immigration, and restricting the
number of adventurers.
However, circumstances alter cases, and there are no rules
without exceptions. To carry out water conservation on a scale
adequate to the wants of the country, would have required a much
larger supply of labour than could be obtained there, for though
at that particular time there was a good supply available, yet in
the course of three or four years it would be re-absorbed in normal
pursuits, at higher prices than the State could afford to pay ; if
therefore the plans in question were to be successfully carried
out, the labour required must be obtained from other countries,
and where the supply was practically unlimited.
He proposed, therefore, to import gangs of Asiatics for the sole
purpose of clearing-out and damming all the watercourses in the
country ; they would be employed on that description of work
alone, and not be allowed to follow any other calling, would be
engaged for a fixed term of years, and the State would bind itself
to return them to their own country at the expiration of their term
of years, and not to permit any of them to settle in the land.
In his address to the working-men the Great Statesman pointed
out, that for many years their well-doing and their prosperity had
been so continuous, that they had never had occasion to trouble
themselves about the foundation on which their prosperity rested
—whether it was securely based, or not. Hecent events had
feelingly brought home to them the notable truth that “in
Antipodea the prosperity of the towns depended solely and, exclusively
on the 'productiveness of the country , and they were then learning
that the productiveness of the country depended mainly on an
adequate supply of water.
Unlike Great Britain with her endless resources, her commerce,
her manufactures, her fisheries, who could manage to get on tolera-
bly well with the productions of her soil even at the lowest—the
towns of Antipodea would immediately collapse, were exports and
imports (for which they are simply marts of exchange) to cease ;
having no inherent vitality in themselves, the cessation of exports
would naturally involve the cessation of imports.
The failure of the water supply in the country had now brought
these truths home to the working-classes, and they in common with
the rest of the inhabitants, had to bear their share of the priva-
tions consequent thereon, in the receipt of very scanty wages and
the increased cost of the necessaries of life.


The Great Statesman concluded his arguments by adverting to
the vastly increased impetus that would be given to immigration,
by a comprehensive system of water conservation, an immigration
not confined to the working classes, but embracing large numbers
of small capitalists, graziers, and farmers, who would gladly avail
themselves of the opportunity of acquiring landed property on
easy terms, in a country where salubrious climate and fertile soil
left nothing to be desired.
Happily for Antipodea, the undertaking was greatly approved
of, and was adopted by the Legislature, and it was also decided
that like the railway system it should be left in the hands of the
Government, for it was considered better on the whole to fall into
the hands of the State, than into the hands of “ Rings” or
■“ Syndicates,” the experience of foreign lands unmistakably
proving that though the days of chivalry had long departed, the
■celebrated associations of “ robber knights and free lances” still
existed under other names, and managed to levy as much “ black
mail” from the industrial classes, as their aristocratic predecessors
had done.
In the one case the public could manage to make itself heard
through the agency of its representatives, and control or put down
abuses when they become unbearable ; in the other the public
appeared to occupy the dolorous position of a sheep in the hands
of its shearer, its only option being to “ grin and bear it,” or bear
it without grinning.
Unlike the railways, however, the monopoly of which had been
granted to the Government, on the distinct understanding that
they were never to be used for revenue purposes, the water supply
scheme was both expected and intended to become an important
source of revenue, both from the enhanced price obtainable for
unsold lands, and the water rate levied on the lands supplied.
CHAPTER IX.
Measures were at once taken to commence operations, by
■communicating with different Asiatic States for a continuous
supply of labour. Meanwhile all available labour was employed
on a preliminary work essential to the success of the undertaking.
The losses hitherto occasioned by floods had been caused, not so
much by the rush of water, as by the vast accumulation of
floating timber brought down by the current. It was therefore
decided to burn off all dead timber that would float, along the
banks of creeks and gullies. This was not such an arduous work
■as it appeared at first sight, for very few descriptions of timber
would float, and what would float would readily burn.


With regard to the construction, of the dams it was proposed
that where the stream cut down to the bed rock, the channel for
the running water should be underneath the dam, where one or
more culverts grooved into the rock, and furnished with sluice
gates, would afford ample space for the ordinary flow, while a by-
wash round the end of the dam would carry off heavy freshes,
which usually last but a short time.
As the work was intended to be an enduring one—to last for
all time—it was decided to carry up a narrow brick wall, grooved
into the rock through the centre of the dam, thus making it
watertight, effectually preventing injuries by crayfish or other
aquatic vermin; —a form of construction that would secure a
thorough scour in the bed of the creek, and by which the dis-
tribution of water could be regulated to a nicety.
For the large rivers, weirs on much the same plan as those in
the old country were proposed, only with the upper side sloping
at the same angle as the lower, for as they would back the water
up for many miles, and would be largely used for navigation,
loaded barges could be drawn over them on cradles, the steamer
Ptyi n g i n each reach furnishing the hauling power.
Sites were also selected for large reservoirs intended to hold the
surplus water in heavy freshes or floods ; some of them would be
situated many miles from the nearest watercourse, and in places
where little help could be got from the conformation of the ground,
the general lay of the country was, however, so flat, that little-
difficulty was found in conveying water to any distance, and the
powerful steam excavators, in use even in those days, made very
short work of the excavating part of it.
Lastly, the boring system in use was greatly extended and
improved ; hitherto it had been far too costly for the settlers to-
avail themselves generally of it. By the introduction of improved
machinery, by the use of blasting through hard rock, and by
payment by results (the State taking the risks), the practice of
boring became universal, and was attended with excellent
results.
CHAPTER X.
The last legislative work of the Great Statesman was to inaugurate
and bring into practical action an extensive system of acclimatiza-
tion. It must be confessed that up to that time, the efforts of
amateurs had not been particularly encouraging. The State had
devoted large sums of money to the purpose of destroying the
numerous tribes of marsupials, that infested and destroyed the
pastures of the country—and colonies of rabbits and hares,.


infinitely more prolific and destructive, were imported and turned
out to occupy the place of the departed.
Liberal bounties had been awarded for the destruction of wild
dogs, and foxes—infinitely more mischievous and a great deal more
cunning, were imported and turned out to gratify their propensities
on the lambs aud poultry of the stockowners and farmers; while
enthusiastic sentimentalists imported house sparrows, under the
impression that they were insectivorous birds, to supplement in
the orchards and vineyards by day, the ravages of the flying foxes
by night.
It may safely be asserted that to have imported and turned out
mixed cargoes of wolves and rattlesnakes would have done the
country less harm, aud would have cost less to annihilate, than did
the stocking of the country with these apparently harmless animals.
The vermin, finding themselves located in a country exactly
suited to their wants, set to work to colonise with a persistant
vigour that defied all calculation ; and increased so fast in spite of
all the appliances that modern science and ingenuity could bring
against them, that large districts were rendered literally useles
to the graziers, while the farmers were put to great expense in
erecting close fences to keep out the marauders.
In vain did the Government spend hundreds of thousands, and
exhaust every known means of destruction to get rid of these pests,
and it was not until the water conservation system was far
advanced, and the rivers and water courses rendered impassible,
that it was found possible to make headway against the four-footed
vermin ; as to the sparrows, they remain to this day a lasting
memento of the folly of those who indulge their sentimental zeal
without practical knowledge.
Warned by experience, and realising that the pastoral lands
of Antipodea were far too valuable to be turned into hunting
grounds, the introduction of wild game was limited to gazelles
and the smaller species of antelopes, which, as they would make
their habitat in the ranges, while affording good sport, would not
increase too fast, or interfere much with the hnrds and flocks.
The importation of birds was restricted to the various kinds of
pheasants and partridges, the least mischievous and most
palatable of the feathered tribes.
But the main efforts of acclimatisation were directed rather
on botanical and piscatorial lines, the introduction of plants and
trees, and different species of fish suitable to the country. To
this end naturalists were accredited to foreign lands, notably to
those possessing a similar climate to Antipodea, to select speci-
mens that would be likely to thrive there, foremost among which
the Sycamore from Syria, the Cork and Curole from Spain, and
various species of Bamboo (so useful for the conveyance of water),
found congenial localities in different districts. Of fish the
39


Gouramie from China, the Lola from Ceylon, and the German
Carp and Black Bass from Western Columbia, were found to
thrive well in the creeks and reservoirs, and added to the wealth
and comfort of the inhabitants.
CHAPTER XL
And now that over a thousand years have passed away, let us
take a brief survey of the outcome of the Great Statesman’s
legislation, and its bearings on the state of things generally in
this our native land at the present time.
We find that the population of Antipodea amounted at the
last census to the enormous number of three hundred millions of
souls, while one hundred and fifty millions more occupy the
adjacent islands.
Unlike most of the nations nursed into adolescence by the
fostering care of Great Britain, the population of our country is
to all practical purposes homogeneous. It contains no distinctly
foreign element clinging to different manners and customs, and
speaking a different language. Our countrymen are all of the
Anglo-Saxon race, and it may be safely said that we have
attained such a state of prosperity as was never even imagined
in days gone by.
Isolated by our position from the political jealousies that
harrass the Western World, and too conscious of our own power
and resources to be disturbed by foreign complications, we
“ pursue the even tenor of our way” in peace and amity with all
mankind.
All differences and misunderstandings between nations are in
these days settled by arbitration : for war, in the old meaning of
the word, has long been a thing of the past. No one in these
days would dream of settling a quarrel by an appeal to physical
force. So great has been the advance in scientific discovery, such
tremendously destructive engines have been invented, that a
tattle between two armies or navies would result only in mutual
annihilation ; there would be none left to enjoy the triumph or to
reap the fruits of victory.
The “glorious uncertainty of the law” has passed away for
ever, for law is now the handmaid of justice, in the place of
justice being the bondslave of law. Heparation in all cases of
infraction of the law is sternly and inexorably exacted, and the
means of detection have been so amplified and improved, that an
offender is sure to be run to earth and captured, when enforced
■compensation or restitution as certainly follows, so that those who
formerly constituted the criminal class have had it pretty strongly


borne in upon them that dishonesty is a losing game—a game
not worth the candle.
The offences glanced at under the head of commercial
immorality, have ceased to require the intervention of the law,
which was indeed rather intended to clear the way for united
private action, than to act permanently as the repressive power.
Tribunals of trade and commerce have been established throughout
the land, at which the rules, customs, and practices of the various
forms of industry have been thoroughly investigated—alterations
made, new rules where necessary made, and the whole proceedings
lad before the public, whose approval has conferred on these
regulations the force of law, which the dishonest trader finds it
equally difficult to evade or oppose.
The old antagonistic feeling between capital and labour has
been settled by the irresistible force of events. As each nation
gradually learnt to supply its own wants, foreign markets
necessarily became limited, and trade was confined more and
more to home consumption ; consequently, the higher the wages
of the working-man, the greater was the purchasing power of
the masses, and the more extensive and remunerative the market.
Production and manufacture were cheapened—not by lowering
wages—put by improving machinery.
For the incurably idle and vicious, the foot-motor is still
available, where, if they do not exactly enjoy the fruits of their
hands, they can at least keep themselves from being burdensome
to the community by the vigorous exercise of their pedal
extremities, for while the State recognises its obligations in the
way of taking care that all its subjects shall have enough to eat,
it also exercises its kindred obligation, to take care that all who
can work, shall be made to work.
The study of foreign languages has long been eliminated from
our schools, for, as in the days of old, “ the whole earth is of
one language and one speech”—the language and speech of the
colonising race.
Missionaries are no longer required to indoctrinate the heathen
with the truths of Christianity, for Christianity is the religion of
the world. The different sections of the Christian Church work
amicably together, and cordially assist each other in their under-
takings. A convocation composed of leading members of the
different denominations meet together periodically to deliberate
and decide on all questions affecting the welfare of the whole,
and to see that each division carries on its appointed work
efficiently and harmoniously.
The conversion of the natives of the East was greatly forwarded
by the good report carried home by the numerous bands of hired
workmen engaged in contract labour in Antipodea. As they
came at intervals from different kingdoms, the blessings of


Christian civilisation were gradually promulgated among their
countrymen by the returning labourers, who highly praised the
justice and generosity with which they had been treated, and the
peace and prosperity that reigned in the land of the Christians.
Since the days of the Great Statesman the physical features of
the country have completely changed. What were formerly
rivers are now chains of broad lakes; the excavated soil has been
utilised to form plateaus for homesteads, and places of refuge for
stock during floods.
From being one of the worst watered countries in the world,
Antipodea now takes rank among the best. The climate itself
has changed in unison with the features of the country. Just as
Scotland and Ireland (the most treeless and yet the wettest
climates in Europe) are lands of locks and tarras, so no sooner was
Antipodea dotted with lakes and veined with canals than water
attracted water, the rainfall became more steady, and the seasons
more constant.
The long weary years of agonising suspense, when the sheep
and cattle were dying by thousands, when the crops were
shrivelling up in the arid heat, and when utter and absolute ruin
was slowly but surely closing in on the settlers and their house-
holds, are never experienced now. There is not an estate or farm
in the country that has not its due proportion of irrigatable land,
not a garden or orchard that have not their fountains, dis-
pensing an ample supply of the life-sustaining fluid to a wealth of
trees and flowers. The monotony and sameness that formerly
characterised the land is gone, merged into a succession of fairy
landscapes, where the gorgeous splendour of the tropics vies with
the emerald green of the temperate zone, and the cottage homes
of Antipodea gleam out brightly from their summer setting of
russet brown.
Among other items of progress the skilled application of
scientific processes in the production of various kinds and
descriptions of food for the human race has resulted in an almost
boundless increase of the same. Cattle that formerly took years
and recently months to fatten, are now rendered marketable in
as many weeks. In agriculture, setting aside the vastly increased
production from subsoil, irrigation, and drainage, we have dis-
covered methods of forcing the growth of vegetation that would
have appeared utterly incredible to our forefathers. So rapid,
indeed, is the process, that we can literally see our plants and
vegetables grow, shooting up in the morning, and ready for use
in the evening; and although we have not yet brought the sys-
tem to perfection, yet we have learnt enough to know that, given
the due proportion of atmospheric elements, with gases, electricity,
and magnetism necessary, the growth of vegetation may be so


forced and rendered so productive, that it would sustain a much
larger population over the whole earth than has hitherto existed
on any part of our globe.
Our methods of locomotion have made wonderful strides in the
last few centuries. Compared with the veritable leviathans that
make their monthly trijte round the world, the largest vessels of
the twentieth century were but mere cockboats. So huge are the
proportions, and so massive the frames of our ships, that the
wildest tempest affects them no more than it does the solid rock ;
and they cleave their way through the storm and the hurricane
with the ease and celerity of their mighty namesake.
Instead of confined and awkwardly approached harbours, closed
in at an enormous cost of money and labour, and affording at best
but scanty accommodation, triple lines of buoys moored from
point to point wherever desirable, form safe and commodious
havens, easily approachable, where all the fleets in the world may
ride, while electric lights, worked by tidal action, stream out
from every headland, and render the approach to the homeward-
bound mariner as safe by night as by day.
-53 rial navigation has reached perfection, and our bridal couples
take their honeymoon trips round the continent or through the
islands with much more expedition and comfort to themselves
than they would formerly have travelled a few hundred miles.
In matters of finance our condition leaves nothing to be desired,
as oar exchequer is always ahead of its liabilities; more than
half of our revenue is derived from the irrigation rate, and no tax
is more willingly paid, and a moity of the remainder is drawn
from a cumulative income tax, pressing most heavily on those
best able to bear it. Although we have no hereditary rank,
which in the absence of old associations is but an encumbrance to
the bearer, we possess a chamber of “Notables,” where all those
who have earned their country’s gratitude find an ample guerdon
for their services, and to attain a seat in it is the highest
ambition of our citizens, for the privileges it confers are highly
valued.
While on the one hand we can boast but few millionaires, on
the other we have no abject poverty ; wealth is more evenly dis-
tributed, and all who choose to exert themselves can obtain a
competency, while for those who are disabled by disease, infirmity,
or accident, provision is made out of the public purse.
The immunity of our poorer classes from the miseries of
grinding want, and the degradation it invariably brings, is due in
a great measure to the equableness and mildness of our climate ;
we have no long bitter months of frost and snow, to chill the
blood and benumb the limbs of the scantily-clothed working man.
Work in our country is never suspended from the rigour of the
climate


To conclude, we cannot describe our present state of unex-
ampled prosperity and the cause thereof more truly, briefly, and
comprehensively, than in the beautiful and suggestive words of a
leading section of our Church—“ Peace and happiness, truth and
justice, religion and piety have been established among us for
many generations.” ♦


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.—ln Times gone by 3
~ ll. —Law and Justice 8
„ 111, —Justice and Law 12
„ IV. —Commercial Immorality ... 15
„ V.—The Political “New Model ” 20
n Vl. —Education
Vll. —The Religious Element 25
VIII.— Irrigation 2 ®
IX.— Irrigation Concluded 37
X.—Acclimatization 38
XL—All Serene 40




Sgtrneg:
EDWARD LEE, STEAM MACHINE PRINTER,
(Late Lee & Ross,)
53 MARKET STREET.


