

: v N , y& \ H H fry ?
, ? ?
THE
PROSPECTOR?S HANDBOOK.
A CATALOGUE OF USEFUL MINERALS,
WHICH MAY BE SOUGHT FOB AND POUND IN
X
f
4
VICTORIA.
11. BROUGH SMYTH,
F.G.S., LONDON,
HON. COKRESPONDINO MEMBER OP THE SOCIETY OP ARTS AND SCIENCES
OF UTRECHT, ETC. ETC. ETC.
HUlbomm*:
) '
F. F. BAILLIERE,
PUBLISHER IN ORDINARY TO THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT,
AND IMPORTER AND PUBLISHER OF SCIENTIFIC WORKS. >
X 85 COLLINS STREET EAST,
W (j < 1863.
?-


f r


PROSPECTOR?S HANDBOOK.
A CATALOGUE OF USEFUL MINERALS.
WHICH MAY BE SOUGHT FOR AND FOUND IN
VICTORIA.
R. BROUGH SMYTH, F.G.S., LONDON,
HON. CORRESPONDING MEMBER OP THE SOCIETY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES
OF UTRECHT, ETC. ETC. ETC.
P*lboam;
F. F. BAILLIERE,
PUBLISHER IN ORDINARY TO THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT,
AND IMPORTER AND PUBLISHER OF SCIENTIFIC WORKS.
85 COLLINS STREET EAST,


COLONIAL AGENTS FOR ME. BAILLIEEE?S PUBLICATIONS.
Syd net f A. Cubitt, Bridge Street.
( J. Sands, George Street.
Tasmania .. .. Walch * Sons, Hobart Town and Launceston.
Adelaide .. .. W. C, Rigby, Bindley Street.


NOTE.
This little pamphlet is published at the suggestion of
my friend Mr. Alfred H. Louis, Barrister-at-Law,
and is intended for the use of prospectors and
miners. When he made the suggestion, Mr. Louis
told me that he had found great difficulty in recog-
nising even common minerals from the descriptions
given in the large works on Mineralogy, because the
language employed was technical, and because a
knowledge of the use of the blow-pipe was essential
to the application of the tests prescribed: I accord-
ingly set myself the task of simplifying the language
of Mineralogists, and selecting only such tests as
could be used by the miner or prospector on his
journey through the bush or in his tent on the
gold-fields. I know how imperfectly the work has
been done; but it is better that it should be imper-
fectly accomplished than left undone.
I lay claim to no originality : indeed the Miner-
alogist will see that I have been guided, all through,
by the works of Dana, Phillips, Brooke, Miller,
Chapman, Aquilla Smith, .Page, Thomson, Allan,
and others.
R. B. S.
Flemington, 18th February, 1863.


In addition to his ordinary outfit the prospector
should provide himself with five or six small test-
tubes, a small quantity of nitric, muriatic (hydrochloric),
and sulphuric acids, a few pieces of copper, a file, a
good pocket knife, and a small hammer.


PROSPECTOR?S HANDBOOK.
Agate.? A name commonly given to varieties of
quartz, carnelian, calcedony, and amethyst. It is
properly a variegated calcedony, and consists of con-
centric layers of crystalline and amorphous quartz.
When the lines are angular or zigzag, it is called
Fortification Agate. It is easily recognised by its
hardness (the same as quartz), and by its emitting a
phosphorescent light, when two pieces are rubbed
together in the dark, and giving off a faint empy-
reumatic odour. Good specimens are valuable. It is
found in Victoria, and largely in New South Wales
and in the interior of Australia. One or two fine
specimens were brought from Cooper?s Creek by Mr.
Howitt?s party; Dr. Mueller brought some pieces
from the North-Western interior; and lately, very
large, fine specimens have been found in the basin
of the River Yarra.
Alum, Native.? Usually occurs in connection
with clay slates, and is due to the decomposition of
iron pyrites (sulphuret of iron) in contact with
alumina. Alum has a sweetish astringent taste,
is soluble in water, and in hardness is nearly the


same as rock salt. It is not seldom found as an
efflorescence on aluminous rocks. Wherever iron
pyrites exists in contact with clay slates it may be
looked for. The common alum of the shops may
be easily manufactured from the. pyritous slates
found at Heathcote, Sandhurst, Castlemaine, Bal-
laarat, and other gold-fields, and ere long the value
of these rocks will be recognised.
Alianite.? Alum Stone.? Colourless, white, and
slightly yellow, red, or grey. Not hard enough
to scratch glass. It occurs both crystallised and
massive. Decrepitates violently when heated. If
reduced to powder it is soluble in sulphuric acid.
In the South of Europe alum is obtained from this
mineral by roasting and lixiviating it, and crystal-
lising by evaporation. Owing to the presence of
silica it is sometimes very hard.
Aimilgaim.? A compound of mercury and silver.
It is silver white, and has a metallic lustre. It is a
little harder than rock salt, and brittle. It is soluble
in nitric acid. When heated in a glass tube it yields
globules of mercury.
AssaeiSayst.? A purple variety of quartz crystal.
Is hard enough to scratch glass. Its infusibility,
insolubility in the acids, its hardness and its colour
are sufficient to distinguish it. Oriental Amethyst is
the name given to violet-coloured Corundum. The
latter is composed of alumina; the true amethyst
is silica.


Antimony.? Occasionally found native; but the
Antimony of commerce is derived from the sulphuret.
Its colour is tin white and lead grey. It has a
?metallic lustre, is rather brittle, and hard enough
to scratch a copper coin. When strongly heated it
gives off white fumes.
Antimony, Grey.? Sulphuret of Antimony.?
The colour and streak* are lead grey and steel grey.
It is liable to tarnish, but when freshly broken has
a shining metallic lustre. It is soft?about the
same degree of hardness as rock salt?and brittle.
It fuses readily in the flame of a candle, and gives
off a strong odour of sulphur. It is decomposed by
nitric acid. Sulphuret of antimony is found in the
basin of the River Yarra, at Heathcote, on the gold-
fields in the Maryborough District, and at Steiglitz.
There are several other sulphurets of antimony and
lead which need not be described here.
Aquamarine.? See Beryl.
Arsenic.? The fracture f of arsenic is uneven.
It is opaque. Lustre metallic. Its colour is white
inclining to grey. Becomes greyish black on ex-
posure to the air. It is hard enough to scratch a
* The point of a penknife or a file should be run across the
mineral a few times, and the colour of the streak and streak
powder accurately noted.
t The mineral should be freshly broken. If it break with convex
and concave surfaces like flint, tlte fracture is called Gonchoidal:
When the surface of the fracture is flat it is called even : when
rough with numerous small projecting points uneven : and when
the surface shows many jagged points, like broken iron, it is called
hackly.


copper coin. It sublimes when heated in a glass
tube, and when burning gives off the odour of garlic.
It burns with a pale bluish flame. It occurs in veins
in the older rocks with antimony and galena, and
is sometimes found in considerable quantities.
Asbestus.? Amianthus.?Anhydrous Silicate of
Magnesia.? Colour white or green. Some specimens
resemble flax. This mineral is incombustible and
is used for lining iron safes, &c.
Asphalt mu Vide Bitumen.
Baryta.? A protoxide of the metal Barium.
Baryta, Sulphate of.? ln rhombic and rectangu-
lar prisms. Crystals usually tabular. Colour white,
yellowish white, red, blue, or brown. Transparent
or translucent. \ery heavy. Is not so hard as to
scratch glass, but is not scratched by a copper coin.
Decrepitates when heated, and is not easily fused.
Does not effervesce with acids. Some specimens
emit a foetid odour when rubbed. Somewhat re-
sembles carbonate of lime, but is much heavier and
does not effervesce with nitric acid. Occurs in beds
and veins in various formations. Dr. Mueller, the
Government Botanist, brought a specimen from the
interior of Australia.
Beryl.? Usually crystallised in long, stout, hexa-
gonal prisms, striated vertically. Colourless, green,
passing into blue, yellow, and red. The colours are
usually pale except in the Emerald which is a deep
rich green. The crystals are usually transparent;


brittle; and harder than quartz. Aquamarine in-
cludes varieties of a sea green, pale bluish or bluish
green tint; and the rich green varieties are called
Emerald. Beryls are found in veins of granite and
talcose schists with topaz, rock crystal, and tourma-
line, and in broken crystals and pebbles in alluvium.
Some crystals are very large.
Bismuth, Native* ?Opaque. Lustre metallic.
Colour and streak, silver white, or reddish white.
Liable to tarnish. Will fuse in the flame of a candle.
When cold it is brittle, and when heated is slightly
malleable. It is not so hard as to scratch a copper
coin. It is soluble in nitric acid, and on the addition
of water a white precipitate falls. It occurs in
granite, gneiss, mica slate, and in veins with pyrites.
The Sulphuret of Bismuth, Bismuth Blende, and acicular
Bismuth are not common ores.
Bitumen* ?Occurs both solid and fluid. Belongs
to the family of hydro-carbons or mineral resins.
Found in nearly all formations from the earliest
fossiliferous rocks to the tertiaries. Highly inflam-
mable, and burns with much smoke and flame.
Solid bitumen yields with difficulty to the nail.
Asphaltum is hard and solid, breaking with a glossy
conchoidal fracture. When pure will float in water.
Petroleum is fluid bitumen, colour blackish, reddish,
or brown. Rather thicker than common tar. Naphtha
or Mineral oil is a yellowish or brownish limpid
fluid, lighter than water. Hardens on exposure.


These valuable hydrocarbons cannot well be mistaken.
I hey may be sought for both in the Silurian rocks,
the oolitic carboniferous rocks, (particularly in basins
where lignite is known to occur) and the deep
tertiaries on the northern frontier.
Blende.? Sulphuret of Zinc. Colour wax
yellow, green, red, brown, black. Streak white to
reddish brown ; transparent and sometimes opaque.
Lustre resinous or waxy. Some specimens have
rather a metallic lustre. Hard enough to scratch a
copper coin. Is dissolved in nitric acid and emits
sulphuretted hydrogen. Does not fuse. Decrepi-
tates violently when heated. Some specimens are
not unlike tin ore but are much softer. The clear
red crystals resemble garnet but they cannot be
mistaken for this, which is as hard as quartz. Dark
coloured specimens of blende often contain sulphuret
of iron.
Bomnonite.? Endellionite.?Wheel Ore.
Colour steel grey, lead grey, iron-black. Lustre
metallic. Yields easily to the knife and is scarcely so
hard as to scratch a copper coin. Brittle. Decrepitates
when heated, and disengages sulphurous acid.
When reduced to powder it is partially soluble in
nitric acid, forming a blue solution. Contains lead,
copper, antimony, and sulphur. It is properly a
? plumbo-cupreous sulphuret of antimony.? It
occurs in small quantities in the quartz veins at
Heathcote, in larger quantities at St. Arnaud, and


at Ballaarat, Steiglitz, and other places. Mr. George
Ulrich?s analysis of a specimen from MTvor is
given in the ? Transactions of the Philosophical
Institute of Victoria,? 4th March, 1857. Much of
the so-called Bournonite is Aphthonite and Patrinite.
Kmcitc ?Hydrate of Magnesia ?Colour white
and pearly, sometimes greyish or greenish. Soft,
yields to the nail. Soluble in acids without effer-
vesence. When heated in a glass tube yields water.
Resembles Talc and Gypsum.
Cairngorm Stone. ?Brownish yellow or amber
coloured. It is a smoke-tinted variety of crystallised
quartz. Commonly found on the gold-fields.
Calamine.? Smithsonite. ?Carbonate of Zinc.
?Colourless, whitish, grey, green or brown, streak
uncoloured. Brittle. Semi-transparent or tians-
lucent. Lustre vitreous or pearly. Scratches
glass hut slightly. Infusible. W hen heated gives of!
carbonic acid and oxide of zinc. Effervesces in nitric
acid. Soluble and effervesces in hydrochloric acid.
Calamine Electi'ic. ? Gai.mei. Silicate of
Zinc. ?White with shades of brown, green, or blue,
streak uncoloured. Transparent or translucent.
Lustre rather peaxdy. Brittle. Is not scratched by a
copper coin, and is not hard enough to sciatch
glass. Heated in a glass tube it turns white and
yields water. Heated with sulphuric acid it
dissolves, and forms a jelly on coohng. Infusible.


It somewhat resembles carbonate of lime but is
harder. It is a valuable ore.
Calcedony.? A semi-transparent or translucent
variety of quartz, having a rather glistening or
waxy lustre. Its colours are milky white, pale
yellow, pale greyish, bluish, or light brownish,
lound on the gold-fields. Very fine specimens
occui on the Nammoi and Peel Rivers in New
South Wales. Mr. Howitt and Dr, Mueller brought
several specimens from the central parts of Aus-
tralia.
Calclte. Calcareous Spar. Carbonate of
Lime. Crystallised, stalactitic, and in rock masses.
Effervesces with acids. Scratches a copper coin but
is also scratched by it. Harder than sulphate of
lime. Stalactites, stalagmites, and fine clear six-
sided transparent crystals of a large size are obtained
from the Basaltic caves near Cape Schanck and else-
where on the coast. On some parts of the coast
where tertiary limestone rocks overlie the basalt
the shrinkage cracks of the latter rock are filled
with veins of white and ferruginous carbonate of
lime, and the \ escicular cavities with calcspar
forming amygdaloids. Limestone rocks occupy
relatively but a limited area in Victoria. Two large
areas occupied by hard blue limestone, were found
by Mr. District-Surveyor Skene on the Snowy River
geological age unknown. Beds of sandy limestone
(tertiary) occur nearly everywhere on the coast; and


thin deposits, composed of broken shells (fresh or
brackish water?), in many parts of the interior of
Victoria. Ferruginous marble is found near
Geelong.
Carbon. ?Crystal used. ?Vide Diamond.
Chromic Iron.? Chromate of Iron. ?Chromite.
?ln octahedral crystals. Usually massive. Iron
black, brownish black. Streak dark brown. Lustre
submetallic. Scratches glass easily. Yields with
difficulty to the knife. Brittle. Breaks with a rough,
uneven, unpolished fracture. When reduced to
powder, usually slightly attractable by the magnet.
The ore is often coated in places with a greenish-
coloured, earthy, oxide of chrome. At MTvor there
is a vein of ferruginous quartz everywhere inter-
sected by very thin seams and patches of chrome
ochre, a yellowish green ochry clay, which many
persons believe is copper-ore. The substance does
not contain copper, but it is coloured by oxide of
chrome, derived from the decomposition of small,
octahedral crystals of chromic iron which are every-
where scattered through the quartz. lam not aware
that chromite is found massive in Victoria, but the
mineral is a very important one, and is deserving of
attention by Prospectors. It occurs massive in New
Zealand.
Cinnabar.? Sulphuret of Mercury.?Native
Vermilion. ?Occurs sometimes massive, with a
granular structure. Also as a fine powder of a


rich scarlet colour (native vermilion), and in bril-
liant perfectly transparent crystals of a deep carmine
colour. There is also an impure ore of a dark
led 01 blackish brown colour, of a slaty structure,
containing earthy matter, bitumen, &c. Cinnabar
is a heavy ore.' Its colour is cochineal red, passing
into lead grey or steel grey, and scarlet red. The
stieak is scarlet red. Lustre, in some specimens,
slightly metallic. If heated, it gives off the odour
of sulphur, and mercury is volatilised. Soluble in
nitro-muriatic acid. Insoluble in hydrochloric and
nitric acids. Is not hard enough to scratch a copper
coin. Found in talcose and argillaceous shales of
different ages. Is often associated with iron pyrites
and other ores. Native Mercury (Quicksilver) is
occasionally found in small quantities where the
ore occurs.
Coal ?This mineral is found at Cape Patterson,
affvarious points on the coast between Geelong and
Cape Otway, in Gipps Land, and in the County of
Mornington. Carboniferous rocks also occur in the
Counties of Bourke, Grant, Polworth, Heytesbury,
Normanby, Dundas, and Talbot. Whether or not
they occur under the Murray tertiaries, or under
the basalts of the Western Plains has not yet, I
believe, been ascertained. The known areas covered
by carboniferous rocks exceed, in the aggregate, 3000
square miles.
Cobalt ISJooats. ?Erythrine.?Arsenate of Co-


balt. ? Colour, peach or crimson red, sometimes
greyish or greenish. The streak powder is a lavender
blue colour. Some specimens are transparent. Soft.
Yields to the nail slightly. Gives off fumes of
arsenic when heated. Heated in an open glass
tube gives off water, and turns blue. Is soluble
in hydrochloric acid, forming a rose red solution.
There are several other ores of Cobalt.
Cohalt, Earthy.? Absolane.?Black Oxide of
Cobalt.? Colour black, bluish black, .or brown.
Lustre resinous, glimmering, or dull. Soft, yields
easily to the nail. Soils slightly. Acquires a polish
by rubbing on the nail. Infusible. Soluble in
muriatic acid. If a drop of the acid solution be let
fall on white paper, it leaves a blue mark on drying
before the fire, which disappears on cooling. Yields
water if heated in a glass tube. Occurs in an earthy
state mixed with other ores.
Cohalt, Tin White. ? Smaltine. ? Occurs in
cubes, and in eight-sided, and twelve-sided crystals.
Often massive. Colour, tin white, inclining to steel
grey, and copper red. Streak greyish black. Lustre
metallic. Scratches glass. Brittle. Fracture,
granular and uneven. Gives off fumes of arsenic if
heated at the flame of a candle. Forms a pink
solution in' nitric acid. Somewhat resembles
mispickel or whiteiron pyrites, but is heavier.
Copper, Bine Carbonate of. Azurite. ?
Colour deep blue, azure or berlin blue. Streak


bluish. Transparent to nearly opaque. Is not
scratched by a copper coin, and is not so hard as to
scratch glass. Yields easily to the knife. Brittle.
Dissolves with effervescence in nitric acid, and coats
a clean knife blade with metallic copper. Effervesces
with muriatic acid, and sulphuric acid.
CopperGlance.? Yiteegus Coppee Oee, ? Often
massive. Colour, blackish lead grey, often tarnished
blue or green. Streak, blackish lead grey. Slightly
scratches a copper coin. When heated gives off
fumes of sulphur. Dissolves in nitric acid, and if
a clean knife blade be immersed in the solution it
receives a coating of metallic copper. Contains
copper, sulphur, and a little iron. A very rich ore.
Copper, Oreen Carbonate of.? Malachite.?
In rounded tuberose lumps with a smooth surface.
Occurs also in an earthy state. Structure fibrous.
Colour, light green, emerald green, verdigris green;
and the sti?eak left by passing the point of a knife
over a specimen is pale green. Is not scratched by
a copper coin, and is not hard enough to scratch
glass. Yields easily to the knife. Contains a good
deal of water. Effervesces with muriatic acid. Dis-
solves with effervescence in nitric acid, and coats a
clean knife blade with metallic copper.
Copper, Grey. Teteahedeite. Colour steel
grey or iron black. Streak nearly the same. Is
hard enough to scratch a copper coin. Rather
brittle. Yields easily to the knife, and the cut


surface is of a bright lead grey colour. When
reduced to powder dissolves in nitric acid, and affords
a brownish green solution.
Copper, Native .?Frequently accompanies the
ores of copper occurring in rocks of all formations.
Copper Pyrites.? Sulphueet of Coppee and
leon. Colour brass yellow, and deep yellow when
tarnished. Streak greenish black. Lustre shining
and metallic. Hard enough to scratch a copper
coin. Slightly brittle. Yields easily to the knife.
When heated gives off fumes of sulphur. Bears
some slight resemblance to native gold and to iron
pyrites. It differs from gold in crumbling when cut
with a knife, and is much softer than iron pyrites,
and of a deeper yellow colour. This ore is partially
dissolved in concentrated nitric acid,?more readily
m nitro-munatic acid. It is a valuable ore when
iron is not in excess. Occurs in veins with pyrites,
blende, lead, tin, &c.
Copper Pyrites, Variegated.? Eeubescite.?
Colour copper red and pinchbeck brown. Streak pale
greyish black. Tarnishes rapidly. Scratches a
copper coin. Brittle. Yields easily to the knife.
Nearly all dissolves in nitric acid. Gives off fumes,
of sulphur when heated. A very rich ore.
Copper, Red.? Colours crimson, deep red of
various shades, and sometimes lead grey and almost
black. Streak brownish red. Sometimes semi-trans-
parent sometimes opaque. Lustre submetallic


also adamantine. Brittle. Will scratch a copper
coin. Dissolves in nitric acid with effervescence, and
in hydrochloric acid without effervescence. Slightly
resembles Cinnabar. Contains 89 per cent, of copper
and 11 per cent, of oxygen. Tenorite is a black
copper ore. These ores are easily smelted. Said to
occur at Steiglitz. Occurs in veins in granite and
crystalline rocks with pyrites, galena, blende, &c.
Copper, Silicate of.? Chrysocolla. Colour
bright green, bluish green, sky blue. Lustre
resinous, streak greenish white. Not so hard
as to scratch a copper coin. Yields easily to
the knife. Slightly brittle. Gives off a good deal
of water if heated in a glass tube. Does not effer-
vesce with nitric acid, but is decomposed by this
acid and hydrochloric acid, leaving a residue of
silica in powder.
Corundum.? Sapphire.?Pure Alumina. ?The
colour of the sapphire, properly so called, is blue.
When red it is called Oriental Ruby, when yellow
Oriental Topaz, when green Oriental Emerald, oriental
aquamarine or chrysolite, and when violet Oriental
Amethyst. Sometimes different parts of the same
crystal are variously coloured. In hardness it is
next to the Diamond. Scratches steel readily, and
scratches Topaz. Beautiful six-sided crystals of
sapphire are found in the Ovens District, at Ingle-
wood, and on other gold-fields. Sapphires of a fine
colour, but unusually small, are found in the County


of Moroington. Fine crystals of good colour are very
valuable. The name corundum is usually restricted
to the dull, dingy-coloured crystals and masses.
Emery is granular corundum.
Cryolite.? A fluoride of aluminum and sodium.
Colour snow-white, and with shades of yellow, fed,
and brown. Streak white. Very little harder than
rock salt. Scratches a copper coin slightly. Brittle.
Translucent to semi-transparent. Lustre vitreous or
pearly. Becomes more transparent when immersed
in water. Fracture uneven. Is a little .heavier than
gypsum. If heated in an open glass tube the
vapour corrodes the glass. Contains no water.
Does not fuse in the flame of a candle.* Completely
soluble in concentrated sulphuric acid. Is found
in gneiss and .granite, associated with felspar,
pyrites, and galena. A mineral somewhat resem-
bling Cryolite is found in Victoria associated with
Kaolin , but true Cryolite is much softer than the
mineral which was brought to me.
Diamond.? Pure Carbon. ?Colourless, white,
grey, green, brown, yellow, orange, red, blue, black.
Hai?der than sapphire. The diamond may be
recognised by its hardness, by its form?that of a
prism terminated by a square pyramid (not seldom
with curved faces) ?and by its brilliant reflection of
* On the authority of Dr. Aquilla Smith. Dana and Phillips
state that it does melt in the flame of a candle.


light and lustre. Diamonds are said to occur in
the Ovens District.
Dysodile.? Paper Coal.? Colour greenish, grey,
or yellow. Soft. In foliated masses. Burns with
much smoke and flame, giving out a strong odour.
Embolite.? Chloeo-bromide of Silver.? Colour
sulphur yellow, olive green, asparagus green. Re-
sembles horn silver. Fracture hackly. Malleable.
Soft. Yields with difficulty to the nail. Contains about
67 per cent, of silver, 20 per cent, of bromine, and
13 per cent, of chlorine. Occurs in veins with gold
and protoxide of iron in the Maryborough and
Ararat Mining Districts.
Emerald. ? Vide Beryl.
Fuller?s Earth.? A greenish, greyish, yellowish,
white or brown earth, opaque and rather dull, which,
when immersed in water, falls into powder. Streak
shining. It has a soapy feel, and is not plastic like
other clays. It consists of silica and alumina with
a little protoxide of iron, lime, and magnesia.
Galena.? Sulphueet of Lead. Colour lead
grey, and when newly broken has a shining
metallic lustre. Fragile, breaking into cubical frag-
ments. Soft. Scratches a copper coin slightly.
Heavy. When heated gives off fumes of sulphur
and decrepitates. Partially soluble in nitric acid.
Occurs in rocks of various formations. Galena has
been found in the quartz veins of the Ballaarat,
Maryborough, and Sandhurst Mining Districts.


Gold.? Found native and alloyed with other
metals. Colour various shades of yellow, depending
upon the nature of the alloy present. Malleable.
Ductile. May he cut with a knife. Not attacked
by nitric, muriatic, or sulphuric acid. If a piece of
gold be immersed in a mixture of nitric and muriatic
acids it readily dissolves. The best proportions are
one part of nitric acid to two parts of hydrochloric
acid. Found in quartz veins, and in alluviums con-
taining the debris of quartz veins. In Victoria,
about 600 square miles have been dug over, more or
less, and nearly 30,000,000 ozs. exported.
Graphite ?Plumbago.? Black Lead. ?Usually
foliated and massive. Sometimes has a fine scaly
structure?sometimes compact and granular. Colour
iron-black to dark steel-grey and lead-grey. Metallic
lustre. Very soft, yielding to the nail. Soils paper.
Feels greasy. Infusible and not acted upon by
acids. Said to occur at Mount Blackwood.
Gypsum. ?Selenite, Alabaster, Hydrous
Sulphate of Lime.? ln large tabular crystals, also
in arrow-head shaped crystals, and massive, and
granular. Colourless, reddish, yellowish, blue, grey,
and nearly black. Pearly lustre. Soft, yields
slightly to the nail, and does not scratch a copper
coin. Some varieties are as clear as glass. When
heated in a glass tube yields water. Is not affected
by acids. The tabular crystals easily split into thin
leaves. Occurs in the Wimmera District, and in


the Murray tertiaries. Fine tabular crystals occur
about twenty miles N.N.W. of Inglewood. Is found
in Batman?s Swamp, near Melbourne, in clay, quite
recently crystallised.
Hematite. ?Vide Limonjte.
Horn Silver.? Fide Silver, Chloride of.
Iron Pyrites.? Mundic.?Bi-sulphuret of Iron.
?Most often in cubes, the faces of which are
striated. Also massive. Colour bronze-yellow, brass-
yellow, often inclining to gold-yellow. Lustre of
crystals, often metallic. Brittle. Scratches glass.
Yields with difficulty to the knife. Strikes fire with
steel. When heated gives off sulphurous fumes.
Partially soluble in nitric acid. One of the most
common ores, occurring in rocks of all ages. Is
found in the quartz veins, and disseminated through
the older recks on all the gold-fields. Frequently
contains gold, and sometimes silver. Pyrrhotine, or
Magnetic pyrites is much softer than the bi-sulphuret
and is not hard enough to scratch glass. Mispickel,
or arsenical iron pyrites, contains about 46 per cent,
of arsenic, and is not quite so hard as the common
pyrites. It gives off arsenical fumes (gaxdic odour)
when heated. Iron pyrites is of common occurrence
on the gold-fields.*
* It is probable that, for the better extraction of the gold which
the iron pyrites of this country contains, the ore will be treated as
if for the manufacture of alum; a process at once easy and
economical.


Kaolin.? A name applied to clay, which results
from the decomposition of felspar. Large quantities
are found, in situ, at Bulla, on the Deep Creek, and
elsewhere in the colony where granite rocks prevail.
The name is said to he a corruption of the word
? Kauling,? a Chinese word, meaning a high ridge.
Lignite.? Brown Coal. ?Wood Coal. ?This is
fossil-wood, more or less mineralised. Colour, dull
dark brown, sometimes silky brown. Burns with,
a dull flame and much smoke. Occurs in beds
alternating with true coal in the Oolitic rocks of
Victoria, also in tertiary rocks, and in the auriferous
Alluviums at Ballaarat, Yandoit, Creswick?s Creek,
Mount Blackwood, and elsewhere on the gold-fields.
Lime, Carbonate of.? Vide Calcite.
Limonite.? Brown Iron Ore. ?Hvdrous Per-
oxide of Iron. ?Most often massive, having a smooth
rounded surface. Sometimes earthy. Colour, dark
brown or ochre yellow. Streak brown, yellowish
brown, dull yellow. Scratches glass slightly. The
fractured surface of this mineral is often silky.
When heated in a glass tube, gives off water. There
are several varieties of this ore; amongst them
brown haematite and brown and yellow clay ironstone are
important. Found in rocks of all ages. Specular
iron ore (red haematite) is usually rather harder and
heavier than Limonite. It is an anhydrous peroxide
of iron. Its colour is dark steel grey to iron black.
Streak cherry red or reddish brown. It is brittle,


and sometimes feebly magnetic. Fine crystals were
brought from the interior by Mr. Howitt?s party.
Lead Ore. ?Vide Galena.
Magnesite. ?Carbonate of Magnesia.?Colour-
less, white, yellowish, greyish, brown, black. Vitreous
lustre. Transparent or opaque. Soft externally,
but when broken yields fragments hard enough to
scratch a copper coin. Dissolves slowly, and effer-
vesces feebly with nitric or sulphuric acid, and
effervesces briskly with muriatic acid. Resembles
carbonate of lime. Said to occur at Bulla, on the
Deep Creek, associated with Kaolin,
Malachite.?- Fide Copper, Green Carbonate of.
Manganese, Binoxydc of. Pyrolusite. ?
Often massive. Colour dark steel grey or iron
black. Streak black. Soft. Yields Avith difficulty
to the nail. Some varieties nearly hard enough to
scratch a copper coin. Brittle, Soils, Gives off
no water Avhen heated in a glass tube. This ore
occurs at Pleasant Creek and in the Ararat District.
Mr. Berd. Smith has collected fine specimens.
Manganese Spar.? Rhodonite. Silicate of
Manganese. ?Colour reddish, flesh red, peach
blossom red, brown, green, or yellow. Lustre
vitreous. Transparent or opaque. Scratches glass
Yields with difficulty to the knife. Does not
dissolve in hydrochloric acid. Resembles felspar,
but is heavier.


Meerschaum. ?Keffekil.?SeaFeoth.' ?Silicate
of Magnesia. Opaque. Dull white, greyish,
yellowish, or reddish. Waxy. Like clay. Does
not fall to pieces in water. When heated in a glass
tube yields water, gives off a foetid odour, and be-
comes hard and white. Soft. Receives a polish on
being rubbed by the nail. Has a greasy feel, and
lathers like soap. Adheres to the tongue.
Naphtha. ?Vide Bitumen.
Onyx.? A kind of agate with the colours arranged
in alternate layers. Usually light clear brown, alter-
nating with opaque white. I have seen a fine
specimen, which was found in the basin of the River
Yarra.
Opal, Precious? ln stalactitic and reniform
shapes. White, usually milky. Exhibits a rich
play of colours. Scratches glass, and is easily
scratched by quartz. Very brittle. If heated in a
glass tube yields water.
Orpiment.? Yellow Sulphueet of Aesbnic.?
In foliated masses. Colour fine yellow, lemon
yellow, orange yellow, golden yellow. Streak yellow.
Lustre resinous, or brilliant pearly, or metallic
pearly. Quite soft: yields to the nail. Slightly
transparent. When heated gives off the odour of
garlic. May he sought for in metalliferous veins,
and is found imbedded in various formations.
Platinum.? ln angular, rounded or flattened
grains, and nuggets. Colour pale or dark steel


grey, lead grey, inclining to silver white. Not
scratched by a copper coin and not hard enough to
scratch glass. Yields easily to the knife. Frequently
slightly magnetic. Soluble in heated aqua regia
(nitro-muriatic acid). Not attacked by sulphuric,
nitric, or muriatic acid. Infusible. Very malleable
and ductile. Heavier than gold.
Plumbago. ? Vide Graphite.
Psilomclanc. ?Colour black, bluish, greenish,
black, or dark steel grey. Streak reddish or brown-
ish black. Scratches glass. Yields with difficulty
to the knife. Brittle, If heated in a glass tube
yields water. If reduced to powder is soluble in
hydrochloric acid, and if a little of the powder be
put in a glass tube with sulphuric acid the solution
becomes red. This mineral is considered by some
an impure kind of Pyrolusite. Occurs in the Ararat
District.
Quartz.? This mineral, as it occurs in veins, is
so well known as not to need description.
Quicksilver. ?Vide Cinnabar.
Realgar.?Red Sulphuret of Arsenic. ?Colour
aurora-red, clear-red to orange. Transparent or
translucent. Lustre resinous. Quite soft: yields
to the nail. Streak orange yellow. When heated
gives off the odour of garlic. Scarcely soluble in
acids. Dissolves slowly in hot nitro-muriatic acid.
Found in veins with arsenic, pyrites, mispickel, galena,
blende, &c.


Salt.? Usually associated with gypsum and clays.
May be sought for in the northern parts of the
Colony bordering on the Murray, and in the
tertiaries of Gipps Land. It occurs in considerable
quantities in the beds of the lakes in the western
part of the Colony.
Sapphire. ?Vide Corundum.
Selenite.? Fide Gypsum.
Silver, Chlorid of.? Horn Silver. Crystal-
lised and massive. Colour white, yellowish'white,
sometimes with grey, green, and blue stains, resem-
bling horn or wax. Becomes brown when exposed
to the light. Streak shining. Sometimes translu-
cent, sometimes opaque. Quite soft. Cuts like
wax or horn. Fuses in the flame of a candle. The
clear surface of an iron, zinc, or copper plate wetted
and rubbed with it is silvered. Buttermilk silver is
an earthy chlorid of silver, mixed with clay.
Silver, Glance.? Vitreous Silver. ?Argentite.
Sulphuret of Silver. ?Colour and streak, dark
steel grey or blackish lead grey. Malleable. Scarcely
hard enough to scratch a copper coin. Both massive
and crystallised, and in an earthy state. Gives off
the odour of sulphur when heated. May be cut
with a knife without crumbling. Dissolves in weak
nitric acid. There is also a grey sulphuret of silver
and copper, pamed Stromeyerite; and a sulphuret of
silver and iron, resembling graphite, named Stern-
hergite. These ores are easily tested by dissolving


them in weak nitric acid, and dipping a clean piece
of copper in the solution, on the surface of which
the silver will be deposited. If copper is present,
a clean plate of iron (knife blade) will be covered
with a thin coating of that metal.
Silver Ore, Brittle.? Stephanite.? Sulphueet
of Silver and Antimony. Colour iron black.
Streak iron black. Lustre metallic. Scarcely so
hard as to scratch a copper coin. When heated,
gives off the odour of sulphur. Soluble in dilute
nitiic acid; and a plate of copper immersed in the
solution receives a coating of silver. There are
several other sulphurets.
Siiiitlisonite. ? Vide Calamine.
Soapstone.? Steatite. Hydrous Silicate of
Magnesia, This is a grey or greyish green massive
talc. Sometimes yellowish, bluish, or milk white.
Very smooth, and feels greasy like soap. Is easily
cut with the knife.
Spinel.? ln eight-sided and twelve-sided crystals.
Colour red, passing into blue, green, yellow, brown
and black. The red shades are often transparent
and bright. Glassy lustre. Will scratch quartz,
hi early as hard as Topaz. The black variety called
PUonaste is often mistaken for tin ore, but pleonaste is
harder, and the colour of the streak is not the same.
Topaz ?Colourless, pale yellow, greenish, bluish
or reddish. Lustre vitreous. Harder than quartz.
In piismatic crystals, or in rounded fragments.


Is found most often in the vicinity of granite
rocks. Fine specimens have been brought from
Pleasant Creek by Mr. John Woods, M.L.A., and
this gem also occurs at Beechworth, Castlemaine,
and in the Maryborough and Sandhurst mining
districts.
Tin Ore. Cassiterite. ?Oxyde of Tin. In
modified square and eight-sided crystals, also massive
and in grains. Colourless, grey, yellow, red, brown
or black. Streak pale grey or brownish. .Some
specimens transparent, generally opaque or nearly
opaque. Hard ; scratches glass easily. Brittle. Feels
heavy. Is not acted upon by acids, and does not
give off fumes when heated. Somewhat resembles
Tourmaline hut is not quite so hard. Tin ore occurs
in veins in granite, gneiss, and mica slate. No veins,
I believe, have yet been discovered in Victoria, but
stream tin (rolled fragments of tin stone) occurs in the
Ovens district, and in the beds of the streams on
other gold-fields.
Tourmaline.? Usually in prisms with six, nine
or twelve sides, commonly long and streaked verti-
cally. Colourless, grey, yellow, green, blue, red,
brown, black, and blue black. The same specimen
sometimes shows different colours in different parts.
Sometimes red within and green externally. Harder
than quartz. Lustre vitreous, inclining to resinous.
Streak uncoloured. Brittle. Transparent, trans-
lucent, and almost opaque. Boiled fragments


resemble tin ore. Fine crystals of schorl (Black
Tourmaline) are found in the granite at Wilson?s
Piomontory, and in the granite of the Beech worth
district. I have a crystal of brown Tourmaline
from the River Nammoi in New South Wales, and a
green crystal from the bed of the Yarra.
Wltherite.? Carbonate of Baryta. ?Often mas-
sive, having a greyish or yellowish white colour, with
a slightly resinous lustre and translucent. Some-
times greenish or reddish. Effervesces in nitric
acid, and in dilute hydrochloric acid. Scratches a
copper coin and is easily scratched by it. Brittle.
Feels very heavy.
Ziaicitc.? Red Zinc Ore.?Red Oxtde of Zinc.
In grains, and in foliated masses. Can be sejiarated
into laminae like mica, but the leaves are brittle.
Scarcely hard enough to scratch glass, Coloui
dark or bright red, inclining to yellow, and colourless
Streak orange yellow. Brilliant lustre. Dissolve
in nitric acid without effervescence. When exposei
to the air becomes dull and is coated with a whit<
crust. Brittle,
FERGUSSON AND MOORE, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.


PRACTICAL ASSAYIMC;
INTENDED FOR THE USE OF
METALLURGISTS, CAPTAINS OP MINES,
assatebs iisr g-einTE^-A-Xj,
Copious Tables, for the purpose of ascertaining Assays of Gold and Silver
the precise amount, in ounces, pennyweights, and grains, of Noble
Metal contained in one ton of ore, from any given quantity.
JOHN MITCHELL, F.C.S.,
2nd edition. Entirely revised, corrected, and enlarged.
WITH THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTY ILLUSTRATIONS.
v riTF _Tn the author?s preface to the second edition he says '" In the pre-
? ration 0 f this edition the author has been greatly influenced by a desire
utility of the former
trace the varied re-actions occurring, either in the crucible < or mrnao ,
of fineness, &c.?
One Volume, B vo, Handsomely Bound in Cloth, 21s.
F. F. BAILLIEEE,
PUBLISHER IN ORDINARY TO THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT,
815 Collins Street East,
MELBOURNE.


GEOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS ON SOUTH
AUSTRALIA,
THE
JULIAN �l. WOODS,
(Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, of the Geological
Society, and the Royal Society of Victoria, dec., dec.)
This -work contains a popular account of the Geological and Mineral Features
of a great portion of the South Coast of Victoria and South Australia, and
is illustrated by many Engravings of newly discovered Fossils, named
and classihed. The work is likewise largely interspersed with Views
from Photographs of the Extinct Volcanoes of Mount Ganibier, the
Caves at Mosquito Plains, &0., &c., besides an interesting account of the
Geology of these remarkable features.
Now Ready, in 3 vols., Bvo., with many Maps and Illus-
trations, a
HISTORY of the DISCOVERY and EXPLORATION
of AUSTRALIA ;
An Account of the Progress of Geographical Discovery in
that Continent, from the earliest period to the present day,
THE
E_ WOODS
Author of ? Geographical Observations in South Australia.?
ORDERS RECEIVED BY
H. T. DWIGHT, BOOKSELLEE,
Near Parliament Houses, Melbourne,
SOLE AGENT FOE THE ABOVE WORKS.
As only a limited number of copies are printed, Subscribers? names should
be sent in as early as possible.
X3C. T_ DWIGHT
baud'BookT^ 011 � f hiS Laig6 Miscellaneous Collection of New and Second-
Catalogues of Classical, Architectural, Medical, Theological, and Miscel-
laueous Works, posted on receipt of a sixpenny stamp b Q Miscel
Books purchased or exchanged. A liberal pi ice given for good works. ?


I 1
3 1508 00247019 8


? ??*$*
