

THE CHURCH OF JESUS
Sermon
(Preached in the Temperance Hall, Melbourne, February 14, 1886)
BY
REV. CHARLES STRONG
(Minister of the Australian Church)
[PUBLISHED BY REQUEST]
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE
1886




* Behold there came with the clouds of heaven one like unto a son of man.”—
The Prophet Daniel.
“For if that which passeth away was with glory, much more that which
remaineth is in glory.”— The Apostle Paul.
“The inquirer, perplexed by the troubles and superstitions around him,
suddenly heard a voice from the sky uttering distinctly these words— 1 Behold
the Son of Man : let the heavens be silent before him ; let the earth hear his
voice.’ Then lifting up his eyes he beheld on the altar, around which the idol-
worshippers were assembled, a figure whose aspect, at once impressive and
sweet, struck him with astonishment and awe .... His dress was homely,
and like that of an artisan .... The people were seized with enthusiasm,
the priests were irritated almost to madness.”— J. J. Rousseau, quoted by
Stanley, Jewish Ch., vol. Hi., pp. 474, 475.
“With carpets of gold the ground they spread
Wherever the Son of Man should tread,
And in palace-chambers lofty and rare
They lodged Him, and served Him with kingly fare.
“ Great organs surged through arches dim
Their jubilant floods in praise of Him,
And in church and palace and judgment-hall,
He saw His image high over all.
“ And in church and palace and judgment-hall
He marked great fissures that rent the wall,
And opened wider, and yet more wide,
As the living foundation heaved and sighed.”— Lowell.
“Whoso fancies that by Church is here meant chapter-houses and cathedrals,
or by preaching and prophesying mere speech and chanting, let him, says the
oracular Professor, read on, light of heart.”— Sartor Res ftus.


THE CHURCH OF JESUS
MARK IX. 8.
“And suddenly looking round about , they saw no one any more,
save Jesus only , with themselves."
The story of the transfiguration, narrated by the
three first evangelists, with slight variations,* has
been looked at from different points of view. By
most it has probably been regarded as a strictly
literal narrative of events —as pure prose matter of
fact. By others it has been regarded as the figura-
tive imagery, the poetical form, in which Christian
thought in the first century expressed itself. In
regard to the story of the temptation in the wilder-
ness, given alike by Matthew and Tuke, with some
variations, we have the same difference of view-
most, perhaps, taking it literally, others looking upon
it as a picture of the inward and spiritual life of Jesus.
So in regard to the story of the transfiguration ;
while most, as we have said, take it literally, others
see in it a picture drawn by Christian imagination
—a parable or allegory embodying a great spiritual
truth. Both views of such narratives, we hold, are
* Matt, xvii., Luke ix.


perfectly compatible with Christian faith ; and we
claim absolute liberty to treat them either as
matters of fact or as poetry. On historical ques-
tions of this kind, the solution of which only those
who know nothing of the subject can deem easy,
there must be the widest freedom, and we must
cease to make questions of historical criticism the
criterion of faith or infidelity.*
Between the two views to which we have referred
there may be, after all, no impassable gulf. Whether
the story of the transfiguration be prose or poetry,
in either case it is the expression of a religious idea,
and it is this idea which is the chief thing. If it
was a matter of literal fact, then it was meant to
express, in an outward and tangible way, to the
disciples a spiritual truth. They saw, as it were,
a drama enacted by real figures before their eyes,
the meaning of which must be sought in the spirit.
They saw the body of Jesus swathed in light, Moses
and Elijah standing by Him. They saw a cloud
and heard a voice, and then looking round found
themselves alone with their familiar Friend and
Master. But the meaning of what they saw
and heard eye could not see nor ear hear. The
religious significance of what was thus outwardly
presented to them could be only spiritually dis-
cerned by the reflective religious mind. If, on the
other hand, the story is a parable—a poem, a picture
* See Keim’s “Jesus of Nazara,” vol. iv., and Pfleiderer’s
Hibbert Lecture; also, “The Protestant Commentary,” trans-
lated from the German.


full of eastern imagery, in which Christian thought
has expressed itself, in which the Christian Idea
has beautifully clothed itself in the mind of the
early Church—it is still the expression, in an out-
ward and tangible form, of a spiritual truth which
must be spiritually discerned. The meaning of
the poem, the parable, the picture, can, like the
meaning of the literal fact, become manifest only
to the reflective and religious mind.
If this be so, people may be allowed to differ as
to whether what is written is to be regarded as
prose or poetry, literal fact, or drama and picture.
The great thing will be to get at the underlying
idea, the spiritual truth which, whether prose or
poetry, the narrative embodies. To grasp this will
be the important matter. In this will lie the
substance of Christian faith. The question of
historical criticism, though important, and one to
be discussed with patience, learning, and reverence,
is thus seen to fall into the background.
While, then, we leave it an open question as to
whether this narrative is to be regarded as pure
prose or pure poetry, not concealing our own leaning
to the latter view, let us endeavour to understand
the meaning of the story as that seems summed up
in the words of the text—“ And suddenly looking
round about, they saw no one any more, save Jesus
only, with themselves.”
Moses, who appears talking with Jesus, represents
the Jewish law, Elijah the Jewish prophets. The
whole of the old religious system, summed up in


the familiar phrase “ the law and the prophets,”
vanishes before the glorified Jesus, who appears
clothed in garments of light, symbol to the Hebrew
of the Divine Presence. Out of the darkness comes
a voice like that from Sinai—“ This is my beloved
Son ; hear Him.” Jesus, their familiar friend, their
master, the Nazarene, whose father and mother
and brothers and sisters they knew, is beheld by
His disciples as a glorified being, the centre of a
new religious world, the revelation of the Highest,
the Son of the Divine. Moses and Elijah melt
away like stars in the crimson dawn, and the disciples
are left alone with Jesus as the Light of the World.
If this is imagery, it is very beautiful imagery;
and no less beautiful is the truth which it shadows
forth. “ I beheld,” says the Apocalyptic writer, “ a
new heaven and a new earth And He
that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all
things new.” And truly, to the first Christians, it
was a new heaven and a new earth. Moses and
Elias —the law and the prophets—faded away ;
Sinai, the peculiar people, the temple, the priests,
the rabbis, the Jerusalem of David and Solomon
and the Restoration, the dreams of national pride
and greatness, all vanished, and a new world rose
up where was neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor
free, and the chief figure in which was not the
blackness and darkness of tempest and a smoking
mount, nor yet a man clothed in rough garments,
dwelling apart in the wilderness, uttering words of
denunciation and wrath, like Elijah or John, but a


lowly man from Galilee, friend of publicans and
sinners, a man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief. No longer a great legislator, no longer a
king seated on the throne of David, no longer a
high-priest clad in gorgeous robes, no longer a
rabbi with his scroll, no longer a temple with a
cloud of sacrificial smoke perpetually rising from
it; but a Son of Man, a teacher of love and good-
ness, a Son of God lifted up upon a cross. To us
all this is an old story. We have looked so long
upon the picture that we forget there ever was
another heaven and another earth. But to the men
and women of the first century it was a revolution,
a revelation, a making of all things new—a mount
of transfiguration. Can we wonder if they cast
their thoughts of Jesus into such a poetic picture ?
Beneath the outward form so familiar to them—
the carpenter of Nazareth —they suddenly beheld a
new revelation of the Highest. The scales fell from
their eyes. “He was transfigured before them.”
The son of Joseph and Mary, the Son of Man, they
discerned to be the Son of God, the revealer of the
deepest thought and meaning of the universe—a
messenger, as it were, out of the heart of things,
out of the bosom of God. Suddenly their whole
outlook was changed. Religion was beheld in a
new focus. A new truth flashed like the lightning
through their soul, and, looking round, they found
Jesus only with themselves. Strange, how people’s
view of life and religion changes. They come to a
turn in the road, they reach a rising ground, they


climb yet another hill, a ray of sunlight falls across
the fields, and the narrow pathway broadens out
into a universe ; the stream becomes an ocean ;
all things are made new; Jesus, the obscure
Galilean, becomes Son of God and Light of the
World, shining with the light of God upon Jew
and Gentile, bond and free, and the past seems
but as the garments of his childhood to the “ new
man ”in Christ. Such, brethren, is the meaning of
this story. Such is the spiritual truth which here—
whether in prose or in poetry —expresses itself. It
is the parable, the allegory, the picture of that new
morning which burst upon the world when, under
the influence especially of the Apostle Paul, the
old forms of Judaism melted away, and Jesus —the
spirit of life and light, of sonship and brotherhood,
the reconciler of man with God, the abolisher of
distinctions between Jew and Gentile, the author
of a universal religion—took the place of law and
prophets, and, in the language of that age, “ sat
down upon the right hand of God.” With fear and
trembling, with many doubts and much hesitation,
did the disciples part with the old. Paul had a
fierce struggle ere he could dissociate Christianity
from Judaism. He had to bear suspicion and
obloquy. Even Peter, we read, opposed him so
that at Antioch Paul “ withstood him to the face.”
The epistles to the Corinthians and Galatians bear
the marks of the struggle. They show us the
disciples afraid as they enter the cloud, anxious to
make three tabernacles —one for Moses, one for


Elijah, and one for Jesus —anxious, that is, to be
Jews, sticklers for the old law, and at the same
time believers in Jesus. And they feared, we read,
as they entered the cloud. And Peter said, “ Rabbi,
it is good for us to be here ; and let us make three
tabernacles —one for Moses, one for Elijah, and one
for Thee.” But the fear passed, and the cloud, and
the Church was left looking up to Jesus as the Son
of God, its sole Plead and Guide.
The story of the transfiguration, however,
presents us rather with an ideal picture of the
Church than with the reality. For, though Jesus
came to be exalted to the throne of God, and
Moses and Elias passed into the background,
under the name of Jesus the spirit of Moses and
Elias—the old spirit of religious childhood which
Paul speaks of in the Epistle to the Galatians,
the spirit of the servant rather than of the son,
the spirit of the Old Testament—still lived on.
Jesus became to many but a second lawgiver, a
vengeful God, a fearful Judge, a King coming in
the glory of David or Solomon, an earthly Prince,
with seats on the right hand and the left. You
have seen a river merging into the ocean. Far
out amid the waves you can mark its track, where
the blue sea is streaked with its yellow flood. The
spirit of the old religious economy was a river.
The spirit of the new was the ocean. And long
was it before the thoughts and figures and forms
of the earlier age were lost in the wide world of
the later.


And this brings us to the important point —the
meaning of this allegory, this picture, this poem,
for the men and women of to-day. I have tried to
show you its meaning in the light of the history of
the first century, when Jewish Christianity was still
openly struggling with the wider and more spiritual
teaching of such as the Apostle Paul. Let me now
endeavour, in the second place, to bring it before
you in the light of the present.
“ And suddenly looking round about, they saw
no one any more, save Jesus only.”
The words suggest to us the Ideal Evangelical
Church of the present. It is the Church of Jesus.
By this I do not mean that Jesus is made an idol
of; for, as I pointed out to you last Sunday, even
the most sacred names—the very name of God
Himself—may be turned into an idol. I do not
mean that the true church will despise and reject
everything which is not to be found in the New
Testament, or, as some seem to say, that it will lay
such teachers as the Apostle Paul or the author of
the Fourth Gospel entirely on the shelf and confine
itself purely and simply to the teaching of the first
three gospels. No, a Church of Jesus is a Church
of God, whose motto is—“ All things are ours.
We are debtors both to the Greeks and to the
Barbarians, to the Roman and to the Jew.” An
Ideal Church will welcome all truth as a ray of light
from the Father of Lights. It will seek to “gather
together in one ” all things in heaven and earth,
to behold God as “all in all.” It will not look


with suspicion or jealousy upon any “word of God
which is to be found in Greek or Roman, in Persian
or Mohammedan, in Buddhist or Vedic Scriptures.
It will not reject any facts of scientific induction
simply because it stands written otherwise in an
ancient legend. It will not disdain poetry, art, or
divine philosophy. It will not tie itself down to any
little form of the first century or of the nineteenth.
But an Ideal Evangelical Church will be a Church
of Jesus in the sense that it will build itself up on
spiritual lines , and its spirit will be that which we
think of as peculiarly the Spirit of fesus.
The Ideal Church is spiritual. It aims not at
observance of the outward, the formal, the legal,
but at the cultivation of a spirit, the building of a
temple not made with hands, whose stones are
human souls —the formation of a kingdom which
cometh not with observation, but is like leaven or a
grain of mustard seed. Ihe Ideal Church aims at
saving souls from the hells of animalism, selfish-
ness, and legalism. It says God is spirit, and man
is spirit. God’s worship, God’s law, God’s kingdom,
God’s temple, God’s word are spirit and life. It
says, “ Mercy is better than sacrifice; love is the
fulfilling of the law. Neither in this mountain nor
yet in Jerusalem shall ye worship the Father.
Forgive and ye shall be forgiven. Judge not and
ye shall not be judged. Enter into thy inner
chamber and shut the door and pray. Let not
your left hand know what your right hand doeth.
Blessed are the poor in spirit; blessed are the


pure in heart. Become as little children. Let the
great man be the slave. The Sabbath was made
for man. To eat with unwashen hands defileth
not a man.” Yes, brethren, that is what the true
Church, the Evangelical Church, the Church of
Jesus, has always aimed at: the reformation of
individuals and of society from within—a spiritual
regeneration.
The old law, as represented by Moses and Elias,
did not make this its central point—at least, accord-
ing to the popular interpretation of it. It sought
after righteousness, but righteousness which was by
observance of rites, washing of hands, keeping of
feasts and days, tithing of fruits, offering of sacrifice,
the bearing of a heavy yoke of ordinances—a
righteousness which was “by the law.” Jesus
insists on righteousness. “ Except your righteous-
ness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that hunger
and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled. Seek ye first your Father’s kingdom and
His righteousness.” The Church of Jesus is founded
on righteousness, the righteousness of the Father,
of whom Jesus says, “Ye shall be perfect as your
Father is perfect.” Many people seem to think
that the Church is a sort of place of refuge from
righteousness. They renounce their own righteous-
ness, but they forget that this is only a preliminary
step to being filled with the righteous spirit of
God, and putting on the new man which after God,


we read, is “ created in righteousness and holiness
of truth.” It seems strange how people can read
their New Testaments and not see this, that the
rock on which Jesus bids men build is righteousness.
“Whosoever heareth these sayings of mine and
doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man
which built his house upon a rock.” Can anything
be plainer than that ? And does not Paul say
that the Christian is one who has become a servant
to righteousness, and who has died with Jesus to
the old so that he might serve in newness of the
spirit? Enthusiasm for righteousness—a righteous-
ness after the spirit, not after what Paul calls the
flesh—was the secret of Jesus’ life. He was Son of
God, and He called men and women to be sons
and daughters of God —to live as children of a
Spirit who was their Father, not as slaves of a law
or a letter. He was Son of Man, and He called
His brethren to breathe the spirit of humanity, of
sons and daughters of men. There was the
fountain head of Jesus’ righteousness. He looked
up and recognized human morality as having a
divine root and sanction. He looked up and
recognized it to be the offspring, not of convention
or external law or tradition, but of a spirit in man
akin to the Spirit of God. He looked beyond
himself, and recognized His oneness with mankind.
He was not an unit, but a member of the human
race. The true morality, the true worship, the
true sacrifice, were in acting justly, righteously,
generously, lovingly towards man, even towards


the bad man. Righteousness with Him was fulfilled
in forgiveness till seventy times, in doing good
even to an enemy, in caring for one’s parents rather
than in saying “ Corban,” in being merciful, in
looking after a wounded man, in restoring the
fallen, in seeking to make earth a kingdom of God,
in surrender to the Will of the Highest, in giving
His life for the sake of a great cause. A new
righteousness this, truly—the righteousness not of
the law, but of the spirit—the spirit of a Son of
God, the spirit of a Son of Man.
And it is to this Jesus that, to use the language
of Paul, the Church is married. It is represented
as having died with Him to Moses and Elias, to the
law, and as having risen with Him to a glorified
life of spiritual righteousness. Ye died, we read,
and your life is hid with Messiah in God. And
you know how in the Epistles and in the Gospel
of John we read of Jesus dwelling in His disciples
and they in Him, and the Church is called His
body. Whatever other ideas are represented by
such language, this at least is meant to be
expressed—that the righteousness of Jesus dwells
in men’s hearts as a spirit, a seed, a germ, a well of
water, and that the aim of the Church must be to
be “ righteous even as He is righteous.” The Ideal
Church is filled with the righteousness, not of a
slave, but of a Son of God—a righteousness free,
noble, generous. The Ideal Church is filled with
the righteousness, not of an ascetic or legalist, but
of a Son of Man—a rich humanity, a wide and


unselfish spirit, recognizing in everyone who needs
sympathy or aid a brother, a sister, a neighbour.
But, alas ! just as in the Church of the first
century, so in that of the nineteenth, Christians
would fain, like Peter on the mount, retain Moses
and Elias, and make three tabernacles—one for
Jesus, and one for the lawgiver, and one for the
fierce old prophet. The old spirit of external law,
tradition, conventionalism crops up —the old spirit
of the rabbi, of an eye for an eye and a tooth for
a tooth—the old spirit which cries “ This people
that knoweth not the law is cursed,” “ Thou never
gavest me a kid,” “We have Abraham to our
father,” “ Crucify him ! crucify him !” In Christian
theology and ecclesiastical government, while the
name of Jesus is on men’s lips, and hymns are
sung to it as the only name, Moses and Elias have
their tabernacles close by, and Jesus is often but a
lawgiver or fierce prophet, or first-century rabbi in
disguise. In Christian practice, while the law of
Jesus is said to be the law, we manage somehow to
evade it in the interests of class or Church selfish-
ness, party pride and prejudice, national greed and
vanity, and to make those exceptions in our own
favour which do not prove the rule. A man sings
a hymn about Jesus, and tells you that he is a
Christian because he believes that Jesus died for him,
and that for this reason God has given him immunity
from all his sins, and will take him to heaven when
he dies. But he is self-righteous ; he worships
the letter of a book; he is full of intolerance


towards those who follow not with him; he will be
vindictive towards an enemy, he will be purse-
proud or caste-proud ; he will do anything to make
money—turn corners on people, and be what is
called keen and sharp; if he does not literally, as
Jesus said, devour widows’ houses, he will live from
year’s end to year’s end without doing a hand’s-
turn for the promotion of Jesus’ ruling idea, the
kingdom of the Father. No free, large spirit, as of
a son ; no free, large spirit of humanity; nought
but a poor little shrivelled soul that wants to get
itself saved from burning with devils in a lake of
fire and brimstone! This surely is a perfect
travesty of evangelical teaching. This is not Jesus
the Spirit of God, Jesus the Spirit of Humanity,
dwelling in us and we in Him ! This surely cannot
be what Paul means when he speaks of dying to
sin with Jesus and rising with Him to newness of
life ! So, brethren, Society thinks that it can keep
the old-world spirit and yet be Christian. Men
think they can go on preying on one another
like wild beasts, governed simply by supply and
demand, unbridled competition and the weakest
to the wall—the capitalist squeezing what he can
out of the labourer ; the labourer, selfish, surly,
unscrupulous, doing as little as he can and as
shoddily as he can for the capitalist—they think
they can go on thus selfishly and indifferently as
people did till the day when Noah entered into the
ark and the heavens were opened and the flood
came—poverty, crime, suffering, doing their work


out of sight—and yet be Christian, members of
the Church of Jesus, which knows no one but
Jesus only! Surely there is something wrong
here. One feels tempted to ask, has the world
over seen a Church of Jesus on any but the most
limited scale ? Against the Church, as it is, the
gates not only of hades but of hell do certainly
prevail. But the darkest cloud, they say, has a
silver lining. And, already, do there not seem to
be streaks of a better day ? The political and
social disturbances of the present have round
them a rainbow. “ God’s bow is on the cloud.”
And do we not see the Church shaking off its old-
world garments, theoretical and practical, worn
to rags ? Are not Moses and Elias fading away
into cloudland, and are not Christians learning
that Augustine, and Luther, and Calvin, and
orthodoxy, and heterodoxy, and priests, and
rabbis, and councils must depart, and a new
theology, a new Church, a new Society be born
—born of the spirit of Jesus ? It is not mere
fancy which sees in this beautiful story an
allegory of the church of the future, and of our
own times. “ They feared as they entered the
cloud . . . And suddenly looking round about,
they saw no one any more, save Jesus only, with
themselves.”
George Robertson and Company, Printers, Melbourne.






