

r\e.<v
THE
CHINESE QUESTION
I 3ST AITSTBALIA,
1878-79.
EDITED BY
L. KONG MENG.
CHECK HONG CHEONG.
LOUIS AH MOUY.
llUlhoume: Jf. JU
Publisher in Ordinary to the Victorian Government
' ' * 1879.


MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAY, AND CO.,
9 MACKILLOP STREET.


THE CHINESE QUESTION
IN AUSTRALIA.
In the present grave emergency, we appeal, as natives
of China and as citizens of Victoria, to the reason,
the justice, the right feeling, and the calm good sense
of the British population of Australia, not to sanction
an outrage upon the law of nations and not to violate
the treaty engagements entered into between the
Government of Great Britain and the Emperor of
China.
Let us remind the people of these colonies of the
circumstances under which emigration from China
commenced. Up to the year 1842, we lived in
contented isolation from the Test of the world. The
nations of Western Europe—England more particu-
larly-said, “ This shall not be.” By force of arms,
a treaty was extorted from the Government at Pekin,
in virtue of which a certain number of Chinese ports
were thrown open to British commerce. In 1844,
the United States demanded and obtained similar
privileges. In 1860, the English and French
Governments, acting in concert, overcame the


resistance which his Imperial Majesty and the chief
Mandarins of the country offered to an extension of
these extorted rights, and they dictated a second
treaty at Pekin, which guaranteed to the people of
both nations the utmost freedom of ingress and
egress, and which reciprocally bestowed upon the
Chinese a similar freedom as regards the territories
of France and of the British empire. In 1868, the
Government of the United States concluded with
the Emperor of China what is known as the
“ Burlingame Treaty,” which assured to Americans
the same access to our country which was already
enjoyed by the English and French, and which—as
was only just and equitable—opened the United
States to Chinese immigration. And we beg it to
he particularly remembered that this outflow of our
population was never sought for by us. Western
powers, armed with the formidable artillery with
which modern science has supplied them, battered
down the portals of the empire ; and, having done
so, insisted upon keeping them open. They said, in
effect, “We must come in,, and you shall come out.
We will not suffer you to shut yourselves up from
the rest of the world. We want to inoculate you
with our enterprise, and to bring you inside the
great family of nations. We wish you to read our
Scriptures, which say, ‘ God hath made of one blood
all nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the
earth.’ We are all his children. Let us draw
together the ties of commercial amity, and live and
do business together like friends and brethren.
Throw down the harriers which have separated you
for so many ages from the Aryan race ; adopt our
habits and profit by our example.”


Well, we did so. We learned that there were
vast portions of the earth’s surface which were
almost destitute of inhabitants, and which were
capable of supporting the redundant millions of
Europe and Asia. Your missionaries came among
us, and read from your Scriptures beautiful precepts
like those of Confucius and Mencius. They spoke
to us of the brotherhood of man, and told us
that the foundation principle of the social religion
of Englishmen was this — u Ye shall do unto others
as ye would they should do unto you.” And this,
also, is the sentiment of our own Great Teacher.
Therefore, when we heard, about five and twenty
years ago, that there was a great continent nearly
half as large again as China, and containing only a
few hundreds of thousands of civilized people
thinly scattered around the coast ; that it was
rich in the precious metals and very fertile; and
that it was only a few weeks’ sail from our own
country, numbers of Chinese immigrants set out for
this land of promise. They came to work, not to
beg or to steal. They relied upon the friendliness
and the protection of the Government of the British
empire, because the convention signed at Tien-Tsin
by their Excellencies Lord Elgin and Prince Kung
solemnly guaranteed our countrymen free admission
to all parts of the territory of Her Britannic Majesty.
But the new comers relied also on the Christian
principles of European settlers in Australia. We
felt sure that such an enlightened people as the
English, after having made war upon us for the
purpose of opening China to Western enterprise,
and of spreading European civilization in Eastern
Asia, would eagerly welcome the arrival ol some


thousands of frugal, laborious, patient, docile, and
persevering immigrants from the oldest empire in the
world. Judge, then, of our painful dissappointment,
our astonishment, and our sorrow at what followed.
An encampment of Chinese was formed on a newly-
found goldfield in the Ovens district, known as the
Buckland. They were laborious and inoffensive
men, who wished to live at peace with their
British neighbours, and to pursue their avocation as
gold miners quietly and orderly, like good citizens
and law-fearing colonists. But what followed ?
They were set upon by the other diggers, chased
from their claims, cruelly beaten and maltreated,
their tents plundered and then burnt down. We
do not think this was doing as you would be
done by.
If such a thing had happened in China—if a
number of English miners had been subjected to such
a cruel and wanton outrage, every newspaper in Great
Britain would have been aflame with indignation;
your envoy at Pekin would have demanded prompt
reparation and adequate compensation ; and if this
had not been acceded to, some men-of-war would
have been ordered up to the mouth of the Pei-Ho.
Our Emperor and his Mandarins would have been
reminded of the solemn obligation they were under
to be faithful to their treaty engagements, and they
would probably have been lectured on the barbarous
and scandalous conduct of those who had insulted
despoiled, and maltreated peaceful and industrious
foreigners. Yet no atonement was offered to the
poor Chinese diggers who were violently expelled
from the Buckland, who were plundered by the
stronger and more numerous race ; and who, in


some instances, lost their lives owing to the injuries
they received. We cannot help saying that proceed-
ings of this kind are very disagreeable evidences
of that brotherly love which is inculcated by your
teachers of religion and your moralists, and which is
also taught by our own Confucius.
Then, again, what are we to think of the strong
measures which are being resorted to for the pur-
pose of excluding Chinese sailors and stokers from
steamers trading to and between Australian ports ?
What would be said of our own countrymen at home
were they to have recourse to such acts of violence
and injustice ? A great part of the coasting trade
of China is transacted by English vessels. The
freights they earn are obtained from Chinese
shippers ; but none of these have ever proposed that
those vessels should be manned by Chinese sailors.
Might they not do so as reasonably, or as unreason-
ably, as Australians combine to prevent the latter
from being employed in the intercolonial trade ?
Surely, justice is justice, right is right, and fair play
is fair play, all the world over. The laws of
morality do not vary with the variation in the
degrees of latitude ; and if it be lawful for the
Englishman, with his skill, his experience, and his
scientific inventions, to compete with our country-
men in China, it must he equally lawful for the
Chinaman, with his inferior knowledge of western
arts and inventions, to compete with Englishmen in
A.ustr9jli3i
It cannot be denied that our countrymen have
been good colonists. Had it not been for them, the
cultivation of vegetables, so indispensable to the
maintenance of health in a hot climate like this,


would scarcely have been attempted in the neighbour-
hood of some of the goldfields ; and the mortality of
children would have been very much greater than it
really has been. Lease or sell half an acre of
apparently worthless land to a small party of China-
men, and, if there is access to any kind of water or
manure, they will transform it, by their system of
intensive husbandry, into a most prolific garden,
and will make it yield such a rapid succession of
crops as will excite the astonishment and admiration
of European market-gardeners. As fishermen and
itinerant fishmongers, our countrymen have been
equally serviceable to the community ; and as
hawkers of all kinds of useful wares, they are inde-
fatigable, cheerful, obliging, and patient. Unhap-
pily for themselves, this class of dealers is now sub-
jected to severe rebuffs, to angry vituperation, and
to threats of personal violence from many members
of the working-classes, who forbid their wives to
deal with them, and endeavour to wreak upon the
inoffensive Chinese hawkers the animosity which is
entertained against the A.S.N. Company. Surely
such conduct as this is unworthy of a great, free
people, and especially of one which owes so much of
the prosperity of its mother country to the fact that
it has been, for many centuries past, the refuge and
the asylum of foreigners flying from religious
persecution and political oppression in their own
countries. In this way, its woollen, crape, and silk
manufactures were established by fugitives from the
Netherlands and from France ; and thus its hospi-
tality to strangers has been twice blessed. It
blessed those whom it welcomed to its shores, and
it blessed its own industries by the arts and pro-


cesses which these aliens communicated to their hosts*
And if an island so small as the United Kingdom
made no demur about opening its arms to all comers,
and was not afraid of the competition of these exiles,,
hut greeted them as fellow-workers, surely there is
room enough in this large continent —many portions
of which can never he cultivated by European labour
for some, at least, of the redundant population of
China. That country is estimated to contain not
much less than 2,000,000 square miles of territory,
and 400,000,000 of people. Australia comprises
an area of close upon 3,000,000 square miles,
and it contains no more than 2,100,000 white
people, and a few thousand blacks. In our own
land, millions of men, women, and children —yes,
millions think of the horror and pity of it !
have died of starvation during the last year ;;
and, in the face of these facts, would you seek
to debar us from participating in the abundance
with which a bountiful Providence—or, as our
Master Confucius says, the most great and sove-
reign God —rewards the industrious and the pru-
dent in this country ? Did man create it, or did
God ? And if it be His work, then can it be dis-
puted that it is open to all who cannot obtain the
means of subsistence in their own country, and who
will faithfully conform to the laws of this ? You do
not endeavour to exclude Germans, or Frenchmen,
or Italians, or Danes, or Swedes. There are men of
all these nationalities here. Then why are Chinese
colonists to be placed under a ban ? Are we an
inferior race ? No one can say so who knows any-
thing of our history, our language, our literature,
our government, or our public and private life.


China had reached a very high stage of civilization
when Britain was peopled by naked savages. The
art of printing, the use of gunpowder, and the
mariner s compass were known to us centuries before
they were re-invented by Europeans. We had
instituted so excellent a system of government that
it continued for 2,000 years without a revolution,
and without occasioning the discontent which begets
rebellion. Our administrative machinery is ad-
mitted to be the most complete and efficient ever
organized, and all appointments to the public
service are made after competitive examinations; so
that merit and ability are the indispensable qualifica-
tions for office. In fact, if you will read what one
of your own countrymen (Mr. Meadows) has said
about the causes of the wonderful duration of the
Chinese empire, the historical records of which go
back 4,00 U years, you will find them to be these
1. The universal acceptance of the principle that
the nation must be governed by moral agency, in
preference to physical force. 2. The no less
universal conviction that the services of the wisest
and ablest men in the nation are essential to its good
government. And, 3. The system of civil service
examinations by which this result is arrived at.
Can as much be said on behalf of the governments
of communities which do not hesitate to look down
on us as pagans and barbarians ?
In the next place, ours is a well-educated people.
Indeed, it is but seldom that you could discover
a Chinaman incapable of reading, writing, and
ciphering. Can you assert the same of all English
and Irish men ? Let it be remembered, also, that
our people are not educated at the expense of the


'State, or of the municipality. Parents pay for the
instruction of their own children ; and the poorest
person in the land would he ashamed to bring up
'his offspring in ignorance. All education is based
on religion and morality. Pupils have to commit to
/memory the sublime precepts of Confucius and
Mencius ; and the duty of carrying them into
.practice is earnestly impressed upon their minds.
Some of these precepts are subjoined
“ What you do not like, when done to yourself,
do not do to others.”
“Benevolence is the characteristic element of
humanity, and the great exercise of it is in loving
relatives. Righteousness is the accordance of
actions with what is right, and the great exercise of
it is in honouring the worthy.”
“ Happy union with wife and children is like the
music of lutes and harps. When there is concord
among brethren, the harmony is delightful and
enduring.”
“ Respect the old and be kind to the young. Be
not forgetful of strangers and travellers.”
“ Honour the worthy, maintain the talented, and
•give distinction to the virtuous.”
“If men of virtue and ability be not confided in,
a State will become empty and void.”
“ Benevolence is the tranquil habitation of man,
and righteousness is her straight path.”
“ The root of the empire is in the State; the root
•of the State is in the family; the root of the family
is in the person of its head. There are many
sources, but the source of parents is the root of all
others. There are many charges, but the charge of
one’s self is the root of all others.”


“If a man himself do not walk in the right
path, it will not he walked in by his wife and
children.”
These are only a few out of thousands of wise
maxims and pious precepts which are daily taught in
every school throughout the length and breadth of
China. Not only so, but the loftiest and wisest.
principles of government, of social polity, of political
economy, of metaphysics and morals, of domestic
regulation and personal conduct, are also inculcated
at that period of life when the heart and the intellect
are the most susceptible of such beneficial lessons.
The young are instructed that “all things are
according to heaven ; ” that God “ confers happiness
on the good, and misery on the evil ; ” that “ the
doctrines of heaven are opposed to selfishness ; ”
that “ of ten thousand evils, lewdness is the chief ; ”
and that “of one hundred virtues, filial piety is the
first.”
And yet the people who are thus educated are
stigmatized as “ignorant pagans” and “filthy
barbarians” by persons who have never been in
China : who know nothing of its moral, intellectual,
and social life, and who form hasty judgments and
entertain violent prejudices against its people from
a very slight acquaintance with immigrants.
Although we deplore as much as any fellow-
colonist that immorality does exist amongst Chinese
residents, at the same time we would unhesitatingly
assert that it does not exist to a greater extent than
amongst the European population. In fact, Mr,.
Hayter, the Government statist, assures us that, on
an average, criminality is less prevalent amongst the-
Chinese than amongst the English population here.


Nothing, we submit, can be more unreasonable,
mnjust, or undeserved, than the clamour which has
been raised against the Chinese by a portion of the
people of this colony ; for we refuse to believe that
that clamour expresses the opinions and feelings of
the great hulk of the community. Let us put a
parallel case. Let us suppose that, thirty or forty
years ago. when the English nation forced us, at the
point of the bayonet and the mouth of the cannon, to
open our ports and harbours to British shipping, and
our country to British travellers and settlers, that
some of our Mandarins, who had been in the habit
of reading the English newspapers forwarded to the
missionaries in China, had concluded that Great
Britain must be a nation of devils, because the
. atrocities recorded in those publications, day after
day, were so horrible and revolting; and that,
therefore, the British must be kept out of our country
at all hazards—what would have been said ? Would
not those very newspapers have been loud and
vehement in their condemnation of the obvious
injustice of identifying the character and conduct of
a whole people with those of its criminal classes?
Yet this is what is being done in Australia in regard
to ourselves.
Now, let us see what the English newspapers of
1841-2 told us about the state of society there
“ A thousand operatives were employed on the roads
in one place, and 5,000, 10,000, 14,000 seemed to be
merely waiting for alms or death in others. As
usual, crime began to abound. The murders came
in batches: horrible poisonings, combination murders,
murders for purposes of theft —from the nobleman in
bis bed, to the sawyer in his pit—abound in the


chronicles of the period. New crimes arose, not
bearing an immediate relation to the distress, as
vitiated atmosphere produces not only frightful
epidemic, but new or aggravated disease of other
kinds. Ships were cast away, one after another,
from wretches boring holes to sink them in.
order to obtain the insurance. . . . The
abjuration of intoxicating drinks was little more
than a set-off against the increased consumption of
opium. ... In the large manufacturing towns, the
druggists now employed their spare minutes through-
out the week in making up penny or twopenny
packets of opium for sale on Saturdays, when,
hundreds of poor creatures would come to receive
from the long rows on the counter the packets
which were to give them stupor until the miserable
Monday morning.”* At this time, thousands of
infants were being drugged to death in the manu-
facturing districts by women in whose charge they
had been placed by their mothers, who were at work-
in factories. At Ashton, the weekly sale of opiates
for this purpose, by fifteen dealers, averaged six
gallons, two quarts, and one and a half pints. In,
Preston, twenty-one chemists sold, in a single week,
£66 worth of Godfrey’s cordial, child’s preserver,,
syrup of poppies, and similar compounds. Children
were insured in burial clubs, with a view to their
being slowly poisoned, so that their parents might
draw the money ; until it became a common thing
for women among the lower classes to say, when
speaking of a neighbour’s child, “ Oh ! you may be
sure that child won’t live ; it belongs to a death
* Miss Martineau’s “ History of the Thirty Years’ Peace.” Book v..


club.” Incendiarism raged in Suffolk, Essex, and
Cambridgeshire ; and in the first-named county there
were eighty-nine farm houses and stack-yards given
to the flames in two years. Wages there were as low
as six shillings per week. Only a few years before,
and until the practice was put a stop to by special
legislation, boys and girls, from eight to ten years ot
age, were working in coal mines for ten hours a
day. They were naked down to their waists ; and
around these was fixed an iron chain, with which
they drew truck loads of coal along the dark,
unwholesome drives and galleries. Children equal y
young, half-starved, and untaught, were slaving tor
as many hours every day in factories and work-
shops ; and in Lincolnshire, and other counties,
they were formed into agricultural gangs, sent out
to work before daylight in bleak winter mornings,
and collected together at night into a barn, under
the direction of a white slave-driver.
The English papers of that period would also
have informed our countrymen that the people ot
Great Britain were in the habit of knocking own
their wives, and of jumping upon them with heavy
iron-shod boots upon their feet; that women were
sometimes sold in the open market place for a tew
shillings and a pint of beer; that every article ot
food and wearing apparel capable of sophistication
was adulterated to such an extent, that very strin-
gent laws had to be passed for the protection ot the
public health ; that the streets of every large town
and city in the United Kingdom swarmed with
women who subsisted on the wages of infamy ;
that the population of Great Britain was the most
drunken population in the world ; that the proceed-


ings of its divorce courts denoted the prevalence of
great depravity among all classes of society, not
excepting the highest ; and that the ruffianism of
the roughs in the manufacturing and colliery dis-
tricts was something appalling.
Now, if the Emperor of China and his chief
■councillors had concluded from these undeniable
facts that the English were a nation of murderers,
opium-eaters, slave-drivers, wife-heaters, swindlers,
prostitutes, and scoundrels, how cruelly thev would
have wronged a whole people. Yet this is precisely
what is done with respect to our own countrymen,
.concerning whom the utmost ignorance prevails.
Bead what one of your own historians—Miss
Martineau—says concerning it, in 1841 :—“ The
general notion of China was, and is, of a country
■dreadfully over-peopled, so that multitudes are com-
pelled to live in boats floating about to pick up
dead dogs for food ; that they are tyrannized over
by a Tartar government, which they would fain be
rid of, and by an aristocracy which will permit no
middle class ; that they call foreigners barbarians,
and designate Europeans by foul epithets instead of
their proper names ; and that their sole endeavour
in regard to foreigners is to insult and mock them.
Merchants of any nation, who have lived long
enough in the neighbourhood of the Chinese to be
qualified to speak of them, give a very different
account from this. They declare that the govern-
ment is, on the whole, favourable to the industry and
comfort of the people ; that the people are easy and
contented ; that the rights of property are respected,
and that there is a large and wealthy middle class ;
that literature is the highest pursuit; that the


Chinese possess a greater body of literature than
Europe can show ; and that nothing is known
Among us of its quality, as it remains wholly unex-
plored ; and that the notion of insulting epithets
being applied to our agents, in lieu of their own
names, is an utter delusion, arising from ignorance
of the fact that the Chinese, having no alphabet, are
obliged to express new names by the words in their
language which approach nearest in sound.’
The ignorance thus complained of continues to
this very hour ; and the vilest epithets are be-
stowed upon our countrymen by speakers on plat-
forms, who know nothing whatever about China
or its people ; and who condemn a whole nation
on account of the vices and crimes of a small
minority. Can any language be too strong to
employ in protesting against such an outrageous
act of injustice ? Man for man, we unhesitatingly
assert that our countrymen will compare favourab y
with any European people in morals and manners ;
in proof whereof refer to Hayter’s statistics on crime,
,&c. ; and that they are superior to the average
Englishman in filial affection, in respect for the
aged, in honesty, in cheerfulness, and in patient,
plodding industry. They are free from moroseness
and discontent, very good tempered, grateful for
kindness, faithful to their employers, quick to
learn, clever to imitate, peaceful, orderly, sober,
and methodical.
Sir Walter Medhurst, who is well acquainted both
with our country and with its language, denounces
as false and unmanly the language made use of by
those who, in order to fan the evil passions of the
..crowd, brand us with such epithets as “dishonest.


treacherous, cowardly, cruel, and degraded.” He
says : “As a matter of fact, and making due allow-
ance for the proportion of evil which must exist in.
every community, the Chinese regard the writings-
of their sages with all the reverence which we give to
bibles and liturgies in the West, and, in the main,,
carry out the excellent principles therein laid down
most strictly in their social economy and personal
relations. How, otherwise, could vast communities
exist, as they do in China’s thousand cities—person
and property secure, peace, happiness, and plenty uni-
versal, education encouraged, local and general trade
flourishing, business contracts sacred, poverty excep-
tional, and vice only to be found, if sought out, in.
its own special haunts ?” Then, after enumerating,
the “blots and blisters” upon society in China, he
goes on to remark that there, as elsewhere, these
are exceptions, not the rule,” and that they are apt.
to attract “ the observation of the superficial traveller
or bookmaker, while he shuts his eyes to, or pur-
posely ignores, the background of the picture, where-
may he seen the Chinaman as he is at home—an,
intelligent, patient, hard-working, frugal, temperate,,
domestic, peace-loving, and law-abiding creature.”*
Are not these the very qualities which are most desir-
able in a colonist, and in the citizen of a free country ?,'
And they are those by which, according to the
testimony of a distinguished Englishman, an Oriental
scholar, and a gentleman conversant with the subject
under discussion, our countrymen are distinguished.
He, at least, is an impartial witness to call into court,
and the above is his voluntary testimony. No>
* Nineteenth Century, for September, 1878.


people could desire a better character than Sir
Walter Medhurst gives to the Chinese.
It is objected that they do not bring their wives-
and sisters with them. Can it he wondered at ?
We have shown what scandalous treatment they
received on the Buckland ; and is it to be imagined
that, when the news of this atrocity went home to
China, any woman of average self-respect would
expose herself to be chased through the country by
a band of infuriated ruffians, and to see her children,
burnt to death, perhaps, in her husband’s flaming
tent ? Treated as pariahs and outcasts by the
people of this great, “free” country, the Chinamen-
in Victoria have hitherto had but scanty encourage-
ment to invite their wives to accompany or to follow
them. Subject to be insulted and assaulted by the
“larrikins” of Australia, what Chinaman could be
so destitute of consideration for the weaker sex as to
render them liable to the same ignominious and
' contumelious treatment ? Do unto us as you would
we should do unto you under precisely similar
circumstances. W e only require, as Sir Water
Medhurst says, to be “properly understood and.
discreetly dealt with,” in order to become permanent
settlers and valuable allies in the work of developing
the resources of this vast territory. And as to the
dirt and squalor which are to be found in the Chinese
quarters of Melbourne and other large towns, we
may venture to quote the words of the writer pre-
viously referred to, and to assert that the remedy
for such evils is a mere question of time and effort.
“ It is not so very long,” he observes, “ since Western
people were content to exist amidst surroundings
fully as wretched, filthy, and obnoxious as anything,


mow observable in Chinese cities ; and the reforma-
tion which has since proved possible in their case,
gives reason to hope that the Chinese are not
incapable of a similar regeneration, could similar
inducements and opportunities be afforded them.
A proof of what is practicable in this respect may,
at this moment, be quoted in the Chinese quarter of
the foreign settlement of Shanghai, where the
arrangements for the public welfare, supported and
aided to a great extent by the Chinese population,
would do credit to many a European town.”
There remains to notice one very influential cause
of prejudice against our countrymen in Australia.
It seems to be imagined that they will bring down
the rate of wages in these colonies, to the detri-
ment of European workmen. Is this a real or a
sentimental grievance ? Let us look at it all
round.
That the earnings of the Chinese labourer in
his native land are quite inconsiderable by com-
parison with the rate of wages current in Australia,
is undeniable. But human nature is human nature
all the world over; and the Chinaman is just as
fond of money, and just as eager to earn as much
as he can, as the most grasping of his competitors.
There are Irishmen in this colony who have known
what it was to work for four or five shillings a week
in the island they came from; but when they
•emigrate to Victoria, they are not content to put up
with lesser wages than they find other farm hands
earning.
And so it will be, after a very little time,
with our own countrymen here. Living among
people who have invented thousands of artificial


wants, and thousands of means of gratifying them r
the expenditure of the Asiatic will soon rise to the
European level, because his habits and his mode of
living will approximate to those of his neighbours
and, as it is, it cannot have escaped the observation
of persons who have been brought much into contact
with the Chinese in Victoria, that the diet of such
of them as are tolerably prosperous becomes more
generous and costly in proportion to the improve-
ment of their circumstances, and that those who
marry and settle here conform to British methods of
housekeeping, and are not less liberal and hospitable
than their European fellow-colonists.
Now, in this broad territory there is ample
room and scope for all ; and there are number-
less industries for which our countrymen are
peculiarly fitted, and in the pursuit of which
they would contribute to the prosperity and
advantage of the whole community. In spite of
the prejudices entertained against them in California,
the evidence taken before a committee appointed by
Congress to inquire into the question, proved incon-
testably that they had been of immense service to
the country. Without Chinese labour it would
have been impossible to construct and complete the
Union Pacific Kailway, to carry on many of the
manufactories established in that State, or to obtain
anything like an adequate supply of domestic
servants.
In the farm, the factory, the kitchen, the work-
shop, and the laundry, they have proved invaluable.
They have been found to be sober, assiduous, apt,
docile, and praiseworthy. Their greatest enemies
and calumniators were the idle, the dissolute,.


und the drunken ; men who insisted upon receiving
very high wages for working during three days of the
week, and who devoted the other three to dissipation
and debauchery. To such persons, the patient, plod-
ding habits of the Chinamen, always at his post, never
loafing about, never in liquor, and never plotting
and caballing to drive his employer into a corner,
and extort higher wages from him, were an intoler-
able offence. And thus our countrymen in San
Francisco were cordially detested and cruelly mal-
treated by the “ bummer,” the “ hoodlum,” and the
stump-orator. These have raised a violent outcry
against the industrious and inoffensive Asiatic, and
have been foremost in demanding his immediate
expulsion from the country ; no matter at what
cost to some of its leading industries. For, exposed,
as many of the Californian manufacturers are, to a
severe and unqualified competition with those of the
Eastern States, where pauper labour is employed,
numbers of factories on the Pacific Coast must have
been closed had it not been that their owners were
able, by engaging American labour for the superior,
and Chinese for the inferior processes, to hold their
own against their rivals in the Atlantic States, who
were glutting the Western market with their own
unsaleable stocks.
In Mr. Hepworth Dixon’s “ White Conquest,” he
tells us how boys at play in the streets of Sacra-
mento desert from their sports to hurl stones at our
unoffending countrymen as they proceed to and from
work. He says :—“ The habit of looking on a
yellow face as scum and filth has grown up with
these lads from their cradles, just as the habit of
looking on a black face used to grow up with


■Georgian and Virginian lads. Born in the Golden
State, these boys have seen, since they could see at
.all, their yellow neighbours treated like dogs—
pushed, shouldered, cuffed, and kicked by every
white. At home they see their Chinese servant
■treated as a slave. At church they hear him
branded as a pagan. Never since tbeir birth have
dhev known a Chinee resent an insult and return a
blow. Where, then, is the risk of pelting such a
weak and helpless butt ? The boy’s father seems to
take this view of the affair. Banter and argument
are equally thrown away on him. John is. a drudge,
a waif and stray, without a public right. The child,
he rather thinks, pays John a compliment by trying
to crack his skull.”
Such is the statement of a writer who entertains
strong prejudices against our countrymen; but, never-
theless, cannot close his eyes to the fact that they
-are the victims of base, brutal, and cowardly usage at
the hands of a great and powerful people, who prefaced
their Declaration of Independence with the following
impressive words : —“ We hold these truths to be
self-evident : that all men are created equal; that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain
unalienable rights ; that, among these are life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” What an
instructive commentary on these high-sounding
■phrases is the practical conduct of these preachers
■of the doctrine of equality ! Our countrymen are
treated by them as slaves and outcasts, and are
expected to regard it as an honour when their heads
.-are broken by the Christian American. In “ the
pursuit of happiness,” Chinese emigrate to the
•comparatively unpeopled regions of the Western


States, hoping to enjoy “ life and liberty ” in what
professes to be a land of freedom, and they find
themselves subjected to every kind of insult and
outrage. What are they to think of your religion,
your morality, and your legal enactments, which, if
they do not sanction, do not, at any rate, prevent
such barbarous proceedings in a civilized country ?
Let us see what one of our countrymen thought
of them, as indicated by a little incident recorded by
Mr. Hepworth Dixon in the work previously quoted
from. A gentleman in San Francisco related to him
the following anecdote ; —“ Only the other day, in
our rainv season, when the road was fifteen inches
*/ >
deep in Montgomery-street, a yellow chap, in fur
tippet and purple satin gown, was crossing over the
road by a plank, when one of our worthy citizens,,
seeing how nicely he was dressed —more like a lady
than a tradesman, ran on the plank to meet him,
and, when the fellow stopped and stared, just gave
him a little jerk, and whisked him with a waggish
laugh into the bed of slush. Ha! ha! You should
have seen the crowd of people mocking the
impudent (!) heathen Chinee as he picked himself
up in his soiled tippet and satin gown! . .
No white man can conceive the impudence of these
Chinese. Moon-face picked himself up, shook off a
little of the mire, and, looking mildly at our worthy
citizen, curtseyed like a girl, saying to him in a voice
that every one standing round could hear, ‘ You
Christian ; me Heathen. Good-bye.’ ”
Now, the Americans and the English base their
religion, we believe, on the New Testament; and
will any one be good enough to tell us which acted
most in accordance with the precepts of your sacred


book—the Christian who perpetrated such a wanton
and unprovoked outrage upon a respectable stranger,
or the poor “ heathen,” who, when he was reviled,
reviled not again, and the calmness of whose well-
governed temper could not be roused to passion by
this dastardly and malicious assault ? If acts like
these are the outcome of your Christianity, let us
entreat you to send no more missionaries to China for
the purpose of converting or perverting our country-
men. They have their fair share of faults, but a
native of Pekin or of Hang-choo would be quite in-
capable of such shameful conduct to a well-dressed
foreigner as that which is recounted above. The
Rev. W. A. Loomis, in a book entitled “ Confucius
and the Chinese Classics,” after quoting many maxims
from them relating to morals and manners, makes
the following just remarks: —“ No people, who, from
childhood to old age are constantly drilled in the study
and practice of such rules of etiquette as we have
cited, can fail to possess many of the elements of
gentlemen; and as we desire not to forfeit a right to
that distinction ourselves, we should be careful not
to countenance any rude or improper behaviour
towards others, whatever may be the language they
speak or the garments they wear.” How this
excellent admonition is carried out, will be seen by
such incidents as the one just referred to ; by the
outrageous scene upon the Buckland, previously
described; and by the ordinary demeanour and con-
duct of Europeans towards Chinese, both in America
and Australia. We venture to affirm that neither
Englishmen nor Americans would dare to behave in
this way towards Russian immigrants. And yet these
are of the same race as ourselves; only, while our


people reached a high stage of civilization many
centuries ago, the nomadic Tartars of the steppes
have scarcely emerged from barbarism. Why
is the Asiatic Mongol treated so evilly, while
the European Mongol meets with courtesy and
respect ? Is it because the Czar of Russia can set
a million of men in the field, and has a powerful navy
at his hand ; and because the Emperor of China, our
august master, is supposed to be feeble and unwar-
like ? If so, must we conclude that the great Anglo-
American and Anglo-Australianpeoples are “cowards
to the strong and tyrants to the weak ? ”
When the anti-Chinese agitation began to assume
formidable proportions in California, the six Chinese
companies, represented by Yung Wo, Ming Yung,
Kong Chow, Hop Wo, Yin Wo, and Sam Yap
respectively, issued an address to the American
public, to which we beg to call attention here, for
the purpose of showing the excellent sentiments
entertained by our compatriots in America. That
document comments on the fact that there is a
constant demand for more and cheaper labour in
California, and then proceeds to say: —
“ The white labouring men of this country are very angry
because the Chinese obtain employment which they claim belongs
to white men alone, and so they hate the Chinamen, sometimes
throw stones at them, sometimes strike them on the street, and
constantly curse them. The Chinese people cannot return such
treatment in the same kind, lest other nations hearing of such
things should ridicule the laws of this honourable country as of no
“ To prohibit the Chinese from coming to this country is not a
difficult task. Formerly his Imperial Majesty, our august
Emperor, made a treaty of amity and friendship with the
Government of this honourable country, opening up commercial


relations and permitting 1 free intercommunication between the
people of the two countries. This treaty is in accordance with the
law of all nations. And now, if the American people do not desire
the Chinese to come here, why not go to the Emperor and ask a
repeal of the treaty, or why not limit the number of immigrants
on each steamer to a very few ? Then more would return and
fewer would come, and not ten years would elapse before not a
trace of the Chinamen would be left in this great and honourable
country. Would not that be well indeed? But let there be
counsel and consideration. It cannot be said that Chinese labour
impoverishes this country, and are not the customs paid by the
Chinese a benefit to this country ? Now, let the Government of
the United States propose to the Government of China a repeal or
change of the treaty prohibiting the people of either country from
crossing the ocean, then shall we Chinese for ever remain at home
and enjoy the happiness of fathers, mothers, wives, and children,
and no longer remain strangers in a strange land. Then the
white labourers of this country shall no longer be troubled by the
competition of the Chinese, and our Chinese people no longer be
subjected to the abuses and indignities now daily heaped upon
them in the open streets of this so-called Christian land. It this
can be accomplished, we Chinese will continually offer to the virtue
of this honourable country our deepest gratitude and thanks.”
We echo the language of this manifesto, and we
say: “ Let there he counsel and consideration.”
If you wish to shut out the Chinese from this part of
the British empire, you are bound, by every obliga-
tion of law and justice, to do so in a just and legal
manner; that is to say, by the British Government
going to the Emperor of China and asking for a
repeal of the existing treaty. You cannot say to
him, “You must admit British subjects to trade and
settle in any part of China ; but we will not suffer
Chinese subjects to trade and settle in any part of
the British empire.” If you do this, you step down
from your high place among the nations of the
earth, and stoop to conduct of which barbarians


would be scarcely guilty. For what say your great
authorities upon international law ? Does not one
of them declare that “ the obligation of a State to
render justice to all others is a perfect obligation,
of strictly binding force, at all times, and under all
circumstances. No State can relieve itself from this
obligation, under any pretext whatever. It is
equally binding upon all its rulers, officers, and
citizens—in fine, upon each and every individual
member composing the State or body politic.” And
this obligation, the illustrious Vattel asserts, “is
more necessary still between nations than between
individuals, because injustice has more terrible con-
sequences in the quarrels of those powerful bodies
politic, and it is more difficult to obtain redress.”
Now, as the same great writer remarks, “It is a
settled point in natural law, that he who has made
a promise to anyone has conferred upon him a real
right to require the thing promised—and, conse-
quently, that the breach of a perfect promise is a
violation of another person’s rights, and as evidently
an act of injustice as it would be to rob a man of
his property. The tranquillity, the happiness, the
security of the human race wholly depend on
justice—on the obligation of paying a regard to the
rights of others.” He follows up the affirmation of
these self-evident truths by observing that, “as the
engagements of a treaty impose, on the one hand, a
perfect obligation, they produce, on the other, a
perfect right. The breach of a treaty is therefore a
violation of the perfect right of the party with whom
we have contracted ; and this is an act of injustice
against him.”
This, then, is the position of the Chinese in Aus-


tralia, relatively to British colonists. By a treaty
forced upon his Imperial Majesty, our august
master, your nation compelled him to throw open
the gates of his empire to the people of Western
Europe. In return, you bound yourselves to
reciprocity. The freedom to come and go, to trade
and settle, which you insisted upon claiming for
yourselves, you also accorded to the subjects of his
Imperial Majesty. He has fulfilled the first part of
the compact, and the trade of Great Britain with
China has trebled during the last fourteen years, to
say nothing of the indirect commerce transacted
with that country via Singapore and Hong Kong.
Well, our countrymen begin to emigrate to these
colonies, and to seek employment on board of Aus-
tralian vessels, in the fullest confidence that the
second portion of the compact will be carried out,
and they are astounded to find that its fulfilment is
resisted by the subjects of Her Majesty Queen
Victoria in Australia, and that we are routed and
hunted down as if we Were so many wild beasts.
Chinamen are told—“ You must not work in
Australian ships or in Australian factories ; you
must not earn a livelihood by hawking or by
handicrafts in these colonies. You must leave off
cultivating gardens, and fabricating furniture, and
following the industrial employments you have
adopted ; and you must either starve, beg, steal,
or vanish.”
In the name of heaven, we ask, where is your
justice ? Where your religion ? Where your
morality ? Where your sense of right and wrong ?
Where your enlightenment ? Where your love of
liberty ? Where your respect for international law ?


Which are the “ pagans ’’—you or we ? And what
has become of those sublime and lofty sentiments of
human brotherhood and cosmopolitan friendship
and sympathy which are so often on your lips, and
are proclaimed so wisely from pulpit, press, and
platform ?
Tsze-Kung, one of the disciples of Confucius,
asked the latter on a certain occasion, 1 ‘ Is there one
word which may serve as a rule of practice for all
one’s life ? ” The master answered, “Is not reci-
procity such a word,” meaning thereby what was
sought by your own Great Teacher. “ All things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
you even so to them.” Upon this reciprocity we
take our stand. If you renounce it ; if you say,
“might is right, and treaties are not worth the
parchment they are written on ; ” if you assert that
this large and comparatively unoccupied portion of
the earth’s surface is to be fenced off from a race of
people who are geographically so near to it, and who
are so well adapted by nature and temperament for
the cultivation of extensive regions of it, from which
Europeans will gradually wither away ; if you sub-
stitute arbitrary violence, hatred, and jealousy, for
justice, legality, and right ; it may be that you will
succeed in carrying your point ; it may be that a
great wrong will be accomplished by the exercise of
sheer force, and the weight of superior numbers ;
but your reputation among the nations of the earth
will be irretrievably injured and debased, and the
flag of which you are so justly proud will no longer
be the standard of freedom and the hope of the
oppressed, but it will be associated with deeds of
falsehood and treachery, with broken faith, with a


violated treaty, witl the pitiful triumph of strength
over weakness, of European guile and selfishness
over Asiatic sincerity and confidence, and with con-
duf* which no sophistry can reconcile with the
precepts of your religion, with the canons of your
morality, with the spirit of your laws, with the
policy of your wisest statesmen, with the voice of
conscience, and with the character and traditions of
the people of Great Britain.
i 7 V V '' \
f(« ( CANBERRA . « i
V I
+
Walker, May, and Co., Printers, 9 Maokillop-st. (off 66 Bonrke-st. West), Melbourne.
