

Molden.
Moral & Intellectual Culture of the
People
A Lecture
Sydney
1853


THE MORAL
AND
INTELLECTUAL CULTURE OF THE PEOPLE,
ESSENTIAL SECURE THE ADVANTAGE OF HIGH WAGES
AND FOLITICAL PRIVILEGES:
A LECTTURE
UKLIVKKKIi BT
GEORGE KENYON HOLDEN, ESQ.,
' 0 THE
SYDNEY MECHANICS’ SCHOOL OF ARTS,
TUESDAY, JUNE 7. ISIS.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AT THE “EMPIRE” OFFICE, HUNTER-STREET.
JIDCI'CLIiI.




A LECTURE
DELIVERED BY GEORGE KENYON HOLDEN, ESQ., TO THE SYDNEY
MECHANICS’ SCHOOL OF ARTS, TUESDAY, JUNE 7.
Foreign to my own habits although I feel the
ffice of a public lecturer to be, 1 am at the same
,ime aware that when X accepted the honour
which you lately conferred upon me, by electing
no one of your Vice Presidents, 1 incurred an
bligntion to obey any reasonable call which cir-
umstances might make upon me, to manifest, in
his manner, my interest in the progress of your
mportant institution.
This call is now made, in consequence of the
liability of your respected I’resident, to deliver,
is he had intended, the opening lecture of the
.resent season.
I should indeed be blind to the sinus of the
;imes in which our lot is cast, If I could not find
in them much to awaken my own serious thought
in connection with the great objects of this and
kindred institutions; while, as an officer of your
own unsought election, I may possibly be excused
in asking your attention to many remarks that
jnight otherwise have been deemed obtrusive.
With this preface, I proceed to congratulate
you on possessing a School of Arts, already esta-
blished in this colony, at the present most im-
portant and critical period of its history. X am
well aware that it is as yet only the germ of that
which it ought to be, and into which it is, ns I
trust, destined to grow. In some respects, indeed,
I cannot but regard its designation (whether
“ Mechanic’s School of Arts”—or “Mechanic’s
Institute”) as somewhat unfortunate. Not be-
cause this comprehends the class of mechanics—
or recognises its prominent importance—but be-
cause it appears tacitly to exclude those other
classes for which it is equally adapted, and which
it practically embraces. The additional designa-
tion of “Literary Institution" is, I perceive,
adopted at Leeds, by the Society to which Lord
John Russell lately delivered an address at
that place. That important class which ■
• warms in all large cities aud towns, fulfilling |
multifarious duties, all requiring move or less
education, under the general designation of clerk,
—another equally numerous and important class
of shopmen—many of them destined to rise by
industry aud energy into principals and masters,
in their various departments of industry ; 1 lime
are equally interested with the mechanic, in the
objects of this Society. Nor is the mister trades-
man in the greater number of instances above the
scopie of its beneficial operation. Its main object,
as 1 understand it, is the affording of aid in self-
cultivation to ihat immense majority of our
citizens who are precluded by the necessity of
daily labour from pursuing those methods cl in-
struction that require a degree of leisure and
wealth vouchsafed by Providence only to a few.
That, in short, it either is—or ougi tto be, a kird
of People’s University. And it rests with you alone,
the People itself, whether this Institute and other
Associations which may spring out of if, shall
answer this great end,"and deserve this noble
designation. 1 will venture to assert, at the risk of
all the ridicule 1 may encounler, that if you will
only be true to yourselveq in duly supporting
and extending this, your own self-formed Univer-
sity—if you will only support it to the extent for
which lh"e prosperity of the class to which you
belong affords ample means, e'-en without any as-
sistance from (he State, you may lay the foun-
dation of results more important than have been
attained by all the means and appliances of the
venerable Universities that have le. n endowed
and pampered for purposes of Aristooratical
Education.
Do not, however, misunderstand me. I am
far from asserting, that the as-idnous devotion
of a life of leisure and study to the highest
pursuits, will not accomplish nobler individual re-
sults than are compatible with the application, by
the same person, of threc-ihurthi of bis time to
the routine cf the work'h-p or the counter. This


must, however, always bo the let of a comparative
ffw. If you can succeed in elevating your
cwn position, you are none tho worse off, ai d
should not fed the less grateful for your ad-
vantages, because others posse's advantages yet
higher, through circumstances beyond your reach.
It is enough for your purpose, if suiliciont
knowledge may be attained by each member of
such an Institution as this, to render him a
truly civilhed being, to chcii'h in him cultivated
tist* s—to qualify him to apin-ciareexcellence, in-
tellectual and moral, in himself and in his ffllow-
ine:i. If lids can be rendered the condition of
tho muss of our citizens, wc can well afford to
leave to a privileged few the distinction of be-
coming learned linguist?, inspired pcets, profound
mathematicians, sublime philosophers, subtle
metaphysicians, or eloquent orators. It is, at
the same lime, not mo less evident, that
even of these higher examples of mental culture,
the number would bo vastly increased in such a
ccnditisn cf society us we are contemplating,
while tho:e capable of appprreiatieg and bene-
fiting by tho results of their labour, would be
increased a hundred-fold.
The prevalence of self-conceit ami pedantry,
among the half-educated, is not so much the
consequence of their own partial education,
as of the more deplorable mental destitution
r f those by whom they are surrounded, and by
whose standard they find it more agreeable to
measure themselves, than by that of those above
them. Habits of absurd self-appreciation may
even be forced upon a man so circumstanced,
without being attributable to any great natural
tendency to vain glory. The parish clerk, whose
ability to write and cipher rendered him the
village oracle,
tVhiln still tho wonder prow,
That one imall head 'could carry ail he know,
might well be pardoned if, among a group of un-
couth villagers —more attractive in the poetry of
Goldsmith than they would be likely to prove if
reproduced among a society of intelligent modern
artisans—he assumed the dignity that belonged
to his superior acquirements. If all be
educated to a respectable standard (however
imperfect it may bo, as compared to the
highest) the conciit of these Tritons of the
"Minnows will vanish away, and instead of feeding
on the homage of those beneath, they will be
compelled to join with the crowd in accepting
gratefully the fmits of nnturer wisdom frem
those who are really qualified to instruct and
enlighten mankind.
Another consideration rendering more con-
solatory and sati'factory the prospect of the
general diffusion of an improi cd intellectual taste
—even though it should be stigmatised as super-
ficial, and should confessedly full short of a com-
plete education-—is to be found in tho considera-
tion that a very small porti:n of those attain-
merits which are essential to men encaged in
enlarging the bounda-ies of human knowledge
by means cf new discoveries, is required for the
purpose of correctly apprehending and appie-
ualing (hise discoveries when actually made.
Without any utility to solve lie problems (f
Xcwton’s Brincq in, the ordinary reader of such
books as Nichol’s Astronomy, or Chalmers's As-
tronomical Discourses, rises to the noblest con-
templations which those problems suggest, and
realises the highest truths which they establish.
And it Is' mofe dependent on the moral, than the
intellectual character, which of tlie two, the great
philosopher, or the bumble disciple, shall anhe
at the truest elevation and refinement by means of
their different kinds and degrees cf mental dis-
(ipiine. The same may be said ot such books as
Hcrschtl’s Introductory Ks>ny, Mrs. b’omer-
vilie cn the connexion of tie ?c ; euce-',
Lyall’s works on Geology, Humboldt’s Cosmo*,
and uany others, which give to tlio geneoi
reader, in ilch, ripe, clusters, the fiuits matured
by the scientific labours cf great men of all
ages. It is not that we desire to encourage a
lazy contentment with superficial general views,
however grand and vivid, where leisure and means
exist for more extensive and minute research.
But we do most cordially congratulate you, and
the whole race of man, that it has been brought
within ihe icope of an education open to all, even
the most busy and laborious of matei ial workers, to
acquire ample knowledge for the appreciation
and enjoyment of the sublime revelations open
to man through fcience, and for appropriating
them as the food of noble thoughts and refine I
tastes; and, above all, of profound religious
feeling?.
I congratulate you, I say, and the whole race
of man, that we have reached a period when tho
Tcmjleofsuch knowledge is everywhere beginning
to stand open for all who choose to enter. But,
beyond all, may I fairly congratulate the workers
in the labour-hive of this colony—at the present
day the best paid workers in the world—the
aristocracy of labour, if they choose to become
so, in tho best sense—that these advantages aro
now open to then in a mode and degree which
Mirpats anything before offered to the
class to which they belocg since tbc wcrld
began. It is solely fur themselves to determine,
whether they will apply their new resources to
tho great ends whicli we have suggested, or to
the pampering of appetite and sloth. What is
there, in truth, they could not accomplish, with
tl cir own unaided resources, in the mental ami
moral elevation of themselves and their children,
if they would unite in contiibutiug to this object
even a moderate portion of the increased wages
they aro receiving. Untrammelled by those con-
ventional habits of expense in dross and furni-
ture whb h, in the higherranks of society, and in
the middle who aje the higher, detracts so


seriously from tho means cf sap;lvins higher
intellectual ami moral nocesdtics—nearly all the
.surplus of tlie labourer’s wages, after providing
for mere necessaries, is available for the ends to
1 which this institution, extended as it might be,
is directed. It is a mere question of one alter-
native—this, or the public-house. Who can
measure the consequences, for happiness or misery,
peace or discord, riches or poverty, national in-
fluence or degrading social annihilation, that
hinge on the tenoral choice of the one or the
other alternative ?
In a state of society which affords to the
working classes a clear surplus beyond a provision
for the necessaries of life, their power ot exalting
their condition by combined efforts, mulsr the
influence of improving manners and education,
is far greater than anything iu the history
of the past will enable us duly to appreciate.
Take 1000 individuals whose wages (no unex-
ampled supposition) have been raised by a social
revolution from ss. a day to 12s. a day. The
aggregate difference, provided they still ex-
pended in necessaries only the original ss. a day,
would admit of a contribution of not less
thm £103,000 a year. Hub supposing their
expenditure doubled partly through aug-
mented prices, and partly in the provision
of supeiior articles of food, clothing, and
furniture —so as to absorb, in the animal wants
10s. per day, even the remaining 2s. applied by
1000 persons towards some common objects of
social and intellectual improvement, would pro-
vide an annual sum of £30,000 —a glorious in-
come for many mechanics’ institutes—expanded
as they then might be into literary and scieutificiu-
stitutions, splendid libraries, eflioient lectureship?,
galleiies for flue arts, and many other provisions
for intellectual improvement and enjoyment
worthy of a civilised and enlightened race, it
is within the power, wo boldly maintain, of
t!ic mechanics and labourers of the present age,
not only infinitely to surpass the knights and
barons of olden time, but to rival the wealthy
classes of the present day, in many of the lest at
tributes of civilised humanity. They l ave nothing
to do but to apply to the means of social advance-
ment, what is now squandered in idlene>s, and
debauchery, and this glorious end will be speedily
accomplished. All that we can say at present of
this general enlightenment is that
From the walls of Heaven
Shoots far into the bosom of dim night,
A glimmering dawn.
May it he the precursor of a perfect day !
liven in reference to the selfish inti rests of man
as a mere Epicurean, in pursuit of pleasure as a
chief end, intellectual improvement is absolutely
requisite to extended enjoyment. If the mind
remain uncultivated, what other pleasures can be
sought than those we possess in common with the i
brutes ? Hut these arc soon supplied, and when '
we (I on .seek [o augment them by mere c'p’o’u
drafts, an inexorable law cf nature interposes, and
conveits our coveted enjoyment into loathing and
disease. Half iho physical evils which afflict
mankind, arise ficm vain efforts to graft addi-
tional pleasure upon satiety. What remains
then, even to the votary of pleasure, tut to aug-
ment Die number of its inlets? Sach an inlet U
opened by each now taste for intellectual enjoy-
ment. The Imperial Sybarite who sighed in vain
for a new pleasure, and offered a reward for
its discovery, might have hero found the object
of his pursuit, if its innocence had not been fatal
to its titness for the choice of a being so utterly
debased. Yet surely there must be more true
enjoyment in those pleasures which are peculiar
to iho faculties of man, asito imago of God,
than in those which ho possesses in common
with the brutes. The pleasures of a man mus 3
surely be superior to those of a hog, even though
he revel in the sty cf Epicurus.
Let u?, however, be on our guard. It is only
by effort that this good choice is made and se-
cured. The natural influence of prosperity and
wealth, whether over a Uonun emperor or an
Au-tralian labourer, is to -afford temptation to
. sloth and self-indulgence. Unless we counteract
this tendency by means of such associations a*
this in alliance with improved education, and the
individual and family cultivation cf elevated re-
ligious and moral piinciples, those very resources,
winch are sufficient, when rightly applied, to
elevate the labouring class of this countiy to the
level of the middle ranks of other countries, may
only accomplish their deeper degradation ; en-
abling them to indulge more recklessly in idle-
ness and debauchery, and thus drag themselves
back again into a depth of poverty more wretched,
because mere deserved, and more hopcdcss, than
before.
One of the most gratifying features in tho
origin and progress of Mechanics’ Institutes, is
the cordial and growing interest taken in them
by men occupying tho most exalted social and
intellectual jositions. Tho generous exertions
made in their favour by such men as Brougham
and Bhkbeck is among the earliest recollections
of my boyhood. The feelings which impelled
them could not, however, be then said to influ-
ence any large number of the class to which
Brougham and Birkbeck belonged, still less tho
higher class to which the former has since ascended
in his own person. Those who did not actually
revile or sneer at tho movement, kept aloof as if
it bad an air of something Quixotic, with which
it would endanger their own \crsonal dignity to
meddle. What a change has been wrought in a.
few short vear?, when such men as Lord Carlisle,
Lv-jrd lMlmtT;-ton, Lord Ellesmere, Lord John
Russell, are emulating each other in contribut-
ing by addresses and lectures, in the halls cf
Mechanics* Institutes, to the pleasure and improve


ment of crowds of working men ! "When the no-
tabilities of Oxford and Cambridge, and the
most gifted authors of the age, think it either a
pleasure or a duty to flock to the inauguration of
a free library at Manchester, and ali'ord it all the
encouragement of their influence and eloquence 1
And it is still more pleasing to observe that this
encouragement is rendered as if it were felt to be
the natural and grateful fulfilment of a social ob-
ligation, without any of those haughty, patronising,
airs which have in former times been the common
accompaniment of such favours, if ever indeed be-
stowed at all, “ like angels visits, few and far be-
tween.” It is in truth a happy angurv for England,
andfor tbepermanenceof her institutions, that the
intercourse between the different ranks of the
community can he placed on this footing, if the
possessors of rank and piivilcge will only thus
iccognise their alliance with corresponding du-
ties, and in this manner fulfil the Christum pre-
cept —“ He that will be great among you, let him
be your servant”—there w ill be little fear ot tbe
security of rank and station thus usefully applied.
That aristooratical instinct or prejudice which
considered the education of the humbler classes
us incompatible with their security, is happily
passing away—or, at least, betaking |o its last
and appropriate refuge in the laws of slave States.
The present Prime Minister,Lord Aberdeen, truly
observes, in the speech announcing the policy of
his government, that all difference of opinion as
to the desirableness of an universal education of
the people has now ceased, and that the only
JnalUr of controversy is how, and by whom,
it shall be administered. And, however bitterly
wo may regret that the continuance of this con-
troversy should so long cripple the efforts of the
nation to carry out, with a unity of action corres-
ponding with its acknowledged unity of pur] ose,
a great scheme of universal education—we may
be permitted to congratulate ourselves that so
great an advance in the light direction has been
made during the short space which has been al-
lotted to us on this earth, and that the working
classes of this generation will leave to their
children so many advantages beyond those which
they themselves inherited. The feeling is now
happily dying away which identifies the elevation
of the depressed with the degradation of the
elevated ; which grudges the entry of the sun-
light into the cottages of the poor—as if it could
lessen that which shines on the gilded walls of
the palaco.
The distinction cannot be too strongly drawn
between those revolutionary schemes that drag
down the rich to the level of the poor, and those
which tend to elevate the poor by giving them, as
far as practicable (hy means of education, and
the advancing resources of art and science), the
same command of material and moral good which
has hitherto lecu attainable only by ihe rich.
Call the former all tlic Sue name* yon plea^o—
liberty—equality—fraternity—or the more equi-
vocal ones of socialism or communism, if they
contain within themselves the principle of
destructive •physical force, they will ever suffer
the destruction inherent in their own nsturg ;
while the latter, however liable to be mistaken
for their spurious counterparts, will ultimately
vindicate their claim to the respect
and adoption of mankind. This peace-
ful class of revolutions requires no
barricades, no conspiracies, no political agitations.
They do not overthrow the evils they are destined
to supersede hy a hurricane of brute violence, but
supplant them by a silent undergrowth of truth
and justice. If you think there are any such
evils to remedy, self cultivation, the application
of your Own powers, faculties, and pecuniary
means, to the mental and moral improvement of
yourselves and your children, is all that is
necessary for their complete eradication.
If you desire political influence, be assured that
you will thus infallibly acquire it. In the present
condition of society, particularly among the sons
of Englishmen—and the cousins (as we may call
ourselves) of British Ameileans—-there is no fear
of the withholding of due political power from any
men who will take care to acquire an unquestion-
able moral and mental fitness for its exercise.
Vi’hat is still more impoitant, by the course we
suggest, there will then be due security provided
for your employing all your political power for
purposes truly beneficial. If knowledge be power,
as is said (and this is as true in politics as in the
arts), it must he at the same time admitted, that
far less of knowledge is requisite to gain power,
than is necessary to ensure our using it aright.
Hence, the social disorders which have been otteu
attributed to the progress of popular knowledge,
but which are in truth to he ascribed to its insuf-
ficient advancement. It is peifectly true in this
case, that—
If shallow draughts intoxicate the brain.
The drinking deci>or sobers it again.
Convulsions and revolutions are not so much
wars between truth anil error, as between op-
posing errors (or, what is the same ihing, half-
truths) in conflict with eacli other, and, although,
by such conflicts, sparks of genuine truth are
often elicited, they are very dearly pnichased,
and are too apt to be extinguished in the smoke of
denser and darker evils than those in which they
originated,
A thoroughly enlightened people would not
only acquire a just political influence, hut this
influence would manifest itself by a peaceful and
spontaneous process, like the growth of the com
and the vine under the rays of the sun. Such a
pcoj)le would control their national affairs, to u-o
the language of un old writer, “As God rules the
universe, sTcntly, and without ncise.”


It is no doubt a growing conviction of the ne-
cessity of qualifying the muss of the people to
exercise wisely a power it is manifestly impos-
sible to withhold from them, which has slirau-
lated so many of those occupying the high p’aces
of society to exert themselves in the advancement
of popular education. The most serious and far-
seeing thinkers of our day clearly perceive that the
only wise means of averting anarchy is to teach the
people their own interests —to co-operate with
them in the attainment of them—ami to qualify
both them and the classes above them to perceive
in hew many wavs their interests may, instead cf
conflicting, be made to coincide The people may
thus be rendered not only a harmless, but a
highly beneficial, conducting channel of political
power—just as the same instrumentality by
which a powder magazine may he exploded, may,
under the guidance of a wiser arc, be made to
work an electric telegraph.
Ido not, however, imagine that, in attributing
the favourable regard of leading men in the
mother country to a dread of the consequences
of popular ignorance, I intend ia any way to
disparage their motives. Far from it. We have
no more right to brand their efforts as selfish,
than the fellow-passengers of a man whose exer-
tions had helped to save them from shipwreck,
would have to merge all their gratitude in the
reflection that he had saved his own life together
with theirs.
But, whatever may be the motives
or causes that co-operate, there can be no
doubt that the movement is gaining ground
in England, in tbe various countries
cf Europe, and perhaps still more in America,
where the direct committal of all the functions cf
government to the people, or the organs of tluir
election, renders their liberal education more than
a want—an imperative State necessity. It has
been pithily said that as every Ameiiaan male
above 21 .Kars of age claims to be a sovereign,
he is bound to be a gentleman. It is ratber
a nice question what this terra gentleman
precisely means, or ought to mean, and cer-
tainly its conventional sense differs very much
in different places. The discussion would occupy
too much space hero, but whatever it means, the
qua’ities which mental self-culture tends to pro-
mote arc unquestionably among the leading fea-
tures in the best sense of the character.
While the whole world, and especially that portion
cf it which speaks our own language, is pressing
forward in this glorious career, it is surely not
for Australia, with her golden resources, and
her highly paid labourers, to lag behind iu the
race. Shull m?chanics with incomes equal to
those of the middle classes of other countiies, re-
main content with their former pittance of educa-
tion and intellectual advantage? No latitude
of popular privileges, whether equalling or exceed-
jji those of the mother country, can ever afford
any real dignity or advantage, unless accom-
panied by the knowledge which qualifies ft r its
intelligent exercise—which will 'enable .you to
appreciate the exertions of the honest public ser-
vant —to penetrate the disguises of the artful
demagogue, who would flatter you for his own
sinister ends—to check the rashness of the merely
speculative politician—to take enlightencl views
of the great questions affecting our social wel-
fare—to submit cheerfully to regulations entailing
personal inconvenience, where their ultimate
social results can be shewn to compensate the
sacrifice —to exercise self-control —and resist the
temptation to expend augmented wages in
mere bodily indulgence—to cultivate habits tf
courtesy and mutual forbearance—to reconcile
the ditliculr, hut not contradictory, duties of fol-
lowing with conscientious decision your own reli-
gious convictions, and at the same time.cherishing
the most unallowed x liarity towards all who differ
from you—to take unintelligent part when your
assistance appears requisite, iiMhe management
of useful public institutions, or furtherance of
beneficial social movements—these and number-
less other features in the character of good citi-
zens must be established and generally prevalent
among yon before you can hepe for any lasting
.social improvement. And these are thc*qualities
which such an association as this School of Arts
(or as I may again call it, the Feoph’s Univer-
sity) is calculated to promote. In all those
respects you will admit that we have much room
fur improvement. You will not desire that I
should flatter you, and put to tleep your emula-
tion, and quench your wholesome anxiety for
advancement and reform, by casting a veil over
your present deficiencies.
We may, however, I think, fairly cherish hope,
and take courage for the future, in the reflection
that even the present social condition of the work-
ing classes both here and in England, is far in
advance of what it was before the movement in
favour of popular education commenced. Of this
fact there can be no doubt, and on a subject of
tliis kind there is nothing like a practical illus-
tration, even though it may be as a mere straw
shewing the directun of the wind. I lately met
with one which greatly struck me, iu a* com-
parison between the treatment sustained by
Fielding the novelist from the populace of Lon-
don when embarking on a voyage to recover his
shattered health in 1754, and that which Sir
Walter Scott received under similar circumstances
from the same class of the people in 1832. The
different impression conveyed by the two narra-
tives as to the mental and moral aspect of the people
of the 19th centurv, compared to the 18th, is as
striking as a discovery of a transformed butter-
fly occupying the place of the uncouth grub from
which it sprung.
1 extract the following from Knight’s Half-
Hours with the best Authors; —


u In tlic summer of 1754, Henry Fielding, the
lebrated novelist, left England never to return,
iving been ordered by phydeians to Lisbon, in
e forlorn hope of recovering Ms broken health,
e wrote a most graphic description of his
>\age, full of striking pictures of our social
mdition a century ago.
“Alter depicting the state of emaciation and
isoase in which he accomplished his embarkation,
3 says, ‘ In this condition I ran the ganntlepe
'0 T think I may justly call it) through rows of
vilora and watermen, few of whom failed of
ay ins; their compliments to mo by all manner of
titles and jests on my mb cry. E'o man who
ncw r me will think I conceived any personal rc-
animent at this behaviour; but it was a lively
iclure of the cruelty and inhumanity in the
ature of men which I have often contemplated
nth concern, and which leads the mind into a
rain of very uncomfortable and melancholy
houghts. It may he said that this barbarous
ustom is peculiar to the English, and in them
nly to those of the lowest degree; that it is an
xcresccnco of an uncontrolled licentiousness
nisiaken for liberty, and never shows itself in
uen who are polished and refmod in such manner
is human nature requires to produce that per-
fection of which it is susceptible, and to purge
way that malevolence of disposition of which, at
nir birth, we partake in common with the savage
n eation.’ ”
It is some satisfaction to contrast Fielding,
;hus insulted in his misery by the rabblo of
London, with the conduct of men in the same
rank of society, although no longer moiiung the
same epithet, towards the gic.it author of Wa-
verloy, when lying in hopeless illness at the St.
James’s Hotel, in Jcrmyn-strect, in the year 1832.
That the affliction of tho most popular writer of
his ago should call forth every sentiment of
respect from the high and the refined, was of
course to be expected ; but it is more gratifying
to know that the refinement had gene deeper into
the native soil than those of Fielding's day
might have thought probable. Mr. Lockhart, in
his Life of Sir Walter S.*ott, tells ns that Allan
Cunningham, walking home late one night, met
piith a group of working men at the corner of
Jermyn-street, who asked him, as If there was
but one death-bed then in London, “Do you
know, sir, if this is the street where he is lying/’
* Irrespectively of more general reasons for the
support of Mechanics' Institutes, and popular lite-
rary societies, there are sumo which peculiarly
apply to Sydney at the present juncture. The
city is swarming with young men flocking to and
from the gold diggings, or looking out for other
occupation. These are, for the most part, uncon-
nected with any local family ciicle, and to them
such an institution as this, expanded and im-
proved as it ought to be, would afford a refuge
from innumerable temptations, substituting use-
fid and agreeable occupation, for vicious excite-
ments, or idle lassitude. Many of these, csje-
cially diggers retained, or visiting Sydney for re-
creation* are in possession of ample funds, ami
rorne of them, at least, may be expected to con-
tribute liberally towards an object which so
precisely meets their own wants. Before any
great interest of this kind is likely to be
excited, however, we ought to have in ex-
istence a more convenient library and reading-
room, affording some attractive specimen, of what
could be accomplished by still more extensive
resources.
Another special inducement to the support of
Mechanics’ Institutes in Kew South Wales is, the
peculiar importanse, in all thinly peopled coun-
tries, of turning to the utmost account, the scien-
tific improvements effecting a saving of labour.
Instead of being infinitely in the rear cf older
countries in the use of machinery, there are, no
doubt, many cases in which a machine of iittle
or no importance in the mother country (where
the labour it supersedes is so cheap «s to render
it's saving of comparatively little no*
ment) may here prove of -the utmost
value. "Why, then, is theic an almost total
neglect of such expedients for the. saving of
labour iu this colony? Is it not owing to our
want cf mechanics sufficiently skilled, to design,
construct, and repair the requisite machines, and
servants of sufficient intelligence, or carefulness
to use them aright ? Hew greatly conducive to
improvement, in this respect, would be the diffu-
sion through the community of such knowledge
as these Institutions arc calculated to communi-
cate, if properly encouraged and matured ! One
of the French commentators, on the recent great
exhibition iu London, observes, “ that civilised
mau is now rapidly ceasing to occupy the posi-
tion of a mere labourer ; that he is rising (even
the hitherto common labourer himself)
position of a foreman, and that nature herself, at
the bidding of Science, is doing nearly alMhc
physical work.’’
.Now, to maintain this position with effect, to
take due advantage of this new inheritance/we
need such knowledge as iliat which it is proposed
here to cultivate. And it is a cheering considera-
tion, that every additional step which is made
in this direction, diminishes the temptation
which has hitherto always led cue poition of man-
kind to domineer, in some form or other, over
another. The very democracies (to called), both
of the ancient and modern world havu had t their
helots and slaves, equalling, and, often exceeding
the citizens in numbtr, yet no inert; accounted
as a portion cf the “people’’ (or “demos’’)
than their dogs or their horses. Among
up, at at all events, tho word people has
ins own hone>t signification, and the name of
democracy could never be used as a cloak, under
which a mve-holding aristocracy could disguise,


Or falsify its true character. How much hap-
pier the ’fate of an age, which may commit most
of the work of helots and slaves to the powers of
tteam, of electricity, of water, of air, and cf
machinery thereby impelled, indulging the inno-
cent and elevating cmtemplation of the lans of
nature and the ingenious contrivances of art, in-
stead of brutal conflicts between master ami
ilave, alternating incessantly between tyranny
and revolt.
If the world shall ever outgrow its present
idolatry of more wealth and external distinctions,
it. will be greatly owing to this new feature in the
condition of mankind; namely, the accessilility
of intellectual advantages, and even of decent
external refinements, to the mass of the people.
There is a certain moderate share of these ad-
vantages, botli bodily and mental, without which
a man can hardly’retain the character of a civi-
lised being, unless indeed it bo by assuming that
of a hero, and exercising such rare courage, per-
severance, and fortitude, as only shows in a
stronger light the pitiable fate of the mass
which can only escape by this means, and conse-
quently docs not escape, from its abject condition.
£o long as this is the condition of the mass, the
richer classes have necessarily the monopoly of
all that is worthy of the name of civilisation.
Hut if the condition of the people be once raised
above this standard, and in addition to the
supply of barb physical wants, they be admitted to
the advantages of even a moderate education, and
thus qualified to avail themselves of those means of
instruction and enjoyment in matters of science
which are more or less available even to the
humblest inhabitant of large cities, the practical
distance between the social condition of the peer
and the artisan is thereby incredibly lessened.
It is with the mind as with the body. Jf there
be an insufficient supply of wholesome nutriment
for ensuring health in one class, while there is a
superfluity in another, it is plain that among the
latter alone will be found (however numerously
associated with victims of intemperate indul-
gence) instances of perfect health. They alone
have the means cf fulfilling the conditions of
health, while the other class has no alternative
but to pine way in starvation and disease. Once
admit the latter to the blessing of competency,
though it he nothing more, and it might then be
found that on comparing the two classes, the
health and energy of those whose means of indul-
gence are restricted within narrow limits, would
exceed that of the more privileged class,
enervated by the temptations of superior
wealth and license. It remains yet to be dis-
closed how far it may be practicable for the
classes now called inferior, to ascend, in all the
attributes of genuine civilisation, and reasonable
(not effeminate or ostentatious) refinement, to
the level hitherto monopeliscd by landlords and
capitalists. The attributes of true civilisation
consist far less than wc have been accustomed to
suppose, in that conventional magnificence of
architecture, furniture, attendance, and cookery,
which is regarded as a necessary accompaniment
of first-rate society. While the wealthy Lave
had the monopoly of good education, tbocni-
joint refinements of good education and costly
expenditure have been naturally associated toge-
ther. But now that education and genuine in-
tellectual refinement are becoming widely diffused
among multitudes who have neither means nor
taste for ostentatious externals, and the difficulty
of maintaining establbhments on the old scale is
increasing, through the diminished supply of
domestic servants, it is high time to intioduco
some new, and simpler, and cheaper, modes cf cul-
tivating intellectual intercourse among tbo>o
whoso society is adapted for their mutual gratifi-
cation and improvement. This is not the place* >
make any detailed proposal of this nature,
merely throw out the suggestion. The tocii
want is, I think, becoming a seiious one. Tho
old forms and ceremonials of social intercourse
are not adapted to meet the emergency, either
among the working classes, or their masters, who
are often relatively poorer than they. But among
the former, as they are not enslaved by existing
fashions, or conventionalities, it is highly probable
that some movement in the light direc.ion may
first he made. There can be no reason why refined
social intercourse should be the monopoly of the
inhabitants of magnificent drawing rooms,
and the owners of rich serviscs of plate.
On the other hand, wc have ro desire to e'ej rc-
ciate the amenities of life, or to encourage in
those who are unable to command its luxuries
feelings akin to those of the fox. towards the
grapes, in the old fable. Neither would wo
desire to supersede the ostentation of the banquet
or the ball-room by a yet more odious ostentation
of a pretentious and cynical pedantry. In ad-
vocating the claims of the mind, we would by no
means ignore those of the bod?, or frown harshly
on those innocent follies in which the wise.-t will
seek occasional relaxation from severer pursuits.
What we advocate is the cultivation of tho whole
nature of man, instead of the part only, and by
this means the attainment of a higher pitch uf
enjoyment, no less for the tody than the mind.
Wc dejrccate not amusement, nor animal grati-
fication in its proper place, and due proportion,
but, on the contrary, would follow the maxim of
Lord i!> icon, in always inclining, as far as con-
sistent with the laws of temperance, “to the
benign side." It i?, indeed, mainly for the pur-
pose of augmenting the legitimate pleasures of
society, that we are disposed to desire an altera-
tion in many of our conventional habits, wh'ch,
partly through individual selfishness, but far
more through slavish adherence to custom and
fashion, perpetrate an incredible waste and mis-
application of the means of social enjoyn.eut— l


plundering, in the aggregate, untold wealth in
inducing a minimum instead of a maximum of
iniual advantage. At the same time, it is not
v any rude or sudden -violation of existing
unners that a reform is to be effected. It is
rdy through a natural, spontaneous, process
;iat changes of this nature can take a beneficial
ml permanent root. The character of the
eneral education and intellectual habits
•ill necessarily influence the manners and
octal intercourse of the community. Let
to class to which this institution appertains
nly cultivate their minds as they ought, and
ducate their children as they should do, and
ben all genuine advantages of this nature will
pring up among them, sooner or later, as the
ppropriatc fruits of intelligence and true civi-
nation.
Of political institutions this is not the place to
peak, unless it be to repeat that such Institutions
is this are equady entitled to the support of
hose who dread, and of those who rejoice in the
idvance of popular influence. Our mLsion is to
jnell the fears of the one by rendering the
opular element innocuous—ami to realise the
lopes of the other, by ensuring its efficiency and
lurability. A popularformofGovernmentwithout
an educated people, is a dead shell, cast on a beach
nith no living inhabitant—while a people truly
educated, will spontaneously form its own insti-
tutions as the nautilus forms its beautiful habita-
tion, from its own vital accretions adapted to its
mvn shape, growing with its own growth,
retailed and renewed by its own inherent powers,
whenever mutilated by accident or violence, and
floating its fragile inhabitant safe through all
the storms of that same ocean, which spurns the
dead shell from its bosom to rot on the shore of
oblivion. Such will be the contrast of onr fate,
according as we succeed or fail in cultivating
those mental and moral attributes, that will
qualify us for the task of properly exercising our
political privileges.
One advantage of this Institution :s, that
parties of all shades of political opinion may
here unite. And the same maybe said of all
shades of religious opinion. Without elevating
the pursuits of science and art to a level with
those which concern the dictates of conscience
and the hopes of immortality, we may be permitted
to congratulate ourselves, that while the truths
we seek to cultivate are the nett in importance, in
their tendency to elevate and improve mankind,
they are free from those polemical diversities
which at present unhappily disqualify us, in
regard to the only higher subject of thought,
from all possibility cf united action ; placing ns
much in the same position as those of old, who,
while engaged alike in building a tower to reach
to Heaven, were deprive! of all mutual under-
htanding, by a confusion of tongues. But on
tho common ground of this institution; the
adherents of every phase of religious cloolriao
may happily meet in harmony. Hesorving those
questions on which they differ, they may have
their mutual charities enlarged and confirmed, by
perceiving how numerous and important are those
on which they can agree and co-operate.
The ultimate tendency of advancing education
is not so much to overlay religious by secular
knowledge, as to render these kinds of knowledge
more ami more identical. Lord Bacon some-
where says that a little philosophy leads men
astray front religion, hut a larger acquaintance
with it brings them back again. We may per-
haps go farther, and say that all true philosophy
it itself only a widening of the sphere of religions
truth ; for, indeed, all truth, rigidly understood,
has a religious aspect. All genuine knowledge,
even of a secular nature, consists of an insight
into the works of God. directly in the physical
creation, or indirectly through the actions
of his Creature, man. The very errors of the lat-
ter disclose the divine laws, by the evils which
those errors engender, and which stand recorded,
as warnings to those who are privileged, like our-
selves, to reap the experience of accumulated ages.
Every advance we thus make in gtneral know-
ledge diminishes our temptations to di-ohey the
law, or facilitates our obedience, by tendering
more manifest to our natural reason, the immu-
table link established, in the nature of things, be-
tween obedience and happiness, and shewing dis-
obedience in the light of a glaring moral insanity.
The more enlightened the tace of man becomes,
the wider will lie the sphere of action over which
this light of reason will co-operate with what
was previously more a matter of unenquiriug
faith and comparatively blind obedience
to anthoiitv. And, although there may
seem less of merit in an obedience induced
by an enlightened sense of manifest self-
interest than that yielded, during a twi-
light cf tlie reason, to the same law when pro-
mulgated by authority, we can hardly suppose
tlie Supreme lluler would desire to piolong the
period of mental darkness, in order to put the
obedience of his crca*tiros to a severer test. This
is not a place, or time te enlarge upon such a
subject—but I will venture one illustration of
what I mean. It will, I think, ho acknowledged
that the present world-wide impulse in favour of
free-trade is in the strictest accordance With tlie
purest principle of Christian morals. It is simply
the golden rule, embodied in political
economy. Here then we have a law of Chris-
tianity applied in one of the widest departments
of human affairs through the influence of a science
which had scarcely any existence until the publi-
cation pf Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations, in
1776, a period since the birth of many persons
still living. The developments gradually made
by that science, have in that comparatively short
time, convinced the governing and effective


siajoriiy of men, that tho good of each individual
and each nation is actually and truly bound up in
the exercise of mutual justice—that the dictates
of selfish passions and temptations of local in-
terests, arc mere illusions and snares, and that
even in the light of the coldest worldly policy,
tho law of enlightened self-interest, aud of
diffusive benevolence, in these matters, is
one and tho same. Here is secular
knowledge and religions sentiment actinc in per-
fect, and hitherto unwonted, unison. Who shall
sot limits to this process which has thus begun ?
It is, I think, a new and most promising feature
in the development of the hnman mind. Is not
the growing consciousness of the folly of war ,
which is fostered by the spirit of commerce, and
the tone of modern literature, another instance of
a happy coalition between human reason and
Christian doctrine, to promote the peace and
happiness of man ? Certain we are,
that whatever are really laws of God,
have their foundations in a regard for ilie hap-
piness of his creatures, and the more of light and
knowledge his creatures possess, the more likely
will they be to perceive and realise the manner in
which these Jaws operate, and thus bring the light
of reason to the aid of, what is unfortunately apt
to be, the less perfect obedience of faith.
Much has been said of the pride of intellect as
the fruit of knowledge. If this so called pride
of intellect consist in a grateful consciousness of
enjoyment in exercising new and exalted faculties,
the more of it we excite, as a counterpoise to the
influence of inferior propensities, the better shall
we all fulfil the ends of our existence. If, on the
other hand, it is held to consist in a disposition
to overrate our own powers, and cur own import-
ance in the scale of creation, there is surely'
nothing so adapted to eradicate the last vestiges
of such a feeling, as tho disclosures of science.
The danger would rather seem to- he the other
way; and that the sense of our humiliating in-
significance would be so overpowering as hardly
to leave us courage to regard ourselves as worthy
of the care of our Almighty Parent. Take only
two or three instances of scientific truths con-
clusively established, in proof of the infinite and
and unfathomable abyss of Being which encircles
us, an equal abyss, whether we strain our vision
by the aid of the telescope into regions of remote
space, or by the aid of the microscope into those
impenetrable recesses in which the ultimate atoms
of matter are lost from our view. Humboldt tells
us that the number of distinguishable telescopic
stars in the milky way is eighteen millions—each
individual of which may be fairly regarded as the
probable centre of a planetary system—that the
distance of the most remote nebula? discovered by
theeldcr Herschell's forty foot refractor is estimated
as so vast that their light must require two mil-
lions of years to reach our eyes, although (ravel-
ling at the lute cf 1G6,072 miles per second !
Take, cn tlio other hand, an illustration of tire ii
finite wealth of the universe in the descending seal
Ehrcnberg has computed that 2000 anima
cules of the class infusoiia, placed together, worn
measure but one line, or the twelfth part cf a
inch, and the nrcroscope reveals to us the spe l
tacle of multitudes ot them swimming about \
their case in a single drop of water, passing ar
repassiug each other, without coming into Contact
Every cubic inch of the polishing slate <
Bdin contains, according to the same naturalis
40,000 millions of silicious shells, each individm
shell being the product and monument of the pa:
life of a perfectly organised creature of God !
In respect to time, also, the contrasted marve!
of the little, as compared to the great, are as a?
tonlshing as those which pertain to size andspact
If the mind sinks helplessly into an unfathomabl
gulf of wonder at the thought of the millions c
years required by the light of the stars to reach th
earth at the rate of millions of miles per horn
science likewise discloses subdivisions of limp, a
astonishing in their infinite minuteness, as these as
tronomical cycles are appalling in their immensity
The vibrations of sound vary in their rapidity
according to the lowness or sharpness of the noU
being slower in the low, and quicker in the sbar
tones. The lowest note to which the human eat
is sensitive vibrates sixteen times in a second!
while the highest which the hnman ear is capahll
of distinguishing is the result of 2-1,000 vibration!
in a second, h’rom this it follows, that our organ
is so constructed as to appreciate sensibly a
sound occupying the tweaty-four thousandth pan
of a second ! I
This seems wonderful enough, hut yet greatej
marvels have been elicited in computing the
number of vibrations which are necessary to acJ
count for certain phenomena which light exhibits!
It would be too long and too complex a tasl*
to enter into tho details of scientific research
which have led to the results promulgated
by the most eminent men who have de--
voted their attention to this subject. The best
authorities, however, regard such results as
clearly established, and they are these : —That
the different prismatic colours affect the eye by
vibrations of various periods of duration, and that
the distinction of colour isdependent on the differ-
ences in such vibration. It is computed that the
molecules of ether producing the extreme red oi
the solar spectrum, perform 458 millions of mil-
lions of vibrations in a second; and those pro*
ducing the extreme violet, accomplish 727 mil-
lions- of millions of vibrations in the same time!
What must be the marvellous delicacy of or-
ganization in our optic nerve which renders it capa-
ble of distinguishing effects dependent on such
causes as these, subdividing a second of time by
hundreds of millions of millions of impressions
definitely appreciated and distinguished from
each ether iu their result!


The contemplation of this Utter class of wan Jars,
■nliile equally ealenlatcd to astonish, is, perhaps,
less calculated to create painful bewilderment,
than that which concerns the infinitely remote and
vast in time aud space. The revelations of modern
astronomy might tend greatly to aggravate that
■feeling of almost distrustful solicitude, to which
the sacred Hebrew poet gave utterance in the
expression—“ When 1 consider the stars which
thou hast ordained, Lord, what is man, that thou
art mindful of him?” But the corresponding
revelations which have lean at the same
time made of the wonders cf our own
minute organization, ar.d ot that of creature*
interior to oiirse.ves, at once remove this
painful impression, prosing beyond question that
our relative insignificance, docs not preclude as
full and perfect an exerciser of infinite power and
wi-donr within our own narrow sphere, as if we
were the solo beings in creation subject to their
influence.
If any cold ulilittvian question value the of
knowledge such as this, because it does uot per-
ceptibly add any thing to the external wealth or
convenience of mankind, wo raiaht fairly refuse
to answer his objection, or the same rrincipV on
which wo should doom it useless to discuss the
merits of a landscape, a painting, or a statue,
with a person who was hot n blind. Yet even
such a person, is, on his own narrow ground,
deeply interested in the advance of such know-
ledge. The most useful inventions have spiting
from discoveries uiiginally made through a pure
love of knowledge for its own sake. Jt
is one of the fundamental laws of the moral
government of the world, that our inferior appe-
tite* and wants (so far as they are innocent—that
is, so far as they are consistent with permanent
happiness, either of ourselves or others) are most
truly gratified, when the motive of mtion does
net cnitre in themsehes, hut in something of a
higher nature. A benevolent Bin sveks as liis
end the welfare of others, and in so doing, lie
most effectually secure* hi* own. The modest
and humble do goal by stealth, and blush to find
themselves famous. So is it in the pursuit of
knowledge for its own sal;*. Material advan-
tages are an inevitable, even though unsought,
accompaniment. Humboldt admirably observes:
As in the higher sphere of thought and feeling
in philosophy, (oetry, and the fine arts, the
prim u v aim of every study ongnt to h» an inward
one, that of euhirgingand fertilising the intellect—
so the direct aim of science should ever be the
discovery of laws, und of the principles of unity, j
order, and connection, which every where reveal
themselves in the nnivrrfal life of nature. But
by that happy connection w hereby the useful is
ever linked with the true, the exalted, and the
beautiful, science (hits followed fir her own sake
will pour futh abundant, overflowing streams to
fin fell und fertilise tint industrial jrorperity, i
which is a conquest of tire intelligence of man
over matter.”
The use we arc so liberally permitted to make
of our advancing knowledge of the works of
creation, in subserviency to tire material objects
of human life, may have rather more tendency
to excite vain glory than that knowledge which
terminates in thegratifreition of the mind, and \el
nothing can bo more irrational. Via create nothing
of ourselves, our very hngnaga di-claims it. All
we do is, to invent— i. e. to .rind out —to find oat
what, is—what Uod has made, and done tor u-,
and treasured up for our use, ready for us, a-'f-ocn;
a* »c will duly employ upon it tire faculties which
lie has given n». Can it be doubted that l.e h*s
given these faculties to us for this pur| o-’e f
There is no more evident connection belween tire
various senses, und the sights, sounds, and odours,
which pervade the world, than between the me-
chanical powers and raw materials of art, and the
adaptive faculties of man. livery advance in this
direction renders man marc completely the image
of Ood, the mirror in whom his other works a- e
reflected, and although a just appreciation of the
laws of his moral government is, doubtless, of
still higher importance, there need be no clashing
between these two departments of truth ami
human improvement, tin the contrary, they Urn!
to aid, and illustrate, and mature each other.
Familiar altlKiigh it is now becoming to all
of ns, I cannot, pas* this subject without
adverting to the last ami mo-t pxtranr-
dinary triumph of art in the Liectrical Te’egraph.
rS~o stupendous an application of natural ]i)ve-
to human ends, won’d hate been deemed, only a
few years ago, the wildest of insane reveries.
And yet it is nothing more than we have already
described —the application of a force that has
atwvys existed, by mean* which it required only
observation and comparison of facts to discover.
.Nothing new has been created. It has only teen
found. Ami after this, who shall set limits to
the hope* of man in this direction ? Urostasis
1 ire general appreciation of the electrical telegraph.
1 hardly believe that the tn !y astonishing extent
cf the results attained are tally known. 1 cer-
tainly did not fully appreciate them myself, until
I met witn a descripition r.f them in a recent
work of Dr. J.ardner. Uv says:
“ Happening lately to visit Paris, we assisted at
some experiments which were made at tl k
bureau of telegraph*, ot the Ministry of th ■ 1 -
terror. There we found ourselves in a room a brut
20 feet square, in the pretence of some half dcf.::
persons, seated at <le-ls, employed in trans-
mitting to, and receiving 1-om, various distant
joints of Prance, despatches. Being invited. w«
dictated n message, consisting of about forty
words, addressed tn one of the clerks at the rab-
way station at Vai-nifennes, a distance of 1 t'S
nines from Pari*. This message was Iransrciiud
in two minutes ami a half. An interval of about


live minutes elapsed, during which, as it after-
wards appeared, the clerk to whom the message
was addressed, was sent for. At the expiration
of this interval, the telegraph began to express
the answer, which, consisting of about 35 words,
was dtliverd and written out by the agent at the
desk, in our presence, in two’ minutes. Thus,
forty words were sent ICS miles, and 25 words re-
turned from the same distance, in the short space
of four minutes and thirty seconds.
“ Kuo surprising as this was - (Dr. Lir.lntr con-
tinues) we soon afterward witnessed, in the same
loan, a still more marvellous performance.
“The following experiment was prepared and
performed at the suggestion, and under the di-
leotion of M. Le Veirier, the celebrated astrono-
mer, and Dr. Lardner, and in the presence of a
Committee of the Legislative Assembly, M.
I’ouillet, Professor of Thysics, and several distin-
guished members of the Academy of Sciences.
“Two lelcgranhio wires, extending from the
Ministry of the Interior to Lille, were united at
the latter place, so as to form one continuous
wire, extending from the Ministry tn Lille, and
hack from Lille to the Minister, making a toial
di-tance of 33<i miles. This, however, not being
deemed sufficient fir the purpose, several spiral
coils of wire, wrapped with silk, wore obtained,
measuring in their total length 7-1 C miles, and
weio joined to the extremity of the wire return-
ing fiorn Lille, thus making a contimons wire
measuring 1082 mile-. A message consisting of
282 words was now tranMiiittul iron) one end of
the wire. A pen attached to the other end im-
mediately began to write the message on a sheet
of paper moved under it by a simple mechanism,
and the entire message was written iu full, in the
presence of the Committee, each word being
■upelled completely and without abridgement, in
fifty-two seconds, being at the average rate of he
words and four-tenths per second!
“By this instrument therefore, it is practical)!
to transmit intelligence to a distance of upward
of 1000 miles, at the rate of 19,500 words pt
liour!
“The instrument wcu!J, therefore, transmit to
distance of 1000 miles, in the space of an lieui
the contents of sixty pages of an ordinary printe
volume!”
Surely when we perceive that the discoveries o
science are not only so astonishing as to over
whelm the imagination, and elevate the intellect
hut nre, also, capable of augmenting our commam
over the material world to so stupendous am
hitherto inconceivable an extent—even our ver
•selfish and sordid feelings will come to the aid <i
those of a more generous nature, in urging us a!
to the cultivation of faculties by which such gl«
rions results have been attained, and which, opei
an unceasing prospect of yet nobler ends to he ac
complished.
It is a privilege for New South Wales t<
have commenced her national career at a period
when all this light is breaking upon the world,
but it can only he through her own institutions,
ami by the individual efforts of her own people,
that she can turn this prhi'ege to good account,
and lake her own share in tie general advance of
the human family.
May Mill of you that now hear me act faith-
fully his own part in aiding the humble com-
mencement of this, and similar institution)«, aim-
ing at this glorious end, and however obscure may
he your own personal share in the movement, you
will have done more to benefit the colony than byj
(he discovery of a gold field, and will merit the]
blessings of posteiifv to the remotest genera
tions!
