

F. & W. STEWART, WflT L H d?EWE F L fl L C E T R U S RERS
iAfl Charles Street, Launceston.
OUR JEWELLERY, manufactured on the premises, is
unsurpassed for finish and durability.
OUR WATCH REPAIRS are done promptly and effec-
tively, and give satisfaction to all.
The Wonders of Electricity
TOGETHER
With an epitome of the History of the Political
Relationship between Great Britain
and the Transvaal.
SECOND EDITION.
By W. WILLIAMS.
PRICE - - - - ONE SHILLING.
CLOCKS, WATCHES, and JEWELLERY direct from
the factories.
NEW GOODS arriving by each mail weekly.
F. & W. STEWART, WAT r; E X C E T R u s RERS
149 Charles Street, Launceston.
EXAMINER


PIANOS * *
Collard - - -
Lipp & sohp
Leading German Makers
PACKARD
Organs
. BEST TO BUY. EASY PAYMENTS. WRITE FOR PARTICULARS.
MUX NEW a FINDLAY, Apollo House, 57 George Street,
Launceston.
J. &T. GUNN,
TIMBER MERCHANTS & BUILDERS
C —^^_LAUNCESTON.
Regular Direct Shipments of Baltic Deals, T. and G. Pine
Oregon, Californian Red Wood, Pine, etc.
IMPORTERS of Builders’ Ironmongery, Enamelled Iron Baths,
Kitchen Sinks, Cooking Stoves for Wood or Coal, Register
Grates, Paints, Oils and Colours, Putty, Cement, etc
WALL PAPERS A SPECIALITY.
A large stock of Doors, Sashes, Galvanised Iron, Ridge-Capping,
Spouting, etc., always on hand.
Patterns of our Wall Papers, Illustrations of our Cooking Stoves,
Sample Tints of Muralo, the new Wall Colouring, sent on
application.


THE
Wonders of Electricity.
. . . TOGETHER...
With an epitome of the History of the
Political Relationship between
Great Britain and the
Transvaal.
SECOND EDITION.
By W. WILLIAMS.
PRICE - ONE SHILLING.
Tasmania:
FRiNTED AT THE EXAMINER OFFICE, LAUNCESTON.




PREFACE.
V DON’T intend to say but very little about the science of
* electricity in the following pages, but confine my remarks
to the voluminous history and applications of the wondeiful
science, from its first inception to a certain stage of its
history. A wild dream of a German poet became a sort of
dieadful, sublime reality in its identity with the wonders
of the Solar system. He dreamed that God called a man
into the vestibule of Heaven, and said, “come hither and
see the glory of My House;” and to the servant that stood
round his throne, he said, “Take him and undress him
from his robe of flesh, cleanse his vision and put a new
breath in his nostrils; but touch not with any change his
human heart that weeps and trembles.” It was done
and with the mighty Angel for his guide the man stood
ready for his infinite voyage, and from the terraces of
Heaven, without of the sound of farewell, at 'once they
wheeled away into endless space. The man was led from
sun to sun, from planet to planet. At last the man sighed,
and shuddered, and wept; his overladened heart uttered
itself in tears and said, “Angel, I will go no further, for
the spirit cf man acheth with infinity; unsufferable is the
glory of God. Let me lie down in the grave and hide me
from the persecution of the infinite; unsufferable is the


glory of God. For end, I se€ there is none; and from all
the listening stars that shone around issued a voice, “The
man speaks truly, end there is none, that we ever heard
of; end there is none.” The angel solemnly demanded,
“Is there indeed no end, and is this the sorrow that kills
you?” But no voice answered that he might answer him-
self. The angel threw up his hand to the heaven of
heavens, saying, “End there is not to the universe of
God.” It may be said something the same of the science
of electricity in its discoveries, and its voluminous applica-
tions. End there is not—not so far, at all events; and it
is hard whether there be an end of researches and dis-
coveries, before the consummation of all things.
The numerous and varied researches of the electric
science in its developments and applications is such that it
requires a new book to be written every week, before we
can realise anything approacning the history of its real
progress.
Anyone inclined to criticise this little work, let him or
her temper their criticism with mercy, remembering that
criticism is a very cheap article in our diays.
We can see in the present decade,
That the world by science is made;
Wonders on wonders, wonders untold,
Developed by science fold upon fold.
Secrets brought each day to our door,
Secrets surpassing the secrets of yore;
The wisdom of man ascending so high,
That the grand consummation seems to draw nigh.


The Wonders of Electricity
WE don’t need to sail the blue ocean of space with Caplary,
Herschel, and Newton to see millions of worlds and
thousands of systems hanging on nothing but the support
of Him who upholds all things by the word of His power.
Neither need we travel the immense continent of the
“Milky Way” with the present astronomer, to the boundar-
ies of the unknown, to seek the centre of gravitation We
need not go so far to seek for wonders. There are plenty
of wonders round about us; and wonders that noJxuman
being can ever comprehend their magnitude. The w ondei s
of the prescience of the Almighty Creator in the physical wor
There are wonders vary near to us. Our own
is a wonder —fearfully and wonderfully we aie ™
Their heights are unattainable, and their depth unfathom-
IT Her. are coutineu.s without boundaries, and oceans
without shores. There are other wonders which are less
in magnitude, namely, the wonders of science As mar-
vellous these wonders are, scientists never could, nor ca
do more, as it were, than strip the superficial veil that
covers the higher and deeper wonders of the Great Cieator
in nature. Among the numerous scientific wonders of the
last five or six decades, it seems that the wonders of the
electric science stands in front of them all, producing the
most beneficial results to mankind. As illummants, motive
power, and telegraphy, It is well known that electricity
is latent through all nature; there is not a square yard on
our planet without its presence. It is disseminated through
all nature. Place a galvanic battery on any spot and you
will find that you can generate electricity. Place it in the


the consecrated bell was sufficient to keep out artillery of
the clouds far enough from their dwellings. Instead of
having the patronage of his neighbours to this new scheme.
Franklin suffered a kind of persecution. When a thunder-
storm happened to go over Philadelphia Franklin and his
son had the blame, because they said they meddled with
things which they should leave to Providence.
When the news of Franklin’s scheme reached England
there was a great many that tried the experiment of
protecting their houses with a conductor. One Russian
savant tried at it and was killed on the spot. And an
Emperor of Turkey placed a conductor on his powder maga-
zine, and one sultry day he retired to the balcony of his
palace to witness the result. His Royal Highness had the
pleasure to see his magazine going in fragments to the air.
One of his noblemen, who witnessed the occurrence, said
“Providence is good, but the Emperor is an ass, and now
he has to pay for his folly.”
But the principal electricians of Europe had a more
happy experience when at a picnic on one of the rivers of
the Continent. The first thing they did was to send some
spirits over the river with electricity, with nothing but
the water for a conductor. Then they killed a turkey with
electricity and roasted it on an electric jack before an
electric fire, and fired a gun with electricity as a compliment
to the principal electricians of England, France, Russia, and
Holland.
Now we come to a new exodus in the history of elec-
tricity, as a great factor in telegraphy. Telegraphy drew
the attention of mankind at a very early period, even
hundreds of years before the Christian era, that is by
signals. Perhaps here it would not be out of place to say
a few words about the ancient metnods of telegraphy, before
entering on the modern and the wonderful scheme of
telegraphy by electricity.
The ancient Greeks used to correspond with their fleet
by lighting fires at different stages. Herodotus tells us
that Xerxes received a very speedy message of his generals
taking Athens by lighting torches on the summits of the


Isles of iEgean Sea. At the time of the Persian war there
was another plan adopted, that of post horses —horses
placed at different stages—that strided with great celerity
over the plains and passes of Asia Minor. Another scheme
was to place men at different stages who shouted messages
one to the other. And this living line would despatch a
message with wonderful speed.
But soon after the fall of the Roman Empire these
simple and ancient methods were swamped in the dark ages,
along with other things. The only organ they had to
cultivate science, literature, and theology was the Latin
language, and even that language was wondertully cor-
rupted.
Because there were so many words from the languages
of the barbarians were mixed with it, who established their
kingdoms on the ruins of the Roman Empire. But there
were few lhappy exceptions. There were a few sanctuaries,
consisting of exiles who flew before the force of persecution
to secret hiding places, and kept the word of God, the
learned lauguages, and the primitive doctrines in their
purity. But the Continent of Europe as a whole, darkness
covered it, and thick darkness the people. Now we come
to a more glorious dispensation, namely, the time that
Melancthon and Martin Luther blew the trumpet of the
reformation which awakened all Europe. When that
morning star was lit its radiance spread not only over
Europe, but by degrees over the civilised world. Schools
were opened, colleges were established. The learned lan-
guages were studied, science, literature, and theology
were cultivated. The false theories of the Greek
philosophers were refuted, ignorance and superstition were
dispersed. Now it was time to take advantage of this
great light to look for an item which was lost for five hun-
dred years, namely, for some method of telegraphy. Many
schemes were invented, as water clocks, water pipes, lifting
and lowering of balls, firing of guns, and reflecting glasses.
About this time there was a novice in a religious seminary
in France who had two brothers at different schools. The
schools in France at this time were on the principle of


cloister, a sort of semi-housing. It is supposed that the
two brothers could not see each other as often as they
fwished. They invented a very ingenious instrument to
correspond with each other, which they called the sema-
phore, answering to two Greek words quick writing. This
instrument was on a shape of a big T, with a top beam and
two side pieces. The top piece was the regulator, and the
side pieces were the indicators So by a pulley they could
produce ninety-two signals on both sides. By doing so
they were able to correspond with each other with consider-
able ease. At this time the peace of Prance was
threatened, so the attention of the French Government was
attracted to this instrument, and they erected it on the top
of castles and churches, and found it very useful to
correspond between Paris and the frontier.
Before long it was introduced to the English Govern-
ment. but it was of no use at night nor in foggy weather.
At the time of the Peninsular War there w r as a message
came from Wellington which read, “Wellington defeated.”
The fog came and interrupted the message, which caused a
great consternation in England. But if weeping endured
for the night, there was joy in the morning, when the day
dawned end the fog cleared, that they were able to read the
message in full, which read, “Wellington defeated the
French.”
Now -we enter on a new era in the history of telegraphy.
After making a graphic criticism on the old methods of
telegraphy, the Rev. I. Gamble suggested a very shrewd
plan to the Royal Society of London to send and receive
messages by means of electricity, but his suggestion was
treated with much indifference.
Sir Francis Graham followed with another scheme,
which he presented to the English Government. The com-
pliment which he received from the Government was that
he had better mind his own business, that a semapnore was
sufficient for them to do any official business. After Rev.
I. Gamble and Sir Francis Graham came Charles Morrison,
Cook, and Whetstone, and others, with varied and numerous
inventions, superseding and modifying the others. One


plan was twenty-six wires answering to the tw'enty-six
letters of the alphabet, with balls on the end of each wire,
and the letter printed on each ball, so when the electric
current moved the balls they could spell a message with
considerable ease. Another improved and simpler method
was five magnetic needles moving backwards and forwards
on a dial.
For all the opposition of the Royal Society of London
and the English Government, and their endeavour to crush
the electric telegraphy in its infancy, the telegraph tree was
planted, and its branches are spreading not only over
islands and continents, but also under the sea. Meta-
phorically speaking, the electric wire has brought the
remotest countries close together. In a few hours we are
able to hear of the special circumstances of the Far East;
and in less time, still, we are instructed of the state of war
in South Africa. Fathers, mothers, sisters, and brothers
can know the welfare or otherwise of their friends and rela-
tions there. We can change thoughts with our American
cousins in a few minutes. In fact, steam and electricity
have annihilated space and time; they have brought miles
into yards and months into minutes.
By patient study and profound investigation telegraphy
has attained somewhat its present perfection by an Ameri-
can electric engineer (Mr. Morse), who invented the dot and
dash alphabet. It is said that a sailor who learned this
alphabet was able to correspond with the object of his
affection on shore by showing long and short lights from the
port-hole of his ship, and that she could answer him from
on shore by showing long and short lights from her
window.
The Americans want to claim the honour for M". Morse
to be the father of telegraphy. But we cannot allow that
honour to Mr. Morse, to be the parent of this great science.
There is nothing more patent than that he was not the
one that laid the foundations; neither did he do the inter-
mediate work. No single individual can claim the honour
to be the sole inventor of telegraphy. One after the other


added his quota to the science, until it reached a certain
stage of perfection.
And it is evident that it has not reached its perfection
yet. But we have no objection to grant Mr. Morse the
honour of putting the keystone in the telegraph buildings.
After the science of telegraphy was so far completed, the
world was staggered by the news of another electric inven-
tion; another storey put on the electric building, by Mr.
Graham Bell; nemely, the electric telephone. Even the
whole fraternity of electricians could not believe it
possible for this instrument to do what Graham professed
it could do. But the unbelief of scientists did not do
away with the fact. The instrument soon gave proof of
its efficiency, for when the Queen was at the Isle of Wight
she could hear an organ playing in London, and the Prince
of Wales in his sick chamber could hear everything that
was going on in the theatre. A young electric engineer in
Halifax put a small instrument in the pulpit and a con-
ductor a mile long to a sick man’s bedroom, and the invalid
could hear almost every word of the sermon.
Then came Edison, the great American electrician, who
placed another storey on the electric tower, namely, the
electric light, a new discovery that astonished the world.
This force of nature has been waiting for 6000 years for
mankind to call for its service. At last God sent a genius
to the world in the per-on of Mr. Edison to utilise this
power for the service of man, and to teach others to tame
this force and make it subservient even to the touch of a
child’s finger.
It has been long known that electricity is capable of
producing an illumination far superior to oil or gas.
There have been, however, difficulties in the way of its
practical use; one of the main difficulties being the expense.
This, however, has been largely removed by the improve-
ment of dynamo electric machines, in which currents of
electricity can be generated through mechanical power at a
comparatively small cost. The attention of electricians
being thus turned to the matter with fresh interest, great
advances have been made in acquaintance with the best sub


stance to be employed as wicks or burners, so that within
the last few years the electric light has become an accom-
plished fact. Its first introduction was in lighthouses, to
which purpose it is admirably adapted, and at many stormy
points shines forth leagues and leagues—a true star of hope
to the anxious mariner. Being fixed on the foremast of
large ships it has proved its value in dark and foggy
weather by averting collisions. In America it has been
proposed, by the aid of lofty towers and powerful engines,
to make artificial sunlight above a city, and thus turn night
into day. Beautiful indeed are the displays of this energy
through an enterprising hotelkeeper at the Falls or Niagara.
The effect of colour produced, we are told, puts the richest
display of the painter to shame. Under the rays of an
electric lamp shaded by red glass, this immense mass of
water takes the appearance of an avalanche of purple land.
Then in a moment, by changing the glass, it is made to
gleam like molten silver; or by the use of alternate colours
becomes a splendid moving rainbow. The foam filling the
abyss below shines beneath the electric radiance like the
surface of the Ocean on a stormy night. Hitherto the
sudden illumination of Niagara by a flash of lightning has
been reckoned one of the most rare and striking of its
aspect. Now this effect may be presented at will, to the
delight of tourists, from any part of the world.
Science has proved to be able to make this ltory Vof
nature to take the place of the sun in photography. ca st is
not only lighting streets and public buildings, but ihas
become a welcome guest to private houses in all the prin-
cipal centres of population through the civilised world. And
it would not be a very bold attempt to predict that electric
lighting will become as common as kerosene lamps. It is
in the range Of possibility for every family to procure a
small dynamo, on a small scale, to light a house; and at the
same time to procure motive power to produce motive power
to drive a sewing machine. And to utilise electricity for
the above-mentioned service, Sir William Thompson is
solvpd a problem for those purposes; namely, of storing


electricity in a manner and on a scale useful for these appli-
cations.
The electric energy has been proved in the scientific
world, not only to be capable of lighting houses and driving
sewing machines; but that a box one cubic foot in size,
which contained in it more than enough electric force to
raise a million pounds from the ground —that means the
enormous weight of 9712 tons —and this box was sent from
Paris to Glasgow, without losing any of its invisible con-
tents.
In America they make more use of the electric force
than in an other country as an illuminant and motive
power, by different applications. Toung people sometimes
get married by means of the electric wire, and at times
averting very ugly mistakes. One time I read of a young
couple going to church to get married, but unfortunately
the parson who was going to solemnise the sacred service,
had too much whisky before going to church, and instead
of reading the marriage ceremony he started to read the
burial service, saying, “A man is born of a woman, his
days are few and full of trouble.” The young man told the
pairsOn(, "IMr. Thompson, we came here to be married, and
not to be buried.” The parson said, ‘‘l’ll marry you if you
like, but you had better a great deal to be buried.
But to send the wires over the forests and the jungles
of f k j n '(fn countries was the most difficult work, and many
pr. , lives were lost in the attempt, bandicoots and tigers
at the bottoms of the poles, and elephants and
buffaloes rubbing at them and throwing them down;
monkeys clinging to the wires with claws and tails, making
themselves living conductors, and getting killed. Now all
difficulty of this sort is over. There are only the burning
sands of Africa and the Arctic regions out of the telegraph
map.
But before finishing to spread the wires over the sand,
philosophers and electric engineers contemplated to extend
the same conquest to the sea. So they started to lay a
cable between Dover, in England, and Calais, in France.
But it did not work more than a few hours, and no wonder,


if the story he true that a fisherman grappled the cable and
cut a piece off it, and took it to Calais to exhibit as some
marvellous specimen of sea-weed. Next year a stronger
cable was erected, which was not liable to such accident, and
which is wearing ever since. The great scientists thought
that if it were possible to lay a cable between France and
England that it was possible to lay a cable between England
and America. So the attempt was made, but it proved
twice a failure. But men of science are men of courage, so
they made the third attempt, and succeeded to lay a cable
between Ireland and Newfoundland. And the first message
was a change of congratulations between the Queen of
England and the President of the United States of America,
the Mayor of New York and the Mayor of London, for the
triumph of science. After this there was a uay of thanks-
giving appointed in all the states of America for the
conquest of science. But this very day the cable faffed to
act.
Soon after this the Civil War broke out in America, so
another attempt was abandoned. But during the three
years and a half of the war that time was not all lost; the
great men made use of the time for another attempt. They
formed a great company, and those concerned each side of
the Atlantic contributed very freely toward the great outlay.
They did like the old woman who had got a little in arrears
for her rent, whose landlord sent two bailiffs to seize her
few chattels; and when they arrived to take inventory of
all her goods, and started to mark them all, when they came
to a little trinket on the mantelpiece the old widow said.
"Don’t mark that, it is a birthday present.” Said the un-
merciful bailiffs “We must mark them all.” Presently they
came to another trinket. Says the poor widow, "Don’t
mark that, that is a keepsake I have to remember my
deceased husband.” Said they, "We must mark them all.”
When the poor widow found that all her importunties did
not avail, she tried another logic with the bailiffs. She
went to the garden and brought a beehive, and threw it and
its contents into the house and locked the door, so the little
soldiers began to stab the unwelcome strangers with their


bayonets. It is easy to imagine the unequal battle between
ten thousand soldiers and the two bailiffs. The minor
army tried to make their retreat, but could find no way to
escape, so they called out to the old widow, “Let us out, let
us out;” and she calmly said “I will let you out when you
mark them all. ’ So the great scientists tried another logic
with the fourth attempt of the cable. They chartered the
monster of the sea, the Great Eastern, and were successful
to lay a cable between England and America. And the
marine cable became an accomplished fact. For all this
triumph of science and the enormous expense, it was but an
index of the stretch of marine cable that connect almost all
the countries of the world. There is only one link in the
chain wanted so that it would reach round the world, and
that is from some point in South America to Jepoca.
Telegraphy, like other great inventions, was of a very
small beginning, particularly in America. The first day
the telegraph office was opened for business an old gentle-
man came for two cents, and a half worth of telegraphy.
In a few days business increased, and a few dollars were
taken. From this small beginning it became a great
harvest. In less than five years there were over 6800 miles
of wire spread over America. Now the mileage is increased
to scores of thousands.
The total mileage of the telegraph system of the world
is about five million miles. If all the wires in the world
were in one continuous line, it would wrap round the
equator one hundred and ninety-eight times. Then there
would be enough wire* to spare to connect all the countries
of the world together. An ignorant Persian asked an
electric engineer how on earth was it possible to send mes-
sages so far. The engineer said, r ‘You suppose a dog with
its tail in Persia and its mouth in London. If you tread on
its tail here it will bark in London.”
It is supposed that the late Mr. Bennet, of New York,
made the most lavish expenditure on telegraphy of any one.
When the Prince of Wales was visiting the Niagara Mr.
Bennet sent his reporter there, and instructed him to
occupy the telegraph at any expense. When he went there


the Prince had not arrived. He sent a message that he had
nothing to occupy the telegraph with. His mas ter told him
to wire the Book of Proverbs. That was done before the
arrival of the Prince. He sent again to ask what was the
next. The answer was, “Wire the Book of Ecciesiastes.
But the Prince arrived before many words of that book
were wired, and Mr. Bennet had tne pleasure of having the
first news published in has “New York Herald.” The
electric wire is a great factor in its connection with the
press; it neralds the commercial, social, political, and
religious news of the world to our doors daily. Another
consideration is that trade and commerce are great culti-
vators and fertilisers of civilisation; and steam and elec-
tricity are powerful auxiliaries to trade and commerce.
Advantage should be taken by trade and commerce to push
civilisation further among the heathen world by intro-
ducing steam, the science of electricity, science, and litera-
ture, and teach them that we are their friends and not
thelir enemies. By so doing civilised nations would stamp
their influence, their manners and customs, on the un-
civilised, and by degrees the ground would be fallowed and
cultivated to receive the good Gospel seed.
Now steam and electricity, in company with the
magnetic needle, have been the means to bring remote
nations in contact with each other, who, Sn former times,
were separated by oceans and continents which could not
be penetrated. The inhabitants of the East did scarcely
know that there was such a place as England. They just
heard that there was a little island somewhere in the west,
but they knew but little or nothing about it.
It is here natural to ask the question how many colonies
had England before the introduction of the magnetic needle.
Not one, to my knowledge. Under its guidance Captain
Cook found the South Sea Island, and the mainland of New
South Wales, and Columbus found the Western World.
How many colonies has Great Britain now—Newfound-
land, Canada, Hong Kong, great possessions in East and
West India, four colonies in Africa, namely Egypt, Cape
Colony, Orange Free State, and the Transvaal; the five


Australian colonies, New Zealand, and Tasmania; and all
these are only parts of Great Britain's dominions. ~
No man has ever reigned over an Empire so vast as
King Edward. His Majesty rules over one continent, a
hundred peninsulars, five hundred promontories, three thou-
sand lakes, two thousand rivers, and ten thousand islands.
Queen Victoria ascended the throne of an Empire em-
bracing eight million three hundred and twenty-nine square
miles. She handed it down to King Edward with three
million miles added to it. The Queen found the revenue of
the Empire at £7,500,000; she left the revenue at
£250,000,000, the army twice as many men, as in the first
year of Victoria’s relign; and the navy has nearly quadrupled
itself. Seventy per cent, of all the ships on the sea fly
the British flag. The Empire, the Empire to which Queen
Victoria ascended in 1837, covered one sixth of the land of
the world; that of King (Edward the Seventh covers nearly
one-fourth. The Union Jack has unfurled itself, so to
speak, over two acres of new territory every time the clock
ticked since 1800.
King Edward the Seventh rules over an Empire fifty-
three times as big as France, fifty-two times as big as Ger-
many, three and a half times as big as Europe, three times
as big as America. He has three times as many subjects
os the Czar of Russia, and he reigns over more territory in
America than the President of the United States. Meta-
phorically speaking, all this immense territory was thrown
to Great Britain by the point of the magnetic needle. Now
steam and electricity have cemented these wonderful terri-
tories into one solid Empire. The flag of Great Britain is
now floating in every sea, and her mandates and sceptre
make tyrants to tremble through all the civilised and
uncivilised world. What an alarming despatch Lord
Salisbury sent to Lord Kitchener at Fashoda. He said, “If
the French did not leave Fashoda that war was only a
matter of a few days.” He said, “If France will go to war
with England we will strip her of every colony she possesses,
we will take every man-of-war that will venture to sea, we
will crush and burn every cruiser that we come across.


We are ready for France any day, either on land or on
sea.”
But war and rumours of war are not going to last for'
ever. The Prince of Peace is going to have something to
do with this old world. He is going to improve its con-
dition. There will be other news then war and rumours of
war. The electric wire will be consecrated to do a better
work. The news flashing on the electric wire will be that
swords in South Africa and other places are turned into
plough shares, and spears into pruning hooks.
* Civilisation will be the outcome of trade and commerce,
and arbitration will be the outcome of civilisation. The
talents which are now inventing the most effective weapons
to destroy human lives will be then employed in settling
national disputes, not with the sword, but with sound ana
wise council of arbitration.
And, indeed, as our expectations of progress of electric
science are multiplied, and becoming unlimited, so, also,
may be our hope from its moral influence. Every wdre
between civilised nations is a fresh link in the chain of en-
lightened friendship. As soon as men are able rightly to
appreciate the true benefit of such a discovery, they must
surely recognise how unworthy are its marvellous powers
of being in service like that of mutual destruction. And
thus time will prove the telegraph a more potent ally in the
cause of peace than it was of war. The business world
naturally has been learned to avail itself of electric com-
munication, which is of explicit advantage to tradesmen
dealing in perishable goods, as fish, fruit, and .so forth.
But it must be confessed to have here done harm as well
as good; lending itself to that spirit of rash speculation and
mere gambling in stocks and shares, which in the last few
years has gone far to injure honest transactions, and
’deteriorate our national characters.
The telegraph has been a too convenient instrument in
the hand of men making haste to be rich by ruining their
neighbour. Nevertheless, the advantage and benefit that
is derived from this marvellous science does more than
counterbalance all the evil that is achieved. How often


has the telegraph brought help and encouragement that
without it must have come too late. How many lives have
been saved by its swift summons of the experienced doctor;
what anxiety has it not been able to relieve, what long
weeks of dread cut short?
The great problem that engaged our men of science was
how to keep a sufficient store of electric power at hand, as
gas is kept in pipes, and duly distributing it to a number of
small lamps connected with the same source. This problem
has been successfully solved. Now electricity is in a
position to offer its use in every household as a clear and
pure light, which gives little trouble, and is less liable than
gas to get out of order; sends out hardly any heat, will not
destroy furniture and pictures, and does not, like gas, need
to burn away the very air we breathe. There is the least
possible danger connected with its use on this small scale,
certainly less than in the case of gas, though there were
persons found at its introduction thinking that we would
be blown up sky high, or shrivelled to cinder, some day, if
once we let such mysterious strangers to our houses. The
same sort of persons who exclaimed against gas when it
was brought into use, and for a long time would have
nothing to do wtith such a stranger. The same with other
inventions —as steamboats and railways. We have seen
the difficulty to hold electricity for a moment, a difficulty
partly met by the Lyden jar, or condenser. Now we hear
of a Frenchman, M. Faure, who found it possible not only
to imprison, but to fetter a large quantity of the subtle
force in an accumulator. This contrivance, the materials
of which are simple and inexpensive, as its effects are im-
portant. This is a form of secondary battery, where the
positive and negative electricities become created and re-
leased through a gradual process of chemical change, allow-
ing them to discharge, not with a lightning rush, as from a
Lyden jar, but in a slow continuous current. Great stir has
been caused in the scientific world by news that a box
one cubic foot in size was sent from. Paris to Glasgow
without losing any of its invisible contents. Of this
small reservoir of battery power Sir William Thompson


speaks enthusiastically as at last solving the problem of
storing electric energy, what a water cistern in a manner
and on a scale, useful for many important applications; and
at first it can do for electric light what a water cistern
in a house does for an inconstant water supply. The
Faure accumulator is always kept charged from the engine
by a house supply wire with a proper automatic stop to
check the supply when the accumulator is full, and will be
always ready at any hour of day or night to give any light
that is required, as well as to work machinery, cither in
workshops or private houses.
Electricity is prepared to do the work of steam as well
as of gas. The wires which Edison proposes to light New
York can also, he has promised, be- used in the day time for
carrying motive power that may be applied to any kind of
machinery, from printing press to a sewing machine. Thus
everyone can have his own engine at command without
trouble.
Now many forms of forces can be turned to electricity,
and electricity turned into power available for a thousand
and one applications. Here is a vast field for hope for
the greatest results in saving labour and ameliorating the
condition of human life.
Science has an eye on all the forces, rather the idle
forces of nature which are ready to press into the service of
man.
Now we can get wind and water to grind electricity for
us. What advance has been made by the fruitful exertion
of the mind to ease and minimise labour of the workmen.
It is marvellous how the wild forces of nature have been
running waste for ages and thousands Of years wafting for
mankind to call for their service. Water, wind, electricity,
and magnetism, which can be applied to power, as well as
steam and electricity. Now science has brought all these
forces subservient to its will. Now our scientists can make
wind and water to grind electricity, can make the Palls of
Niagara to light a Continent, and other falls to do the same,
perhaps not to the same extent. They are able to team the
lightning; they can make it go round the world in a few


minutes, or make it gentle enough to work a sewing
machine; make it to obey the touch of a child’s finger.
They can make it to speak and to write, can convey human
thoughts over continents, and under oceans. The journey
is never too far for this fruitful messenger, and is never too
short. Hs is not too proud to send a message from one
room to another.
Electricity is a servant, if we may call it so, of the
greatest celebrity in the world, and has the most varieties
Ot duties to perform. It is the swiftest, the strongest, and
fhe most faithful of all the forcesi of nature; is strong and
willing enough to draw a train, and drive a steamer over
the ocean. One scientist said that it has enough power to
drive all the trains in the world, and all the steamers on the
ocean at the same time. It is gentle enough to boil a
kettle; no duty is too small nor too big. and it is always
ready for its work. It 'is never too early nor too late, and
it never gets tired; and when doing its work in one place
It can do the same work in another place at the same time.
If driving a locomotive in Paris, he can drive another in
Persia at the same time. It can light Pekin, in China,
and at the same time illuminate London with its radiance.
It is also a finished linguist. Give it a message in any
language it will be sent correct to the letter, and it never
gets drunk and gets into a muddle. The electric science is
the most extensive field for scientists to exert their energy,
and to occupy their fertile talents to develop the secrets of
this phenomena. It is not too much to say that the electric
science is the most progressive science in the world, and
the one that provides the most beneficial results to man-
kind. The science of telegraphy was the first gem which
was brought to the surface from the deep mine of electric
discoveries, which was but simple in its first inception, but
gradually being improved from the first suggestion of the
Rev. J. Gamble and Sir Francis Graham; and kept improv-
ing step by step by patient study of many inventors, up to
Mr. Morse’s time, the American electrician. Messrs. Cook
and Whetstone, no doubt, were the first who established a
telegraph for practical purposes, comparatively on a large


scale, and in which the public were more nearly concerned
than in those experiments in which the ends of the wire
were brought into laboratories. The earliest experiments
in telegraphy, it will be seen, aimed at sending a light
charge of frictional electricity to some distance. In the
second stage, currents from a galvanic battery were used
to produce chemical action at the other end of the line; thus
signals were given through a bubble of gas produced by
decomposition in tubs of water.
All this was slow and complicated work. The practical
success of telegraphy resulted from the discovery of the
relation between electricity and magnetism.
To send this current by what is called the galvanic
battery, of which the names of two Italians are identified to
have had a share in the invention.
This apparatus igi to the telegraph what the boiler is to
the steam engine. The simplest form of a galvanic battery
is two pieces of different metals, such as copper and zinc,
held on each side of the tongue, and allowed to touch when
an itching sensation, and a peculiar taste, will be felt in the
mouth, caused by the generation of electricity, as may be
seen by applying the tongue to the conductor of an electric
machine while at work, when a similar taste may be
p*rreived. Acid or alkaline, according as the conductor is
charged with positive or negative electricity. This effect is
caused by chemical action of the moisture of the tongue
upon the zinc or the copper, the former being a metal more
ready oxidised than the latter. Other metals may be used
in the same way, but these two are found best capable of
acting thus in combination. Plates of them are placed in a
jar or box of some non-conductor material, filled with liquid
slightly accumulated to stimulate chemical action, and the
tops of the plates being connected by a wire a current
sets in, running from one to the other. Any number Oi
these cells may he joined to a trough or otherwise to make
a more or less powerful battery; one plate of each division
always being connected with its neighbour in the next,
leaving the copper plate at one end of the series, and the
zinc at the other, to be connected by a longer wire. Then a


current produced by the combined galvanic action of all
the pairs of plants in the cells will flow along the wire, be it
a thousand miles or a few inches. We have here an
electric circuit, on every part of which the same electrical
effects are produced, to all intents and purposes simul-
taneously, by the galvanised current, when once set flowing,
by closing the circuit that is connecting the wire to both
ends of the battery.
Nor need this wire be continuous if the two ends from
the copper and the zinc respectively are somewhere con-
nected with the earth, where the current seems to make its
way round for itself without 1 any conductor.', So
the early telegraphs were supplied with two wires, one for
the transmission of the current from the battery to tne place
at which the message must be read, and the other for its
return.
Only one wire now is used, the earth making the return.
Half of every telegraph circuit, however long, is the flowing
of a current from one little bit of metal to another, at the
two ends of the battery. If a piston of a battery be the
boiler, this piston of the telegraph was supplied first by the
magnetic needle, which in the early part of this century had
been observed to show a property testifying to the connec-
tion between its phenomena and those of electricity, a
proper balanced magnetic needle, deflected while a current
of electricity is passing near it. For a moment it ceases to
obey the influence of the earth magnetism, and moves with
a tendency to place itself at right angles to the passage of
the current turning to the left or right, or according as
the current moves in one direction or the other, that is from
the positive or the negative pole of the galvanic battery.
This effect is strengthened by coiling the wire, so that a
considerable strength shall act at once upon the needle,
which, when thus enclosed in a coil from the galvanometer’
whereby we are able to measure the force of current, more-
over, according to the copper or the zinc end of the
battery be used for charging the wire. The current is
found to pass along (it in one direction or another, turning
the needle in each case to the opposite side. In the tele


graph apparatus the needle is hung between the coils of
wire joined at one end, so that the current will run up the
one and run down the other, giving to the needle, as it were,
a push and a pull at the same time, from one side and the
other. Now let these wire coils be fixed, we say, in London;
make a part of an electric circuit from the copper end to the
zinc of a battery at Bristol. As soon as the circuit is closed
by attaching the wire to the battery, be it a part of a
second, the whole length of the wire is charged and the
needle moves. These effects, as soon as the circuit is
broken. Again, by disconnecting the wire with the battery,
the current caused by connecting the copper with the line,
and the zinc with the earth, begin at the Bristol end, and
when reversing this connection begin in the wire at the
London end, and appears to come backwards as the battery
sucked it instead of sending it. A telegraphist at
Bristol, by starting currents from either end of his battery,
causes them to traverse the wire coil in one or the other
directions, which makes the needle move to the right or to
the left. He has thus the power to spell out signals
according to any code that may have been agreed upon.
This was the principle of Cook and Whetstone, the needle
of a compass directed artificially. At first they employed
five needles with as many separate wires; later two wires
and two needles. Eventually a single instrument was per-
fected with an electric alarm bell for calling the attention
of the clerks, which method was furnished for many years.
The use of telegraphy in England was first confined to rail-
ways, and even there it met with opposition from the true
John Bull spirit, which did not fail to denounce it as new-
fangled, just as steamboats and locomotives had in their turn
been looked upon with suspicion. Before long, however,
the public began to use it more freely; and thenceforth until
now, when we should not know how to do without it. its
history has been of gradual improvement and increased
popularity.
While it remained in the hands of private companies
the expense of telegraphing was against its employment.
But great steps came to be taken, when in 1899 the whole


telegraph system passed into the hands of the Government,
and was made a branch of the Post Office, and a uniform
charge fixed for messages between any parts of the United
Kingdom. It was contemplated that the charge would be
sixpence. What the charge is now is without the bound of
my knowledge. One thing Ido know, if the colonies were
to lower the charges for telegraphy it would facilitate great
convenience to the public, and gain popularity without les-
sening the profit.
At present England, with more than one hundred thou-
sand miles of wire, has a greater number of telegraph offices
and messages in proportion to its population than any
country in Europe. Now, when we consider the new
world, about the same time when telegraphy was put in
operation by Gook and Whetstone in England, and by Stein-
heil in Germany, an American artist, Samuel Morse, took
out a patent for an invention at which he has been working
independently. His instrument depended on the discovery
of the properties of electro magnet. Not long after the
influence of the current upon the magnetic needle was
observed. It had been found that a horse-shoe-bar of soft
iron, wrapped round with insulated wire, becomes a magnet,
so long as a current of electricity be passing through the
wire, and will therefore attract a piece of iron, like that
closes the end of a common toy magnet. Such a cross piece
or iron known as the armature of a magnet, which takes the
place of a magnetic needle in Morse’s telegraph. When the
current flows towards the magnet, being let go through the
intermission of the current, it is held back by a spring out
of the motion thus communicated to it, by breaking contact
with the battery. Signals are formed on a system that
will be more fully explained further on. It all looks very
simple, but what a patient study and profound investigation
went toward enabling the youngest telegraphists to handle
One of the most marvellous wonders of nature, and work
with it at their will. The Morse system has passed into wide
use, that Americans claim the right of honouring its in-
ventor as the true father of modern telegraphy. But at


first his countrymen, were not so quick to recognise its
merits. It was not till 1844 that Morse got the length of
having a line put up between Washington and Baltimore,
and even then only by Government aid. For some time it
remained a matter of curiosity On the first of April, 1845,
it was opened for the public at a charge of one cent., about
half a penny for every four letters signalled. During the
first days it is stated that no customers appeared at the
office but one gentleman, who asked a good many questions,
the working of the instrument showed him for nothing. On
the fourth day he returned, and went so far as half a cent,
worth of telegraphy. Next day business was more brisk,
to the extent of twelve and a half cents.; by the ninth day
about three dollars had been taken. From- that small
beginning arose the gigantic telegraph business of the
United States. Brother Jonathan was some years behind
John Bull in adopting the new invention, but its use grew
far more quickly with the former than with the lattei.
It must be admitted that the chief improvements in
telegraphy have come from America. It was a clever
operator from Boston who first showed the practicability of
working with currents from each end of the wire at the
same time, on the duplex system, as it is called. Since
then it has been found possible for currents, even four cur-
rents, to work at once, and even more without confusion.
From anecdotes it will be perceived that a skilful
operator, with a quick ear, has only to hear the click of the
messages to spell them off by sound as easily as he can
read them. So delicate the perception grows, that clerks,
accustomed to send to and receive from one another come
to recognise the touch of their unual «or/«spondents.
It is even said that a deaf man has proved himself an
accomplished operator, reading by the sense of feeling. He
put his leg against that of the instrument table, and could,
thus interpret the slight jarring and quivering produced by
the working of the apparatus.
The Morse instrument does not depend on the Attendant,
who may be inattentive or inexperienced, for it can also
record for itself what it has to say. Let the armature of the


magnet be fitted with a point, which acts as a pencil; then,
as often as attraction taaes place through the closing of the
circuit a score or dab is made by this point on a strip of
paper kept moving before it by clock-work machinery. The
scores, of course, will be longer or shorter, according to the
length of the note struck on the key at the other end. The
letters are marked off in this manner, twenty or more words
a minute can be despatched; as many as fifty has been
attained by a skilful operator. And by the use of the Whet-
stone automatic system the speed is so much increased that
one hundred and twenty words per minute can be sent;,
almost as fast as some people can speak. In this system a
slip of paper punctured with holes in the shape of Morse’s
letters, introduced into the transmitting instrument, and the
current being sent and stopped, as it finds its way through
the holes in the paper, corresponding marks are conse-
quently produced at the other end.
In ocean telegraphy, where the current would not be
strong enough to move an armature readily, signals are
given through the quivering of a spot of light reflected from
a tiny mirror, verberated by a magnet; or they may be recor-
ded in a thin line of ink spurted out of a fine glass tube
moved to right and left. These are the inventions of Sir
William Thompson. Messages so marked down have still
to be interpreted and reduced to ordinary writing. But in
the hands of our present inventors the telegraph is not yet
at the end of its resources. By means of a contrivance too
complicated and delicate for the writer to describe, it has
actually been made possible to print off in plain ink letters
and words dedicated to the obedient types by a compositor,
■who in his life had not been within a hundred miles of a
place where the printing was done.
We have not only writing, but even speaking, by tele-
graph, if such a phrase is permissable. The telegraph is
literally the far-writer; the new invention by some is called
the far-speaker, Or telephone. Other names have been sug-
gested to it, such as mile-tongue, the world’s trumpet, the
speaking post, and the word lightning. It would be a
hard task to detail the various experiments in the nature


and productions of sound, which till recently were hardly
noticed except for their ingenuity, but which led on to this
wonderful disco\ery. It had struck several investigators
that a stretched membrane could be made to vibrate, and
thus produce sound like a drum of a human ear. Sound
had been conveyed by electric wire as well as by mere vibra-
tion of rods and cords. But these toys of science, as they
seemed, had led to no practical results.
So far back as 1854 Mr. Charles Bourseul, a French
soldier, published an article in “L’ Illustration’ on the
electric transmission of speaking, containing the following
pregnant passage:—“Suppose one would speak near movable
metal plates, so flexible as not to move any of the vibrations
produced by the voice, and that this plate should alter-
nately establish and interrupt communication with a battery,
you might have at a distance another plate which would
produce at the same time the same vibration as electric
battery: two vibrating plates and a metal, and a metal
thread, would be sufficient. The very name of telephone
was not unknown in 1844. The “Illustrated London News
gave an article describing an invention so called for com-
municating sound to a distance of some miles; which was,
in fact, a great trumpet acting by compressed air, and had
nothing to do with electricty. Finally the telephone, like
so many discoveries, is claimed by the Chinese, and
in this case with more truth than usual, for a writer
named Chin Too declares in the Pekin “Gazette 0 that it was
invented in the year 968 by the distinguished philosopher
King Too Whing.
Several persons, then, have been put forward as the
parent of the telephone, but the credit of the first to 1 bring
it before the public in a practical form must be given to
Alexander Graham Bell, so little impression had been made
by previous steps toward such a discovery that tne first
account of this new Yankee notion passed for a mere hoax,
and even scientific men staggered when Sir William Thomp-
son sent home a description from the Philadelphia Centen-
nial Exhibition of 1876.
In a few months, however, the fame of it had spread


over the world, and electricians were eagerly interested in
the new direction that had just been opened out to them.
The new wonders of science soon came into use for the
practical purposes to which it was so well adapted. In
England, for certain reasons, partly on account of the high
price, partly from the national slowness to accept anything
novel, partly because our Post Office had the monopoly of
telegraphing, and whicn raised some difficulty about private
communications of the kind, it was not at first so widely
welcomed as might have been anticipated. But m other
countries, especially in America and Germany, its advan-
tages have been fully recognised; the public offices, railway
companies, and business men, with extensive premises, find
it a great saving of time and trouble. Such is the main
end of most scientific inventions. Prince Bismarck, of the
German Empire, is stated to be connected by a telephone
with his country house. So, too, the President of the
French Republic has a telephone communication with the
House of Legislature, and can thus resign, if so minded, in
less than half a minute. Even Chinese mandarins give
orders by telephone. If things go on at this rate we will
soon let our sovereigns, statesmen, and such like, live in
[New England or the Sandwich Island, should these climates
suit their health better. Once established, we can see that
the telephone could be worked by any one, no matter how ig-
norant of its principle, and there is the further advantage of
secrecy and reliability in communications not requiring to
pass through the hands of possibly indiscreet operators and
tardy messengers. in some telegraph offices arrangements
have been made for correspondents to exchange secrets if not
exactly face to face, at least from ear to mouth, as it were,
Though here comes the practical difficulty, that some agent
of the telegraph company must know what the public say
in this manner, in order to settle what is to pay. This in-
strument, therefore, seems to be more suited for private
than for public use. It has been applied with great success
to shooting ranges, where a man cr,r. know when he fires at
a target a thousand yards off the result of his aim in a
moment. It has also been used for communication between


ships of a squadron lying in a harbour, and the galleries
of a mine. And if all the expectations with which it was
hailed by the scientific world, have not been realised, it will
be but a matter of time to find new tasks of which it is well
capable, especially when conjoined with other inventions
that came just at the right juncture to supplement this one.
The world was scarcely done wondering at the telephone
before its admiration had to be repeated for the miciophone,
with which Professor Hughes’s name is identified. The
performance of the microphone, means, in fact, a battery
applied to the telephonic ear, instead of a magnet, but a
battery with transmitting apparatus so sensitive that
resistance to the electric current is constanly increased
and decreased by the slightest wave of a sound, which thus
•conveyed by the wire is produced in the vibration of the
membrane, similar to that produced by the magnet.
Neither the principle nor the apparatus of the micro-
phone can well be explained here. But the result is that,
whereas the sounds of the' telephone are apt to reach their
destination in a somewhat confused and enfeebled state, the
microphone actually magnifies the least noise that is en-
trusted to it, as the microscope brings invisible animalcule
into sight. A whisper, inaudible to the sending apparatus,
comes out loud and clear at the other end. A tread of a fly
moving near the battery is heard by the distant listener,
as distinctly, as it were, furnished by horses’ hoofs. So,
too, the ticking of a watch, the buz of an insect, the rustling
of writing pen so gentle that the ear cannot catch it without
the aid of such an instrument. The weak point of the
microphone is its strength, for one must speak low indeed
to it if one does not wish to stun the listener.
It is stated that in America and other places people
have availed themselves regularly of such a way of having
sermons laid on to their premises. In this case it is
desirable that the preacher should not be too excitable, as
shaking the pulpit interferes with the action of ingenious
tell-tale. Prom Switzerland, in the same way, we hear
Of an Italian opera performance being carried along a thin
wire to another building, where several critical auditors


testified that they did not lose a note either of the words
or the music thus rendered by the microphone or, x-ather,
the micro-telephone.
Several eminent physicians and surgeons have shown
that by the use of the microphone applied to their instru-
ments the presence, we say, of a bullet, and its position,
could be readily detected by a top probe, otherwise imper-
ceptible, so that electricity can aid them to reveal hidden
mischief hitherto only to be guessed at. Here is opened
a new field, for truly wonderful and eminently useful are
the adaptation of this discovery. It has been suggested
that a practically deaf person has only to carry about his
microphone to enjoy the pleasure of conversation through
an excellent ear trumpet, without his friend having to bawl
loud enough to make things unpleasant. A microphone
placed in the recesses of a mine might at once give notice
of the hissing escape of that deadly gas which destroys so
many lives. So, to use it with the instrument for measur-
ing the trembling of the earth, it might announce the first,
faintest groan of an earthquake or an eruption, and thus
warn the inhabitants against danger; as dreaded in other
portions of the globe, as explosions are in our collieries.
An army, it is said, need only to surround its camp with
microphones, these sentinels of science would infallibly
reveal the approach of an enemy, distinguishing the tramp
of an infantry from the clatter of cavalry and the roll of
guns; and if it were to join this apparently insignificant
apparatus with another, as one enthusiast suggested,
namely, a sort of gigantic speaking trumpet, the eloquent
debates of Our great statesmen, instead of being penned up
in a sleepy House of Parliament, might be given forth loud
enough to be heard by all London. This would be a poor
treat to a sick person. The microphone, as this speaking
trumpet is called, threatens unconsciousness as well as ad-
vantage. Let its use once be established among us in all
the ways prooosed, we would find that walls might truly
have eers, and that what was spoken in secret may be pro-
claimed on tho houseton. In connection with the micro-
phone and telephone, should be mentioned the phonograph,


though it is not properly an electric apparatus, it is to sound
that the photograph is to sight. For by it, not our appear-
ance, but our voice, may be printed off upon a plate and sent
to any part of the world. This extraordinary invention
belongs to an extraordinary man, the American electrician,
Mr. Edison, who might hold even a higher place than he
does in the world of science, if his eager mind had not been
so busy in so many directions. The story goes that one
day when Mr. Edison was making experiments with a
telephone, a little sharp point attached to its vibrating mem-
brane pricked his finger, so sharply as to make it bleed. It
at once occurred to him, if these vibrations have such force
they might produce, upon a flexible surface, the trace of all
the sound-waves of speech, and that these traces might be
made to reproduce mechanically the vibrations which has
caused them. In two days, it is said, the apparatus for this
purpose was conceived, and put in execution. The principle
of this apparatus as in some respects like that of a musical
box, provided with one style, or little point, instead of
many such sharp proturberances which you may see round
the barrel that is turned to grind out a tune. This point in
the phonograph is fitted in the membrane struck on by the
roice, and makes the vibration communicated to it upon a
£heet of tin foil which, rolled round a cylinder, is made to
pass before it, raising thus an indented trace of the sound
waves. This part of tin foil, with the impression of sound
actually engraved upon it. may be taken off, and fitted on
any similar barrel. Then, the action being reversed as the
plate is spun round, its indentation is cut upon another steel
point, which sets another membrane vibrating with the
very same sound that produced the first impression. It
is a small wonder, when this contrivance was first exhibited
before the French Academy of Science, that some of the
members declared they were being tricked by ventriloquism.
The voice of the phonograph, indeed, is apt to have a
suspicious resemblance to that of Punch and Judy. To
reproduce the tones faithfully it is necessary that the
machine be turned at the same pace when going and when
taken off the impression, since heighth of sound in the


musical scale depends on the number of vibrations caused
in a given time. So if you turn the barrel more slowly
than when the message was being recorded, you give it a
bass voice when turning it too slowly, and if turning it too
quickly it may rise to a squeak. The accent, however,
remains recognisable. For this reason it is found neces-
sary to works the barrels by the regulated motion of clock-
work. Then even music can be ground off as by a hurdy-
gurdy. The sanguine inventor not unreasonably boasts of
the many applications that may be made of this discovery
as soon as perfected. But who can have the least im-
agination of when any inventor will come to perfection.
The phonograph, no doubt, will be improved, and will come
to a point, that it will come more freely to the hands of the
public. Every house some day will have its phonograph
to amuse the family. Telegraph companies will have
nothing to do but to provide wires and instruments, every
one will send and receive messages of his own. Letters
can be written to the blind, or spoken, rather, for we can
speak our letters now, and can send amusing ones round
to be read by a whole circle of acquaintances. Witnesses
may be examined and give evidence, lawyers make speeches,
judges sum up, all comfortably lying in bed if they like.
Authors shall no longer send scrawled and blotted manu-
script to the printer, but dictate their inmost work to the
public direct. Teaching, too, can be done by phonograph.
One said that it required another instrument to keep them
at their work; this, he said, will perhaps be done by Mr.
Edison in one of his leisure moments. The same one said
a lover need not risk catching cold of a wet night, he can
send his overture to her audibly by post. A baby can be
hushed to sleep by this marvellous tin plate. The cow can
say a boo in the nursery,and a real kiss, at least satisfactory
to the ear, can be sent from a distant fond mamma. It
has been suggested that a phonograph may be held to a
dying man’s lips, and the last word may be recorded for a
distant friend or relative. We learn now, that electric
science has found out a method of telegraphing thought as
well as sound. There is a substance called selenium,


looked on as a useless chemical curiosity, which has now
risen to high importance by the discovery that it does con-
duct electricity more readily when exposed to light than in
the dark.
It occurred to Professor Bell that by varying the in-
tensity of the light wave falling on a selenium cell, and
varying the current, the current of electricity, passing from
a battery through this cell, he may get an audible sound,
reproduced by the action of the oiner membranes. A ray
of light is in part substance for the connecting wire, and
sound is actually flashed from one station to the other.
The light wave being directed, and regulated, in its passage
through the selenium by the sound wave of the voice. Some
scientists, however, think that heat is more concerned in
the production of this effect. For light, heat, and sound
are all manifestations of the same energy, infused through
every form of life and motion. By means of this apparatus,
to which the name of photophone has been given, the
inventor has already spoken to a colleague at a distance of
some hundreds of feet, and it is believed that the result may
be obtained as far as a beam of light can be thrown.
Another invention follows hard upon this. The sen-
sitiveness of selenium has been used in an instrument called
the telectrophone, as a means for transmitting pictures, with
currents corresponding, to the intensity of their lights and
shades. The telectrophone is the last wonder, almost, in
the electrical science. Perhaps we must give the credit
to the wireless telegraphy to be the last of all. Electricity
comes in many ingenious ways to the homes of the people,
fts driving sewing machines and coffee mills. The scarcity
of domestic servants gives it ready welcome in many
families. In large America there are what they call co-
operative commissions systems. The District Telegraph
Company of New York have some thousand boys ready at
the first call to start from the nearest station to any house
oi* office in connection with a great network of wires,
extending to all parts of the city. Each subscriber has a
'wire laid to his premises. Then he needs only to press a
button at any hour to summon a smart young messenger, in


uniform, to arrive in a few minutes to do what is required
of him. These young messengers make themselves handy
in a great variety of ways, as an office to be minded, bills
to be distributed, escort a child to school or to bring him
home. There are similiar institutions in London, which
supply the offices with the latest financial news, so that sub-
scribers sitting at their desk from minute to minute receive
all the fluctuations in the market.
In America, also, the system of el'ectric fire alarms in
the large cities, which have been in operation for years,
there are little boxes on the lamp of the telegraph posts.
As soon as a fire breaks out a citizen can run for the key of
the nearest box, and by a touch sets at work the machinery
wlthin, which instantly informs the fireman of the trouble
and the locality. Then before the alarm stops sounding
they are making ready to set out at the signal for which
they are always on the watch, with horses harnessed and
steam up. Moreover, in some places the current rings a
loud alarm bell, heard all over the city, and is understood by
the number of its strokes to refer to such a quarter. So
the well-warned inhabitant, when away from home, know
at once if it is necessary to be off to look after his property.
These fire alarms are liable to be falsely used for mere mis-
chief, which, unfortunately, has been too much the ex-
perience. In our old England an electric alarm of the
same kind can be applied to safes, in such a manner that as
soon as any felonious person begins to tamper with the lock
he would either rise a sound loud enough to frighten him
from his purpose, or would send to the public office, giving
a clear notice of what he is about, and the very spot where
he may be caught at it. No matter where the alarm works,
in the same room or a thousand miles away, as soon as the
burglar sets to work at one end, click ci'ack goes the tell-
tale at the other. And electricity will automatically keep
guard for us against fire as well as thieves. The apparatus
may be so arranged as not to act till the temperature rises
to a certain point, which soon happens in case of fire
breaking out. Then flies away the silent message to those
whose business it is to watch for and attend to it.


tn America the telephone is attached to the lamp posts,
by which tne public can be called to the spot by the voice of
any aggravated citizen. Electricity can do yet more for law
and order, should the garroting business begin to flourish
against people in the centre of population. It will be pos-
sible for late street-farers to arm themselves with portable
batteri ,by which they can be turned to torpedoes at the
first touch of an assailant.
In these districts of foreign countries, exposed to in-
undation from the swelling of rivers and the bursting of
dykes, the telegraph renders good service in calling help to
the threatened spot or giving the inhabitants time to pro-
vide for their safety. The flood travels fast, but the
friendly warning, ten thousand times faster. The- power of
electricity has been nowhere felt stronger than in the
development of our own newspaper press. Without it the
host of journals printed daily in the English language would
suffer as much loss as the leaves of the forest when the
autumn wdnd has blown. In old times, in quiet country
districts, people may be a week before they knew that a
King or Queen was dead, or that an usurper had landed.
But in our days the words of a speaker in Parliament are
ticking to his constituents while he is still on his feet. Now,
in any town or village, a person at his breakfast-table
can read the history of the world in a few hours, and by
turning to a reading-room can read the history of the world
and inform himself during the day of any important event
that has just happened, from England to Persia. It is
common now for our newspapers to have private wires of
their own. In earliter days they sometimes found it
difficult in getting their messages transmitted when there
happened to be a pressure of work. Enterprising editors
found it to their advantage to spare no expense on important
despatches, and have in many cases been before the
Government in getting and giving information of great
public events.
Railways, which literally paved the way for telegraphy,
have richly repaid for this obligation for service that no
other means could perform for them. It would be almost


impossible for our large and crowded lines to be in safety
without the aid of the electric spark, working twenty-four
hours a day, without feeling the least confused. Never
mistaking a signal, never failing to attend to its duties.
The railway world, now considerably over half a century
old, has some exciting traditions of a run-away engine,
and trains shunted to the wrong lines, which would have
done some frightful damage if this trusty messenger had not
been ready to fly after them, giving them instructions to
clear the way, or turn the monster to some empty sideling
where it harmed little but itself. Any one who travels on
the London underground railway, and sees heavy train after
train following each other at intervals of a minute or two,
might as well wonder how serious accidents never hap-
pened all the years it had been going on. But the telegraph
knew how and why. But the engineer, unless he is a
madman, will never pass a station till it has been told him
that there is nothing on the next division of the line.
Some of the latest devices of inventors have been directed
toward making a train to give its own signals by electricity,
and reducing to a minimum the risk of carelessness to
which men are liable. A wire running from carriage to
carriage, not only for communication at all times with
the engine, but if any part of the train break off—a fre-
quent cause of accidents—the breaking of the wire sets
an alarm going, which, so long as both driver and
stoker are not deaf or asleep, lets them know at Once that
something has gone wrong. But about a wheel of an en-
gine giving an electric message along a rail to show the
danger behind it, then giving notice that all is clear and
safe in the next signal station —this precaution would be
specially useful in America, where trains run often through
streets of towns like our tramcars, and where stations are
so commonly not furnished with platforms that people
walk freely about among the rails, and must take care to
look out for the locomotive when the bell rings. It has
been shown that two trains approaching on the same line
might be able to give telegraphic warning to each other in
plenty of tihie to avert a collision.


Telegraphy, as already mentioned, has been more ser-
viceable than railways, and to law and justice, if the latter
help criminals to escape the cry in the neighbourhood
of their proceeding, the former provides a detective await-
ing for them at the end of their journey, to close their
circuit with a pair of handcuffs if required. When a mur-
derer or a forger has got on board of an ocean steamer
under way for America or some other distant country, he
can no longer feel himself safe but for a few days. During
that time a detective has plenty of time to prepare for
meeting him and take charge of him at the end of such
useless voyage. To pick an instance from the papers of
the -day. we read that lately the Norwegian authorities
wanted a man who was ascertained to have gone to Glas-
gow. with the intention there of taking a passage for
America. About twenty minutes before his vessel was to
sail a telegram was sent from Norway describing this
fugitive. The Glasgow police at once proceeded to arrest
him. and within half an hour from the despatch of the
message an answer was on its way announcing the man to
be in safe custody. In estimating the influence of the tele-
graph upon society, we must not forget the new occupa-
tion which, like railways, it has provided for so many of
cur teeming population; from the small message boy to
the electrical engineer, on whose scientific knowledge so
much depends. Women as well as men find in our
post offices an employment for which their well-adapted
fingers seem so admirably suited. In war it is evident that
our hero, if we may so call the telegraph, must have
played a great part ever since its first appearance in the
trenches before Sebastapol. The enormous masses of men
which have to be moved about in modern campaigns could
cot be so well handled without this agent of destruction,
end every well-equipped army iis provided with field tele-
graph. which can be put up on posts or laid on the ground
cable wire as fast as troops advance. There are also hand
telegraphs, or telegraph watches, by which an outpost is
able to communicate with the main body. And a telegraph
may be erected and worked in the very heat of a battle


as efficiently as in a quiet country post office. It is sad to
fcee this invention, that ought to be ranked among the
glorious victories of peace, turned to such account among
r he many kinds of scientific apparatus which make war
a costlier and more complete business every year. But
there is a blessing even here. The more millions that are
uselessly spent killing and wounding myriads
of our fellow-creatures the sooner will nations come to see
the folly, not to say the wickedness, of that deadly game;
and, indeed, as our confidence in the progress of the elec-
tric science is unlimited, so also may be our hope for its
moral influence. But every wire between civilised coun-
nes is a fresh link in the chain of enlightened friendship.
As soon as men are able rightly to appreciate the benefit
of such a discovery they must surely recognise how un-
worthy ds its marvellous powers of being pressed into ser-
vice like that of mutual destruction. Time will prove the
telegraph a more potent ally in the cause of peace than
at ever was in war. The business world naturally has soon
learned to avail itself of electric communication, which is
of special advantage to tradesmen dealing in perishable
articles. But it must be confessed here harm is done as
well as good. Lending itself to that spirit of rash specula-
tion and mere gambling in stocks and shares which during
the last few years has gone so far to injure honest trade
end to deteriorate our national character, the telegraph is
a too facile instrument in the hands of men making haste to
he rich by ruining their neighbours.
We hear every day of a new patent being taken out and
fresh suggestions, many of which, indeed, coming from the
ot er side of the Atlantic, remind us of Brother Jonathan’s
urn o dry am as well as of practical ingenuity. But after
an experience of a thousand years we need not be in any
*' rr ‘ '^ srn iss the wildest of these projects as absurd.
we jaugh at them, so we did some years ago the very
notion of the teleohone or the microphone, as our fore-
fathers must have laughed at in their day when some
creamer foretold the power of artillery, of the marine com-
pass, and of reading and writing, all of which at one or


ether period of the world’s history seemed just as in-
credible almost as any invention that now can be sug-
gested. With what force does the words of old Granville
come to our mind, one of the members of the Royal Society
who was so enthusiastic over the discovery of such instru-
ments as the telescope, the barometer, and the air -pump.
In a book published by him he says:—“Methinks this age
seems resolved to bequeath to posterity somewhat of the
glorious undertakings wherewith heaven hath blessed our
days, who will leave the world better provided for than
they found it, whereas in former times such generous, free-
spirited worthies were rare as new observed stars, when one
was a wonder of an age. In our time they are like the
lights of greater size that twinkle in the starry firmament;
and this last century can glory in numerous constellations.
Should these heroes go on as they happily begun they will
fill the world with wonders, and I doubt not that posterity
will find many that now are but rumours verified into
practical realities. It may be in some ages hence a voyage
to the southern unknown tracts, yet impossible to man, will
not be more strange than one to America. To those that
come after us it may be as ordinary to buy a pair of wings
to fly to the remotest regions as it is now to buy a pair of
boots to ride a journey, and to confer at the distance of
the Indies by sympathetic conveyance may be as usual to
future times as to us is literary correspondence.
Already the predictions of Granville have been verified to
ns, and when we consider the countless conquests of science
which this sanguine mind could hardly imagine, surely we
have more reason to glory in our own age, and to affirm
with Granville that these acquaintances with the endea-
vours of so many true philosophers, will despa: of nothing.
"We may stand lost in reverent admiration to see what has
been done, not only in centuries of patient progress, but
within the lifetime of a mere child. Astounding indeed are
the forces of nature and mighty the achievements of lives
spent in studying and adapting them to the service of
mankind. What bounds, then, can we place to the hopes
cherished by laborious votaries of science? Wonderfw! in


deed is the conquest of science. What marvellous treasures
the fertile talents and patient investigations of our great
scientists and philosophers have stored up for the present
and future generations. And all to improve the condition
of mankind. Science has brought all the forces of nature,
which were running waste for thousands of years, subser-
vient to the call and to be the servant Of man. Ma-
chinery is adopted to minimise manual labour to an incal-
culable extent. Steam and electricity have brought the re-
motest nations into social intercourse and commercial ac-
tivity: in fact, it has federated the four quarters of the
world into one great commonwealth, and has facilitated
trade and commerce to an unknown extent. If we take a
retrograde view of the disadvantages merchants had to
trade with foreign countries from London and Liverpool
and other places a little time back when sending enquiries
of the prices of merchandise, would have to wait for months
for an answer, and after the purchase had to wait for
months before having the goods sent to their warehouse.
But what a difference now. If a merchant sends to ascertain
the state of the market —we will say to New York —he will
receive an answer in a few minutes, and when purchased the
merchandise will be in his warehouse in a fortnight, mes-
sage* going backward and forward at the speed of the
lightning. And thus by bringing nations in contact with
nations by the means of trade and commerce and friendly
Intercourse, civilisation is improved and established. Really
manual activity is changed, and gives place to steam and
electricity and machinery. The horse is stripped of his
harness to make room for the iron horse, which is stronger
end swifter. The ships are stripped of their canvas, and
ore substituted by steam, that ploughs the ocean faster and
with more punctuality. The tailor and the seamstress aban-
don the needle; the weaver has to give up his shuttle to
the iron fingers that ply quicker and more effectively.
The horse is eased from its labours and toil. The Bir-
mingham iron horse takes its place, which is stronger and
faster. Go to the field, again, and there the iron horse
makes its appearance. Instead Of two old dobbins sweating


and toiling to turn one furrow at a time, the iron horse,
without grunting or sweating, turns six furrows at a
stroke. Sowing with machinery, threshing and winnowing
by steam—the flail had to yield to the threshing machine
and the old-fashioned fan to the sieves and wheels of the
cleaning machine. In fact, all the energy and activity of
the world seem to go on wheels and motive power, and
nothing direct from hand. The poor hen is not allowed
time to hatch her chickens: that must be done by steam.
Ignorance and superstition are yielding by bounds to the
conquest of science and enlightenment.


The War: was it justifiable? Yes.
IT is well known that there is a diversity of opinion in
reference to the right of the English Government to go to
war with the Boers; but those that doubt this right form
the minority, and a very inferior minority. If they will
advance another stage in this insanity the lunatic asylum
will not be short of tenants. There is nothing more cer-
tain than that England was justified in going to war with
the Boers. Further on we will bring forward proofs, and
undeniable proofs, to certify this proposition. Petition
after petition was sent by the TJitlanders. to the English
Government for deliverance from the tyranny of this Egyp-
tian bondage, under which they were subjected. Was it
not right that England should listen to the voice of her
children, who were so cruelly treated? Bearing on this
point is the noble despatch of Mr. Chamberlain to Sir Alfred
Milner, the High Commissioner in South Africa.
Its result from this review of facts and conditions on
which the petitions are forwarded, as well as from informa-
tion derived from your despatches, and from other official
services, that British subjects and the TJitlanders generally
in South Africa Republic have substantiate ground for
their complaint of their treatment to which they are sub-
jected, her Majesty’s Government attach much importance
on those matters that effect the personal rights of the
TJitlanders’ community, and which place them in a condi-
tion of political, educational, and social inferiority to the
Boers, and even endanger the security of their lives and
property.


The Boers are following the practice of the Govern-
ments in the time of the House of Tudor, the House of
Stewart, and the House of Brunswick, when to report
the debates in Parliament was a capital crime, the people
then had to behold a corrupt Parliament, and dared not to
lift their voice against it; noblemen and pressmen had their
hands shackled and their tongues tied; they could neither
speak nor write.
Kruger and his advisers plunged the Uitlanders far
deepen- in the mire of oppression and tyranny than the Eng-
lish Parliament did the public at the time mentioned. The
Uitlanders paid something like 90 per cent, of the taxes;
for all that they had not one iota of control over the taxa-
tion which they contributed. They were deprived of any
voice in the management of their own municipal or local
affairs. They were not allowed to have their children
taught in their own language. Press laws were passed, by
which men who wrote against the Government were liable
to arrest, and tried by persons who were prejudiced and par-
tial; at last they abolished the law by which the judges of
the land were independent, so they were now no more or
less than a part of the executive over which Mr. Kruger
had the control. There was not in the civilised world
any body of white men held in such bond-
age as the Uitlanders in the Transvaal. They made
the loyalists in the Transvaal tools and stepping stones by
imposing on them such heavy and inequitable taxation, to
accumulate money, weapons, and ammunition of war, and
that for many years, as Mr. Kruger thought, to be a means
to continue to keep the loyalists of the Transvaal under the
iron yoke of his oppression. The income of the Govern-
ment was £1,480,000; the civil service salaries fund alone
came to about £2,4oo,ooo—enough to pay £4O per head per
annum to every man, woman, and child !in the Transvaal.
Where did the money go? The Uitlanders had no voice in
the disbursing of that money, most of which they provided;
their judicial independence was taken away from them.
They were denied education to their children, and when
they protested against their municipal government their


meeting was broken up. It was entirely a race govern-
ment. There could be no worse system of tyranny.
It was even worse tyranny than that in France before
and during the Revolution, when the peasants of France
were bathing the ground with their sweat and tears, and
the noble having the force of law, and the king exercising
confederacy with his rich subjects, at the same time desti-
tute of sympathy with the poor and the middle class. Rea-
ders of history know how this tyranny ended; the awful
tornado bursted upon their own heads; the king, tried by
his own subjects, found guilty and executed. So the con-
federacy that exists between Mr. Kruger and his associates
has brought on them an awful calamity and irreparable
consequences.
But the black cloud that has been hanging over the
English population in the Transvaal has a silver lining.
At the consummation of the present war the unparalleled
oppression which the English suffered since the initiation
of the Transvaal Republic will give birth to a more pros-
perous and glorious dispensation, because it is a war of
right against might, a war of liberty against slavery, a war
of freedom against servitude. They will have their children
taught in their own language. They will have a free press
and liberty of speech. They will have a sound Legislature,
a well-balanced executive, and an equitable judic-iary; they
will have jurors of their own nationality, and faithful and
impartial judges; they will have a liberal franchise; they
will have two Houses of Parliament, and in the two Houses
they will have representatives of their own choice, the
privilege of building those houses with their own hands,
and choose their own materials. Thev will have the sub-
stance of the Magna Charta. which is the foundation of
the English Constitution, and all these privileges will be
ratified to them by the greatest monarch in the universe.
Their persons and properties will be protected from all
usurpers. There is a glorious harvest before the Enalish-
Epoken people and others in South Africa. Their fields are
getting white for the harvest, theiir sun rising towards the


meridian. There is still balm in Gilead, and corn in Egypt
for the oppressed Uitiander.
In this war England is not only defending conditions,
but also the supremacy and the predominance of British
power in South Africa. Upon the maintenance of that
power and supremacy depends not only the civil and politi-
cal freedom of the people of South Africa, and the stability
and existence of the British Empire in that country, but
also the honour and integrity of the British Empire through-
out the world. There could be no permanent peace in
South Africa until this question of supremacy and equality
of the different people residing there was finally settled.
This was the underlying controversy which was the key
of the whole situation. The question and the cardinal
question is, how did the Boers become subjected to the
English Government in the Transvaal, and how did the
English Government become supreme in that part of
South Africa?
To answer this question one must begin in the be-
ginning. The Transvaal, a country as large and larger than
England, Wales, Ireland, and Scotland put together, in-
habited by two classes of people; one of them (the Boer
population) numbered about 67,000, the other class (not
fairly called Uitlanders) 150,000 persons. The question is
by what right was either of these classes there? The Boers
were Originally by right of conquest over the natives; the
founded fact was the Uitlanders were there by a right as
good, no better nor worse, than that of the Boers them-
selves. The Boers entered the country about 60 years ago.
They left the Cape Colony and Natal because of the diffi-
culty with the English Government in reference to the na-
tives. The English Government was for emancipation of
slaves; the Boers were not. therefore they established that
little Government of theirs, and were recognised then as
an independent Government, 1852.
In 1877 the Boer Government was bankrupt, and was
In serious danger of attack from surrounding natives. Hav-
ing great objection to pay taxes, the Boers had not provided
the means to defend themselves against the Zulus. The


English Government sent a man wlho was instructed to as-
certain whether the Boers desired annexation with Eng-
land.
In the year 1884 Mr. Kruger invited, through the Lon-
don papers, people to settle in the Transvaal on equal terms
with the Boers. When people of different nationalities be-
gan to pour in, when the diamond mines were discovered,
Kruger thought he could turn his politics to a better ad-
vantage. He raised the condition of the franchise to a
higher standard, namely, from a white 21 years of age to a
residence of 15 years, together with a payment of £25.
Next thing, trial by jury. The Uitlanders demanded to be
tried by their peers and not by a Boer jury. This was a
reasonable demand. They could guess pretty well what
sort of judicial decision they would be subjected to. An-
other complaint was education. There were 20 English
pupils in Johannesburg to one pupil of the Boers, and the
Dutch language was only taught in the school, was this
not an extreme cruelty to rob a nation of their own lan-
guage? As to the municipal taxation, it was practically
taken from foreigners, and they have no voice as to how
their money was expended. In Johannesburg, where there
are from 60,000 to 100,000 inhabitants, the largest city in
the Transvaal, there were 23,000 Uitlanders to 1000 Boers;
for all this inequality the majority was governed by the
minority; such in the essence of a corrupt Government.
The following are the articles which were submitted to
the Boers by the English Government, and which the Boers
accepted and signed at the Pretoria Convention, 1881:
All persons who hold property in the said State on the
Bth day of August, 1881, will continue to hold the right of
property which they enjoy, and which they have enjoyed
since the annexation.
No person residing, or who remained loyal to Her Ma-
jesty, during the recent hostilities, shall suffer any moles-
tation by reason of his loyalty, be liable to any criminal
prosecution or civil action for any part taken in connection
with such hostility; and all persons shall have full liberty to
reside in the country, with enjoyment of all civil rights


and protection for their persons and property. All persons,
other than natives conforming themselves to the laws of
the Transvaal State will have full liberty, with their fami-
lies, to enter, travel, or reside in any part of the Transvaal
State. They will be entitled to hire or possess houses,
manufactories, warehouses, shops, and premises. They
can carry on their commerce themselves, or by any agent
whom they may think fit to employ. They will not be sub"
ject to their persons or property, or in respect to their
commerce or industry, to any taxes, whether general or
local, other than those which are or may be imposed on the
Transvaal citizens.
The Convention granted to the Boers a right to manage
their own internal affairs only; the general rules to prevent
ihcm abusing the native tribes, and of the alien white popu-
lations, who are dwellers in their midst.
Had the Boers made use of the liberty which the Con-
vention granted them, they would enjoy that liberty; but
they resorted to its violation, and forced England to lift her
hand then.
Now we come to the Convention of 1884, in London,
which was the result of the Transvaal negotiations; the
Transvaal delegation consisting of Mr. Kruger, Du Toit,
a *td Snut, with the Earl of Derby, the Colonial Minister
in the Government of Mr. Gladstone.
The Convention of 1884 did not disannul, but rather
supplemented and confirmed it. The following are the rules
which refer to the suzerainty of England, and the rights of
i-he loya l population of the Transvaal: —The South African
Republic will conclude no treaty or engagement with any
state or nation other than the Orange Free State, nor with
6ny native tribe to the eastward or westward of the Repub-
llc * unti! the same has been approved by her Majesty the
Queen, such approval to be considered to have been granted
lf Majesty’s Government shall not, in six months after
receiving a copy of such treaty, which shall be delivered to
kem immediately upon its completion, have notified that
6 delusion of such is in conflict With the interest of


Great Britain, or of any of her Majesty’s possessions in
South Africa
Treaties can only be concluded by her Majesty’s Govern-
ment in the name and on behalf of the Transvaal, as pro-
vided in the Article 2nd of Pretoria Convention. The South
African Republic will be at liberty, under Article 4, to enter
into treaties with foreign Powers, subject to approval of her
Majesty, as therein provided.
On March 17, 1884, the Earl of Cadogan asked in the
House e f Lords whether in the Convention the suzerainty
of the Queen was abolished.
The Earl of Derby, in his reply, stated that the power
of suzerainty remained, namely, the right of Great Britain
to veto any negotiations into which the Transvaal might
enter with any foreign Power. On the subject of civil and
political right of loyalist settlers in the Transvaal, consider-
able emphasis was given by the Earl of Derby in a despatch
dated
Robinson, the High Commissioner for South Africa, in
which h/> declared: —
Her Majesty’s Government have felt themselves able,
after full and friendly discussions with the delegates, to
agree with them in the adoption of provisions which meet
their own views to a very considerable extent, and which in-
volved substantial concessions on points to which they at-
tached special importance, while on the other hand the in-
terests of her Majesty’s subjects on the independence of the
native tribes adjacent to the South African Republic have
been duly considered. Her Majesty’s Government are justi-
fied in confidently anticipating the people of the South
African Republic will honourably carry out the undertaking
solemnly entered into on their behalf.”
The question arises whether the Government of the
South African Republic have, in the word of the Earl of
Derby, honourably carried out the undertaking so solemnly
entered on behalf of the loyal subjects in their midst; not
so every one who studies the declaration on both sides,
wherein the Convention of 1881 and 1884, or the despatches,
must admit it was a strong and an unassailable one. The


question is, what are the circumstances of the Uitlanders in
the Transvaal? The best way to consider it is by the two
petitions they addressed; first, to Sir Henry B. Loch, at the
time her Majesty’s High Commissioner of South Africa; the
petition was signed by 14,800 British subjects. The second
was signed by 21,684 British subjects, and addressed to
her Majesty Queen Victoria. These petitions were answered
by the Honourable Joseph Chamberlain, her Majesty s Minis-
ter for he Colonies, and addressed to Sir Alfred Milner,
on the 10th of May, 1899, High Commissioner for South
Africa. The petition of the 4th of June, 1884, which was the
prayer of 41,208 Uitlanders resident in the Transvaal, which
echoes the voice of the petitions, 28th March, 1899; the for-
mer was as follows: —
“ Denied the franchise, and have recently been sub-
jected to the indignity of seeing a petition presented by
13,000 residents, mainly subjects of the Queen, praying for
some relaxation of the unjust franchise laws, and were
greeted with laughter and scorn ! by the Legislature, having
been further informed by the authorities that not only we,
but our children born in the country, can never hope to
participate in the more precious citizenship. Our wrongs
have lately been accentuated by the circumstances that the
courts and the Government of this state have declared our
liability to be called out at any time without pay or com-
pensation for compulsory military service; for carrying the
laws, m the making of which we have never had any voice,
and in the enforcement of which we have no interest.”
In the famous despatch of Mr. Chamberlain, May, 1899,
addressed to Sir Alfred Milner, her Majesty’s High Commis-
sioner for South Africa, after reviewing with great fairness,
moderation, and ability the various and important matters
referred to ir the remarkable memorial of 21,684 signatures,
he thus sums up the decision of her Majesty’s Government
ttnse noble words:
“ The results from this view of the facts and conditions
on which the petition is founded, as well as from the infor-
mation derived from your despatches, and from other offi-
cial soirees, that British subjects and the Uitlanders gener


ally in .he South African Republic have substantial ground
for their complaints of the treatment to which they are
subjected Her Majesty’s Government attach much im-
portance to matters which affect the personal right of the
Bitlander community. Her Majesty’s Government earnestly
desire the prosperity of the South African Republic. They
have been aijxious to avoid any intervention in its internal
concerns and they may point out in this connection that
if they realty entertained the design of destroying its inde-
pendence which has been attributed to them, no policy
ec aid he better calculated to defeat their object than that
which In al. friendship and sincerity they now urge upon
the Government of the South African Republic, and which
removes any pretext for interference by relieving British
subjects of ab just cause of complaint.”
THE BLOEMFONTEIN CONFERENCE.
Th? origin of the Bloemfontein Conference between Sir
Alfred Milner and President Kruger may be traced and was
due to the initiative of Mr. Chamberlain, who in the clos-
ing words o' 3 his despatch said:
With the earnest hope of arriving at a satisfactory
settlement and as a proof of their desire to maintain a cor-
dial relation w r ith the South African Republic, her Majesty’s
Government now suggest, for the consideration of President
Kruger, that a meeting should be arranged between his
Honor and yourself, for the purpose of discussing the situa-
tion in a conciliatory spirit, and in the hope that you may
arrive, ,'n concert with the President, at such an agreement
as her Majesty’s Government could accept, and recommend
to the THtlanders’ population as a reasonable concession to
their just demands, and the settlement Of the difficulties
which have threatened the good relation which her Ma-
jesty’s Government desire should constantly exist between
themselves and the Government of the South African Re-
public.”
This proposal to help a satisfactory settlement of the
franchise and other questions in controversy was supported
by the President of the Orange Free State and by the Prime


Minister of Cape Colony, the proposal being accepted by
President Kruger. On May 31, 1899, the conference of
Bloemfontein met, and consisted on the part of Great Bri-
tain of Sir Alfred, her Majesty’s High Commissioner, and
on the part of the South African Republic President Kru-
ger; and its deliberations continued to June the sth, but it
resulted in no decision being arrived at —in fact, the diver-
gence of the views of the two Governments was so great
that on the question of the franchise as to the Uitlander an
agreement was practically impossible. The declaration of
Sir Alfred Milner at the opening of the conference was clear
and emphatic.
Sir Alfred Milner considered that the previous questions
mentioned should be secured after the franchise to the Uit-
lauders had been settled, and said: —“ I cannot agree to the
basis which appears to have been laid down that I should
begin with something else.” Just settlement of the fran-
chise question, and he recalled to President Kruger’s mind
ibe urgency of the franchise question being settled first.
The second day of the conference, at the invitation of Pre-
sident Kruger, Sir Alfred Milner formulated his suggestion
for the enfranchisement of the Uitlander as follows:
“ He had to bear in mind, on the one hmd, the pre-
judices of old burghers, and the necessity of convincing
them that they would not be swamped by newcomers, and,
oil the other hand, the uselessness of proposing anything
that would be rejected by the Uitlanders as totally insuffi-
cient, and would not bring them on to the side of the state,
throwing in their lot with it, and working in future with
the old burghers as one people. Bearing these two points
iu mind, he proposed that the full franchise should be given
i° every foreigner who had been resident for five years in
the Republic, declared his intention to reside permanently,
f cok an oath to obey the laws, undertake to obey all obliga-
tions of citizenship and defence of the country, franchise t©
be confined to persons of good character, possessing a cer-
tain amount of property or income, finally some increase of
seats in districts where the Uitlanders principally reside;
the number of seats a matter of future discussion; but it in


essential that they should not be so few as to leave the
representatives of the new constituencies in a co ntemptibl«
minority/’
Sir Alfred Milner, presenting his memorandum on the
franchise question from the Uitlander point of view, sup-
ported it as follows: —“ The people complain that the Go-
vernment of the Republic does not pay sufficient attention to
their interests, and they appeal continually to the British
Government to assist in improving their position in sonw
respect, and my position is that the British Government
sympathise with them, therefore I have come to the conclu-
sion that the best manner to place those people in a post-
lion to ree their reasonable desire satisfied would be to ac-
cept the burghership of the State in which they reside, and,
therefore, I say for the British subjects who want to make
the country their home it would be best that they should
become heart and soul burghers of the Republic.”
President Kruger met this proposal with a strong oppo-
sition, on the ground that it would hand over the Transvaal
to the rule of the foreigner, and that he wished first to come
to terms for the settlement of various other questions in
dispute by arbitration before deciding on the question of the
franchise; and on Sir Alfred Milner pressing for the pro-
posals of the South African Republic on the franchise ques-
tion first, President Kruger, on the 2nd of June, handed in
his counter-proposals on this subject, which were as fol-
low: —
Newcomers registering themselves within 14 days after
arrival to obtain naturalisation after two years, on comply-
ing with the following conditions: —First, six months’ no-
tice of intention to apply for naturalisation; second, two
years continuous registration; third, residence in the South
African Republic during that period; fourth, no dishonour-
ing sentence; fifth, proof of obedience to the laws, no act
against Government or independence; sixth, proof of full
state citizenship and franchise, or title to it, in former
country; seventh, possession of fixed property to value of
£l5O, occupation of house to annual rental of £SO, or yearly
Income of at least £2OO, Government to have power of grant


ing naturalisation to person not satisfying tnis condition;
eighth, oath similar to Orange Free State, person so na-
turalised five years after naturalisation to obtain full fran-
chise on the following conditions: —Ist, continuous registra-
tion for five years after naturalisation; 2nd, continuous re-
sidence during that period; 3rd, no dishonouring sentence;
4th, proof of obedience to law; sth property qualification,
as above ; 6th, residence in South Africa before 1890, getting
naturalisation within six montns from promulgation of
this proposed law, and giving six months notice of inten ■
tion to apply for naturalisation to obtain full franchise two
years after naturalisation; on complying with these con-
ditions for full franchise mentioned above, substituting two
for five years, those not getting naturalised in six months
fall under already-mentioned conditions for newcomers; 7th,
those already resident for two years or more to be allowed
immediate naturalisation on above-mentioned naturalisation
conditions for newcomers, and to obtain full franchise five
years after naturalisation, in compliance with the above-
mentioned full franchise conditions; Bth, those already na-
turalised to obtain full franchise five years after naturalisa-
tion on last-mentioned conditions.”
Sir Alfred Milner said this scheme differed entirely from
his proposal, in so far that it did not provide for immediate
or even speedy entertainment of the franchise by persons
who have been for a long time in the Republic. President
Kruger objected to give the franchise to non-burghers, be-
cause they constituted the great majority of the population,
and said because a great majority flocked in they wanted
him to give away his right, and then indeed his country
would be lost, and that would be unfair.
Sir Alfred then declared:—The result of our memoran-
dum is that you and I have failed to come to an agreement
on the most important points of the subjects discussed by us,
and we are at present in the same position as we were pre-
vious to the conference. Therefore this convention is alto-
gether at an end, and there is no obligation on either side
as an outcome thereof. On the subject of arbitration, he
said: —“This matter has been mentioned during this discus-


siOn, but there is no definite proposal with respect thereto.
There are subjects about which her Majesty’s Government
most clearly arbitrate. At the same time, there is a class
of questions regarding which her Majesty’s Government
would be prepared to arbitrate if an appropriate method
can be found, and if a proposal regarding that subject shall
be at any time made, then this can be taken into considera-
tion independently of any proceeding of this conference.”
President Kruger said:—“ Regarding disputes in refer-
ence to the manner of interpreting documents, such as the
Convention, there can be arbitration in such manner that it
is not necessary that another Government should be called
in. We can find impartial lawyers enough.” Sir Alfred
Milner rejoined:—“There are some cases in which her Ma-
jesty’s Government will not arbitrate, and some it will. I
have no authority to speak on this matter, but if any de-
finite proposal should be made by you it could be submitted
to the consideration of her Majesty’s Government.
The history of the discussions at the Bloemfontein con-
ference between Sir Alfred Milner, the High Commissioner
of her Majesty’s Government in South Africa, and President
Kruger, and the despatches that followed, are both remark-
able and interesting. Sir Alfred Milner, on behalf of her
Majesty’s Government, conducted the discussion, and spared
no effort to conduct the proceedings in a peaceful and con-
ciliatory manner even to the last. Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, through her High Commissioner, asked only for what
was reasonable, namely, the same rights and privileges for
the subjects of the Transvaal as were possessed by the Boers
themselves. Sir Alfred Milner pushed to the very utmost
extent conciliation and patience in his dealing with Presi-
dent Kruger. On the other hand, Mr. Kruger hampered
him with conditions that did not suit the Uitlanders nor
the English Government; instance the spirit in which he
treated the Uitlanders. The following is one proof:—When
the Uitlanders implored him to grant them the same right
as the white men enjoyed in any civilised community in the
world, the President exclaimed, “ Your rights, yes, you will
get them over my dead body.” It was in that spirit of un


reasonable obstinacy that all the overtures of G-reat Britain
were met. But Sir Alfred Milner in a calm and pacific spirit
brought forward his proposals, and laid down the founda-
tion stone of his important commission, which was to
ameliorate the conditions of the Uitlanders, namely, that
taxation and representation should go hand in hand, and
that something of equal franchise should be established.
But Mr. Kruger, on the other hand, commenced to retail his
numerous proposals in quite an opposite spirit. The first
was arbitration, which was to be formulated after his own
views and his own method. In the first place, the tribunal
was to be composed of foreigners. This concoction of his,
no doubt, had a deep meaning, and, as he well knew, was
pregnant with danger to the English Government, and op-
posite to the conventions of 1881 and 1884, so by these pro-
ceedings, had he his own way, he may have plunged the
English Government, in fact, Great Britain, into difficulties
with a foreign nation, or perhaps nations. But Sir Alfred
made a firm stand, and declared to Mr. Kruger that this sort
of material would not suit on the foundation which he laid.
The franchise was the foundation stone, so the question of
arbitration, and the method of carrying it out, was finally
and totally rejected by the High Commissioner, Sir Alfred
Milner. Mr. Kruger in an illusory manner pretended to
modify the former proposal of arbitration by substituting
another scheme, namely that the tribunal should consist of
lawyers and foreign empire or president, wiho no doubt
would decide matters in bis favour; and lastly, when Sir
Alfred Milner rejected the named proposals, he invented
another scheme. That was to choose an English and Free
State tribunal, and Boer judges to be presidents. A very
good chance, according to bis idea, to come to a favourable
decision. All these proposals did not fit on Sir Alfred Mil-
ner’s foundation, and an were rejected. When Mr. Kruger
found that all bis proposals were scattered to the wind, and
that his proposition for arbitration was null and void, he
resorted to the franchise question, and brought it forward in
a bold, unreasonable, and despotic manner. He was willing
to grant the five years’ retrograde residence providing that


Great Britain would surrender her suzerainty over the
South African Republics.
Sir Alfred Milner was too cute a dealer to sell and to
strike a bargain of this sort to sacrifice the supremacy of
Great Britain for a five years’ franchise. He substituted this
proposal by another, namely, that he would grant the fran-
chise on the understanding of 12 years’ residence, together
with some additional tyrannical details, that is, that a 12
years’ resident would pay the sum of £25. But Sir Alfred
Milner firmly opposed, and rejected all these proposals, and
stuck fast to his original proposition, the five years’ fran-
chise. Sir Alfred Milner took his stand in the Convention
to execute the important commission, which was entrusted
to his care by her Majesty’s Government, which was to at-
tempt to bring about a speedy release to the Uitlanders, and
deliverance from the slavery to which they were subjected.
To this subject Sir Alfred Milner devoted his whole energy
to bring the matter to a successful issue in a calm and
peaceful spirit, and yet firm tQ execute his commission. He
knew well the circumstances of the English residents of
the Transvaal; he knew their grievance; he knew the op-
pression under which they were labouring; he knew also of
the determination of her Majesty’s Government to release
the Uitlanders at any cost. There is no community of white
men under heaven subjected to such tyrannical treatment
as the Uitlanders in the Transvaal Republic. The Boers,
since the Convention in 1884, have been adding to their op-
pression little by little. After the discovery of the diamond
mines Mr. Kruger thought to turn his politics to some better
account. He rose his franchise from 21 years of age to 15
years’ residence, and imposed on the English people and
other Europeans almost all the taxes of the Commonwealth.
About three years ago the Boers’ income amounted to
£1,800,000, and the Civil Service Fund to £2,500,000. The
two items added together came to the enormous sum of
£4,300,000. The English population and others contributed
nearly all this enormous sum. At all events, they contri-
buted about 90 per cent, of the amount. Yet they did not
know where the money went to, neither had they any voice


in its distribution. Their hands were tied and shackled, and
their tongues tied; they dared not write or speak; if tney did
they were liable to arrest and imprisonment; but they came
to guess pretty well where the great bulk of the money went
to and that to their great sorrow. It was eviuent that a
great amount went to buy weapons and ammunitions ot war,
in which war they were compelled to slaughter their own
friends, their own nationality, and to suffer to be slaugh-
tered by them. Under these circumstances did not the Ui
landers have a just cause to complain of their grievances;
The English Government had a right to alleviate their dis-
tress long before they did; they have been much too lenient
with the Boers. Instead of listening to the proposals t
the Boers at the Bloemfontein Convention, and be troubled
with the exchange of despatches for months and months,
the English Government should have prescribed her own
proposals to the Boers, and demanded yes or no as an
answer; particularly when the English Government has such
strong proofs that Kruger had made every effort to prove
that the suzerainty of Great Britain over the Transvaal Re-
public was abrogated in the Convention of 1884, and in se-
veral instances tried to claim the supremacy over the Trans-
vaal Republic. In fact, all the movements of the Boers
proved plainly that they did not want arbitration, that they
did not prepare for arbitration, but for war, particular y
since the Jameson raid. They were filling the country with
weapons and ammunitions of war, and in that insolent, in-
sulting and repulsive ultimatum they expounded the whole
problem, but at the same time they gave the opportunity
to Old England to prove her strength, and evidenced that
the British lion was not a creature to play with. The High
Commissioner in these proceedings viewed the case not of
the Uitlander in the Transvaal only, but the interest of
South Africa as a whole, 'which was consistent with the view
of Great Britain in regard to this country.
It is a source of regret that the dignity of the white
race —a large, healthy, industrious, and intelligent com-
munity—should continue in that state of subjection which


have been their lot. History cannot produce an account of
any white race labouring under such slavery.
It is gratifying to remember that the attempt to release
the Uitlanders did not relapse into indifference. It is a
source of gratification to those who are fighting a battle
of reform to feel behind them what no English soldier ever
felt before—the unanimous sympathy of the British people
throughout the world, and not only their sympathy, but
every encouragement shown to them in hearty contributions.
Never was there such an exhibition of loyaity and
such attachment of the English nation to
each other. All this goes to show how the British Empire
3s cemented together throughout the world.
THE DESPATCHES OF SIR ALFRED MILNER AFTER
THE BLOEMFONTEIN CONFERENCE.
The following is the full text of his despatch of June
14:—I have the honour to transmit a despatch from her Ma-
jesty’s Agent, enclosing a note from the State Secretary, in
which he puts forward on behalf of the South African Re-
public a proposal for arbitration on differences arising on
varying interpretations approved by the parties Of the terms
of the London Convention.
In introducing this proposal the State Secretary remarks
that it was apparent at the recent conference at Bloemfon-
tein that his Excellency the High Commissioner was per-
sonally in favour of removing differences between this Go-
vernment and her Majesty’s Government by arbitration.
This statement is far too absolute, though it is certainly
less wholly incorrect that President Kruger’s remark at the
close of the conference that it had acknowledged the Pre-
sident’s request for arbitration by other than foreign Powers
on all points of difference under the Convention to be rea-
sonable. As a matter of fact, when the President said this
he had made no request for arbitration by other than foreign
Powers. The principle of excluding foreign Powers was for
the first time admitted by him on that remark in the next
place in the very general observations which I had made


about arbitration, I never spoke of all differences under the
convention, or of the Convention at all.
In regard to Mr. Reitz’s present observation, I can
only say that whatever personal opinion I may have ex-
pressed favourable to the principle of arbitration, and I
adhere to all that I said, it in no way constrains me to look
with favour on the present proposal. On the contrary, if I
were to advocate its acceptance now I should be in a man-
ner entirely inconsistent with the position taken up at
Bloemfontein. The whole point and gist of my contention
there was, if there were ever to be better relations, and an
amicable settlement of present and future differences be-
tween her Majesty’s Government and the South African Re-
public, redress of the Uitlander grievance must come first;
that I could consent to bargain for the adoption of an ade-
quate enfranchisement by arbitration or any other conces-
sion that President Kruger wanted to get out of us, on the
other hand, I repeatedly expressed the belief that if the fran-
chise question, involving as it is the gradual removing Of
the Uitlander grievance, could be satisfactorily settled, I
thought it would be much easier to arrive at an understand-
ing on all other matters, and I was most anxious to have
no more controversies, and that personally I was quite pre-
pared to advocate the settlement of differences between the
two Governments, or some of them, by an impartial tribunal,
if such could be devised, involving no foreign interference
whatever between her Majesty’s Government and the South
African Republic. My proposal for a settlement of Uitlan-
der grievances on the basis of a moderate measure of enfran-
chisement having been rejected by the President, and a tot-
ally inadequate scheme put forward in their place, he now
comes forward with an arbitration proposal. My conten-
tion is that the atmosphere to which that or any other con-
cession to the Government of the South African Republic be
considered has yet to be created. Redress of the grievance
of her Majesty’s subjects in the South African Republic
stand at the head of the programme, and nothing else cem
be considered until that matter- is out of the way. Apart
from that. I consider the particular scheme an absolutely


unacceptable one on its merits, it is a mere skeleton of a
scheme, and leaves so much undefined that I believe it would
raise more questions than it solved; thus it is provided that
no matters of indifference of trifling importance shall be
referred to arbitration. Who is to say what is trifling and
what is important? According to President Kruger no
doubt all our complaints are trifling. In a certain section it
provides that each Government shall have the right to pre-
serve or exclude points which appear to be too important to
be submitted to arbitration, provided that thereby the prin-
ciple itself of arbitration be not frustrated. I find it diffi-
cult to attach a precise meaning to these words, but it is
easy to see that they must be fruitful of endless disagree-
ment. I cannot see the smallest reason why her Majesty’s
Government should not at once reject this particular pro-
posal, and I advise that this course should be adopted. The
scheme is, as I have shown, unavoidable; but, more than
this, it does not exclude that foreign interference between
her Majesty’s Government and the South African Repub-
lic, which her Majesty’s Government have always declared,
and which I repeatedly declared at Bloemfontein that they
would never admit.
By clause 2 the two arbitrators, who are vaguely defined
apparently to South African judges, nominated by the Go-
vernments respectively, shall agree respecting a third per-
son, who shall be president of the arbitration tribunal,
which is to decide in every case by a majority of votes. It
is evident that this person will virtually decide everything,
and it is provided that he shall not be a subject of one of
the arbitrating parties, that is, a foreigner. On this ground
alone I feel sure that her Majesty’s Government will not
accept the proposal; for every reason I think it is desirable
that it should promptly intimate its total inability to enter-
tain it.
DESPATCH FROM CHAMBERLAIN.
The successive modifications which have been made by
the Government of South African Republic since the confer-
ence at Bloemfontein in the proposals of admitting the Uit


landers to some share of representation in the Government
of the country had followed each other with so much ra-
pidity, and have been so difficult to understand, as reported
by telegraph, that her Majesty’s Government have been un-
able to communicate with you fully on the different phases
of this question, as they have been in turn presented. Hap-
pily each new scheme seems to have been an advance and
improvement upon that which preceded it, and he,r Majesty’s
Government hope that the latest proposals passed by the
Volksraad may prove to be a basis for settlement on lines
which you have laid down at the conference, and which her
Majesty’s Government has approved.
It is, however, a matter of satisfaction to her Majesty’s
Government to learn from your telegram of the 19th July
that the Government of the South African Republic have
still further amended their proposals, and that the Volks-
raad has now agreed to a measure intended to give the
franchise immediately to those who have been residents for
seven years in the country as well to those who may in fu-
ture complete this period of residence. This proposal is an
advance on previous concessions, and leaves only a dif-
ference of two years between you and President Kruger so
far as the franchise is concerned.
Her Majesty’s Government assumes that the concessions
now made to the Uitlanders are intended in good faith to se-
cure from them some approach to the equality which was
promised in 1882; but the points tuey have still to urge for
the consideration of the Government of South Africa are of
great importance, and require interchange of views be-
tween the two Governments. These points involve compli-
cated details and questions of a technical nature, and her
Majesty’s Government are inclined to think that the most
convenient way of dealing with them would be that they
should be, in the first instance discussed by delegates ap-
pointed by you and by the Government of the South African
Republic, who should report the results of their consulta-
tion, and submit their recommendation to you and to that
Government.
If a satisfactory agreement cn these points can be


leached in this way and placed on record, her Majesty’s
Government are of opinion that it should be accepted by the
Uitlanders, wfho, in this case, will be entitled to expect that
it will not be nullified or reduced in value by any subsequent
alteration in the law or acts of administration.
The eettlement of this most important subject will
greatly facilitate an understanding in other matters, which
have been the source of continuous and ever-increasing
correspondence between your predecessors and yourself
and her Majesty’s Government, and there has been during
the last few years a number of instances in which her Ma-
jesty’s Government contend that the conventions between
this country and the South African Republic have been bro-
ken by the latter in the letter as well as in the spirit.
There are other cases, again, in which there may have been
no actual infraction of the letter of the Convention, but in
which injury has been inflicted on British subjects, for
which redress is required on their behalf. With a view to
the settlement of some at least of these questions, the Go-
vernment of South African Republic have met the repre-
sentations of her Majesty’s Government with an offer to
submit to the arbitration of some foreign Power, in view
of the relations established by the Convention of Pretoria
and London. Her Majesty’s Government have felt them-
selves compelled to declare emphatically that under no cir-
cumstances whatever will they admit the intervention of
any foreign Power in regard to their interpretation of the
Convention.
faction r th^ jeS ?a S G ° Vernment note > with satis-
faction that in the course of the discussion at Bloemfontein
President Kruger withdrew the proposal for the dnterven-
tion of foreign Powers in the memorandum put in by him
at the afternoon meeting On June 5. He spoke of his re-
quest for arbitration by other than foreign Power, and the
Government of South African Republican a communication
addressed to the British Agent on June the 9th, to which
have already referred, have modified his formal proposal
as to the formation of a tribunal of arbitration, so as to
substitute for a foreign Power a foreigner as president,


and therefore as a supreme arbitrator in a court to be
otherwise composed of two members nominated respect
tively by 'her Majesty’s Government and by the Govern-
ment of South African Republic. This proposal, although
in a different form to those previously made, is equally ob-
jectionable, inasmuch as it involves the admission of
foreign element in the settlement of controversies between
her Majesty’s Government and Uie Government of South
African Republic; and for this reason at is impossible for
her Majesty’s Government to accept it. Her Majesty’s Go-
vernment recognise, however, that the interpretation of the
convention in matter of detail is not free from difficulty,
when on the one hand there can be no question of the in-
terpretation of the preamble of the Convention of 1881,
which governs the articles substituted in the Convention of
1884. On the other 'hand, there may be fair differences of
opinion as to the interpretation of the details of those ar-
ticles, and it is unsatisfactory that in cases of divergence of
opinion between her Majesty’s Government and the Go-
vernment of the South African Republic there should be
no authority to which to refer the points at issue for final
decision. If, therefore, the President is prepared to agree
to the exclusion of any foreign element in the settlement of
such disputes, her Majesty’s Government would be willing
to consider how far and by what methods such
question of interpretation as have been above alluded to
could be decided by some judicial authority whose inde-
pendence, impartiality, and capacity would be beyond and
above suspicion.
After the discussion by delegates, as already proposed,
of the details and the technical matters involved in the
points which her Majesty’s Government desire to urge for
the consideration of the Government of South African Re-
public in relation to the political representation of the Uit-r
lander, it would be desirable that you should endeavour to
come to an agreement with President Kruger as to the ac-
tion to be taken upon their reports by means of another
personal conference. In this case the concession would be
a suitable one for you to discuss with his honour, the matter


of the proposed tribunal of arbitration, and those other
questions which were not brought forward at the Bloem-
fontein Conference because of the failure to arrive at an
understanding on the question of political representation
of the Uitlanders.
REFUSAL OF BRITISH PROPOSAL.
The despatch of Alfred Milner, 23rd August, is an his-
toric document of great importance,as it is not only a review
of the policy pursued by her Majesty’s Government since
the conference at Bloemfontein, but is a full explanation
and defence of its actions, and ii the demand it had made
upon the Government of the South African Republic that
policy clearly indicates to be to terminate an intolerable
position by not only the settlement of the franchise question
and the grievance of the Uitlanders, consequent upon their
political isolation, but also the settlement of many other
questions in dispute between Great Britain and the Trans-
vaal —such, foy instance, the press laid the right of public
assembly, police reform, and other questions which the
conference at Bloemfontein proved itself powerless to grap-
ple with or to settle.
The South African Republic in its despatch of Septem-
ber the 2nd requested that her Majesty’s Government should
fall back on the proposal of the seven years’ franchise
contained in the despatch of July 27, and also profess its
willingness to accept the joint commission of enquiry upon
this scheme of seven years, although her Majesty’s Go-
vernment had informed it that it could not accept less than
a five years’ franchise scheme, which was the minimum of
the proposal of Sir Alfred Milner at the Bloemfontein Con-
ference.
This reply, therefore, of the Government of the South
African Republic was in effect a refusal of the proposal
contained in the despatch of her Majesty’s Government of
August 28th, and for this reason, that it would not submit
them to the Volksraad for approval. On the subject of ar-
bitration, as to the right interpretation of the Conventions


of 1881 and 1884, the South African Republic declared that
it welcomed the proposal, as it was their firm intention to
adhere to the terms of the London Convention of 1884; but
as their interpretation of this convention constituted the
South African Republic a sovereign international state, the
proposal must be looked upon as a denial of her Majesty’s
Government that Great Britain is paramount, and that
therefore the South African Republic is not a sovereign
Power.
The South African Republic was determined to stand
by the position taken up by President Kruger at the Bloem-
fontein Conference that to concede the five years’ franchise
scheme would surrender the Transvaal to the Uitlanders,
and that if this concession was granted Great Britain must
make concession by surrendering iher protectorate or so-
vereignty over South African Republic, as guaranteed by
the Conventions 1881 and 1884.
The despatch of her Majesty’s Government of September
Bth clearly indicated to the Government of the South Afri-
can Republic that its proposal of five years’ retrospective
franchise to the Uitlanders, being based on conditions that
struck a fatal blow to the sovereignty of England over the
Transvaal State, it was impossible to accept them, and that
it was equally impossible for her Majesty’s Government to
fall back upon the proposals contained in the South Afri-
can Republic’s despatch of August 19th for the seven years’
Franchise Bill as passed by the Volksraad, inasmuch as they
were insufficient to secure the immediate and substantial
representation which her Majesty’s Government always had
in view, and which, as it gathers from the reply of South
African Republic, the latter admit to be reasonable.
LAST DESPATCH FROM MR. CHAMBERLAIN.
On the 22nd September the last despatch of her Ma-
jesty’s Government was sent to Sir Alfred Milner immedi-
ately after the Cabinet Council had met, and the following
is the full text of the important State document: —“ I have
to acknowledge receipt of your telegram of 6th September,
conveying reply of the Government «f fie South African


Republic to note of British Agent, conveying communica-
tion of hey Majesty’s Government, contained in my telegram
to you of Bth September. The offer therein made by her
Majesty’s Government was moderate and conciliatory, and
they have to express their profound regret that the reply
of Government of South African Republic is a refusal to
accept it. Her Majesty’s Government have on more-than
one occasion repeated their assurance that they have no de-
sire to interfere in any way with the independence of the
South African Republic, provided that the conditions on
which it was granted are honourably observed in the spirit
and in the letter, and they have offered as part of a general
settlement to give a complete guarantee against any attack
on that independence, either from within any part of the
British dominions or from the territory of a foreign state.
The object her Majesty’s Government has had in view
in the recent negotiations has been stated in a manner
which cannot admit of misapprehension, viz., to obtain such
a substantial and immediate representation for the Uitlan-
ders in the South African Republic as her Majesty’s Go-
vernment hoped would relieve them from any necessity
for further interference on their behalf, and would enable
the Uitlanders to secure for themselves that fair and just
treatment which was formerly promised to them in 1881,
and which her Majesty intended to secure for them when
She granted the privilege of sell-government to the in-
habitants of the Transvaal. As was stated in my telegram
of Bth of September, her Majesty’s Government are of opi-
nion that no conditions less comprehensive than those con-
tained in their offer of that date can be relied upon to
effect this object.
The refusal of the Government of the South African
Republic to entertain the offer thus made, coming as it does
at the end of nearly four months of protracted negotiations,
themselves the climax of an agitation extending over a
period of more than five years, make it useless to further
pursue a discussion on the lines hitherto followed, and her
Majesty’s Government are now compelled to consider the
situation afresh, and to formulate their own proposals for


a final settlement of the issues which have been created in
South Africa by the policy constantly followed for many
years by the Government of South African Republic, they
will communicate the result of their deliberations in a
later despatch.
THE END OF NEGOTIATIONS.
It must be admitted that this final despatch is a states-
manlike reply to the extraordinary despatch of the South
African Republic of September 16, worthy of the dignity of
a great empire towards a vassal state such as the South
African Republic.
The Government of the South African Republic have
refused the proposals of her Majesty’s Government, and
these proposals having been rejected, after prolonged nego-
tiations, beginning with the Conference at Bloemfontein of
May 28th, down to September 23rd.
a period of four months, preceded by an incessant and
disturbing agitation in South Africa of five years, it was na-
tural. nay, inevitable, for her Majesty’s Government to re-
solve to terminate this diplomatic wrangling, because i
was not only barren of any practical results, but incon-
sistent with respect and consideration due to Great Britain
as it was also dangerous to her position as the paramount
power in South Africa, and to the confidence and loyalty of
the Uitlanders’ population, whose cause she was bound to
safeguard. , , .
In every capital of Europe the terms of this despatch of
22nd of September was considered to open a door of peace,
for it placed before the Government of South African Re-
public a golden opportunity to retreat from an untenable
position; but its doarged obstinacy prevailed, and as the
sequel proved, it sullenly refused the proffered hand
reconciliation and peace.
THE SPEECH OF THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE.
The obstacle that seems to stand in the way of a peace-
ful settlement of our difficulties in South African Republic
appears to be in the rooted conviction they have that in


the demands we have made we cherish some design hostile
to their independence and self-government. That any such
apprehension on their part is absolutely unfounded has been
asserted as strongly as can be asserted both officially in
our despatches and unofficially by members of the Govern-
ment, and nothing that I can say can add to the force of
these assertions.
I can only trust, although at this time there is nothing
that leads us to take a very hopeful or very sanguine view,
that wiser or more moderate counsel may prevail in the
Transvaal Republic, and that some means may be found by
their friends in this country or elsewhere to disabuse them
of the idea, absolutely without foundation, that we nourish
any designs intended to interfere with their independence
or self-government, or that require anything for our people
but the barest rights and barest measure of justice. If
they would so frame their policy there is no need that the
existence of their state should be a continued source of an-
xiety and trouble in that portion of Africa.
THE ULTIMATUM.
Having regard to occurrences in the history of this Re-
public which it is unnecessary here to call to mind, this
Government felt obliged to regard this military force in the
neighbourhood of its borders as a threat against the in-
dependence of the South African Republic, since it was
aware of no circumstance that would justify the presence of
such military force in South Africa, and in the neighbour-
hood of its borders. In answer to an enquiry with respect
thereto, addressed to his Excellency the High Commis-
sioner. this Government, to its great astonishment, in ans-
wer to its insinuation that from the side of the Republic an
attack was being made on her Majesty’s colonies, and at
the same time a mysterious 'reference to possibilities where-
by it was strengthened in its suspicions that the inde-
pendence of this Republic was being threatened. As a de-
fensive measure it was therefore obliged to send a .portion
of the burghers of this Republic in order to offer the re-
quisite resistance to similar possibilities. Her Majesty’s


unlawful intervention in the internal affairs of this Re-
public in conflict with the Convention of London, 1884,
caused by the extraordinary strengthening of troops m
the neighbourhood of the borders of the Republic, has
caused an intolerable condition of things to, anse whereto
this Government feels itself obliged, m e m
only ot this Republic, but also ot all South Africa, to make
an end as soon as possible, and feels itself called upon and
obliged to press earnestly and with emphasis for an im-
mediate termination of the state of things, and to request
her Majesty’s Government to give it the assurance that all
points of mutual difference shall be regulated by the fnen
v course of arbitration, or by whatever amicable way
agreed upon by this Government with her Majesty s Govern-
ment that the troops on the borders of this Republic sha
be instantly withdrawn. .
That all reinforcements of arrived in Sout
Africa since Ist of June, 1899, shall he removed from South
Africa within a reasonable time to be agreed upon with
this Government, with mutual assurance and guaran-
tee on the part of this Government that no attack upon, or
hostilities against, any portion of the possessions of the
British Government shall be made by the Republic during
further negotiations within a period of time, to be subse-
quently agreed upon between the Governments, and the
Government will in compliance therewith he prepared to
withdraw the armed burghers of this Republic from the
border.
That her Majesty’s troops which are now on the hign
seas shall not be landed in any part of South Africa.
This Government must press for an immediate and
affirmative answer to these questions, and earnestly re-
quests her Majesty’s Government to return such an answer
before or upon Wednesday, the 11th October, 1899, not later
than 5 o’clock p.m., and desires further to add that in the
event of unexpectedly no satisfactory answer being re-
ceived by it by that interval, it will with great regret be
compelled to regard her Majesty’s Government as a formal
declaration of war, and will not hold itself responsible for


the consequences thereof, and in the event of any further
movement of troops taking place within the above-men-
tioned time in the nearer direction of our borders, this Go-
vernment will be compelled to regard that also a formal
declaration of war.
(Signed) F. W. REITZ,
State Secretary.
October 9, 1899.
The protracted negotiations evidenced the fact that her
Majesty's Government had only some few important points
in view of all her voluminous despatches and speeches,
namely, that taxation and representation should go hand in
hand, the five years franchise and the claims of her Ma-
jesty the Queen’s supremacy over the Transvaal Republic,
and that claim on a most favourable condition.
That the Transvaal Government was to have the privi-
lege to transact her internal affairs, subject to suzerainty,
etc. Great Britain ha*d also to be protected from outward
attacks, and that the outcome of these proposals was to se-
cure fair play to her Majesty’s loyal subjects :in the South
African Republic.
This was at the bottom of all the Convention speeches
and despatches, which nothing less than a reasonable
demand. At last the demand had to be forced on a bloody
war, the stubbornness of the Boers resulting in their total
defeat. Their tyranny to the Uitlanders resulted not only
in their defeat and humiliation, but also in the total loss
of their privileges, which they had the chances to secure.
The Boers grappled for all —at last they got nothing
but disappointment, loss, and shame.
It is wonderful that the patience of the English Cabinet
was not exhausted, particularly after the conference at
Bloemfontein, and totally ignore Mr. Kruger’s proposals
and their endless detailed conditions, and bore their own
proposals through their High Commissioner, Sir Alfred Mil-
ner.
In the words of the Boer Secretary of State in his ulti-
matum, the Government of Great Britain press for an affir-
mative answer to the question of five years franchise, which


-was proposed by the High. Commissioner at Bloemfontein
conference, and earnestly requests the South African Re-
public to return an answer on or before such a date.
The above is the ultimatum which Great Britain should
have sent before being insulted by the Boers.
There is nothing more patent than that the Boers did
not want an amicable or peaceful settlement, but war. All
their negotiations were hostile, illusionary, and repulsive.
The High Commissioner had one cardinal point laid down
for discussion, and, be it to his credit, took a firm stand,
that no other question be discussed until that was settled,
and that the franchise question. But Mr. Kruger, to the
contrary, nothing but arbitration would do, together with
its endless details, and subject to his own scheme, namely,
all matters of dispute to be settled by foreign tribunal,
which scheme would tend to bring Great Britain to be im-
plicated with other Powers. In fact, Mr. Kruger did not
mean this question as a subject for a peaceable discussion,
hut rather for a bone of contention to urge Great Britain to
adopt such severe measures which she, through all the pro-
ceedings, did not intend to adopt.
Philip of Spain thought he- would effect a very sudden
change in the politics of Great Britain with his invincible
Armada, his 132 great men-of-war, and 2632 brass cannon,
he made his mind up if he did not get Queen Elizabeth he
would have old England and Elizabeth’s throne and her
crown. But his most sanguine hope found its realisation
in the sinking of his brass cannon in the sea, and his ships
shattered on its surface.
Mr. Kruger will have the bitter experience of seeing
all his cannons in the possession of the English soldiers at
the consummation of this war, and his hope to reign su-
preme over the Transvaal to be a dream.
AMERICAN OPINION OF THE WAR.
A lecture delivered, expressive of the origin of the present
war in South Africa—Wihat was the demand? Why was it
commenced? The complaints of the Uitlander are. first,
taxation without .representation. In 1884 Oom Paul invited,


through the Southern papers, all the world to settle in the
Transvaal on equal terms with the Boers. As they began
to come in, and the diamond and gold mines were dis-
covered. they raised the condition of the franchise from be-
ing simply a white, 21 years old, to a resident of 15 years
and the paying of 125 dollars; and if a man met these con-
ditions he could be prevented from voting by some matters
of detail. Then the trial by jury. The Ultlander demanded
to be tried by his peers, and not a Boer jury. Next educa-
tion. While there were 20 English pupils to one of the
Boers at Johannesburg schools, they taught the Dutch lan-
guage in the schools. As to the municipal taxation, it is
practically taken from foreigners, and they have no voice
as to how it is expended in Johannesburg, where there are
from 60.000 to 100,000 inhabitants, the largest city in the
Transvaal. There were 23,000 Uitlanders to 1000 Boers,
and yet their only right of citizenship was to pay taxes and
obey laws that a Boer Government, in which they had no
representative right, might impose. Underlying these ex-
pressed reasons for war is the fact that all Boers have been
educated in a hatred of the British. Race prejudice has
been encouraged. On top of this the Boers sent their ulti-
matum. On October the 10th they informed the British
officer at Pretoria that the British must arbitrate, under
certain conditions and restrictions which they demanded,
and they must remove all the troops from the borders of
the Orange Free State and the Transvaal, which were sta-
tioned there to keep the savage tribes away, and remove all
troops from the country that had arrived since June Ist,
and that all troops on their way must be turned back with-
out being permitted to land. This ultimatum must be re-
plied to by October 11, at 5 p.m., or it would be regarded as
a declaration on the part of the British. Great Britain re-
plied by telegram that it could not consider in any way the
ultimatum. The fact is the Boers had been preparing for
war since the Jameson raid, filling the country with all
munitions of war, including artillery and ammunition. The
war was sprung on the British when they were least pre-
pared for it. The question simply resolves itself into this,


whether an unprogressive, ignorant, religious people have
the right to block the progress of civilisation. That they
are honest and feel themselves aggrieved, and carry their
conscience and religion into this war we believe; that in
many points they are technically right in their diplomatic
position we have no doubt; but a larger question presses
whether a people even as good and worthy in many re-
spects, have a right to block the highway which leads to a
free, a just, and a noble Government by the 17th century
ignorance.
THE DECLARATION OF THE WAR BY THE MARQUIS
OF SALISBURY, K.G.
What was the cause to the war, and of the ultimatum?
It was not caused by any demand that we made. It so hap-
pened that at the moment the ultimatum was issued we had
withdrawn our demands, and there was none before the
Transvaal Government. It was because we had taken mea-
sures to increase the amount of our forces in that part of
her Majesty’s dominions. But if that had been done a
month or two months sooner exactly the same result would
have taken place. The moment that you showed of raising
your forces in that part of her Majesty’s dominions to an
equality with the forces opposed to them, the ultimatum
would have been issued, and the war would have been be-
gun. It is idle, therefore, to say that from that cause, or
from any delay, there was a want in the requisite military
preparations. The evil dates further back. It dates from
those unfortunate arrangements by which we deliberately
permitted a community that was obviously hostile to enjoy
an unbounded and unlimited nght of accumulating the
munitions of war. to be used against ourselves. Year after
year that accumulation of munitions of war was made. I
would go further, and say that England, as a whole, would
have no advantage from the possession of gold mines, except
so far as her Government conferred the blessings of good
government upon those who had the prosecution of that
industry. Every industry that is prosecuted successfully
breeds commerce. All commerce that is produced is to the


advantage of England; and all industries and all commerce
flourish better under that good government which she fur-
nishes, than under any regime in the world. But that is
the limit of our interest. We seek no goldfields; we seek
no territory; what we desire is equal right for the empire.
I will not ask by what means those rights are obtained.
The hour for asking that has not yet come. But those are*
the objects; those are the only objects that we seek, and we
do not allow any other consideration to cross our path.
Whether we are victorious, we shall consult the vast in-
terests which are committed to our care. We shall consult
the vast duties which it lies upon us to perform; and tak-
ing counsel of the uniform traditions of our Colonial Go-
vernment, and of the moderation and equal justice to all
races of men which it has been our uniform practice to
observe I have no doubt that we will so arrange that the
issue of this conflict will confer good government upon the
area where it rages, and will give the security that is sorely
needed for the future from the recurrence of such dangers,
from the necessity of any such exertions, and the restora-
tion of peace and civilisation to that portion of the voild.
VISCOUNT WOLSELEY, COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF
THE BRITISH ARMY.
The Boers —at the time, perhaps, we did not manage
them properly— certainly set their faces against us, and
things have gone on from bad to worse, until the aspiration
now moving them is that they should rule, not only the
Transvaal, but that they should rule the whole of South
Africa. That is a point which I think the English people
must keep before them.
There is no question about ruling the Transvaal or the
Orange Free State. The one great question that has to be
fought out between the Dutch in South Africa and the Eng-
lish race is which is to be the predominant power, whether
it is to be the Boer Republic or the English monarchy.
Well, if I at all understand and know the people of this na-
tion. I can see but one end to it, and it will be the end that
we hope for and have- looked for.


LORD KIMBERLEY, K.G.
He thought the state of affairs in the Transvaal was in-
tolerable. The Government was exceedingly bad. Look at
the tone and spirit of the ultimatum of the Transvaal Go-
vernment. Look at the preparations they have been mak-
ing for war. If we had been in difficulty in Europe or Asia,
with great calls upon our resources, did anybody suppose
that the Transvaal and the Orange Free State would have
been friendly or even neutral neighbours to us in South
Africa. The position was a precarious one in South Africa,
because these people were bad neighbours to us, and were
armed. There were two remedies possible. One was that
the Uitlanders should have been given Home Rule, control
over their own public education and municipal matters. Sir
Alfred Milner proposed that as an alternative, but Presi-
dent Kruger refused to hear of that remedy or to discuss it
at all. There was one other alternative, and that was the
admission of a considerable number of the Uitlanders to
the franchise. That rule was an unsuccessful alternative.
Those were the great causes which had been at work, and
if they wanted to find the real cause of war it was in that
way they must view the question. The issues about the
franchise and about joint enquiry were only apparent is-
sues. The Transvaal had been a great military power, not
well disposed towards us. There had been a race struggle
in South Africa, in which we secured fair play for the
Dutch at the Cape, and we expected to secure fair play for
the British at the Transvaal.
DECLARATION OF RIGHT HON. LORD TWEEDMOUTH.
There were, after all, serious complaints against Mr.
Kruger and his Government. For his part, he would wipe
away all details of which so much were heard —questions of
suzerainty, franchise, and so forth. He would put our posi-
tion rather on the ground that we were from the natural
situation of affairs in South Africa the predominant Power
in that country. That, rightly or wrongly, in 1878 we an-
nexed that country, that rightly or wrongly in 1881 we re-
stored to the Transvaal Republic their independence on con


ditions which, brieny summed up, were, first, that Great
Britain should have a veto on any transactions between the
Boer Republic and any foreign nations; secondly, that with-
in the Boer Republic white men of all nations should have
that same favoured treatment that the Boers themselves re-
ceive in our South African colonies; and thirdly, that at any
rate some measure of fair treatment should be extended to
the native subjects of Africa within the country.
THE RIGHT HON. VISCOUNT CROSS.
In 1881 annexation was given up, and the Transvaal
was rendered a quite independent state, but as to what took
place m 1881 he had not the smallest 'hesitation in saying
that the conduct of the Government of that day had brought
on us the evil which they at the time never could possibly
hove coi templated.
The result of the policy of 1881 was that the Boers had
an exalted notion Of their own power, and no notion at all
of the power of Britain, and hope sincerely that before this
war is ever they maj* change their opinion on those two
subjects. Mr. Kruger never meant to perform his part of
his promises he made under the Conventions of 1881 and
1884. He took the Convention of 1884 as a stepping-stone
to something else. What he thought was that under his
Presidency the Transvaal would become an independent
sovereign State. That is what he will never get. Equal
rights, equal representation were promises made by Presi-
dent Kruger; but it never entered into Mr. Kruger’s mind
to fulfil them. The British Government actually guaran-
teed the independence of the Transvaal against foes with-
out and foes within: but they wanted British subjects to
possess the liberties to which they were entitled under the
Convention, and those liberties they should have. The Uit-
landers had no representation, but a great deal of taxa-
tion, though our English view was that taxation and repre-
sentation should go together. Prom the beginning to the
end the Government were absolutely and unanimously de-
termined that if it were possible they would live peace-
ably with all men.


THE RIGHT HON. LORD HAMILTON.
He was speaking of M. Pevery, single member of the
Cabinet, when he declared that they had earnestly striven
for peace. Not many months back the allegation made
against the Government was that they made too many con-
cessions to foreign nations, and were too patient and con-
ciliatory in their dealing with President Kruger.
It was related of President Kruger what seemed to be
true, that in reply three or four years ago to a memorial
in winch the Uitlanders implored him to grant them the
*a ne rights as white men enjoyed in every civilised com-
munity n the world, the President exclaimed —Your rights?
Yes, you will get them over my dead body. It was in that
spirit of unreasonable obstinacy that all our overtures were
met. Y T hen at last President Kruger found that we were
determined not to be bluffed by subterfuge or illusory pro-
posals, and that our Government were determined to push
through the work we had undertaken, he declared war
against the country, and issued the most insulting ulti-
matum iver issued against a great nation.
It is evident that on one hand, from the protracted de-
spatches, speeches, telegrams, and declarations, that England
sincerely and earnestly sued for peace, even up to the
eleventh hour. On the other hand, that Kruger and his fol-
lowers did not want peace. All his negotiations were noth-
ing but a sham. He did not desire even the concessions that
he asked for. It was only one concession that he was look-
ing for, and that was the surrender of the supremacy of
Great Britain over the Transvaal Republic. He knew well
enough had he that, all the other concessions would be in-
cluded. England did not want territory, neither gold nor
diamonds, but religious, civil, and commercial liberty—
liberty of speech and of the press for her subjects. When
these considerations are analysed and balanced, it is a posi-
tive and unconditional fact that the responsibility of the
present war rests upon Kruger and his followers’ shoulders.
Kruger commenced this campaign with some sort of prayers,
and Lord Roberts will close it with praise.


Signs of the Times.
BY observing what I have seen and reflecting on what
I have read in the course of the last half century, I have
found some marvellous changes; not only changes, but
changes of a progressive nature in material civilisation;
progress which elevates humanity and adds much to the
comfort of daily life. It is not too much to say in this
respect that more has been done, more prolific discoveries
have been made, grander achievements have been lealised
in the course of 50 years of our life, than in all the previous
lifetime of our race, since states, nations, and politics have
had their being. Of a truth, this is an age of mysterious
schemes and inventions, which were once deemed next to
impossibilities. Now we communicate our thoughts to re-
lations, friends, and others by cable, with oceans rolling
between, by which means the time of communication is re-
duced from months to minutes; or that of the phonograph,
which makes inanimate material to talk and sing as dis-
tinctly as the human voice. Another marvel is the telephone,
by means of which we can articulate our voice to friends
at a distance of hundreds of miles. We make a mile of
white printing paper and send it on a spool, and a perfect
printing press unwinds, prints, and delivers it to us by the
thousand per hour. I say again, this is an age of inven-
tions, and it has not found a stopping-place yet. Never was
there such activity of inventions within the history of man -
kind as at the present day. The characteristics of our
times are the succession of rapid strides which the world
is making in science, general knowledge, and general inven


tions. The steamboat in 1807, steam printing press in 1811,
railway cars in 1825, reaper and mower in 1833, telegraph in
1837, sewing machine in 1846, telephone in 1876. It will be
seen that none of these inventions antedate 1798. There
is something more than common in machines constructed; a
machine that will take a shaving from a nail, or slice up
steel like an apple; those that will drill a hole invisible to
the naked eye; screw cutter, which will turn out perfect
screws so small that on white paper they appear like tiny
dots, and a register is constructed which will measure the
thousandth part of an inch. Go back little more than half
a century: the world stood as it did in the days of the
patriarchs, but about the time mentioned the world awoke
from its slumber, and knowledge increased to that degree
that men brought all the elements of nature subservient to
their will and control; bound the elements to their chariots,
and laid hold of the very lightning and made it their mes-
sage-bearer round the world. And now, had we all the
statistics of all the railways in the world in their connection
with trade and commerce, they would be beyond calculation;
all items in this line would be beyond computation. They
are all to be counted by thousands and millions. If we
consider all the iron mines in the world and their incal-
culable productions, the smelting furnaces that dissolve that
ore, the number of men employed in the work, and the
money paid for labour —this is something beyond compre-
hension. In America alone they obtain £290,000,000 annu-
ally of iron and steel. Then come the foundries and engineer
manufacturers, that utilise the iron and steel to different
purposes. Then, taking into consideration the owners of
iron mines, furnaces, foundries, and manufacturers, what
emoluments they have made, what riches they secured and
fortunes realised! Someone may ask the question, what
has this to do with the railways? I say that it has some-
thing very considerable to do with them, because all the
!t.em<i mentioned are inseparably linked with the railway
interest. There are millions of tons of iron accumulated
in the construction of rails and rolling stock; we can num-
ber the employees by the million and the money to pay them


by the million. There are numerous inventions which
attract our wonder and admiration, but not so much adapted
to advance the welfare of mankind, viz., the phonograph,
etc., which to my view is the masterpiece of this class; but
steam and locomotion is the bread and cheese invention,
and is the foremost to promote the interest and enhance the
comfort of mankind. It would take a volume to enumerate
its advantages. All readers of history are aware who was
the inventor of this great scheme. It was no one but the
hero of the eighteenth century, Mr. Stephenson. There are
many amusing anecdotes in circulation in reference to tha
undertaking at its initiation; these must be taken by the
reader for what they are worth. When he told a friend
that he could drive coaches without horses, his friend told
someone else, and they took it for granted that Stephenson
had lost his balance —indeed, they took him to be an out-
and-out lunatic. At last the authorities heard the rumour,
and they were going to take him to Bedlam; so he had a
narrow escape from going to the madhouse. Was he mad?
Not so! If the intelligence of all the scientists of the world
were concentrated in one head it would become short of the
powerful genius of Mr. Stephenson in its connection with
the above-mentioned scheme. When the Government had
seen the model of his wonderful Invention, his insanity was
discounted by a very considerable percentage; and the
Government had such confidence in his scheme as to con-
struct 30 miles of road, viz., from Liverpool to Manchester.
It is easy to guess what excitement prevailed at the first
starting of the Birmingham iron horse from Liverpool, ans
on its arrival at Manchester. One old lady said, after wait-
ing for some time, “It will never come;” another said, “It
is coming, I hear it snorting; ” and when it did arrive, one
asked the old lady. “What do you think of it now?” She
answered, “Sure it has come right enough, but it will never
start again.” It is evident enough she did not understand
the power of the hot water inside the iron horse, nor yet the
cocks and valves by which it was regulated; but, at all
events, the spur -was applied to the iron horse, and away if
went to the satisfaction and surprise of the great crowd


present. Then said the old lady, “It has gone right enough,
but it will never stop.” In this latter remark she spoke
partly the truth, unknown to herself. Certainly it stopped
at Liverpool, but, in reference to the great scheme, it has
not stopped yet. Metaphorically speaking, Mr. Stephenson
never dreamed that the few seeds sown over that 30 miles
would grow a thick crop over the four quarters of the globe.
It never entered his great mind that lines of 3000 miles
would be erected from New York to California, and that a
network of railway would reach round the earth. How did
the inventor attain to such knowledge so as to solve such a
problem then, and how did he bring about such an under-
taking. which was a mystery to all the scientists of the
world? Had he been assisted by schools anu institutions,
or by professors of universities? Not so! If he perused
the mathematical calculations of Herschel and Newton, if he
went to the workshop of Watts of Frost to inspect their
plans and models, they could not teach him the alphabet m
the science of locomotion. This secret came from the work-
manship of his own heart. The secret of how he attained
to this wonderful discovery is in the fact that God in His
providence sent a genius to the world to promote the welfare
of man. He placed his wonderful mental power under the
social and commercial world, and elevated it to an im-
mensely higher standard than it ever reached before, anc
b; doing so he bequeathed an immense fortune. Who tv?
To his family! Whatever he left to his family, that was
not all. Was it to England, Scotland, and Wales? Nay,
that is not all. Was it to France, Norway, Denmark, Rus-
sia. Austria, Germany, Switzerland, Spain, Portugal, Italy,
Turkey, and Greece? Yes, but that is not all! The wealth
of legacy enriches the four quarters of the globe, yea, the
fifth quarter, the Australian colonies, too. To my mind,
there is not half enough respect paid to the memory of this
wonderful man. The whole world should subscribe towards
the erection of a pyramid of gold to his memory.
Were the latest discovered schemes to be classified, I
think that the next to the railways in importance is the
electric telegraph. In my early days all that was known


of the electric fluid was its destructive power in splitting
trees, opening the earth, knocking down houses, and occa-
sionally killing men and beasts here and there. Now, man
has hold even of the lightning, and makes it speak for him,
and makes it work for him, bridles it up to draw carriages
over tihe tops of houses, at the same time to boil his kettle
and light his house and streets. The lightning has now
become an obedient servant to man; he has it under his
control, subservient to his will and power; not only the
lightning, but all the elements of nature, are brought under
the control of man, the services of which are an untold
accumulation to him. and an addition to his daily comfort.
The great benefit of tlhe lightning is in the fact that its
service is not confined to one place. While this servant is
at work in one place it can do the same work at the same
time all over the surface of the globe. One great advantage
derived from the electric telegraph is that it is such a
speedy message-bearer. If a hole were put through the
centre of the globe, furnished with a wire, it would travel
that 8000 males in a fractional part of a minute. In my
early days the average time to receive messages from the
colonies in England was about six months, but now we can
receive a message or send one to London in as many hours— ■
nay. I would not make a great mistake if I say in as many
minutes. We do not forget that a message from the Prince
of Wales from London (I think on the opening of the Im-
perial Institute), was transmitted in the marvellously short
time of 6 V 2 minutes. What a marvellous change in the
signs of the times. As far as communication goes, it has
brought the four quarters of the globe together, which are
now in that respect as an extensive city. Through the
instrumentality of the electric telegraph in its connection
with the press, we are having the advantage of realising the
intelligence of the social, commercial, political, and the re-
ligious news of the whole world, and it is brought to our
doors for a penny. This present century is an exceptional
century in the age of the world. This is the age of steam
and machinery. So it is in every sense of the word. Maclhi-
nerv for agricultural purposes, ploughing by steam, sowing


with a machine, cutting down our crops, and turning our
crops into flour for our use, all done by the same method.
Our newspapers are turned out by the million by the same
means. Nothing in all our industries is brought out
straight by hand; new ways and means for everything.
The horse is stripped from his harness and substituted by
an iron horse which is stronger and faster; the shuttle is
taken from the hand of the weaver and placed in iron fingers
which fly more efficiently and with greater speed, the sailoi
furls up his sails and ploughs the ocean with steam. Time
is not even given to the hen to hatch her chickens, that
must be done by steam, and some people cannot munch
their cabbage without the aid of machinery. What an un-
told advantage these inventions are. What would become
of our gold and other precious minerals which are obtained
from our deep sinking through the known world in the
absence of the above means? It would remain a hidden
treasure in the bowels of the earth. What about the state
of religion in this exceptional century? Can we say that
religion is progressive in this age? Is it keeping place
spiritually with the advancement of material reforms? Bv
observing religion in its external reform we are inclined
to say that it is; but, take religion in its spiritual sense,
every symptom tells us that 'it is declining. Religion now
is managed by machinery, too. Nothing follows its spon-
taneous course—nothing is left to be accomplished by old
natural methods. Will the religion of the present age bear
a favourable comparison with the primitive religion? I
am afraid that it will fall far short. All Bible readers are
well informed how and in what form religion was carried on
in the primitive time. Its Founder said the foxes have
holes, the birds of the air have nests., but the Son of Man
has nowhere to lav His head; His followers, too, were in-
structed to go without money and without scrip to preach
the gospel. Now what changes there are in the signs of the
times in regard to religion. One would think now that the
instructions of the Master are to provide horses, secure
handsome buggies, make sure of profitable emoluments, look
out for stipends that will maintain them in well-furnished


(houses. Why ave the disciples greater than their Masters?
There is no lack of buying brick and mortar for building
churches with tali spires, preparing young men for the
ministry with classical education, with black cloth and
white muslin, holding synod, conferences, and formal insti-
tutions, and in such places talk much about the form of
religion. No one would think tnat the crop is white tor
harvest, and that reapers are required in the fields. A ery
few ministers you can see going straight to the field to reap
and to save souls and to pluck the branches from the fire.
They preach a couple of sermons on Sunday and all is over,
and have much to do with formalities. All this is done
to secure lucrative emoluments, extravagant stipends, easy
and idle life. The reader may read these remarks lightly,
but they are of deep importance and indicate a mighty
change in the whole manner of our religious existence, for
the same habit regulates not our mode of action alone, but
our modes of thought and feeling. Men and ministers are
grown mechanical in head and in heart as well as in hand.
We can trace this tendency in all the manifestations of our
time, its politics, morals, and religion, in the "hole current
of its spiritual as well as its material activity. No wonder
that a great minister in America said, “The church must be
reformed or it will be a failure.” Where are the reformers?
I cannot see any. By reading I cannot be informed of any.
I say that there are no heroes to be found in our time;
no Martin Luther, who went to the Council of Worms
with his life in his hand to defend the orthodox doctrine
of the Bible, when he faced the greater power of Rome
single-handed; a venture that no army of soldiers would
attempt. When his friends advised him not to venture
such an undertaking, he said that “he would go if there were
as many devils as there were tiles On the roofs of the
houses.” I don’t think that I would be far wrong in saying
that this great Christian hero has done more to elevate the
moral and the religious world to a higher standard than
all the ministers of our time put together; he lit a lamp
in Germany that will not be extinguished until the last con-
summation. I cannot hear of another John Calvin at


Geneva, nor John Wesley m England, nor none to fill the
places which, were vacated by the old non-comormists,
Howell, Harris, Thomas, Charles, Matthew Henry, Sir Kow-
land Hill, and many more l could name in England, under
whose ministry hundreds and thousands were converted.
The preaching of the Word by those men by simple, natural,
and individual effort flew like hallowed tire from heart to
Heart till all were purified and illuminated by it, and its
heavenly light shone like the sun and stars; from which
part of the world can we now near such refreshing news.
The news is very opposite indeed. Dr. Talmage says:—“l
simplv state a fact when I say that in many places the
Church is surrendering, and the world conquering; wnere
there is one man come to the Kingdom of God through
Christian instrumentality, there are 10 dragged down to dis-
sipation. Within the last 25 years the Churches of God
in this country average less than two conversions a year.”
The same authority says that “in America there are 60,000
ministers.” Without controversy we must say that the
above statistics speak volumes of the signs of the times.
Can we, according to the above computation, conscientiously
consider that those 60,000 are worthy of their hire? If £4
per week is paid to those ministers, the ministry in America,
which is no doubt much under-rated, receive £130,000 per
week, or the enormous sum of £6,760,000 per year. Put
this against the conversion for 20. will it appear likely that
they are faithful workers in the vineyard? Is it possible
to believe that they obey their Master’s command to go to
the highways and hedges and compel men to come in? Nay,
it is to he feared that it is a matter of profit and loss-
pounds, shillings, and pence with an awful percentage of
them. They are robbers of widows’ houses, dumb dogs that
cannot bark. It is hard to know how far to contribute
towards supporting the ministry. Some will say, "Muzzle
not the ox that treadeth out the corn,” and “The labourer is
worthy of Ms hire.” But how are we to distinguish between
the ox and the wolf in sheep’s clothing, and the true worker
from the false shepherd? Under these circumstances I sup-
pose we must put this down as an impossible enquiry, and


ltu. - wc wuetiL ana. me lares to grow together until the
uuurf au tnese darn features God <nas a church
on in huiit on a sure foundation. If there are no Guttlers
auu. .»liimeius, mere are tnousands of strong pillars to up-
ihoiu h; mere are still Princes in Israel. In reference to
the uuivation Army, this is an institution established in
this naif-century. I have been observing the movements
of this institution from its initiation up to the present
time, and from these observations I arrive at the conclusion
that this form of religion resembles the primitive religion
closer than any other form. One feature is their unbounded
charity. They feed the hungry, clothe the naked in every
way, ameliorate the sufferings of their fellow-creatures;
their self-denial is proverbial, which is the parent of every
virtue; and with their zeal and energy to improve the moral
and spiritual condition of all they come in contact with, they
make an irresistible effort to pluck the brand from the fire.
To what religious body can we give give credit for going
to the highways and hedges and compelling men to come in ?
They are like the good Samaritan, they never pass anyone
weltering in his blood without giving him a helping hand.
There is no place too far; the Torrid Zone is not too hot,
neither is the Frigid Zone too cold. They penetrate to the
interior of the colonies, and to all the quarters of the globe;
the world is the field of their labour, and it is manifest they
prosper. No doubt they meet with obstructions in their
way; nevertheless, they are becoming a formidable power in
the world. They are encouraged and supported by judges,
by governors, lawyers, mayors, and leading ministers of
religion. They are like their Master, whose good works
were all for the benefit of others. They don't look for
ease and comfort, nor extravagant stipends; no Archbishop
to provide a palace for. and £15,000 a year to maintain it:
no expensive mansions for Bishops, and velvet couches to
lie on in ease and idleness; it is all work with them. They
go in the strength of their threepenny bits as they proceed.
They well represent the vision of Peter; the sheet, with its
four corners towards heaven, including four-footed animals,
wild beasts, and creeping things. We can say of the sheet


of the Salvation Army that its corners are extending 10 the
four corners of the earth, and they make unflinching effoit
to gather all sorts of characters into it.
It is patent that the politics of the present time are
much changed. The cry of all the civilised nations is:
"Give us a reform of government, a good structure of legis-
lation, a proper check upon the executive, a wise arrange-
ment of judiciary.” This cry should be sincerely regarded
by politicians in every country, and wise means should be
adopted to give it a satisfactory reply. lam afraid that
little attention is given in our days to this cry. This obli-
gation is enjoined on everyone that takes upon himself the
responsibility of making the laws and administering them.
There is one important matter to be considered by every
commonwealth (a matter that embodies in it many other
considerations), viz., to adjust and modify the gap that
exists between the rich and the poor. It is regrettable to
state that the tendency of legislation has been to extend the
gap and make it wider. The leading policy of the Tas-
manian Government, and the neighbouring colonies as well,
is to do an extensive business with the London brokers.
This is a motive-power that puts every wheel of the Govern-
ment machinery in motion. By the above means the
Government ship is kept afloat and escapes the breakers.
"Borrowing money to a certain extent. I believe, is not out
of place, and spending it on profitable work in a judicious
manner, to make roads and bridges for the convenience of
farmers in particular, because when we assist the farmer
we assist ourselves. Good roads mean cheap transit, and
cheap transit means cheap provisions all over the world.
It is not Out of place for th> present generation, after mak-
ing considerable improvement for their own convenience and
the following generation’s benefit, to borrow a limited
amount, and let their successors pay a part of the same and
part of the interest also; but I think to borrow a million,
and borrow another million to pay interest and pay them-
selves handsome salaries, is a national calamity, and void
of wise discretion. But the calamity does not end here.
The public are saddled with the responsibility to pay enor


mous interest, such, as oppressive and inequitable duties,
piled on the necessaries of life, until the public are groaning
under the burden. is it not time for the working man to
cry for a reform of government and a good structure of
legislation? More care and respect should be paid to him
who is the bone and sinew of every commonwealth. His
interest is not regarded with sympathetic care by our law-
makers. If we only look to the mirror of recorded history
we can easily come to the conclusion that he is not. Mea-
sures, which have been submitted to the Assembly, beneficial
to the land, have been thrown on one side by the Council
like a despicable toy,ap'd not a hero is to be found with enough
moral courage to avow and back his opinion and stand by
his right, but cowardly knuckles down and sacrifices his privi-
lege, which is the birthright of every member of Parliament.
What a different account we have to record of politicians in
the House of Commons in the old country. Men that did
not undertake to legislate in their own interest,,
nor the interest of the nobleman and the wealthy at
the expense and neglect of the poor; men that conferred
honour on their situation and high calling; men of integrity
and courage, who would not take no for an answer, even
from the peers of England, when they were persuaded by
their own conscience to be in the right. What a noble
example we have in Peel. Palmerston, Penn, and Cobden.
Did they go and stand up for three or four hours at a stretch
advocating the repeal of the corn law for their own benefit?
What they Avanted was cheap bread for the peasants of
England, and they did this noble work without favour or
fear. They did not knuckle down to Lords, nor slacken
their advocacy until they carried this grand measure
through, though confronted by the most fonnidable opposi-
tion almost on record. To prove their sincerity they offered
to reduce the rents of their farming tenants, if the passing
of the law were detrimental to their interests, and by so
doing they immortalised their names as long as the 'history
of England will be read. What a contrast we find in Tas-
mania. Instead of adjusting and repealing our arbitrary
laws, they make the yoke of taxation heavier and heavier.


taxing our bread, prohibitive tax on meat, which could be
exported to us, taxing our leather, taxing our boots, and
were we to throw our boots on one side and walk barefooted,
we are saddled with the road rate. What is the next article
they win put the screw on? This is an age of discoveries.
Our wise politicians may find out a scheme to bottle up the
air and retail it to the public. Is there no one to stand up
for the working man, like Lord Byron did in his maiden
speech in the House of Lords? When those who were
called the frame-breakers were going to be transported and
hanged, he said:-Why do you call the working men the
mob 9 Who tills your ground but the mob? Who defen
your lives and property but the mob? To make your tragedy
complete, you had better erect gibbets in every corner of
your fields, get Jeffries for a judge, and butchers for a jury,
and see how you get on without the mob.” It would be
well for our politicians in Tasmania to take the same view
of the working men as Lord Byron did. The working men
of Tasmania are deserving of respect, for they are peaceable,
docile, and submissive under all kinds of imposition, no
dynamiters, no secret societies, and seditious risings. It
would be wise on the part of the Government to keep them
so; men’s patience will not last for ever. We have a strik-
ing proof of this in France, before and in the revolution,
when the peasants of France got fanatic, the clergy drawing
immense emoluments and living in extravagant luxury, the
aristocracy living tax free, all the revenue drawn from the
pockets of the common people, till their patience was ex-
hausted and Paris became an immense almshouse and even-
tually ft complete slaughterhouse. Is there not something
of a kindred spirit in Tasmania?
In warfare what a drastic change there is in the signs
of the times, particularly in the weapons employed. The
battering ram and the how and arrow were the principal
weapons used by the Romans and the Britons. It is a terror
even now to think of the weapons of war in our days. This
age is called a civilised age. When considering it so, there
is one thing that I cannot reconcile, a problem that is not
easily solved, when the greatest talerits in all the world, in


every country, are devising to construct the most destruc-
tive weapon to destroy human life. If those talents were
employed in establishing a wise system of arbitration, it
would be an additional plank in the platform of civilisation.
If they must fight, let them resort to the old custom of the
Eastern countries in former times, viz., settling national dis-
putes by a duel. No diplomatists, no council of war, no
despatches going to and fro, but go at it like David and
Goliath, when he only just asked the question, “What shall
be done to the man that killeth this Philistine?” When
this question was answered he said, “I will serve him as 1
did the lion and the bear.” When his elder brother heard
him speaking those boasting words, he apprehended him and
said he was a presumptive fellow from his youth, and asked
him a question—“ Who hast thou left with those few sheep
In the wilderness?” I should imagine 'that David answered,
saying—“ You had better go and look after the sheep, because
you are more adapted for a shepherd than you are for a
soldier, else you would not for 40 days listen to that uncir-
cumcised Philistine roaring his challenges. I have a higher
ambition than minding sheep; I am going to kill the giant
and join the Royal family.” We can clearly find that
David in this tragical undertaking had two important things
in view; first, to banish the insult which was overhanging
the armies of the living God; second, to secure royalty and
fortune for himself. But in this work he had a formidable
obstruction, the apprehensive remarks of his elder brother
and the discouragement from Saul, when he said —“Thou
art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him.
for thou art a youth and he a man of war.” But both could
not break down the courage of this young hero. David in-
formed them where the secret of his strength was. He told
them that he was going to fight in the name of the Lord
of Hosts, the God of the armies of Israel. David was a
closer observer of ancient history than either Saul or his
elder brother; he did not forget how the Red Sea was opened
for the deliverance of his ancestors. He was still mindful
of the heavenly bread which was showered on them, and
the table which was furnished to them in the wilderness, the


opening of the Jordan, and the fall of Jericho by means or
rams’ horns. This seat of war between the Philistines ana
Israelites is a most historical spot. To give an account ot
it, perhaps, would be somewhat foreign to my subject,
nevertheless it may not be uninteresting to young pilgrim
readers. It is many years since I read the geography ot
this portion of Palestine. This seat of war is a gorge some-
what like the Cataract Gorge, with the exception that a
creek runs down the former and a river runs down the lat-
ter. It is situated, I think, about 6% miles from the city
of Jerusalem. It is supposed that in this creek David got
the five smooth stones which were water-worn, with one of
which he killed Goliath; a little from this place was Jesse’s
sheep run, where David killed the lion and the bear, and
in this valley were the fields of the ancient Boaz, where
Ruth was gleaning among the reapers in order to support
herself and the returned exile Naomi. The above-named
Boaz was an open-hearted philanthropist when he told Ruth,
‘•Go not to the other field, abide here fast by the maidens.”
In the same neighbourhood, a flock of angels, the celestial
choir, appeared to the shepherds by night, singing the melo-
dious first Christmas anthem, “Glory in the highest to God,
on earth peace and goodwill towards men.” Lower down
the valley is the ancient city of Bethlehem, which is not
only the centre of Palestine, but the centre city of the whole
world, not on account of its situation or its size, but on ac-
count of it being the birthplace of the promised Messiah
which was pointed out by the finger of prophecy. Consider-
able time after the war between Saul and the Philistines
comes the change of changes, a revolution in religion and
politics, new religion is the shadow of the old religion pass-
ing away, and the substance substituted. The religion
which was confined to one nation becomes the religion of all
the nations of the world. In politics also was a marvellous
change; the sceptre departing from Judaea, every vistage ot
secular power was lost by the Jewish nation, the Roman
Empire having a tighter grasp on them than ever, so they
ore left w’thout either a king or a sceptre to this day.


Supplement.
To illustrate the difference in expense of travelling by
rail to what it was by the old method of travelling with
coaches and carriages. I will mention just one instance. A.
gentleman starting from London in his own carriage wouiu
have to hire horses from stage to stage, for a distance of
350 miles, viz., from London to Holyhead road, on
the London and Holyhead road, and from Holy-
head to Queenstown, Ireland. That was the principal
route. Anyone can see the enormous expense incurred, and
travelling by the stage coaches was almost equally expensive,
besides the time spent in travelling such a distance. Now
you can go irom London to Birkenhead in a few hours, and
from there to Ireland in a few hours more, and the expense
by rail and steam is no more than so many shillings to so
many pounds.
The electric telegraph, again: what an advantage it is
to trade and commerce through all the civilised cvorld.
Merchants are all able to receive intelligence of prices of
merchandise of all sorts, corn in America, tea in China and
India, silk in Persia, and getting those advantages in as
many hours as they did in months under the old dispensa-
tion. The marvellous speed of messages by electric wire
and the speedy transit by rail and steam, put animation and
life into trade and commerce over the civilised world; every-
thing running fast and smooth, crying out “Forward, for-
ward!” like the rivulets running to the sea.
There are some establishments in the world which we
cannot say that they are running so very smooth; politics,
for instance: we can conscientiously say that they are in a
retrogressive state. Self-interest, which is the parent of
all evil, is the ruling principle of too many politicians. In
making laws they have a keen appetite for self, and heedless
of the universal interest of the community. One, writing
on this subject, says—“ Contrive the fabric of the law aright,
and, without any further effort on your part, that Divine


spirit of freedom, which all hearts venerate and long tor,
will come of herself to inhabit it, and under her healing
wings every noxious influence wall wither, every good and
salutary one more and more expand.” Now comes the car-
dinal question—Do our legislators cultivate that spirit of
freedom which all hearts venerate? Does the community
enjoy the pleasure of being under these healing \vings, undei
which this freedom expands? No! It is too patent that the
reverse is the case. The wheels of legislation aie turning
in a reverse way, and the shafts of the machinery are being
oiled with noxious schemes, trickeries, and tyranny, such as
border on dishonesty. When a wise and equitable measure
is brought forward in our Assemblies, they meet with for-
midable opposition, and the framers thereof, possessing not
the moral courage to stand by them, but cowardly knuckling
down, and either by fear or favour, perhaps by both, they let
good measures slip between their fingers to the waste bas-
ket. I think this is a fair portrait of our modern legisla-
tion. Immoral and corrupt actions are the offspring of
impure and selfish motives; what are called legislators form-
ing constitutions for themselves at the cost of depriving the
public of their freedom and right.
In regard to religion, too, by viewing the external, one
may think that religion is progressive and in a flourishing
state, everything regulated in perfect order, but the inward,
the moral, and spiritual is to all intents almost extinct.
Those who are called ministers are well trained in the ex-
ternal. have classical education in colleges and universities;
but. the question is, did spiritual religion ever flourish under
these external and mechanical arrangements? Anyone that
reads history with any degree of thoughtfulness, and com-
pares the primitive with the present form of religion, will
find that the latter will not bear a favourable comparison
with the former. Did anyone find spiritual religion—which
is the crowning glory, 'the life and soul of our modern cul-
ture-flourish with the aid of schools and well-arransred
institutions? Not so! On the contrary, in all past and
existing institutions for those ends, its Divine Spirit invari-
ably has been found to languish and decay. In the time


of the reformers, Zwingle, Huss, Wycliffe, and Luther, we
don't read of assemblies, conferences, and synods organised.
No, they went at it to Christianise Europe, with individual
heavenly zeal and energy, and subdued heresy, superstition,
and hypocrisy, and these four bright lamps illuminated
Europe—yea, and the civilised world—with iight that will
not be extinguished until the consummation of all things.
It is very different in our time. Religion has become mecha-
nical; on untold number of institutions is the order of the
day; counties and sub-counties organised by every sect and
denomination; and all this work is done for place and pay.
working for wages. I see that there is now an attempt
to unite different denominations in one body to be legislated
for by one church government. These proceedings are
nothing more than external work, only scaffolds to the
spiritual edifice. There is no fault to be found in the
erection of the scaffold; the work is approaching perfection;
but it seems that the building of the spiritual temple is a
matter of secondary considerations. The fence by which
the vineyard is enclosed are kept in pretty fair repair. The
erecting of churches, collections, and stipends, and the ob-
serving of the Sacraments and doctrines are somewhat
orth «d<'.£ but the * ceyard itself is shamefully neglected,
briars and weeds are allowed to grow—avarice, self, and
hypocrisy. The cultivating of the inward, the noble work of
purifying the soul, is neglected by ministers and churches.
The Saviour said to Peter that he had a church in the world
built on a rock, and that the gates of hell would not prevail
against it, and it is in the world now, for all the short-
comings of ministers, priests, and professors. There are
thousands of faithful workers that would obey their Master’s
bidding (if it were necessary) to go and preach without
money and without scrip. The number of such a class may
be multiplied.


R. D. RICH ARDS & C?
lmporters of Drapery^|l 3
“THE BLOCK,” BRISBANE STREET,
LAUNCESTON.
J. T. FARMILO
Timber Merchant & Builder.
STEAM AND MOULDING A ALL KINDS OF
MILLS. <s> BUILDERS’ IRONMONGERY
CIMITIERE STREET, LAUNCESTON.
H- THOMPSON,
General Importer of Drapery and Clothing.
High-Class Tailoring and Dressmaking.
SMALL PROFITS AND QUICK RETURNS.
96 George Street
62 Brisbane Street Launceston.
W. L. JACK, bailor, etc.
148 Charles Street, Launceston.
. . Excellent Assortment of . .
WOOLLENS, VICUNA?, SERGES, SUITINGS, TROUSERINGS.
Uniforms and Liveries of all classes.
A TRIAL SOLICITED.


SALISBURY FOUNDRY CO.,
WILLIAM STREET, LAUNCESTON,
Iron Founders, Millwrights, Engineers, Boilermakers,
Manufacturers of Sawmills, Flour Mills, Agricultural, Pumping,
and Mining Machinery, Ovens, Stoves, Horse Works,
and Crab Winches.
Sole Makers of Kayser’s Patent Tin Dressing Appliances.
High-class Mining Machinery.
D. STORRB R,
FURNITURE EMPORIUM ::: : : UNDERTAKER.
Funerals Furnished on the Shortest Notice.
In reading a good book with comfortable surroundings life is
made more enjoyable. These can be had by visiting Storrer s,
where Furniture is Cheap and Good.
D. STORRER, ST. JOHN STREET, LAUNCESTON.
:::: W ESTON ::::
PLUMBER,
IRON AND LEAD WORKER— —^
HOT WATER AND SANITARY ENGINEER,
CAMERON STREET, LAUNCESTON.
L. FAIRTHORNE & SONS,
ST. JOHN STREET, LAUNCESTON,
AND AT BISACONSFIELD AND BURNIE.
Fairthorne’s “Balm of Liquorice”— The Best and the Most
Popular Remedy for Influenza, Coughs, and Colds, Is. 6d. and 2s. 6d.
per bottle.
Fairthorne’s Corn Cure Never Fails, Splendid Testimonials.
Is. per bottle.
Fairthorne’s Celebrated Liver Pills. Well known to Every
Household.


KING
Champion
Cycles . . .
Are known as . . . 4
LEADING MACHINES
for Strength combined with
. Lightness ------
• Easy Running - - - -
• Speed and Finish - -
A well-known and Established Fact—
The only Firm Building High-Grade Models.
BUILT TO ORDER, AND FULLY GUARANTEED.
Well known to be the Largest Staff of Experienced Cycle Engineers
in the State.
COUNTRY ORDERS RECEIVE PROMPT ATTENTION
JOHN KING, Proprietor,
(Late J. W. SMITH)
197 Charles Street, Launceston.


Attention!
• • •
FINLAYSON
T A / ANTS his friends and the public to note
that on account of the increase of his
Tailoring and Mercery Business, especially
the former department,» he is compelled to
have more room at 90 Elizabeth Street,
and in consequence has decided to remove a
portion of his Up-to-Date
TIES SCARVES
COLLARS SHIRTS
Including his Special Line of COURT SHIRTS with
Reversible Cuffs, and a Special Line of IMPORTED
SUITINGS, &c., to . . .
158 CHARLES STREET.
C. F. also takes this opportunity of thanking his
friends and the public for the liberal patronage that
has made this change a pleasing necessity.
FINLAYSON
Up=to=Date
Tailor-
-158 Charles Street,
90 Elizabeth Street, and
Next Coffee Palace, Wynyard.


1
Che Blood
is the Life
Most peases are caused by the blood becoming impure, and until it
I s purified, it is impossible for anyone to regain health
and strength.
VITADATIO!
IT MAY SAVE YOUR LIFE, AND IS WORTHY OF A TRIAL
Sole Proprietor: W. WEBBER, Launceston, Tas.
HATTON & LAWS, Wholesale Agents,
Brisbane Street, Launceston.
Webbers Yitadatio
»
Tbe Great Verbal Remedy.
“ Oh, but it is so expensive !This is what we are constantly told bv all sort*
and conditions of people. A medicine that is able to save liftfis not dear at anv
LSne 6 is Pr » VITADATIO I^ 6 ?• compared to life and health ? Such a
meaicine is VIIALATIO, which costs ss. 6d. a bottle (quarts) or less hv
a ,ng p a i < l Uantl ty> does a h that is claimed for it in diseases of' the hiring
never failing to effect a perfect cure if given a fair trial .
herbal b ° ttle , of V^ a datio contains just half as much more medicine than anv
herbal remedy which is retailed at 55., and there are many living witnesL “n
these states who have tried many and various remedies and n Q n * V
superiority of Vitadatio as a life-giver, as ifa taplTe’s “ ‘ eSWy ‘° the
Considering the wonderful cures this medicine has wrought manv cases
being pronounced incurable, it would not be dear if it cost a guinea Tbottle foJ
what will not a man give for his life ? guinea a oottie, tor
Obtainable from all Vendors of Medicines.


White Star Line
Steamers
f
Melbourne to Launceston direct, thence Devonport,
Burnie, and Stanley, Orion, Saturday, 2 p.m.
Launceston to Melbourne, via Devonport, Burnie, and
- a Orion, every Monday, 6 p.m. Fares:
.. saloon, .Melbourne, 155.; return, 225. 6d.
Launceston to Strahan, Zeehan, Queenstown, Kelly
Basin, via Devonport, Burnie, and Stanley, Koonoo-
karra, Tuesday, 4 p.m., taking cargo and
passengers to all ports.
Fares to Strahan and Stanley, 10s; return, 15s.
Launceston to Devonport, Burnie, Wynyard, and Stanley,
also to Latrobe, Leven, Penguin, Amy, every
Friday, 7 p.m.
Passengers and cargo taken to all parts at lowest
rates.
W. HOLYMAN & SONS,
LAUNCESTON.
AGENTS :
Devonport —W. B. COCKER
Leven R. R. E. HAMILTON
Penguin-H. KING Burnie-W. JONES
Table Cape— STUTTERT & SONS '
Stanley —C. EDWARDS
