

fe jf-’y
JV. S. Wales, Vol. xxxvii.)
' « l\
» f
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
[With two Illustrations.]
*. *
it
( Reprinted, from Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
The ABORIGINAL FISHERIES at BREWARRINA.
Associe etranger Soc. d’Anthrop. tie Paris.
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, August 5, 1903 .]


llllmliww*
3 1508 00551996 7


ABORIGINAL FISHERIES AT BREWARRINA.


The ABORIGINAL FISHERIES at BREWARRINA.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
Associe etranger Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris.
[With two Illustrations.]
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, August 5, 1903 ]
The town of Brewarrina is built upon the left bank of the
Darling River, parish of Brewarrina, county of Clyde, New
South Wales, and is at present the terminus of the railway
into that district. Near the northwest extremity of the
town, at a bend in the Darling River, there is a low bar of
Desert Sandstone across the channel, forming a natural
weir or dam when the river is low. Above the bar there
is a long stretch of deep water, never known to go dry,
called Gurrungga by the natives. As soon as the water in
the river rises to the level of the rocky bar, it flows over,
and forms a series of shallow rapids for about a quarter of a
mile, in which distance it is said to fall eleven feet. When
the river is in flood, the channel is filled to a sufficient
depth to allow flat-bottomed steamers and barges to pass
over the rocks. These barges carry merchandise on the up
journey, and wool and other produce on the downward trip.
In examining the channel of the river at the site of the
rapids, we find evidence of the sandstone outcrop at this
spot having been much wider and higher in ancient times
filian at present. All the way along the southern bank of
the river from the present bar downward for about fifteen
chains —and at a few places on the opposite bank —the
Desert Sandstone is exposed. Here and there on the river
floor, within the same distance, isolated masses of this
rock, which have withstood the erosion of flood-waters,


are still standing. The average width of the bed of the
river is about five chains at this place.
From these indications we may safely infer that the
river, in the course of a long period, has cut its way through
about fifteen chains of the Desert Sandstone, that is, from
about the point D on the diagram upward to the existing
bar.* Mr. R. Daintree was the first to name rock of this
description. Speaking of “horizontal beds of coarse grit
and conglomerate,” he adds, “ I have called this upper
conglomerate series ‘ Desert Sandstone,’ from the sandy,
barren character of its disintegrated soil, which makes the
term particularly applicable. . . The denudation of the
Desert Sandstone since it became dry land, has been
excessive.” 1 Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods, 2 in speaking of
this kind of rock, says, “Wherever met with, it bears
marks of being much denuded. Water seems easily to have
broken it up. The age of the Desert Sandstone may be
the equivalent of the Upper Cretaceous.”
At the western extremity of the outcrop of Desert Sand-
stone, about the point F on my diagram, some schists are
met with, for a description of which i will quote from the
Report of Mr. E. F. Pittman, who has visited that district:
“In the banks of the Darling, at the western end of the
town of Brewarrina, Palaeozoic slates and schists, with
interbedded quartz veins, occur. These schists are inclined
at a high angle, and are probably of the Upper Silurian age.
These rocks in the river bank are overlaid by horizontal
beds of Desert Sandstone, of the Upper Cretaceous age.” 3
During the progress of cutting out the river channel as
above suggested, fragments of rock of various dimensions
were worn off and broken up by the water, and formed into
1 Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., (London, 1872) Yol. xxviii., p. 275.
2 “The Desert Sandstone”—Journ. Boyal Society, N.S.W., Vol. xxii.,
pp. 291 and 296.
3 Ann. Rep. Dept. Mines, N. S. Wales, 1902, p. 119.


boulders. After a long interval, the channel of the river
at this spot became strewn with boulders of different sizes.
At some time subsequent to this period, the aborigines
availed themselves of this building material and erected
those interesting structures called by the white population
of the river “The Native Fisheries,” but which are known
to the blackfellows as “ Ngunnhu.”
Amongst other towns on the Darling River, I visited
Brewarrina in 1901. The great drought was then at its
worst, and the river had ceased to run, leaving the site of
the aboriginal fisheries quite dry. I took advantage of this
opportunity to make an accurate survey, with chain and
compass, of the principal fish-pens still in existence.
Most of the aboriginal population of the district have
died out, and the few blacks and half-castes who are left
are settled upon an Aboriginal Station, under Government
management, about six miles up the river from Brewarrina,
where the aged people and children are fed and clothed at
the expense of the State. Under these circumstances, and
the natives being naturally an indolent race, they haye
allowed the fishing-grounds of their forefathers to get con-
siderably out of repair, and many of them have been
damaged by floods, or knocked down by steamers and
barges navigating the river.
In tlie olden days when the natives were numerous, the
fishing-pens were maintained in good working order, in
anticipation of the spawning season and also of freshets in
the river. At times when the stream was low, or the
channel altogether dry, and the stone dykes were fully
exposed, the men set to work and repaired such damage as
might have been occasioned by trees and other debris
carried down during floods. On such occasions new pens
were sometimes added.


I will now endeavour to describe the fish-traps and their
construction. The river-floor at this point consists of
immense numbers of loose stones, ranging from twenty
pounds to a hundred weight, with others of greater dimen-
sions. The aboriginal builders collected large quantities
of these stones and erected walls, in the way many of our
farmers about Kiama used to build stone dykes or fences
around their farms. These walls were erected in a sub-
stantial manner, being wider at the base, where also the
larger stones were used, and tapering upward to the top.
The stones were merely laid in position, without mortar or
dressing of any kind, forming a structure sufficiently strong
to resist the force of the current. The large stones used
in the foundation or base of the wall were rolled into
position, whilst the sipaller ones were carried by the builders.
Areas were enclosed in this manner, varying in dimensions
from that of a small pond almost down to the size of a
plunge bath, the walls of one enclosure being common to
those around it, forming a labyrinth of inextricable wind-
ings. These enclosures were continued right across the
channel from bank to bank, and occupied all the suitable
portions of the river floor for about a quarter of a mile
along its course. Some of the pens or traps were long and
narrow, others nearly circular, whilst others were irregular
in shape, according to the formation of the bed of the river,
and the facilities for obtaining the heavy building material
close at hand.
The level of the water was observed while the river was
running, and owing to the unavoidable irregularities of the
bed, the walls of some of the pens were built higher than
others. Again, when the water was low, or during a small
freshet,only a portion of the channel and the pens contained
in it, could be utilized for fishing operations, whilst certain
pens on higher ground could not be used at ail, owing to


insufficiency of water. The average height of the walls
varied from two to three feet. They were about eighteen
inches wide at the base, and the top was surmounted by a
single course of stones.
During the early spring months of the year, or at any
time when there was a fresh in the river, the fish travelled
up stream in immense numbers. The stone pens or traps
had their open ends towards the direction from which the
fish approached. The aboriginal fishers, men and women,
were on the look out, and as soon as a sufficient number of
the finny tribe had entered the labyrinth of traps, the open-
ings were closed up by means of large stones which had
been placed alongside ready for use. If the opening was
too wide to be thus blocked up by stones, a number of
natives posted themselves across it to prevent the egress
of the fish. The natives next entered the pens and splashed
the water with their hands or feet, thus frightening the
fish into the smaller enclosures, where they were more
easily caught. Any unusually large fishes which might be
in the “haul,” were killed as speedily as possible, because
they at once commenced swallowing the smaller ones
collected in the pens. These “big-fellow fish” were
generally speared by the young men, as they first entered
the enclosures, before they had time to do any damage.
It appears from the foregoing description that the fish,
in coming up the river, were intercepted by the outliers or
“wings ” of this maze, which stretched from bank to bank;
they entered the larger enclosures, from which they were
chased into smaller and smaller pens, much in the way that
sheep are driven into “ catching-pens ” at shearing time,
or cattle into the “ killing yard.’’ In driving the fish
through the different yards, some were killed by spear or
club as opportunity offered, going along, but on arrival at
the smallest pens all the fish were caught and killed. The


larger fish were speared, or killed by a club, but the smaller
ones were caught by hand, the fisherman passing his finger
through the gills and inserting a cord, on which he carried
as many fish as could be dealt with in this manner. My
old native informants told me that none were left in the
yards, because if they got away they would warn all their
fellow-fish not to go into such a trap in the future. One
old man stated the same rule was followed in netting emus
when he was a boy. Great care was taken to prevent the
escape of an emu from the net, lest he should tell other
birds about the ingenuity of their enemies.
Each division of the tribe, and the families composing
it, had their own allotted portion of the fishing
and every pen or trap had a name by which it was known
and spoken of among'the people. The following are a few
of these aboriginal names: —Mirra gan, Gu'na, Tliau'ia,
Il'priinya, Buddhau'inga, Giwirri, Ngidderi, Giimboar'o,
Mu'arba, Thulur'digana, Buraguman, Burugungal', Dhau'-
danbaia, Mogel', Goara, Wirridung-kunya, Wagurma,
Bau'andanna. In the lowest portion of the river
where the water has the most fall, and consequently runs
the swiftest over the rapids, is called by the natives
“ Wirruwirrumba.” Large rock masses, projecting high
above the water, occupying their natural, undisturbed
position in the channel, also had native names by which
they were easily distinguished. The most remarkable of
these large blocks of Desert Sandstone, which are chiefly
near the southern bank of the river, are represented in
their correct positions on the accompanying plan and
their names given in the descriptive letter-press.
To enable the fishing operations to be proceeded with, it
was necessary that the walls of the pens should be a little
way out of the water, because when the flood rose above
the tops of the traps, the fish could easily swim over them.


But when the pens in the lower portions of the river floor
were submerged, those situated on a higher level, referred
to in an earlier paragraph, could be availed of. When the
river was falling these conditions were reversed —when
the higher yards became dry, the lower ones were resorted
to. In very uneven portions of the river bed there were
several grades, to meet the exigencies of the rise and fall
of the water.
The water of the Darling is never clear, but always of a
greyish hue, owing to the light-coloured clays along its
banks. This has given it the name, among poets and
novelists, of “The old, grey river!” During long periods
of dry weather, however, a good deal of the clayey matter
held in solution sinks to the bottom and the stagnant water
becomes somewhat clearer. In times of flood the water is
muddy and of a slightly reddish shade, due to the storm
water draining in from surface soils of that colour. Owing
to this sudden change in the character of the liquid, the
fish often flee before the advancing turbid stream, which
appears to nauseate them. When such a fisli-laden current
reached the Ngunnhu at Brewarrina, the aborigines Had
the “up-stream” ends of their traps ready for action.
The Brewarrina fishing pens were situated within the
territory of the Ngeumba tribe, who always mustered there
in considerable numbers in the fishing season, or at other
times when fish were expected to be plentiful. The same
people did not remain there all the time, but when certain
families moved away into the back country to hunt for
kangaroos and other game, other families came in to the
river, and participated in the piscatorial harvest. Although
the fishing grounds were apportioned among specified
people, as already stated, the ownership was not of the
exclusive character existing among Europeans. For
example, if a man were not present, his “claim” might be


worked by his relatives, such as uncles, brothers, brothers-
in-law, nephews, or the like. Generally speaking, there
were some straggling members of the tribe located about
the Ashing grounds all the year round.
The fishing season was sometimes made the occasion of
inviting neighbouring tribes to join in their great corob-
borees, initiation ceremonies, or meetings for trade and
barter. The people camped on either side or both sides of
the river, because when the water was low enough to admit
of the traps being used, it was quite easy for those who
wished to visit friends on the opposite shore, to wade across
the rocky bar.
The principal fish which formed the subject of operations
at the traps were Murray cod, black bream, and yellow
bellies. The black bream was the favourite fish among
the aborigines as an article of food. The cod fish, so the
natives told me, ramble down as well as up stream, and
were caught in the pens at any time.
In the “ History of the Fisheries of New South Wales,”
by Lindsay G. Thompson, published by authority of the New
South Wales Commissioners for the World’s Columbian
Exposition, Chicago, 1893, an article was furnished by Mr.
E. G. W. Palmer, in which at pp. 96 98, he briefly refers
to the Brewarrina Fishery, and gives a photographic view
of a portion of the structure. He erroneously describes
the rocky bar as a “granitic dyke.”
Explanation of Illustrations.
No. 1. Diagram. —The accompanying plan has been pre-
pared by me from a detail survey which I made about a
year and a half ago, and shews twelve chains of the channel
of the Darling River, representing the dykes and pens still
existing on the best preserved portion of the ancient fishing
locality. Extending upward from A, see diagram, there
are about eight chains more of the river floor containing
K-Aue. 5, 1903.


fragments of old fishing yards in different places, but they
are of less extent and more disconnected than those I have
selected for reproduction.
Diagram of the Ngunnhu or Native Fish Traps in the Darling River at
Brewairina.
There is now a magnificent high-level bridge over the
Darling about a mile above the fishery, but prior to its
erection, loaded drays, travelling stock, and general traffic
used to cross the river on the rocky bar already described,
in consequence of which most of the pens in the vicinity of
the bar have become dilapidated beyond recognition. In
midstream, just below and adjoining the bar, is a small, low,
rocky island, on which trees formerly grew, as evidenced
by a few stumps still remaining. Within the recollection
of the present natives, and also of old residents among the
white people, the area of this island is less now than it was
thirty or forty years ago, owing to the trampling of cattle
and other stock. Between this island and the northern
bank of the river, but somewhat lower down stream, are
two other insular patches, but much smaller, with a few trees
growing upon them. The oldest of the aborigines told me
that the bar itself, and the margins of the little islands,
were studded with catching pens in the olden times.


Near the southern bank, and at a few other places in the
bed of the river, there still remain some masses of original
rock which have withstood the ravages of time, and are
shown in solid black on the diagram. The following are
the aboriginal names of most of them: —B, see diagram, is
called Muar; C, Kullur; D, Dlierraginni; and E, on the
northern shore, is known as Kirragurra.
The blank spaces on the diagram were in the olden days
studded with fishing pens, of which the wreckage is visible
in many places in the shape of scattered boulders and
indistinct outlines of former enclosures. But the whole of
the river floor was not occupied with the maze of traps.
A waterway had to be left for the fish to travel up to the
catching pens of families located higher up-stream, and for
this purpose the most uneven portions of the bottom were
selected because the least suitable for building upon.
The black, sinuous lines drawn upon the diagram repre-
sent the walls of the different pens, and groups of pens,
with the “wings” or outlying walls which guide the fish
into the enclosures. I have not shewn the openings into
the traps, because they were sometimes made in one part
of the wall, and sometimes in another, according to the
part of the stream in which the “ school ” of fish were
approaching.
At the point marked with a cross on the diagram, on the
southern bank, which is rocky, between G and A there are
about two dozen grinding places, worn in the rocks by the
natives sharpening their stone hatchets. About three
chains eastward from A there are a number of similar
grinding places.
No. 2. Photographic View. —The photograph from which
this zinco-plate has been prepared was taken from some high
ground on the left bank of the Darling River a few yards
easterly from the point marked A on the diagram, and faces


downward and diagonally across the channel, in a generally
northwesterly direction, taking in a perspective view of
most of the fishing pens shown on the diagram. The large
horizontal rock on the left-hand side of the photograph is
the same as the rock marked B on the diagram ; and the
rocky mass with an uneven top on the right-hand side of
the picture corresponds to the long rock appearing in black
on the diagram, due north of the rock at B.
Photographic View of the Native Fish Traps in the Darling Eiver at
Brewarrina.
The mark x, visible on one of the trees on the opposite
bank, in the middle of the picture, indicates the flood-level
of the Darling River.
It is hoped that the two illustrations now supplied —the
ground plan and the perspective view—together with the
descriptive letterpress, will enable the reader to form a
more realistic conception of the aboriginal fisheries at
Brewarrina than has been possible hitherto.


lllllllininil M in
3 1508 01826919 6


■ • '
