

Final Report
SECRET
AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
MINISTRY OF AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION




FEDDEN MISSION REPORT
SECTION 2
Assigned to . Copy Ho. 9J£.
Address Bate of issue
This report contains confidential information, and must
therefore be treated accordingly by the person to whom this copy
is issued. Anythin!; contained in this report must only be com-
municated to approved and accredited executives of Government de-
partments or firms undertaking the manufacture of aircraft or ac-
cessories for His Majesty’s Government; and must not be published
or disclosed to unauthorised persons.
There is a considerable amount of detailed information
in this report which may only be of interest to those specialising
on the particular problem. In order, therefore, to assist executives,
this report has been so framed that at the beginning of each Phrt
a special coloured page has been provided which sets out as short-
ly as possible the broad policy conclusions of the Mission on this
particular subject, including the action that is advised.
By this means it is hoped that those concernedmth policy
may have as concise a picture as possible of what is considered
should be done to put into effect the work of the Mission.
The purpose of the Mission was to learn what American
methods could be' introduced into this country to improve our out-
put, and to investigate certain technical problems and new devel-
opments in America. The report is therefore mainly concerned
with those aspects in which the American industry is ahead of cuts,
and with promising technical developments. No emphasis has been
laid on points where the Mission consider that British production
methods or technical develo ment are ahead of American.
S.T.A.M.
Cook’s Building,
40 Stratton Street, W. 1
June, 1943


This report is issued in seven separately bound Sections, as follows;
SECTION 1 CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY AND GENERAL CONCLUSION’S
OF THE MISSION
" 2 AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
" 3 AIRCRAFT DESIGN
" 4 ENGINES, PO’.VER PLANTS AND PROPELLERS
” 5 ACCESSORIES AND EQTJIHiENT
" 6 EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
" 7 POST-VAR PROBLEMS
Each Section is divided into two or more Parts, and a list of
contents appears at the beginning of each Part. The in a
section are lettered A, 3, C etc.
Each Part is divided into Chapters, the first of which, (on a
coloured page) gives the broad policy conclusions for the The
Chapters are made up of Items, and each Item has a number indicating
the Chapter to which it belongs and its position within the Chapter.
For example:
2.03 indicates the third item of Chapter 2
3.12 M " twelfth " " " 5
For specifying completely any item, it is also necessary to
quote the Section and r> art, and in the text, at the beginning of
each Item, its complete reference is given.
For example:
3A - 2.03 indicates Section } Part A, Chapter 2, third item.
40 - 3*12 indicates Section g, Part C, Chapter 5* twelfth item.


CONTENTS OF THE WHOLE REPORT
SECTION 1 - CCNSTITUTION. SI MiAM AND GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
PART A - OBJECTS OF THE MISSION, PERSONNEL AND ITINERARY
Chapter 1 Scope, object and general survey of the Mission
" 2 Itinerary, December 1942 to March 1943
" 3 Broad policy conclusions
" 4 Future policy in regard to Missions to America
PART B - AMERICAN NATIONAL AIRCRAFT ORGANISATIONS
Chapter 1 General
” 2 Army Air Force
M 3 Navy Department
” 4 War Production Board
" 3 Joint Aircraft Committee
n 6 Office of Scientific Research and Development
SECTION 2 - AIRCRAFT PRODUCT lON
PART A - ORGANISATION
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
” 2 Engineering departments
" 3 Factory layout
” 4 General notes on organisation of airframe factories
" 5 Boeing Aircraft, Seattle
M 6 Consolidated Aircraft, San Diego
” 7 North American Aviation, Inglewood
n 8 Bell Aircraft, Buffalo
” 9 Curtiss Wright
M 10 Other aircraft firms
11 11 Data* on American airframe factories
” 12 Canadian aircraft industry
PART B - FACTORY LAYOUT AND PROCESSES
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
n 2 Special applications of lofting
” 3 Economy of floor space
" 4 Conveyors
** 3 Drop hammer
M 6 Rubber die press
" 7 Mechanical press
” 8 Stretcher
" 9 Special tools
" 10 Famum rolls
H 11 Rivet sorting
" 12 Finishing and painting
" 13 Extrusion manipulation
" 14 Pipe bending
” 15 Glenn Martin 3kin stretching process
M 16 Plaster moulds for light alloy casting
" 17 Powder metallurgy
w 18 Riveting
M 19 Spot welding
M 20 Flash welding of undercarriages and engine mountings
" 21 Heliarc welding
” 22 Cycle we Id


SECTION 3 - AIRCRAFT DESIGN
PART A - GENERAL DESIGN TECHNIQUE
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" Scope and organisation of engineering departments
3 Weight analysis
" 4 Factors and design requirements
* 3 American stressing technique
" 6 Aerodynamic design
* 7 Aerodynamic controls
8 Stressed skin construction
■ 9 Pressure cabins
* 10 Undercarriage design
" 11 Materials
" 12 Processes
" 13 Aircraft testing procedure
PART B - REVIEW OF AMERICAN AIRCRAFT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Description of new North American P. 51
" 3 Description of,Curtiss P. 60
* 4 Description of Bell P. 63
" 3 Description of Douglas A. 26
6 The Boeing 8.29 and Consolidated 8.32
7 Current fighters in production
8 Current heavy bombers in production
" 9 Transport types
" 10 Wooden aircraft
" 11 Flying boats
* 12 Tailless aircraft
* 13 Tabulated data
PART C - PHOTO LOFTT>3r,
Chapter 1 Board policy conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
" 3 Layout procedure
4 Alternative reproduction processes
" 3 Camera procedure
" 6 Miscellaneous
PART D - SELF SEALING FUEL TANKS, OIL TANKS AND FUEL HOSE
Chapter 1 Broad conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
" 3 Fuel tanks - American practice
" 4 Kose - American practice
SECTION 4 - ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND FRoraT.Tires
PART A - PRODUCTION
Chapter 1 Broad Policy conclusions
2 General design and production notes on firms visited
" 3 Organisation and output
4 Engine and propeller production processes and equipment
PART B - DESIGN
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Technical review of American engine developments
* 3 Propeller design
" 4 Power plant policy and installation
3 Specific technical items


PART C - REGENERATIVE ENGINE TESTING PLANT.
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
* 3 Methods of absorbing engine power
■ 4 Speed control
* 5 Relative merits of testing plant end methods
" 6 The Buick arrangements at Melrose Park, Chicago
PART D - FUEL ATT) OIL
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 Fuel
* 3 Oil
SECTION 5 - ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PART A - ELECTRIC WIRING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Summary and conclusions
" 3 Principles underlying American methods
* 4 American wiring practice
" 5 Maintenance and repair aspect
" 6 Comparative appraisement of British and American
practice.
* 7 Developments in relation to alternating current
" 8 Application to British development and production
PART B - AIRCRAFT ELECTRICS
Chapter 1* Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Conclusions
" 3 Present use of low pressure direct current
4 Effect of operating conditions on choice of system
5 Review of electrical services in relation to hydraulics
" 6 Manuals on installations
* 7 Design and production of electrical equipment
" 8 New developments in aircraft electrics
" 9 Approval and standardisation of equipment
" 10 Liaison with America on electrics
PART C - INSTRUMENTS AND RADIO INSTALLATIONS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 Aircraft instruments
* 3 Radio installations
PART D - AIRCRAFT VIBRATION TESTING AND EQUIPMENT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Summary and conclusions
" 3 Introduction
" 4 Equipment
" 5 Application
* 6 Scope of activities
" 7 Review of technique
* 8 Equipment ordered for M.A*P.
" 9 Application to British development


PART E - INSTRUMENTATION OF TEST FLIGHTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
• 2 Summary and conclusions
■ 3 Introduction
" 4 Outline of installations
• 5 Organisation
■ 6 Equipment
■ 7 Review of technique
■ 8 Application to British development
SECTION 6 - EDUCATION AND RESEARCH.
PART A - ENGINEERING STAFF
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
■ 2 Economical use of present aircraft engineering
staff
" 3 American publications and engineering propaganda
■ 4 Manuals prepared by firms for instruction of drawing
office staff etc.
" 3 Manuals prepared by firms to explain administration and
define duties
" 6 Standardisation
PART B - INDUSTRIAL AND SERVICE TRAINING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
• 2 Technical manuals for part time study
■ 3 Schools for training industrial and service personnel
" 4 Instruction manuals prepared by firms on their products
■ 3 Instructional films
PART C - UNIVERSITY EDUCATION OF AERONAUT I CAL ENGINEERS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
• 2 American education
PART D - RESEARCH ESTABUSHMENTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Need for increased researcn equipment in Britain
• 3 Langley Field
" 4 Canadian National Research Council
" 3 American wind tunnels
" 6 Engine research
SECTION 7 - POST WAR PROBTFMS.
Chapter 1 Review of the civil aviation position in America
• 2 Training aircraft


AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
PART A ORGANISATION
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item I*ol General
w I*o2 Action
CHAPTER 2 - ENGINEERING- DEPARTMENTS
CHAPTER 3 - FACTOR! LAYOUT
CHAPTER A - GENERAL NOTES ON ORGANISATION OP AIRERAME
FACTORIES.
CHAPTER 5 - BOEING AIRCRAFT, SEATTLE.
Item 5.01 General
' n 5*02 Seattle plant
M 5*03 Organisation charts
H 3*04 Tool department
* 5*05 Material control
" 3-06 Production control
CHAPTER 6 - CONSOLIDATED AIRCRAFT, SAN DIEGO.
Item 6*ol General
M 6,02 San Diego plant
" 6.03 Organisation chart
" 6.04 Production control
tt 6.05 Material control
w 6.06 Sub-contracts
n 6.07 Tooling and methods department
M 6.08 Labour summary
CHAPTER 7 - NORTH AMERICAN AVIATION, INGLEWOOD
Item 7*ol General
w 7*02 Inglewood plant
M 7*03 Organisation chart
7*04 Hours control and scheduling section
M 7*05 Material control section
w 7*06 Tool engineering
" 7*07 Planning
M 7*oB Parts Control (Production Control)
w 7009 Manufacturing co-ordination
M 7*lo Labour summary


CHAPTER 8 - BEIL AIRCRAFT, BUFFALO
Item B*ol General
H B*o2 Buffalo plant
" B*o3 Organisation charts
M 8. 04 Estimating
M 8.05 Product ion cont*x>l
M 8.06 Production engineering
H B*o7 Purchase department
M 8.08 Graphic analysis
M 8.09 Labour summary
CHAPTER 9 - CURTISS WRIGHT
n 9.01 General
M 9*02 St .Louis plant .
” 9*03 Organisation charts
CHAPTER 10 - OTHER AIRCRAFT FIRMS
Item 10.01 General
M 10.02 Glenn L. Martin, Baltimore
» 10.03 Douglas Aircraft, El Segundo, Los Angeles
" 10.04 Lockheed, Los Angeles
H 10.05 Vega, Burbank, Los Angeles
** 10.06 Republic, Farmingdale, Long Island, New York.
CHAPTER 11 - DATA 0» AMERICAN AIRFRAME FACTORIES ..
CHAPTER 12 - CANADIAN AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY.
APPENDIX - T.TST OF DOQUMSNTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA.


CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS.
2A-I.QI General. The Americans have undoubtedly looked big in the size of their
staffs and in the organisation -which they have built up. In some cases
they have been extravagant, but this extravagance is inevitable on account
of their extremely rapid expansion ,-vdiich has been even greater than ours,
and also because of the considerable pre-production work and supervision
required for the large number of unskilled men who have been brought into
the industry. This is accentuated in some factories because they are not
yet working to capacity and this means that there is a lade of balance
between productive and non-productive personnel.
The various aspects of management, the size and scope of engineering
departments, the control of Jig office, planning department etc., have
been conceived on a bold basis. The various production operations are
broken down into stages and planned more elaborately in America than in
this country. Much time and effort is put into pre-production work of
scheduling, process planning, machine loading, labour loading and shop
layout and this is carried out in greater detail in America than is
customary in many of our factories. This is considered to be an essential
part of obtaining efficient production. Time study is extensively used as
a means of obtaining accurate data far this work. This outlook follows
naturally on the highly product ionised American automobile industry.
Factory buildings are on the whole better ventilated and lighted
etc., than our own. The time and effort put into tooling is well
rewarded by the results achieved with unskilled labour. In conjunction
with good supervision, the American system goes quite a long way towards
obtaining good results from their labour without the incentive of piece-
work.
2A-1.02 Action.
(i) In considering the points which can be applied to the British aircraft
industry, it is suggested that the following require particular attention:-
(a) All new types should be carefully vetted by the Production
Organisation in the early stages of design and every endeavour should
be made to obtain close liaison between Design and Production. On
existing types, any difficulties of production should be carefully
considered by both the Design and Production staffs to see if an
improvement could be incorporated at a convenient stage*
(b) Careful attention should be given to all pre-production work
and steps taken to strengthen both supervision and staff wherever
possible*
(c) The British industry has had to face a great shortage of
skilled personnel and although it is already short staffed, the
transfer of men to the armed farces continues. It is usually-
found that such replacements as are supplied are of an inferior
quality, and it is felt that the present policy must be reversed
if our clerical organisations are to function in an efficient
manner. Unless action is taken immediately, it is difficult to
see how any of the improvements mentioned above will be realised.
(ii) As a further step, vigorous action should be taken by the Government
to extend the training facilities throughout the country, and every
assistance should be given to encourage the industry to improve their
present educational departments.




CHAPTER 2 - ENGINEERING DEPARTMENTS
2A-2.01 Engineering departments are dealt with in detail in Section 3 and
therefore only brief mention is being made of this subject here*
This whole matter however, has a profound effect on production,
because a larger number of people in the engineering department are able
to spend more time in consideration of the production aspect of any design*
Another important aspect of the American system is that each aircraft type
is under the supervision of a Project Engineer who is usually answerable
direct to a Chief Project Engineer whose office is responsible for the co-
ordination of all the various aspects*
The Project Engineer is responsible for co-ordinating all the
engineering work on his particular model, including that of the specialised
sections, such as hydraulics, power plants, etc*, and all drawings are
issued over his signature. Freedom of the individual in detail design is
encouraged. The project engineers generally have a wider experience and
knowledge of production methods than comparable design s taff personnel in
U.K. They spend considerably more time in the shops and we were impressed
by their ability to discuss production methods, workshop functions, plant
and machinery available for any job, types of jigs and tools, skill of
workers and all matters relative to their aircraft in relation to the
production programme.
It is the opinion of the Mission that the best way to obtain easy
production is to design for it. We are certain that this close liaison
with production personnel and methods is a considerable aid to this end and
that this practice should be more vigorously pursued in this country. It
is obvious that when production methods and assembly breakdown are
considered in the scheme stages of the design, it must result in more
efficient sub-assembly units, and we are convinced that this easing of
production has not resulted in increased structure weight*
Perspective drawings were used considerably for a number of processes,
such as illustrating to unskilled shop personnel the exact amount of work
comprising their group operation. These drawings were excellently carried
out and were of considerable value in shortening the time required for
planning etc* and in getting operators accustomed to their jobs quickly.
It is recommended that more attention should be paid to the use of
perspective drawings in this country.
CHAPTER 3 - FACTORY LAYOUT.
2A-3*ol Factory layouts are universally good, and full use is made of time
study methods for this purpose* Great consideration is given to the
positioning of machines in order to avoid unnecessary handling during
manufacture*
In this country we are faced with additional problems introduced by
dispersal, the provision of blast walls and shelters, but nevertheless
could benefit by more careful study when laying out both machine and
assembly shops* In one respect could American practice be criticised and,
generally speaking, that applies to factories in this country, namely
inadequate provision in the first instance for storage space in all
categories*
One Canadian factory visited approached an ideal layout. Adequate
stores space to approximately 2J/o of the total floor space had been
allocated along the entire front of the factory. The hull assembly was
laid out across the factory at one end and on completion at the far side,
it was in correct position for the start of the final assembly line moving
the length of the building. Other components worked away from their Group
Stores across the factory in the same manner and reached the assembly line
exactly at their incorporation point, thus avoiding all unnecessary
movement•


The Americans lay out the entire factory at the commencement of a
contract on a large hoard, similar to that shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
This is referred to as a "Gazinta" hoard ("This goes into that and that
into this”, etc.) and is kept up to date throughout the entire contract.
It is undoubtedly much easier tp organise flow through a factory with a
complete scale layout of this type than with the small departmental
layouts usually used hy firms in this country.
Fig. 1.
Fig. 2.
Figs. 3 and 4 are examples of flow systems, and Fig. 5, which is a
return to he made daily of progress on the 8.24 contract, is typical of.
the close control which is exercised over the flow of aircraft through
American plants.


FIG. 3.
FLOW CHART - BELL NIAGARA FALLS PLANT.


FIG. 4. FLOW CHART FOR CONSOLIDATED 8.32 CENTRE SECTION


FIG. 5 DAILY AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION CHART


Gangways in many factories were cut down to a minimum with special
delivery trollies designed to handle the particular components economically,
while large basements were used for Stores, Cafeterias, Locker Rooms, etc.
and the large corridors to control the changeover of shift workers.
CHAPTER 4 - GENERAL NOTES ON ORGANISATION OF AIRFRAME FACTORIES.
2A-4.01 The member of the Mission responsible for Works Administration only
made a detailed investigation at the following four plants:
Boeing Seattle
Consolidated San Diego
North American Inglewood
Bell , Buffalo
In addition, short visits were paid to?-
Curtiss fright Buffalo
Curtiss Wright St* Louis
Glenn Martin Baltimore
Douglas Los Angeles
Lockheed Los Aug©les
Veg& Los Angeles
Republic Long Island, New York
More detailed information concerning the factories ia given later.
The Mission could not help being impressed by the breadth of the vision
behind the recent expansion of the U.S. airframe manufacturing programme and
the expeditious manner in which it has been put into effect. There are
undoubtedly many useful lessons which we could learn from U.S. methods, but
it is necessary to point out that their practice should only be followed after
careful consideration, as they are in certain respects behind the best methods
in use in this country.
In general, the main organisation is broken down into six divisions -
Contracts, Financial, Quality, Industrial Relations or Personnel, Engineering
and Manufacturing, and is similar to many of our own factories.
The Contracts division are responsible for all negotiations regarding
the contract for production and spares, estimating, and the maintenance of
records of aircraft and spares deliveries. The Financial division is generally
sub-divided into many smaller sections covering General accounts, Legal
matters, Budget control. Payroll and Costing, etc. Punched card systems are
used extensively for costing and are designed to give much useful information
to the Manufacturing division.
The correct position in the organisation of the Inspection has given rise
to much comment in America, and cases will be found where this department is
responsible to the General Manager, Chief Engineer, or Production Manager,
The pre-production work, such as scheduling and process planning, is
invariably done by the Production department or a Section under its control*
The schedules, which are prepared from the flight programme, cover all
details, sub-assemblies and assemblies and, although some are of a complicated
nature they serve as a useful target on which all other Sections can plan
their work. The accuracy with which the operations are laid out has an
important bearing on production, as this information, coupled with standard
times determined from time study, is used as the basis for machine loading,
shop layout and labour requirements. These pre-production operations are
carried out very thoroughly and in more detail than is customary in many of
our factories. The importance of this work was realised by the Americans as
far back as 1938* when steps were taken to build up and train suitable
personnel, many of whom have now become their Sectional Supervisors. It is
felt that benefit would be derived from the strengthening of this work in
many of our factories. The functions which we know as progressing and the
control of Finished Part Store is also controlled by the Production department.


Tool Engineering is usually a self-contained Section, who are
responsible for the design, ordering, obtaining and storage of all tools,
jigs and fixtures and generally control the Tool Shops.
Until the present time, there has been no adequate control over the
supply of raw materials and steps are now being taken to apply controls
similar to those which are operating s 6 satisfactorily in this Country.
Perhaps as a result of this, it has been U.S. practice to consider all
sub-contract items as bought out parts, leaving each individual sub-
contractor the responsibility of obtaining his raw materials direct from
Suppliers. As one would expect, £his is not satisfactory and it will
obviously be some time before the present conditions can be completely
corrected. There is, in general, a high percentage of sub-contracting on
machined parts and in some cases the machine shops are looked upon as a
means of supplying shortages or parts which are living special difficulties
in manufacture.
It is usual practice in American factories to have one section entirely
responsible for all materials or parts purchased outside, including sub-
contracted parts. Production drawings are received from the Engineering
department, from, which material requirements are prepared. The section is
divided into many sub-sections, each dealing with a particular type of
material and each having a separate buyer. As Material Control generally
is responsible for the receipt and storage of raw material and bought out
parts, it is necessary to maintain a stock and an allocated stock record;
in each of these sections. Shop orders prepared by the Planning department
are issued to the Material Control to check availability of materials and are
not generally released until the full quantity for the batch is in Stores.
There is in this country a division of opinion as to whether it is
advisable to have a separate Material Control section or to divide the
functions performed by this section between Planning, Purchase, Progress and
Stores. Either scheme could be made to work well, but it is considered that
the latter method avoids a considerable amount 1 of duplication, provides,
better co-ordination and is therefore a more logical solution of the problem
than the former.
It was common practice in .American factories for the Finished Part
and Assembly Stores to be under the control of the Production Organisation.
The parts required fortach stage on the assembly line were often kept in
bins located along the line and minimum stock figures were used as a means
of controlling the quantity of sets to be held in advance of assembly. It
was the responsibility of the Production Control to replenish the stocks as
required. The operators were, however, allowed to procure the parts they
required from these bins without a requisition, and difficulties were being
experienced in a number of factories in maintaining balanced sets, as
scrapped and lost parts could be replaced by the Operator without the
knowledge of the Production Control. The methods used in this country of
issuing a group of parts to an aircraft or batch of aircraft against a
requisition, gives a better control, and it is felt that it will be
necessary far America to adopt a similar system as materials become more
difficult to obtain.
It has been found in this country that regular and high production can
only be obtained' when there is an adequate backing of raw materials and
bought-out parts in advance of production and although this
increases the value of work in progress, it provides a means of disclosing
potential shortages at a sufficiently early date to enable the necessary
corrective action to be taken and is, therefore, more than justified.
There are indications that same American executives have recently arrived
at the same conclusion, others have either not realised this or, for
reasons of financial policy, have not taken the necessary action to correct
these conditions.


In many of the plants, punched card control schemes for tools,
materials and finished parts are being introduced. Such schemes, if
properly designed and applied, can be of great value, but it must not be
assumed that the mere introduction of a punched card system will
necessarily solve all difficulties. Punched card accounting schemes
probably provide the most effective method of preparing payrolls, purchase
ledger, Stores Control accounts, Job costs and in some cases, material
summaries and certain types of progress records. It is considered that in
many cases the Americans are attempting to use punched cards where simpler
clerical methods could be equally as effective. The paper work throughout
all the plants was of a more extensive and complicated nature than that in
the best factories in this eountry. This has been realised and specialist
sections are being set up to rationalise and co-ordinate the clerical
side of the organisation. Up to the present time there has been no
serious shortage of clerical labour comparable with that which has forced
us to adopt more economical and simpler methods.
Throughout the American airframe industry it was noticeable that the
number of assistants employed on such indirect operations as process
planning, material control and production control, are considerably higher
than is the case in this country and that there was a very high quality of
supervision, particularly in the lower grades, such as Departmental
Managers, Foremen and Section Leaders. Furthermore, the number of
operators per supervisor was approximately half that looked upon as
normal in this country. The necessity to transfer many of our skilled
personnel to the Armed Forces has resulted in a great shortage in our
Aircraft Industry, and this has given rise to considerable difficulties.
It is usually found that such replacements as are supplied are of an
inferior quality and it is felt that the present policy must be reversed
if our clerical organisations are to function with the degree of efficiency
necessary to maintain a high production. Material benefits would accrue
from the adoption of intensive training courses on American lines, which
are described in Section 6.
It has previously been noted that all operations are time studied for
planning purposes. In no case was it found that the established standards
were used for the purpose of wage incentives and it is common practice to
pay all hourly operators on a fixed rate which, after a probationary period
of three months, is increased on merit considerations only. Despite the
lack of financial incentive a high rate of operator productivity was
observed throughout the various plants. The probable reasons for this are
worthy of consideration. In the first place working conditions, such
as lighting, air conditioning, canteen facilities, provision of bath rooms,
are considerably better than the average standards in England; further-
more; there is a strong propaganda movement designed to foster the spirit
of loyalty towards the plant, and backed up by liberal use of posters,
social functions, works magazines, sports clubs, medical and welfare
services, etc. Full use is also made of suggestion boxes and the rewards
afforded are on a higher scale than is our habit. In all these respects,
improvements could be made in England. It is only fair to point out that
despite these conditions, absenteeism is slightly higher than in this country
and that it has recently become necessary to freeze labour in order to
prevent a very high labour turnover.
CHAPTER 5 - BOEING AIRCRAFT, SEATTLE
2A-s*ol General. This is one of the oldest established aircraft firms in
America. They impressed the Mission as being the most experienced
specialists on heavy bombers. The Seattle plant has probably the
densest production of any firm seen in America. The Engineering,
Research and Blight Testing departments are excellently organised and
have a wealth of technical background.


The firm is now spreading its activities, and are hound to experience
the difficulty of having to disperse their stronger personnel.
The number of employees increased from 3,800 in August, 1940, to
33,000 in February, 194-2, and the many difficulties which accompany such
a rapid expansion appear to have been well controlled.
The general feeling that construction and manufacture must remain as
flexible as possible is basad on the assumption that changes can be made
more easily in the production line to bring the aircraft up-to-date with
combat experience, and Mr. Beal (Chief Engineer) is very positive in his
statement that this arrangement has led to a greater output than could
have been achieved by other means. Conveyors are not used as
extensively as seen in other factories and no attempt has been made to
place the final assembly on this basis.
It is important to note that Boeing is one of the few firms visited
where a reasonable backing of both raw material and finished parts are
held in advance of production requirements. The quantities given were
approximately two months on raw material and 30 days on fabricated parts*
This backing was giving the Production Control advance information on
assembly shortages, the result of which was seen at the end of the
assembly line, where only five aircraft were waiting for shortages as
against 80 to 100 at most other factories.
From the attached organisation chart, it will be seen that a
separate division has been established for Experimental Flight and
Aerodynamics. ' This section was built around the late E. Allen (Chief
Test Pilot) for experimental flight and research purposes, and has
developed into an important part of the organisation.
2A-5.02 Seattle plant
Types
8.17 Fortress
8.29 Experimental
Area
Productive 2,016,4-70 square feet
Non productive 1,268,095 H "
Total 3,284-,565 square feet
fo Stores of Total 25$
Employees
Productive 18*573 = 60$
Non productive 12,358 = 40$
Total 30,931
Female (Productive) 4-5$
(Non productive) 38$
Engineering Staff (included in above) 2,537 including flight
experimental of 172
Absenteeism 10$
Productive man hours (December) 3,737,000
Sub-contract ing 29$


21-5*03 Organisation charta
2A-5*04 Tool department
Functions:
1 • Checking all engineering drawings and changes prior to issue and
preparing advanced layouts. (This is done by having
approximately 30 Tool Department personnel permanently located
in the Engineering department).
2. Receiving blue prints and release card from the Engineering
department and checking against the advance layout.


3* Piling blue prints in part number order
4* Allocating tool code numbers and entering on back of layout
5. Preparing production schedule for all tools
6# Preparing a ditto master tool order for each tool required
7* Ditto tool orders
8. Requesting a tool drawing where necessary, (drawings are
required for tools for all machine shop details).
9. Pre-punching tool location cards (lEM cards).
10. Issuing tool orders, together with punched cards
11. Controlling production of tools according to schedule and
preparing from returned punched cards a tool location
tabulation.
12. Controlling Tool Shop
13* Preparing a tool order for repair of tools where estimated
time for repair is over 12 hours. (Any repairs that can
be completed in under 12 hours do not require an order and
are generally passed to the Tool Room by the Shop Foreman).
14* Investigating all tool difficulties as reported by Shop
Inspectors, etc.
Very close liaison is maintained between Engineering and
Production by the placing of approximately 30 Tool Engineers in the
Engineering department. The Tool division is responsible for the
layout of all operations requiring tools, the Tool Shops and the
follow-up of manufacture according to schedule. The control is
based on pre-punched IBM location cards, but as is the case of
the Production Section, full benefit is not* being derived from this
method.
2A-5 •05 Material Control
Functions:
1 • Receiving production drawings and part cards from the
Engineering department for each part assembly or spare
item.
2. Determining the material requirements, including tooling
allowance, for each part from drawing or other sources
such as templates, etc. (Drawings do not give quantity
of material per part)
3. Placing orders for material and bought-out parts and
following up deliveries according to schedule.
4. Maintaining order records, stock records, surplus stock
position records.
5. Receiving sub-contract information from Production Control,
checking and placing sub-contract orders.
6. Agreeing sub-contract prices, but if large unit, price
must be passed by the Accounts.
7. Maintaining order records and following up information
for aircraft items.


8* Receiving works order from Production Control for issue
on material being available. Entering material quantities
on requisitions.
It will be seen from the above that the Material Control do
not receive a copy of the layout and are determining the quantity of
material per aircraft without knowing how the job has been laid out.
Difficulty under such arrangements was experienced in U.K. \ an
accurate figure can only be obtained after the detail has been fully
planned,
2A•~5*06 Production Control
Functions;
1 • Receiving blue print and part card from Engineering departrasnt
2. Receiving copy of master tool card from Tool department and
adding to the layout operation where tools are not required
and entering inspection code, production assembly number, etc,
3* Preparing ditto master works order forms.
4* Duplicating shop order forms,
5, Pre-punching master location cards for each order,
‘6. Punching set of location cards,
7« Issuing shop order envelope to Material' Control according to
schedule,
8, Maintaining records of total quantity required and quantity
order with balance to order,
9* Receiving location cards, sorting and tabulating position,
10, Preparing assembly master ditto, breaking down engineering
split if necessary,
11, Duplicating assembly order forms
12, Receiving finished parts in Finished Part Store,
13* Feeding assembly lines according to assembly sheets,
maintaining a minimum stock in bins,
14* Issuing shortage list of items below mi nirmmu
15* Chasing Material Control or Tool Section for shortages
against the respective sections,
16. Controlling the Despatch Section,
The Production Control are responsible for determining the
quantity of parts to place on the Shops according to the nature of the
detail. The quantities are divided into three categories:-
(a) Parts that are simple to produce and are small
in size are ordered in batches of 1,500 sets
(maximum material sizes: sheet 100 square
inches, extrusion I*, bar 6 H , tubing 6”)
(b) Parts of average size and of average manufacturing
problem are placed on the shops in batches of 600
sets, (maximum material sizes: sheet 500 square
inches, extrusion 5% bar 3*, tubing 3*)


(c) Difficult parts are ordered in monthly quantities
Bre-punched cards are used to maintain a location record of
parts in manufacture. This is carried out by pre-punching a quantity of
cards which are issued with each works order. As the part passes through
various stations, one of the cards is sent to the Central Production
Tabulating Section. A tabulation is prepared, showing the location of
all parts, but the present set-up is complicated.
It is not possible to pre-determine the exact number of cards to
be issued with each works order, as the actual quantity varies with
shortage of material, splitting, etc. As many as 15 are pre-punched,
half of which are not required and are destroyed on the completion of the
batch.
CHAPTER 6 - CONSOLIDATED AIRCRAFT, SAN DIEGO
2A-6.01 General. This conpany is a most progressive organisation, founded in
the east at Buffalo, but moved a few years ago to new premises at San
Diego on the west coast • The company has recently been through a
considerable re-organisation. Their products and activities cover a
wide field, including four engined heavy bombers, and flying boats.
Their engineering organisation is progressive and up to date.
The layout of the factory was very good, the Assembly Shop being
arranged for line production, but owing to the nature of the building
and size of the 8.24 it was necessary to arrange the aircraft at an angle
of 45° to the line. This has resulted in the accommodation of more
aircraft on the floor and the increased handling and cradle difficulties
have been well arranged.
On the introduction of the Material Control department, it was found
that transport of material from the Store to the machines was so great
that a special study was introduced on the handling of material generally.
From studies taken, it was found that handling was 7Qj& of the total
fabrication time. Every effort has been made in the design of correct
equipment, boxes, etc. for transport throughout the whole factory, and a
manual issuedgiving standard methods.
The store facilities were inadequate for the quantities required and
only approximately 20 sets were being maintained in advance of production,
resulting in 32 8.24*s and 69 PB2Y aircraft waiting at the end of the
assembly line for shortages. The backing of raw materials was again low
and with the increasing difficulty in obtaining supplies, 332 machine
shop orders were held pending receipt of material. It was understood
that approximately 160,000 square feet had just been allocated for
Stores for the purpose of increasing the reserve of finished parts.
Attention has been given to the strength of Shop Foremen, as it is
considered by Management that the key to production is in the fabricating
shops and not on the assembly line. At the start of the contract there
were 76 foremen responsible for over 44 j 000 operators. This figure has
now been adjusted to 770 foremen and assistant foremen or an average of
60 operators per foreman. Each foreman is entitled to bonus based on
standard departmental cost and the output of the Shop. The bonus
figures range from ls> to and are averaging 17/2 over the whole factory.
(No bonus is paid to any operators).
Modifications are not being incorporated as early as possible in the
production line, as it is the practice to deal with those aircraft at
the Consolidated Modification Centre first. One of the outstanding
points is that a trial installation is not taking place, but in view of
the difficulties experienced, it is felt that adjustment will be made as
early as possible.
The Production departments are not yet coupletely organised and there
is consequently a considerable amount of duplication. An Industrial
Engineering department has been set up to revise many of the existing


procedures, but at present they only function on methods affecting more
than one Section. It is not uncommon therefore for a department to
make internal changes without their knowledge.
2A-6.02 San Diego plant»
Types
8.24 Liberator
P332Y Coronado
PBY Catalina
33*32 Experimental
Area
productive 3,153,606 square feet
Non productive 325,971 M ”
Total 3,479,577
Productive Yard Area 3,035,464 square feet
Non " n n 1,523,428 " "
Total 4,558,912 square feet
Total Plant Area 8, 038,489 square feet
fo Stores of total 25f0
Employees
Productive 23,954 = 52$
Non productive 20,592 = 46-0
Total 44,546
Female (Productive) 58$
(Non productive) 17^
Engineering Staff (included in above) 1,739
Experimental n m »» n 1,645
/
Sub-contr acting 8.24 16^S
PB2Y 36f0
PBY 21$
2A-6• 03 Organisation chart


2A-6.Q4 Production Control
Functions:
1* Preparing schedules for issue of production orders.
2. Receiving operation sheets from Tooling department and
preparing masters and ditto masters for works orders.
3. Duplicating works order forms*
4* Releasing orders to Material Control and recording issue.
5* Receiving shop orders and requisitions from Material Control
when materials became available.
6. Procuring material from store and issuing to production shops,
7* Maintaining control centres in each shop.
8. Controlling Finished Part Store.
9* Issuing parts from Finished Part Stores to Assembly Store and
maintaining & minimum stock in each store.
10. Progressing Material Control far all bought out parts that
cannot be obtained from Material Control Store for assembly.
11. Determining which of the small details should be sub-
contracted and marking orders accordingly.
2A-6.05 Material Control
Functions:
1. Receiving drawings and bill of material (in units) from the
Engineering department.
2. Checking bill of material against drawings.
3* Punching an IBM card for each item shown on the bill of
material.
4* Tabulating bill of material.
5. Preparing additional punched card having material size
printed on top for issue to Material Control Section in shop
for checking quantity of material required per part against
actual part.
6. Adjusting bill of material where required.
7. Building up schedules for delivery of materials and bought
out parts.
8. Extending material requirements from bill of material and
preparing purchase requisition for issue to their own
buyers.
9. Receiving copy orders from buyers.
10. Maintaining order record cards showing materials ordered,
received, scheduled and allocated.
11. Receiving materials and controlling Raw Material Stores.
12. Receiving shop orders from Production, extending material
requirements to cover batch quantity and entering on
requisition. (At present preparation of whole requisition
is done in Material Control).


13- Returning shop orders to Production Control as materials
become available,
14. Progressing delivery of materials with suppliers.
15« Preparing a sub-contract requisition for any assembly to be
manufactured outside and passing to the Sub-Contract
department,
16, Maintaining liaison with Government Material Control Centre,
17. Placing orders for small parts on Sub-Contractors and
following izp deliveries.
2A-'6.06 Sub-Contr acts
Function:
1. Receiving requisitions for sub-contract assemblies from
Material Control.
2. Deciding on suitable Sub-Contractors,
3* Maintaining technical liaison with Sub-Contractors.
4* Placing sub-contract orders.
5. Following up deliveries.
6. Despatching materials to Sub-Contractors according to
schedule.
2A-6.07 Tooling and Methods department
Function:
1. Maintaining liaison with the Engineering before production
drawings are issued.
2. Receiving drawings from Engineering.
3» Planning assembly operations, breaking down engineering
drawings further, if required for production purposes.
4* Listing all parts required for assembly on assembly bill of
material sheet, entering description of assembly operation
on assembly operation shefet.
3. Preparing master ditto assembly bill of material and
Assembly operation sheet.
6. Duplicating assembly copies.
7. Preparing assembly lists, duplicating one per aircraft.
8. Laying out operation lists for each detail.
9* Preparing ditto master sheets from operation detail sheet.
10. Preparing tool order forms.
11. Requesting tool drawings and following up receipt.
12. Placing orders on own Tool Shop or outside Suppliers and
following up deliveries.
13* Maintaining master record tool cards.


14. Controlling Tool Stores.
15* Estimating tool costs and maintaining records of estimated
and actual costs.
16. Maintaining a Tool Repair Section in each Production Shop
for small repairs up to 4 hrs. work-
17* Establishing standard times for all operators.
18. Preparing shop layout.
19* Investigating new methods of production, etc.
2i.-6.08 Labour Summary
A. Productive Labour
Total
Drop Hammer 44&
Draw Bench 486
Tube Bending 357
Machine Shop 1,266
Sheet Metal 1,399
Tank Shop 287
Wing-Shop 4,823
Welding 752
Control Surface 883
Bench Assembly *1,336
Electrical Bench Assembly 930
Assembly. Nose Fuselage Bull etc. 5,312
Final Assembly 3,079
Radio & Instrument Assy. 479
Finishing 764
Anodic & Heat Treatment 176
Upholstering & Covering 367
Field Operations 393
Misc. Outside Duties 110
General Misc. 307
Total Productive Labour 23,954
B. Non-Productive Labour
Executives & Management 402
Accounting 569
Contracts 86
Timekeepers & Time Clerks 443
Industrial Relations 711
Asst. Supts. & Clerks 118
Engineering 1,739
Experiment al 1,645
Productive Control 3,328
Material Control 1,682
Tool & Assy. Planning 470
Tool Control (incl. manufacture) 3,172
Sub-Con trading 149
Manufacturing facilities & Stds. 143
Shipping & Transport 806
Inspection 1,601
Salvage 236
Plant Engineering • 1,708
Manufacturing Research , 47
Flight & Service 962
Industrial Engineering 100
Plant Protection 319
Factory Liaison 156
Total Non-Productive Labour 20,592


CHAPTER 7 - NORTH AMERICAN AVIATION, INGLEWOOD
2A"7»01 general. The North American Aviation Company is & progressive concern
which realised the importance of* a strong engineering organisation and
the co-ordination of production and design at an early date. The
Company was initiated by Mr. Kindleberger in 1935 with about 100 men and
by September, 1943, inclusive of their shadow plants, will conprise about
70,000 people. Their latest type, the Mustang, is therefore one of the
best production -types seen and it is interesting to note the amount of
assembly work that is being done in the sub—assembly stages. The
results could not be fully assessed as the delivery of the new contract
was Just starting, but it is felt that an excellent output should be
forthcoming.
The working conditions in both the offices and shops are very good
and layout has been given very careful consideration by the Method
department. The Assembly shop has been well laid out for line conveyor
methods, but up to the present it is only moved in stages.
Thageneralorgani.sation is broken down into fire main divisions
W ° “ d fTOm the organisation chL-t lt rtU be
seen that the Inspection is under the direct control of the Factory
. anager, and that a Material department has been formed outside his
control. Both these practices are not common in other factories
vi sited.
The Engineering division maintains close liaison with Production
and is responsible for the aircraft from the design stage to the release
of production and stage drawings. It is very noticeable that a high
percentage of the senior staff has a very much greater knowledge of the
production organisation than is normal in Britain.
2A-7• 02 Inglewood plant
Types
P. 51 Mustang
8.25 Mitchell
Area
Productive 1,269,510 square feet
Non productive 354» ; i? 9 w n
1,623,932 square feet
Productive Yard Area 162,675 square feet.
Non " " n 653,414 » »
Total Yard Area 816,089 square feet
Total Plant Area 2,440,021 square feet
% Stores of total 20 %
Employees
Productive 14,388 s 58$
Non productive 10,469 = 42$
Totai 24,857
Female (Productive) 36$
(Non productive) 39^
\ <
Engineering Staff (included in above) 1097
Absenteeism &f 0
Sub-contracting 20 % (Total aircraft)
6Qfo (Machine Shop)




2A-7*03 Organisation chart
2A-7.04 Hours Control and Scheduling Section
Functions:
1* The preparation, from delivery programme, schedules covering:-
Procurement of material and bought-out parts
Procurement of G-.F.E. parts
Fabrication of details
Sub-assembly and final assembly
2, Maintain close liaison with Methods department and Tool
Design department in building up above.
3« Establish standards to which actual hours worked may be
compared.
4* Receive actual hours worked from the Cost department.
5* Prepare weekly report of hours for Management.
6* Provide the shop loading group with information for labour
requirements.
7* Issue weekly report on departmental position against schedule.
2A-7*05 Material Control Section.
Functions:
1. Receiving drawings and material lists from the Engineering
department.
2. Preparing material lists from production drawings.
3* Placing orders for materials and bought-out parts.
4* Progressing delivery of orders.


3. Maintaining a record of orders placed and delivered.
6. Maintaining material allocation records.
7. Maintaining material stock records and supplies stock position.
5. Agreeing with the Engineering department on parts to he
sub-contracted.
9. Placing sub-contract orders and agreeing on prices.
10. Maintaining order records of sub-contracted orders.
11. Maintaining price records of sub-contracted orders.
12. Progressing sub-contracted orders.
13* Controlling Raw Material and Bought-Out Stores, including
Receiving Section.
14. Controlling G-.F.E. Stores.
15* Releasing work tickets to Production Control as material
becomes available and according to schedule.
2A-7*06 Tool Engineering
Functions:
1. Receiving drawing and release notes from Engineering department.
2. Laying out operations where tools are required and deciding on
type of tools necessary.
3. Allocating tool numbers.
4. Passing copy of layout to Planning.
3. Issuing orders to Jig and Tool department.
6. Placing tool sub-contract orders and agreeing prices
7. Following up deliveries.
8. Maintaining records of load in Tool department.
2A-7.07 Planning
Functions:
1 • Receiving production drawings and releasing from Engineering
department.
2. Receiving tool numbers from Tool Engineering department.
3. Preparing master ticket for each detail covering actual
quantity required for duplication on the ditto machine.
4. Duplicating works order forms (5 copies) and releasing to the
Control Section according to schedule.
5. Preparing master works order sheets for Assembly Stores for
duplication on the ditto machine.
6. Duplicating assembly works order sheets (3 copies) for issue
to Control Section according to schedule.
I
7. Maintaining record of work released.


2a-7*oB Parts Control (Production Control)
Functions:
1. Receiving works orders from the Material Control.
2. Maintaining files of tickets showing work issued, material
issued, passed inspection.
3* Controlling delivery of planning orders.
Maintaining visible edge record of parts received in Store
and parts issued to Assembly, showing balance in Stores.
5* Maintaining visible edge record to show progress of sub-
assembly against schedule.
6. Obtaining change control information.
?• Receiving parts in Finished Parts Store and checking in to
Store and booking on bin cards and location cards.
8. Issuing parts required for assembly to racks in Shop,
keeping stock above minimum where possible.
9. Booking groups issued on assembly work sheet.
10* Preparing shortage list of parts against schedule when
issuing to Assembly Shop racks.
11. Following up shortage lists and issuing daily.
12. Maintaining Control Section in each Shop and booking work
to machine groups.
13* Maintaining Control Section of work issued to machine at
each machine group.
14* Preparing requisition on purchase for the issue of sub-
contract orders when decision to sub-contract is based on
shop load.
15* Receiving drawings and engineering orders from Blue-Print
department for shop use.
16. Issuing drawings and engineering orders to Shops.
17* Withdrawing obsolete drawings from Shops.
24-7*09 Manufacturing Co-ordination.
Functions;
1* Maintaining, for Management purposes, full analysis of
horn's worked etc., from information received from the
Cost and Accounting departments.
2. Securing information from the Engineering department and
changes or modifications to be incorporated in the
production line and to arrange when incorporation can take
place.
«
3* Maintaining close liaison with both Engineering and Shops
on the above.
The production department has been built up rapidly and,
although all details have been covered, there is a considerable amount
of duplication in the various Sections and clerical work can be reduoed.
These points are realised and steps are now being taken to co-ordihate


the activities of the sections and to reduce the amount of work involved*
The suggestion scheme which was introduced a few years ago has been
adjusted from time to time to meet new conditions and appears to be
functioning well* All suggestions are received by the Methods department
where they are carefully vetted* All successful candidates receive a
bonus equal to 10/b of the estimated savings over a six monthly period*
There is a general lack of Stores facilities, especially for finished
parts, and it is felt that steps will have to be taken to reduce this
fault, as difficulties are being experienced by the Production Control in
keeping trace of the movement of all parts and, as only a small backing of
finished parts is maintained in advance of production, there are
approximately 100 aircraft waiting for shortages at the end of the
assembly line.
2A-7« 10 Labour Summary
A* Productive Labour
Total
Machine Shop 1,103
Sheet Metal 731
Processing 213
Paint, Cover & Dope 198
Pinal Assembly 232
Welding 187
Advanced Production 290
Wing Sub Assembly 1,200
Machine Sub Assembly 322
Sheet Metal Sub Assembly 866
Machine Forming 201
Hull & Frame Assembly 784
Pinal Assembling (bomber) 296
Control Surfaces 745
Pinal Assembling (Pursuit) 516
Electrical Assembly 501
Hydraulics 123
Pinal Assembly Bomber 624
Enclosures 196
Tanks 282
Tubing 196
Engine Assembly - 358
Paint, Lower 123
Cowling & Ducts 732
Sub Assembly 321
Centre Section Bomber 769
Pursuit Ramp 161
Hull & Frame (Pursuit) 257
Bomber Fuselage Assembly 541
Empennage Assembly 48
Bomber Ramp 623
Material Preparation 306
Shop Foremen 323
Total Productive Labour 14,360


B» Non-Productive Labour
Total
General Administrative 15
Factory Administrative 20
Wood Shop 280
Tool Grib 152
Tool Design 179
Jig Construction 579
Foundry 79
Plant Despatch 145
Machine Tools 315
Rivet Tool Dept. 87
Maintenance 330
Janitors 181
Yard Maintenance 99
Shipping 221
Planning 152
Industrial Relations 10
Personnel Director 12
Personnel Records 54
Labour Relations 5
Selective Service 16
Employment 94
Medical Department 77
Research 17
Education 25
Safety Engineer 5
Transportation 40
Welfare <sb Recreation 20
Plant Protection 280
Purchasing 369
Inspection 982
Cost Accounting 140
Tabulating 71
Timekeeping 199
Engineering 1,097
Template 65
Contract 52
Material Conservation 1 21
General Accounting 153
Public Relations 16
Flight Test 138
Administrative Clerical 45
Methods 111
Kansas City Office 36
Production Control 1,320
Contract Flight Dept. 22
Ers. Control & Scheduling 21
Raw Material Stores 217
Estimating 80
Dallas Office 9
Field Service 420
Receiving Inspection 288
Numbering 56
Factory Mgr. Office 19
Mfg. Analysis 9
Mfg. Methods 2
Plant Facilities 16
Procedure Control 11
Government Stores 101
Mobile Equipment 55
Communications Dept. 34
Tool Mfg. Research 3
Payroll 88
Change Control 17
Machine Training 92
Pre-Factory Training 461
Employees on Temporary Leave 44
Total Non-Productive Labour 10,4&9


CHAPTER 8 - BELL AIRCRAFT, BUFFALO
2A-8.01 General, This company has made a remarkable growth. Pounded in 1935
by Mr, Laurence Bell with a handful of men, it has grown to employ over
30,000 and increased its turnover 23 times in the last two years, and with
its shadow organisations will soon control over 30,000, The new plant
outside Buffalo is probably the best laid out which the Mission saw in
full operation.
Both the wing assembly line at Buffalo and the final assembly line at
Niagara were continuously moving and were apparently giving satisfactory
results. It was understood that the layout had been carefully considered
in its early stages and was based on time study data. Continuous
movement was however only made possible by the recent enlargement of group
stores to accommodate a minimum of 30 days stocks of finished parts in
advance of the production programme.
p
Raw materials v/ere scheduled from three to four months ahead of
programme so that assembly backing could be maintained. The total
storage space required was given at a minimum of 25$ of the total factory
area, a figure that compares favourably with British practice.
The plant Consists of two main factories, the older one at Buffalo
engaged on detail manufacture and wing assembly, and housing most of the
planning and production control office, and the new factory at Niagara for
final assembly. Although both are well laid out, the working conditions
of the older plant are not quite as good as many other factories visited.
Prom the organisation chart it will be seen that the main divisions
are similar to normal practice. The engineering, inspection, production,
Works Manager, industrial relations and financial are the main departments
responsible to the General Manager. There are, however, several smaller
sections also reporting direct to the General Manager totalling
approximately 15 in all. It is generally considered in an efficient
organisation that not more than five or six*persons should be under the
direct control of one executive. As would be expected from the above,
there are several smaller sections that appear to be carrying very similar
duties, such as the master mechanic, industrial engineering, graphic
analysis and time study. All these sections are dependent on close
collaboration and it is difficult to draw a line between the responsibi-
lities of each. To overcome this situation, an Industrial Engineering
department is being formed of personnel with organisation experience to
overhaul the existing methods. A policy committee has also been formed
to consider changes before they are put into operation, and consists of
seven members: General Manager, Ist Vice President, Vice President,
Secretary, Comptroller, Chief Engineer and Works Manager. Several
procedures were in the process of being changed and it is felt that an
efficient organisation will steadily be formed.
The purchase of materials is based on a bill of material for the
aircraft which is increased by 30$ to cover spares and shop losses. All
purchases are checked against the assembly group sheet to ensure that
each item has been fully covered. This has been found necessary in
Britain, and Bell is the only factory where such practice has been
noticed.
Sub-contracting is at present approximately 30$ of the total
aircraft and it is estimated that, in order to obtain the increased
schedule, it is necessary to place orders outside for 80$ of the new
aircraft. Under these conditions it is difficult to see how the full
schedule will be met by the end of the year.


2A-8.02 Buffalo plant
gyp es
P. 39 Airacobra
P. 63 " (improved)
Area
Productive 1,880,880 square feet
Non productive 987,010 " n
Total 2,867,890 square feet
% Stores of total 2%
Employees
Productive 17,103 =
Non productive 14,497 =
Total 31,600
Female (Productive) ifif o
(Non Productive) 3^
Engineering Staff (included in above) 900
Absenteeism 8^
Sub-contracting y^ Q
2A-8.03 Organisation charts


2A-8• 04 Estimating.
Functions:-
1# Receiving drawings from the Engineering department.
2. Laying out operations and compiling estimates for details,
units and spares, etc*
3. Checking sub-contract prices*
4* Preparing price lists*
5* Building up spares list in conjunction with the Army Air
Force .and issuing to production control*
6. Checking estimated costs against shop returns*
2A-8.05 Production Control.
Functions:
1* Receiving drawings from Engineering and preparing parts list.
2* Preparing schedules.
% Deciding on parts to he sub-contracted.
4* Placing requisitions on purchase for the placing of orders for
raw materials, bought-out parts and sub-contracted parts*
3* Preparing and issuing works orders from layouts received from
Production Engineering.
6. Maintaining records of production.
7* Controlling production*
8. Receiving parts in Finished Parts Store and issuing for
assembly in groups*
9* Controlling G.F.E. Stores.
10. Despatching materials and spares*


2A-8.06 Production Engineering
Functions:
1. Receiving drawings from the Engineering department.
2. Laying out operation sheets for details and assembly*
3* Preparing tool orders and issuing to Tool department or
Purchase.
if. Determining material requirements and placing requisitions
on the Purchase.
5* Estimating tool costs and hours.
6. Following up delivery of tools from Tool Roam or Sub-contractor.
7* Laying out plant and equipment from time study data received
from the time study section.
8. Despatching material to Sub-contractor where agreed.
2A.-8.07 Purchase Department
Functions:
1. Receiving requisition for the purchase of materials, bought-out
parts, sub-contracted parts, tools, equipment, etc., and
placing official order on suppliers.
2. Maintaining order records and following up deliveries
according to schedule.
2A-8.08 Graphic Analysis.
1 • Accumulate all necessary data for compiling full analysis of
company activities on charts of production output.
2A-8.09 Labour Summary
A. Productive Labour
Fighter Bomber Mod. Total
Assy Centre
Machine Shop 2,255 10 - 2,265
Drop Hammer & Foundry 263 1 - 264
Cutting & Drilling 239 - - 239
Gear Manufacture 24 24
Oleo Strut Manufacture 51 - 51
Cap Strip Mills 69 5 74
Welding 321 11 - 332
Wood Shop 104 1 - 105
Press Shop 977 13 - 990
Plexiglass 32 3 35
Tube Bending & Cable Splicing 174 4 - 178
Cowl 780 9 406 1,195
Wing 3,337 50 - 3,387
Parts Assembly 262 1 - 263
Finishing 689 6 - 695
Front Fuselage 858 18 - 876
Superstructure 341 8 - 349
Testing & Assembly 169 16 - 185
Electrical Assembly 202 3 - 205
Assembly Line 1,906 71 - 1,977
C/Fwd.


Fighter Bomber Mod. Total
Assy Centre
Final Assembly 365 27 - 392
Pre-Flight 663 81 1 745
Steel Bench & Gas Weld 279 24 - 303
Heat Treatment & Sand Blast 117 - - 117
Template Dies & Form Blocks 182 11 - 193
Toolroom 534 3 - 537
Plaster Pattern 55 4 59
Fixture Erection 235 4 - 239
Flight Test & Research 149 - - 149
Experimental 38 - - 38
Bomber Assy. - 642 - 642
Total Productive 15,670 1,026 407 17,103
B. Non-Productive Labour
Fighter Bomber Mod. Total
Assy. Centre
Officers & Executives 34 - 35 69
Office Miscellaneous 130 1 - 131
Stenographers 19 - - 19
Accounting 435 - 45 480
Contract 107 3 - 110
Engineering 606 - - 606
Engineering, Blue Prints 115 - - 115
Engineering, Template & Loft 172 - - 172
Production Engineering 385 4 - 389
Factory Administration 118 3 - 121
Timekeepers £4l 1 - 242
Purchasing 188 2 - 190
Shop Project 8 - 8
Traffic 183 - - 183
Production Control 2,152 - 37 2,189
Eraplo;yraent & First Aid 276 1 12 289
Watchmen 658 - 70 728
Janitors 904 - - 904
Scheduling 261 1 - 262
Shipping 41 41
Stock Clerks (Finished
Part Stores) 901 - - 901
Tool Cribs 464 3 13 480
Inspection 2,488 28 37 2,553
Service 380 - - 380
Plant Engineering 1,341 2 121 1,464
Training 17 128 - 145
Modification Centre 4 4
G.F.E. Parts Control 101 - - 101
Raw Material Handling 732 4 - 736
Raw Material Records 75 - 75
Visual Training & Housing 102 3 - 105
Advertising 10 - - 10
Salvage 188 - - 188
Development & Rework 90 2 - 92
Industrial Engineering 15 - - 15
Total Non-Productive 13,937 186 374 14,497


CHAPTER 9 - CURTISS WRIGHT
2A-9• 01 General. Curtiss Wright, under the leadership of Mr. Guy Vaughan,
are the largest aircraft combination in America, and have plants making
aircraft, engines and propellers. The whole group employs 150,000
work people. Three days were spent at Buffalo at two of the four
aircraft plants, a new factory of 2,000,000 sq. ft. and an old plant
of 1,300,000 sq. ft. At the present time there is a total of 40,000
people at these two plants and are women.
The member of the Mission responsible for Works Administration was
not on this visit, and therefore it is impossible to include the
detailed information that has been compiled at the other factories where
full 3-day investigations were made by him.
The two main productions in these two plants are the Kittyhawk
fighter and the Curtiss Commando transport machine.
The Mission considered that the new Buffalo plant was up to date and
well organised, and the production of the Kittyhawk was on as sound a
basis as anything seen in America. In this new factory considerable
use is being made of underground shops for storage, power plant assemblies
etc. and components are passed up through lifts to the main assembly
departments.
The St. Louis Plant is a new and up to date one. It was built
around the old experimental Plant which wa3 150,000 sq. ft. The new
plant was only finished at the beginning of 1942 and is 1,200,000 sq.ft,
on two floors. The old plant was dismantled and the new one put into
operation in a period of five days, a remarkable effort. There is also
an auxiliary plant in the city of St. Louis making a total floor area
of 1,800.000 sq.ft. Total personnel will be 21,000 work-people.
At present there are about 20fo women and it is intended to increase
to 45?S* There are three shifts, stopping for Sunday. The third
shift works hours and is paid for eight. There is no piece work;
average earnings, $ 45*00 to $ 50.00 a week. The transport problem is
a serious one as the Plant is sixteen miles from St. Louis and there
are over 3>ooo private cars and several hundred buses operating daily.
The factory is excellently laid out and lighted, and is fitted with
completely new and up to date plant and canteens. Over 9>ooo meals are
served a .day.
The engineering force exceeds 1,000 and 240 were employed on the
design and development of the wooden Caravan. The tool room staff is
1,200. They have some remarkably fine machines in the tool room
including Do all saws and: Minniston grinders. Attached to the tool room
there is a large force making up the tubular constructions for the
moving line assembly. There is also an interesting plant with a
number of special machines for recovering parts from the shop sweepings.
The lofting system, worked by the Engineering Department, is right
alongside the jig and tool department and is of the old boat-yard type
as opposed to the Glenn Martin principle.
The main product for the future of this factory is going to be
the A-25, a single engine dive bomber designed at Buffalo some two years
ago, but considerably modified since. It is being extensively tooled
and is planned to be erected on a most elaborate moving track. The
track moves three inches a minute and the erection cycle will be six
days. The fuselage and power plant are also built up on a most
elaborate progressive track. The general tooling and layout of this
machine is ambitious. All the machine tool equipment for the building
of the A-25 is new and modern.
The drop-hammers are hydraulically operated and there are two 3,000 ton
presses which are not fully working yet.


At the time of the Mission*s visit, the plant was somewhat disorgan-
ised owing to the introduction of a new type. When this aircraft is fully
tooled and the assembly line, with its 56 cradles, is working satisfactorily,
it will be a highly organised production.
The general organisation was broken down into six main Divisions -
Contracts, Engineering, Inspection, Personnel, Production and Finance,
and follows normal American practice.
Working conditions were good, despite the fact that the factory was
permanently blacked out. The main assembly line had been planned for
continuous movement, but it had not been found possible to put this into
operation as such a small backing of parts (10 sets) was being maintained
in advance of production. The line had been designed to move at the rate
of 15 feet per hour through 56 Assembly Stations and had the capacity for
10 aircraft per day. The new Dive Bcmber had been stage drawn, but it was
understood that these drawings were not being used for the purpose of grouping
sets of parts for assembly.
Sub-contracted items were considered on similar lines to bought-out
parts and Curtiss Wrights were not supplying tools or gauges to the
sub-contractor, unless a special gauge was required for interchangeability
purposes.
2A-9•02 St. Louis plant.
Types
A. 25 Dive Bomber
C. 76 Caravan (Transport)
Area
Productive 1,221,000 sq.ft.
% Stores of Total 18&
Employees
Broductive 14,000 = 67/£
Non-productive 7,000 * 33i%
Total 21,000
Female labour 25/b
/
Engineering staff (included in
above) 1,300
Jig and Tool department ** 1,200
Absenteeism yfo
Sub-contracting 15% Assembly
45% Machine shop
Spares Deliveries 2( Yfo


; 2a-9• 03 Organisation Charts.


CHAPTER 10 - OTHER AIRCRAFT FIRMS
2h General, The following information relating to administration
organisation deals with those firms at which only a one day visit was
made, and therefore it was not possible to go into the systems and
organisations in as much detail.
The firms covered by this chapter are;
GlemHartin Baltimore
Douglas Los Angeles
Lockheed Los Angeles
Vega Los Angeles
v Republic Long Island, New York
A tour only was made of the factories and the figures quoted on
the following sheets were given verbally and could not, therefore, be
checked,
2A-10.02 Glenn L» Martin, Baltimore ,
2HBS&
A. 30 Baltimore
B, 26 Marauder
EBM Mariner
Mars
Area
Productive 3 >4-87* 171 square feet
Non productive 1,245 > 758 tt H
Total 4>732,929 square feet
% Stores of Total 20^
Employees
Productive 40,328 = ~JG%
Non productive 12,609 = 24
Total 52,937
I*olll3lo ( Pro due t ive) 2U%
(Non productive) 33%
Engineering staff (included in above) 2,400
Jig & Tool Department ” w ” 1,500
Absenteeism 3% during week
14;4 over weekend
Sub-contracting 33% of total aircraft
\o% of engineering work.
Spares deliveries 13%
The buildings, the majority of which were of recent construction,
were permanently blacked out and the working conditions, lighting, and
cleanliness were of a high standard.
Of the three main types of aircraft under construction, the
Marauder was the only one being built on an assembly line designed for
mechanical movement between the stages. The parts required for each


stage were stored in bins running the length of the assembly line, and
were kept in part number order. Minimum stock figures were used as a
means of controlling the quantity of sets available for production, and
it was the responsibility of a snop porter to replenish the stocks as
required* The Operators were allowed to procure their own parts from
the assembly bins and there did not appear to be much control over shop
scrap and losses. It was noticeable that there were a considerable
number of shortages on the assembly line, which resulted in many aircraft
waiting for completion on the flying field*
Moving belt conveyors had been installed for many of the smaller
sab-assemblies, but in a number of cases these were not being used by the
Operators.
2A-10.03 Douglas Aircraft. Si Segundo, Los. Angeles
Type
✓
A* 25 Dauntless
Area
productive 784*000 square feet
Non productive 316,000 " M
Total 1,300,000 square.feet
% Stores of Total (approx.)
Employees
/
Productive 13,330 = Tl%
Non productive 4,170 = 23-4
Total 18,000
Female Labour 40^4
Engineering Staff (included in above) 1,500
Sub-contracting Total aircraft
45/4 Machine Shop
Spares deliveries 15^4
Assembly drawings received from the Engineering Division were being
broken down further in the Production Planning department for production
purposes. The assembly. line consisted of 76 stations, movement being
made every 3i hours. Again it was noticeable that a very small backing
of parts was being maintained for the assembly and 89 aircraft were
waiting for shortages at the end of the line.
2A-10.04 Lockheed, Los Angeles.
T2E«
P. 38 Lightening
0*59, 60 & R*so Lodestar (Transport)
C. 69 Constellation
Area
Productive 2,217,000 square feet
f 0 Stores of Total 1554
Employees
Productive 31,200 = 7Q?4
Non productive 13,100 = 30°4
Total 44,300


Female labour 27$
Engineering staff (included in
above) 2,000
Sub-contracting 20$ Total Aircraft
90; o Machine Shop
Spares deliveries 20$
✓
2A-10.05 Vega, Burbank, Los Angeles,
SES&
8.17 Fortress
8.34 Ventura
Area
Productive 1,470,000 sq.ft.
Non-productive 330,000 M ”
Total 1,800,000 sq.ft.
$ Stores of Total 12/15$
Employees
%
Productive 16,900 = 62*.$
Non-productive 9,600 = 3 6$
Total 26,500
Female labour 42$
Engineering staff (included in
above) 1,150
Sub-contracting 15$ Assembly
50$ Machine Shop
Spares deliveries Fortress - 18$
rrrunlTiir wmmmmmrnmmmmm ■ r » mstme /
Ventura - 30$
The Lockheed and Vega Plants are closely associated and are controlled
by the Lockheed Vega Manufacturing Organisation. It was surprising,
therefore, to find such a difference in outlook between the two Companies.
The Vega organisation had made several attempts at improving the layout of
their plant and it is felt that their progressive attitude will lead to an
efficient output. The general organisation was under review and every
endeavour was being made to co-ordinate the activities of the Production
Sections and to rationalise the paper work.
It was interesting to note that the Planning Production Engineers
were located in the shops in order for them to be near the operations for
which they were responsible. The de-centralising of these activities had
resulted in duplication of certain clerical information and it is felt that
with the re-organisation, the Production Engineers will, in future, be
housed in a central Planning department.


2A-10.06 Republic, Farmingdale, Long Island, New York.
Type
p; 47 Thunderbolt
Area
Productive 751,000 sq.ft.
Non-productive 649,000 n "
Total 1,400,000 sq.ft.
/o Stores of Total 15;o approx.
Snployees
Productive 11,212 = 78; o
Non-productive 3,038 = 22, 3
Total 14,250
Female labour 17;$
Engineering staff (included in
above) 225
Spares deliveries 23; 3
Sub-contracting 34/j
The Republic Aircraft was much smaller than the majority of the
factories visited, and one of the difficulties that has been experienced
by management in maintaining a layout for line production has been the
addition of separate buildings to meet a programme that has been
continually revised.
All operations are subject to time study an a basis for machine
loading and labour loading, and this will be extensively used for shop layout
when a further extension to the factory has been completed. me
assembly line has recently been introduced and has been designed to handle
8 aircraft in 10 hours, moving at the rate of 25 ft. per hour.
It was noticed that there was a comparatively small engineering
staff of 225 and it was felt that there was not such a close liaison
between Design and Production as had been seen in all other American
factories.


CHAPTER 11 - DATA ON A ERICAN ARIFRAME FACTORIES
2 A. 11. 01
Plants covered by detailed Examination
Plant
Type of Aircraft
Employees
%
Absent-
eeism
No. of
Engin-
eering
Force,
includ-
ed in
Total
Area
Additional
Outside Area
% Sub-
contract
%
Spares
Prod.
%
Non-
Prod.
%
Total
Female
of Total
Average
Hours
per
week
Productive
Area
(sq.ft.)
%
Non-
productive
Area
(sq. ft.)
Total
Plant
(sq. ft.)
95
Stores
of
Total
Prod.
Non-
Prod.
Dir-
ect
Ind-
irect
Boeing
Seattle
B.17
B. 29
Portress
Experimental
18,573
60
12,358
40
30,931
45
38
47.8
10
X
'2,537
2,016,470
61
1,268,995
39
3,284,565
25
1,470,000
1,180,670
29%
12
Consolidated
San Diego
B.24
B .32
PB.2T
pbt
Liberator
Experimental
Coronado
Catalina
23,954
54
20,592
46
44,546
58
17
55-6
-
1,739
3,153,606
90
325,971
10
3,479,577
25
r^—
3,035,484
1,523,428
16%
56%
21%
17
North Amor loan
Inglewood
P.51
B.25
Mustang
Mitchell
14,388
58
10,469
42
24,857
36
39
54-5
6
1,097
1,269,510
78
354,422
22
1,623,932
20
162,675
653,414
20% total
60% N/c
shop
10
Bell
Buffalo
P.39
&
P.63
Airaoobra
17,103
54
14,497
ko
31,600
45
38
44.9
8
893
1,880,880
66
987,010
34
2,867,890
25
Nil
4,163,897
30
Curtiss Wright
St. Louis
A. 25
<4
0.76
Dtvebomber
Caravan
14,000
67
7,000
33
21,000
25
1,300
1,221,000
18
15* *33y.
45% V/c I
Shop.
20
* Includes Plight Research of 172
Plants where tour only was made.
Plant
Type of Aircraft
Employees
Engineering
Staff included
in Total
Areas
%
S/C
%
Spares
Prod.
%
Non-
Prod.
%
Total
% Female
of Total
Productive
Area
(sq. ft.)
%
Non-
Productive
Area
(sq. ft.)
%
Total
%
Stores
of
Total
(Harm Martin
Baltimore
A. 30
B.
FBM
Baltimore
Marauder
Mariner
1 Mars
40,328
76
12,609
24
52,937
24
2,400
3,487,171
74
1,245,758
26
4,732,929
20
33
15
Douglas
SI Segundo
A. 25
Dauntless
13,830
77
4,170
23
18,000
40
1,500
784,000
60
516,000
40
1,300,000
20
20 Total
45 V/o
Shop.
15
Lockheed
Los Angeles
P.38
R.50
0.67
lightening
Lodestar
Constella-
tion
51,200
70
13,100
30
44,300
27
2,000
2,217,000
-
-
-
-
15
20 Total
90 VS/a
20
Vega
Los Angeles
B.17
B.34
Portress
Ventura
16,900
64
9,600
36
26,500
42
,.,50
1,470,000
82
330,000
18
1,800,000
15
15 Assy.
50 U/o
Shop.
18
30
Republic
Farmingdale
P.47
Thunderbolt
11,212
78
3,038
22
14,250
17
225
751,000
54
649,000
46
1,400,000
15
34
23


CHAPTER 12 - CANADIAN AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY
2A-12.01 Three mexrbers of the Mission paid a short visit to Canadian production
factories at the invitation of Mr. Ralph P. Bell, Director General of
Aircraft Production, who personally conducted the party on a tour of the
following factories:-
Canadian Car & Foundry St. Hubert & Pointe St. Charles
Canadian Propellers Montreal
Fairchild Aircraft Ltd. Longueuil
Canadian Vickers Montreal and Cartierville
Noordyn Cartierville
Victory Aircraft Malt on
De Havilland Toronto
Massey Harris Toronto
Fleet Aircraft Fort Erie
Dowty Equipment Montreal
Bloctube Controls Montreal
The party were impressed by the energy and initiative of Mr. Bell and
the part he has played in building up the Canadian Aircraft Industry, from
an insignificant number before the war, to 35,000 with 3,500 women 12
months ago, and to the present total of 85,000 with 25,000 women.
Canada did not possess the facilities, skilled labour or unlimited
finance to draw on, that were available in the States, and her effort is
therefore praiseworthy through having been realised in spite of these
obstacles. The expansion has now almost reached its peak, and it is
considered they will now settle down to a steady stabilised production.
Government control of firms is more in evidence than here, and it was
stated that there is not an aircraft factory in Canada that is entirely
privately owned.
Federal Aircraft Limited is a government concern, originally formed
for the co-ordination of the various firms concerned with the Anson produc-
tion. It is now operating as an administrative company, placing sub-
contracts with firms normally outside the aircraft industry and arranging
the purchase and supply of materials; it therefore covers many of the
functions of our English controls.
Ingenuity and improvisation has been shewn in overcoming expansion
difficulties. Presses were seen at a lino factory that had been converted
to aircraft work. Research and laboratory work is undertaken by McG-ill
University.
Developments in the States have been closely watched, and questions
were constantly asked concerning the latest developments and equipment at
home and in the States.
The North American Aircraft suggestion scheme, with due acknowledg-
ments, has been installed in all factories, is beginning to work well, and
a number of awards have been made.
It was understood to be government policy to buy equipment needed for
the main factories instead of waiting for lease-lend procedure to be
carried through, and in a short time now it is considered that Victory
Aircraft, Canadian Vickers at Cartierville, and Noordyns will have
absolutely first class equipment.
The training of personnel has presented maiy difficulties, but this
has been tackled in a similar, though not so lavish, manner as in the
States, by training schools in both the factories and towns. An Aircraft
Relations Committee has been set up in each area, so that Aircraft
Executives may discuss all matters relative to the available personnel in
the district with Executives from other industries.
It was stated that 4 8% of the Canadian production will now go to the
States, while 26% is needed for their own Air Force, thus leaving only 26%
available for this country.


Assurances were given on all sides that Canada were particularly
anxious to build British aircraft and that American orders were obtained
after all efforts to build British had failed.
It is considered that every effort should be made to foster this
production and obtain whatever capacity becomes available in the future,
and it is felt that a close and permanent liaison should be set up in
Canada to assist, advise, and report on this whole matter.
While the industry has grown to its present proportions, only one
Canadian designed aircraft, the Norseman, is in production. The Govern-
ment fully realise their weakness in this direction and an effort is being
made to build up a design and technical organisation for post-war require-
ments. There is no doubt they would like to obtain this help from
England, but it is felt that this is a subject which requires some
ventilation with the Canadian authorities.
The largest Aircraft Plant in Canada is that of Victory Aircraft,
at Mai ton, near Toronto, with a floor area of approximately 850,000 sq.ft.
This factory was originally built by the National Steel Car Corporation in
1938, but late in 1942 the Government took over- the factory and changed
the name to Victory Aircraft, appointing Mr. Dave Boyd the General Manager,
and Mr. J.B. Bickell of International Nickel as President.
The firm has been completely re-organised along sound lines, following
in the main the English pre-production system and there is every indication
that this is beginning to work well. The factory is of modern design and
well laid out for the production of large aircraft.
They are at present finishing off their Anson programme and Iysander
spares, and tooling up for Lancaster and York production. The party were
impressed with the thorough manner in which this was being tackled and
have confidence that the first Lancaster will be ready within a short time.
There is a sound backing of parts coming behind this, and we feel that the
production, although slow in starting, will justify itself.
It was noted that the Glenn Martin Photo Lofting system has been
introduced with all the latest equipment, and that the personnel for the
Loft department had been built up from architectural and railway draughts-
men, together with trainees from schools.
There is at the moment some lack of equipment, but we found that a
number of the latest riveting and welding developments we had seen in the
States were on order to this firm.
The tempo of work was good, although we understood that there were
some labour problems being thrashed out with the respective Unions.
From a conglomeration of sheds in Montreal the Canadian Vickers Co.
have now shifted to their new Government financed Canadian Factory at
Cartierville, which is mentioned in Chapter 3. This layout was decided
upon after a close study of all the factories then being built in the
States and is typical of the vision behind Canadian expansion; adequate
storage space, to approximately 25 % of the total floor area, had been
allocated along the entire front of the factory.
The Consolidated PBY Flying Boat, known in Canada as the Canso, was
starting production before the factory was finished. The hull was built
in the same manner as at San Diego, and was laid out across the factory at
one end. On reaching completion at the far side, it was in the correct
position for the start of the final assembly line moving the length of the
building. Other components working away from their Group Stores across
the factory in the same manner, reached the assembly line exactly at their
incorporation point, and thus avoided all unnecessary movement.
The Noordyn factory, also at Cartierville, expanded in 1942 to some
700,000 sq.ft, and now employs 9,300 workpeople. The Noordyn designed
Norseman is being produced for the United States and they are also producing
the North American Harvard trainer. This was a well equipped factory


working on up-to-date lines. Arc welding was being extensively used and
welding experiments were being carried out with atomic hydrogen.
Considerable attention was paid in this factory to the protection of
workpeople with safety devices on drop hammers, and an electric eye
device was noted, which stopped a press in the event of an operator* s
hand being put in a danger position.
The Canadian Car & Foundry Company was visited at St. Hubert and
Pointe St. Charles, but their Hurricane production is carried out at the
Fort William plant. They are now changing over to the Curtis dive bomber,
and will undoubtedly experience some problems, as this is a different
proposition to the Hurricane. This firm have a number of interests, and
among the experimental work the Mission were shown drawings of a single
cylinder unit of a 3,000 h.p. fuel injection engine, which was about to be
built experimentally for the Army Air Force at Wright Field.
Constant speed propellers with hydraulic control units and aluminium
alloy blades were being produced at another of their Montreal factories,
and the Pointe St. Charles plant was used as a Machine Shop for all of
these plants.
The Canadian Propellers Limited Factory at Montreal is a modem plant
of approximately 110,000 sq.ft, floor area, and a steady flow of Hamilton
propellers were being produced under ideal conditions.
Extensive additions were being made under adverse weather conditions
at the. Longueuil factory of Fairchild Aircraft. When completed, this
factory will be approximately 650,000 sq.ft. The layout of this new
extension is on sound lines and a part of this factory was already being
used as a parts plant. The Bolingbrooke production will shortly be
tapering off, and they will be building the Curtis Hell Diver on an
American contract.
A brief visit was made to see the Mosquito production in the
De Haviiland factory at Toronto. The production has not yet got into its
stride and the assembly position seemed unbalanced.
Massey Harris are doing a considerable amount of sub-contracting work
on the Mosquito and Anson programme. 3,000 people were employed in the
factory visited, and the methods and general layout was similar to wood-
working factories in this Country.
The production of the Fairchild Cornell by Fleet Aircraft at Fort Eire
was of particular interest, as the Mission were able later to compare this
with- the production of the same aircraft at the parent firm in the States.
The Fort Eire plant was approximately 220,000 sq.ft, floor area, and
was well laid out. While the production methods were substantially the
same as at the parent firm, the assembly arrangements were better staged
and the production was therefore on a more orderly basis.
The Dowty factory at Montreal were making hydraulic equipment to the
design of their parent English Company for the Hurricane, Anson and
Lancaster. This was a well organised small concern.
Bloc tube Controls Limited of Montreal were producing Lancaster
controls on a sub-contract from Victory Aircraft. The workmanship was of
a high standard.


APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA
1. Bell
Summary employment report.
Factory layout and flow chart data.
Conveyor line drawing and photographs.
Airacobra construction photographs.
2. Boeing
Booklet on Test Laboratory.
Purchasing procedure.
Manual of Engineering Division organisation.
Manual of production procedure
Engineering Division organisation chart.
Engineering Division personnel distribution chart.
Chart of daily factory absentees.
Chart of factory personnel activity.
Various cards of works systems and plant statistics.
Material Department organisation.
Material Department flow chart.
3* Consolidated
Books on Process bulletins.
Time studies.
Shop process memoranda.
Tool and operation planning standards.
Standard tools.
Tool design.
Hydro press standard tools.
Material handling.
Introducing forms used by Tooling and Methods Division
Department 15 and 1 6.
Organisation and functions of Industrial Training Division.
Data on conveyor lines.
Chart F.R. 309 - Speed of assembly lines of FB2T3 Plants 1 and 2.
Chart F.R.308 - Speed of assembly lines of 8.2 k Plants 1 and 2.
Drawing bill of procedure.
Attendance report.
Model 29 date schedule.
Plants 1 and 2 total areas.
Discussion of production control procedures.
Revised tooling and planning functions.
Material requisition - Procedures for acquiring.
Chart - Tool engineering.
Figure Kardex record system for Government furnished equipment.
Plan South and North end of building final assembly line 8.24.
Curtiss
Manuals on "Curtiss S" Conversion list for interchangeability to
"Curtiss S" specification.
Shop practice.
Departmental routine.
Process.
Photographs cf Conveyors and shop layout.
Female workers in sheet metal department.
5* Glenn Martin
Book - Description of aircraft and manufacturing facilities.


6. North American.
Manual— Brief outline of engineering procedure.
Form - Analysis for research department.
Book - Release of new part fittings gun sight adjust.
Book - The use of low carbon low alloy steel in shell type aircraft
structures.
Book - Miscellaneous static tests of 4610 nickel moly steel.
Summary - Production control.
Production records.
Works statistics and system.
Drawing 62 and 82 - Master gauges major assembly.
Drawing 99 - Tool masters major assembly.
Works Employees suggestion plan.
Breakdown chart N.A.B7*
photographs of building jigs and components' under construction.
7- Vega.
Books on Production design engineering memos.
Stock control.
Various forms "Vega shop systems”.
Manufacturing engineering policy and procedures.
Material control department.
8. War Production Board.
Schedule etc., Controlled Materials Plan.


AIRCRAFT INDUCTION
PART B FACTORY LAYOUT AND PROCESSES
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
item I.CI Design tor production
M 1,02 Engineering staff
." 1,03 Collaboration between firms
" 1.04 Action
CHAPTER 2 - SPECIAL APPLICATIONS OF LOFTING
CHAPTER 3 - ECONOMY OF FLOOR SPACE
CHAPTER 4 - CONVEYORS
CHAPTER 3 “ DROP HAMMER
CHAPTER 6 - RUBBER DIE PRESS
CHAPTER 7 - MECHANICAL PRESS
CHAPTER 8 - STRETCHER
CHAPTER 9 ~ SPECIAL TOOLS
Item 9.01 Use of plastics
w 9*02 Cerromatrix shims
n 9*03 Suction pads
tt 9.04 Rubber die tool for press brakes
n 9*05 Frazing of lightening holes
** ' 9*06 Magnetic die sets
” 9*07 Miscellaneous
CHAPTER 10 - FARNUM ROLLS
CHAPTER 11 - RIVET SORTING
CHAPTER 12 - FINISHING- AND PAINTING
CHAPTER 13.- EXTRUSION 2,MANIPULATION
CHAPTER 14 - PIPE BENDING
CHAPTER 13 - GLENN MARTIN SKIN STRETCHING PROCESS
CHAPTER 16 - PLASTER MOULDS FOR LIGHT ALLOY CASTING-
CHAPTER 17 - POWDER METALLURGY
CHAPTER 18 - RIVETING
CHAPTER 19 - SPOT WELDING
CHAPTER 20 - FLASH WELDING OF UNDERCARRIAGES AMD ENGINE MOUNTINGS
CHAPTER 21 - HELLARC WELDING
CHAPTER 22 - CYCLSWKLD




PART B FACTORY LAYOUT AND PROCESSES
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
28-1.01 Design for production. Due to their greater attention to
detailed design and to the larger design staffs, production in
America has been greatly simplified.
28-1.02 Engineering staff. Much attention has been paid to the
training of aeronautical engineers, both in colleges and the
aircraft factories, with the result that a large number of
competent engineers were available at the beginning of the
expansion scheme. In contrast to this, Britain, almost at
the end of possible is short of suitably trained
staff. This whole subject is reviewed at length in section 6.
28-1.03 Collaboration between firms. One important aspect of
American industry which has come to light is the extent of
collaboration between competing firms and the considerable
interchange of information between these firms. Valuable in-
formation could be obtained by members of the British aircraft
industry, if there was more collaboration and a freer inter-
change of information which would further the considerable
knowledge held by individuals in this country.
This opinion was formed and actually recorded in writing
before the Mission left America. It has been considerably
strengthened since the return of the Mission as a result of the
conferences at Hamilton Hace. On several occasions it was
learnt that British firms are not aware of what others are
doing at heme, and several improvements can be made in this
respect.
28-1.04 Action. Although no basic alterations can be made to increase
British production during the next 24 months as a result of the
Mission*s investigations, it will be possible to make appreciable
improvements in current procedure if the detailed recommendations
contained in the following chapters can be adopted.




CHAPTER 2 - SPECIAL APPLICATIONS OF LOFTING
28-2.01 A number of firms make use of photo reproduced templates for simple
and effective jigs* The template is screwed to a thick ply base, all.
nncessary holes are drilled and clamps fitted to form a jig suitable for
the operations required, as shown in the wheel jig in Fig.l.
It is considered that this is an aid to initial production and
admirable for obtaining a short run while the normal type jigs are being
produced, but, from examination of jigs at some firms, that these are in
the main unsuitable for long production runs.
Bell Aircraft of Buffalo have developed a component assembly system
based on lofting of co-ordinated holes in detail. Components are lofted
in the normal manner and a number of sets of master templates produced,
by a lithographic method, of sill skins and details complete with rivet
holes. From these master templates "boiler plate” blanking dies complete
with rivet punches are made, similar to those used in this Country, except
that rubber instead of spring strippers are used. All rivet holes are
punched undersize in the skins, and mating structures have only sufficient
holes to enable the assembly to be pinned together \ghile all holes are
drilled through full size.
The use of blanking dies with rivet punches therefore obviates the need
for a considerable number of drill jigs, and enables production to commence
earlier, although their cost and upkeep do not show any saving over the normal
methods. It is understood that after the initial tryout, it is usually
necessary to make alterations to the majority of the blanking dies for
developed shape, in order properly to align the rivet holes, but this is
quickly and easily accomplished with tooling of this type. In order to
ensure strict interchangeability, most assemblies are riveted in assembly
s jigs to prevent any mal-alignment during riveting.
Fi g. 1. Wheel jig.


CHAPTER 3 - ECONOMY OF FLOOR SPACE
28-3*ol Line production was the general rule and final assembly is dealt with
below under the heading of conveyors.
Every effort is made to save floor space and a number of interesting
layouts were noted. As an example of this, the Curtiss layout for frame
rings used to be to clamp these on tables as shown in Fig. 2, which occupied
considerable floor space. The line has now been revised, using a vertical
wheel board as illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4, which accommodates all the
work shown in the previous photograph.
CHAPTER 4 - CONVEYORS
28-4*ol Conveyors were one of the production matters which the Mission were
particularly asked to investigate and express a definite opinion upon,
because there has been so much contradictory evidence regarding the conveyor
systems as applied to aircraft production. Conveyor systems have been
widely used during the last 25 years in the American and to a lesser extent
in our own automobile industry, and although they have been tried in aircraft
factories in this country, they have not so far been a real success, part-
ly because they do not fall in line with our general outlook on aircraft
production and partly because there are few factories in this country whose
output is really big enough to make them worth while.
Conveyors of one sort or another were in general use in practically
all factories visited; the smaller types of conveyor were definitely
successful, and the general trend was to increase their use wherever possible.
It is understood that some successful applications have recently been made
in this countiy and an extension of the scheme is recommended.
Referring specifically to large conveyors for wing assembly, final
assembly, etc., the Mission saw many systems installed in the American air-
craft factories, and large sums of money have been spent on them. Very
few of them were working to capacity and the ambitious final assembly con-
veyor systems, at such places as the Curtiss Wright St. Louis plant and the
Ford Willow Run plant, could reasonably be criticised as being white
elephants, as they are to-day because they are not working.
It must however be appreciated that the American aircraft industry is
still growing rapidly. As Mr. T.P.Wright expressed it, continuously moving
conveyors for complete aircraft will never pay unless output reaches not
less than 200 per month of large four engined bombers and 300 per month of
fighters. Not many of the American aircraft firms have arrived at this
stage yet, but they are reaching it rapidly, and the Mission are of the opin-
ion that a visit to the United States in six months* time will give a con-
siderably changed picture as regards the efficiency and value of these
conveyors.
At this stage of the war with the present British output, which is
roughly stabilised, it is not considered advisable to recommend automatic
mechanically operated conveyors for final assembly, or even for large com-
ponents such as wings, but undoubtedly the smaller types of conveyor such as
that illustrated below in the Curtiss Wright plant should be encouraged. The
extended use of Morris rolls would also be well worth while in saving labour.
Fig*s shows a typical application of Morris rolls in the Curtiss Parts
Plant for handling atack routing and drilling blanks.
Stores Delivery Conveyors consisting of baskets and trays suspended from
an elevated monorail were used to deliver details and kit marshalled groups
in a number of factories. In some cases they were not considered to be
filled sufficiently to merit their initial cost of upkeep, but they were
working extremely efficiently at Bells of Buffalo.
Here each tray, capable of carrying 200 lbs.,was loaded in the Stores


Fig. 2.
Old
method.
Figs. 3 and. 4.
New method
of clamping
frame rings.


and the indicator set for the correct unloading station. As the tray
approached its destination, the indicator automatically tripped a light and
hell device, which gave the group operators at that station ample warning
that this particular delivery was for them. The track speed was 35 ft.
per minute, the minimum radius at corners of the buildings were 3 ft. and
the station dips to floor level were 20 ft. at group stations and 120 ft.
at the main stores. Pig. 6 shows the track at one of the stations; fig. 7
is a general view of the conveyor.
Belt conveyors were in general use, and a considerable number were
working extremely well and effecting a saving in labour and floor space,
comparable with the best achieved by the few examples in this Country.
In cases where there were shortages and insufficient planning of the sequence
of operations to obtain a balanced cycle, the working was not efficient.
Pig. 8 shows the original layout of some sub-assembly benches in the
Curtiss plant, and figures 9 and 10 show the conveyor which has superseded
itj and a general view at one station showing the complete equipment at the
disposal of the operator. Inspection was invariably carried out at one or
more stations along these lines and finally at the end. Kits of parts for
the station operation were either loaded down the conveyor at set times, or
delivered by kit trays to the operator in the normal manner.
It is considered that belt conveyors can with advantage be used for many
sub-assemblies and assemblies in factories in this country, providing there
is a straight run, ample backing of parts, and time study of the operations
shows that a balanced cycle can be maintained.
There were many variants of the intermittently moving assembly conveyor,
although in almost every case we were assured these were about to move
continuously. Until the movement is continuous, this type has little ad-
vantage over the manually shifted line and does not merit the expensive in-
stallation, except in rare cases of very heavy units.
The only factory where we saw continuously moving assembly conveyors
working effectively was at Bell Aircraft of Buffalo, building the Airacobra
Fighter. It was .felt that this was not due to any unusual features of
the conveyors themselve§, but because they had a balanced sequence of
operations and had overcome the shortages that prevented the other lines
moving smoothly. They had a backing of at least 30 days behind the line,
and made up their kits or groups for each station 7 days before they were
required, issuing these complete for each stage for each aircraft.
The latest development in this factory covers the delivery of kits for
complete stage operations, by means of the stores delivery conveyor already
mentioned, to men stationed in the rafters. These elevated group stores men
will lower the kits alongside the assembly lines as the aircraft pass from
one station to the next, thus creating a shop completely devoid of labour
movement.
The Mission were particularly impressed by the overall picture of the
conveyored lines at this factory and consider these developments should be
carefully watched, as this combination of overhead kit delivery and contin-
uously moving line may well prove the ideal assembly line arrangement.
The following photographs and details are typical of current American
conveyor practice. Pigs. 11 and 12 show the Bell Main Assembly and Wing
Assembly lines which move at 25 ft. per hour. This was generally agreed
the optimum speedy with 35 ft. per hour the maximum permissible. Pigs. 13
and 14 show stations on these lines. Pig. 15 A and B shows the Bell con-
veyor for wing drilling and painting.
The simplest form of track was that used on the manually operated
Mustang line and consisted of an angle attached to the floor with slotted
guideplates at front and rear of the trollies as Pig.l6. This means of
keeping the trollies in line was also used where the trollies were
connected by tow bars and moved by a short chain conveyor at the end station.


Fig.
5.
Fig. 6.
Fig. 7.


Figs. 8 and 9.
Sub—assembly
benches and
conveyor super-
seding them.
Fig.10.


Figs. 11 and 12. Bell assembly lines.


Figs. 13
and 14.
Stations
on Bell
assembly
lines.


FIG. 15 A.
BELL CONVEYOR FOR WING
DRILLING AND PAINTING


FIG.15B. BELL CONVEYOR FOR WING DRILLING & PAINTING


Fig. 16.
The angle track with grooved trolly wheels shown in Pig. 17 is
preferable to the usual channel type which is easily stopped by bolts etc.
being dropped in them. The angle shown is 1-y" x and the diameter of
the wheel is 10”. Junction lines and cross over are shown in Pigs. 18
and and one of the large trollies which are moved manually on these
tracks at Gurtiss Wright in Pig.2o.
Continuous chain conveyors were all of the type shown in Pig. 21. A
variable rheostat enables the line to be speeded up as the operators
become more proficient.
CHAPTER 5 - DROP HAMMER.
28-5»01 The American aircraft industry was
the first to develop the drop hammer
technique of sheet metal manipula-
tion. This method was found to be
ideally suited to production of a
limited number of aircraft and proved
to be the salvation of the industry
in the early days of expansion.
.Then rapid expansion started,
the industry based its production
on the methods already well-known
to its, with the result that a
large number of drop-hammers were
installed in all the important
factories. With the cessation of
the manufacture of non-essentials,
production engineers from other
spheres entered the field of air-
craft production, bringing with
them the automobile production
technique, including the mechanical
press.
Fig. 17. Angle track.


Figs. 18 and 19. Details of angle track.


Fig. 20. Track and trollies at Curtiss.
Fig. 21. Chain conveyor drive.


Thus the use of the mechanical press, together with soft dies of
Kirksite or zinc alloy, is now playing a greater part in the
fabrication of sheet metal and is rapidly supplanting the use of the
drop hammer in large factories, except for experimental work and for
the first few batches to get a new type into production*
Experience has shown that the mechanical press, with soft dies,
provides surprising flexibility for modifications, and much decreased
production time, while it can be worked by female labour* In certain
cases it may be necessary to re-design components which were originally
designed for production on drop hammers only*
CHAPTER 6 - RUBBER DIE PRESS.
28-6*ol The rubber die technique in America has developed on similar lines to
the British method, the biggest advance being in the design of the
hydraulic presses. Very great attention has been paid to loading
facilities in order to make the best possible use of the machines and
Fig* 22 indicates the three most popular methods used©
Designers in many cases have borne in mind the rubber die technique;
sharp curves have been avoided where possible and adequate slots provided*
In order to gather material on a sharp curve, the puckers ( Fig. 23) are
carefully controlled and positioned between rivet holes*
F IG 22
The majority of presses have been
designed to give a platen pressure of
•75 tons per sq. inch and use a
softer rubber die than is normally
employed in this country, where
pressures of 1.5 tons are more gener-
ally used*
Tools are generally made of Kirk-
site or similar zinc alloys, except for
thin forms,when the die is cut from
boiler plate.
Fig 23


It was noted that press finishing was invariably carried out by hand
or by a re-strike with lead slugs, the use of shrinkers being very limited.
Blanking and shearing have been discontinued due to excessive rubber pad
wear and to inferior products, the blanks normally being prepared either on
a punch press or on fixed head and radial arm routers.
CHAPTER 7 - MECHANICAL PRESS.
28-7.01 A larger proportion of double acting presses are employed than in this
country. Die design is similar to 3ritish practice, with the exception
that a greater proportion of soft dies, made of bakelite, Kirksite or
Masonite are used. Many firms are converting their existing drop hammer
dies by tte addition of a blank holder for use on the mechanical press,
thereby increasing their production.
Less pains are taken than in Britain to safeguard the operations by
way of automatic guards etc.
CHAPTER 8 - STRETCHER.
2BrB*ol The stretching technique employed in America is similar to British
practice but has been carried further; the machines used are of the
3rco variety, employing dies of Elrksite or similar zinc (Fig.2if)
One new type of stretcher has been developed by the Sheridan Company
for end stretching panels such as seaplane float bottoms, but the
application is limited. Further development of stretchers is being
carried out.
CHAPTER 9 - SPECIAL TOOLS.
23-9®ol Use of Plastics* The Vega Corporation of America are developing the use
of plastics for drop hammer tools, punch press tools, drill jigs, routing
fixtures, etc. and have laid claims that much tool making time is saved.
Investigations, however, did not appear to bear out these claims for, in
addition to the difficulties experienced in the contraction and warping of
the plastic tools, they were veiy susceptible to damage.
No premature introduction of this technique is recommended in this
country, but it is felt that research on these lines may prove beneficial.
23-9® 02 Cerromatrix Shims. An ingenious application of a low melting point
alloy, Cerromatrix, has been found by the Douglas Corporation for the
final lining of location points on assembly jigs. It has previously been
the practice to machine the jig structure and the location points, set in
position, and use solid shims to fix the desired location.
Fig.2s indicates the Cerromatrix method used. The surfaces of both
jig, structure and location points are unmachined,location points being
positioned by means of packing screws.
When the desired location has been achieved, three sides of the
apertures are filled with clay, into which Cerromatrix is poured, thus
providing a permanent solid shim. A large amount of tool making time has
been saved by this method.
28-9.03 Suction Pads. Fig. 26 is self-explanatory. This tool is used for the
removal of blanks from punch presses where the production quantity does not
warrant the use of pneumatic ejectors. The large editions of this tool are
also useful for moving machined stock and are extensively used in America.


FIG. 24. “ERCO” 300 TON STRETCH PRESS


Fig. 27.
28-9* 04 Rubber Die Tool for Press Brakes.
The tool illustrated in Fig. 27
makes use of a rubber die and an
interchangeable top blade. The
principle of this process is
identical with that of normal
rubber die technique©
28-9* 05 Framing of Lightening Holes©
The tool illustrated in Fig.2B
has been designed for the speedy
frazing of both sides of the
lightening hole at one applica-
tion.
28-9*06 Magnetic Die Sets. In order
to use economical thin gauge
blanking tools, many presses in
America have been equipped with
magnetic die sets on the bolster
and platen. Whilst this method
is not recommended for high
production, it has a certain
application where simple tem-
porary blanking or raising tools
are used.
Fig. 28.
28-9*07 Miscellaneous* Figs* 29 and 30 show two special tools and are self-
explanatory*


Fig. 29. Tube flaring machine.
Fig. JO. Methods of burring.
CHAPTER 10 - FARNUM ROLLS.
28-1 0. 01 This rolling machine, deve-
loped exclusively for the use
of the aircraft industry in
-America, has great applica-
tion for leading edges of flings*
control surfaces, etc., and is
different from the normal type
of three roll machine in that
small diameter rolls are used,
enabling radii of small dimen-
sions to be formed, support
being given by backing rolls.
Instant adjustment is provided
by electric control so that the
curvature of parts can be
continuously varied* See Fig. 31.
Fig. 31. Farnum rolls.


Fig. 32A.
CHAPTER 11 - RIVET SORTING.
28-11.01 The sorting of shop sweepings in America is carried out regionally* In
every large aircraft manufacturing centre, small factories have been set
up to accommodate the sorting of all the aircraft manufacturers in the
area and numerous ingenious machines have been designed, sketches of
which are shown in Figs. 32 A to F*
It is considered desirable that a suitable scheme be introduced in
this country, where, at present, there is a large wastage of labour
employed in manual sorting. In order to differentiate between the
sweepings of each firm, arrangements are made whereby the machines only
sort one firm* s sweepings at a time, the result being that the sorted'
rivets remain separated* Thus the sweepings of Firm "A” are sorted on
Monday and Tuesday, n ß n on v/e dries day and Thursday and so on*


Fig. 32B.
Fig. 32C.


Fig.
32D.
32E.


Fig. 32F.


CHAPTER 12 - FINISHING- AND PAINTING.
28-12*01 The finish of American aircraft types was on the whole very good*
It has been claimed that, due to more efficient tooling of American
manufacturers, a better finish is obtainable*
Observation confirmed the view that American aircraft are better
finished than their English counterparts; it was found that the better
finish was due to:-
(1) American production methods, which are more nearly in line with
automobile practice, ensure a more consistently good finish*
(2) The sheet stock obtained from the manufacturers is in better
condition than can be obtained in this country, due to the
fact that our sheet stock manufacturers still roller level
sheets after treatment whereas in America they are stretched.
(3) In general the designers of American aircraft make use of a
comparatively light internal structure with a heavy skin.
This permits machine countersinking in place of punch
countersinking, and due to a lesser degree of expansion
through riveting, a much better finish is obtained. Cowlings
in particular proved this point, where in addition it has
been found necessary to have the cowling fasteners more
closely spaced.
(if.) Greater care is taken over the fit of panels, doors etc., and
in general more closely pitched fasteners are used.
In a considerable number of plants, parts conveyors were used
extensively for chromate and primer coats.
Details were loaded in racks or hung on hooks and conveyed through a
dip bath or water extraction booth, where they were sprayed in the normal
manner. The conveyor then carried them through a drying chamber, heated
by either batteries of infra red lamps or hot air, and finally to the
unloading station. The layout of these departments was good and resulted
in very little handling of parts.
The American practice is to apply stopping and special surfacing
only on the wings from the leading edge to 40$ of the chord, whereas
on the latest British fighter, it is applied to the entire aircraft;
it is considered that the British process involves several times the man
hours of the American technique.
We were assured that exhaustive flight tests had proved that the
special smooth surfacing back to 40$ of the wing had shown a definite
increase of 11 m.p.h. on the top speed of one fighter, but that
increased application of special surfacing progressively up to the
entire aircraft had failed to produce any further appreciable advantage.
In view of the man hours involved, we would urge that similar tests be
carried out on our aircraft and that special surfacing be discontinued
where it does not show definite advantage.
The remainder of this American fighter was degreased and sprayed with
one coat of synthetic enamel to Spec. 14109. This again shows considerable
time saving over our standard D.T.D. 308, 314 and 517 finishes.
We would therefore suggest that concurrently with the above flight
tests, service reports be obtained, showing how these American finishes
stand up to operational requirements compared with our own, with a view to
their adoption in cases where they show to general advantage.
The rubbing down involved in the special surfacing mentioned above
has proved a decided bottleneck in British production, since no suitable


mechanical means are available and large numbers of workers are employed
to rub down by hand.
We found that Canadian and certain American firms carry out this
work in considerably less time by means of the Sundstrand pneumatic
reciprocating Sanding and Rubbing machine. This Sander has many applications,
is easily operated and can be used wet or dry. Two of these,
with all attachments, have been ordered and will be in England shortly.
It is suggested that further quantities be ordered immediately.
Infra red heat was used for drying special surfacing compounds and
finished components, but it was felt that this has not advanced beyond the
recent developments in some British firms.
CHAPTER 13 - EXTRUSION MANIPULATION
28-13.01 Great ingenuity has been displayed on the development of machines for
the manipulation of extrusions, and the use of such machines is more
nearly universal in America than it is in this country, where many still
rely on the older free roll bending method. The two main methods used are
stretching and ironing as in Pig,33*
The general trend of design on
certain new types, such as the 8.29,
A. 26 and P,51, is for the increased
use of extrusions on wing and fuselage
stringers and frames. In some new
machines such as the B. 32 however,
very few extrusions were used.
The supply of extrusions is
becoming a bottleneck in the
expanded programme for existing
types, but except in isolated
instances, no serious effort.was
observed to change to rolled sections
in the manner that this problem was
Fig. 33.
tackled in this country some years ago.
It is recommended that, in the event of any American aircraft being
considered for production in this country, the supply of extrusions and
the ability to manipulate them should be considered of paramount
importance, as the substitution of rolled sections etc. should be
essentially the responsibility of the American parent firm, since it may
involve redesign and alterations to drawings, master layouts and even
equipment.
CHAPTER 14 - PIPE BENDING
233-14*01 With the exception of the Blackburn method of pipe bending, little
advance has been made in this country.
In America, development has followed the line of universal pipe
bending machines, embodying the well known principles shown in Pigs,
34 and 35.
The machines developed are hand and power driven type, and
embody stops and graduation plates, enabling the exact duplication
of bends. This process is not only quicker and ensures the production
of uniform results, but dispenses with any form of filling.
Development is proceeding on the lines of a completely automatic
machine, working from master templates. The Disney films brought back
by the Mission illustrate this principle clearly.


FIG. 34
PARKER PIPE BENDER


Fig. 35. Pipe bender details.
CHAPTER 15 - GLENN MARTIN SKIN STRETCHING- PROCESS
28-15*01 This process, indicated in diagrammatic form in Fig. 36, was
developed to improve further the finish of stressed skin aircraft. The
rig consists of chrcaaolox strip heaters suitably arranged for particular
wing panels which provide a temperature of some 30° to 70°F above room
temperature. The process is as follows:-
An untrimmed skin is
assembled to the wing structure
and tightly clamped into
position. The heating rig is
then applied and the temperature
raised to the desired point.
With the rig in position, the
boundary holes are drilled,
countersunk and riveted and the
skin trimmed. The rig is then
removed, and as the skin and the
s tincture are allowed to cool
the resultant contraction
removes all pants and looseness
in the skin. When room
temperature has been reached,
the final drilling, counter-
sinking and riveting takes
place.
Fig. 36.
The differential in temperature created between the skin and the
structure ensures tight skins regardless of the temperature to which
the aircraft is subsequently subjected.


This method is generally only suitable for wing panels which have
no doors er cutouts, such breaks in the surface area giving rise to
unequal contractions. It is thought that, vdth the introduction of the
laminar flow wing, development in this country should proceed on the
lines of the technique being developed by Glenn Martin.
CHAPTER 16 - PLASTER MOULDS FOR LIGHT ALLOY CASTING-
2B-16.01 Although a certain amount of research in this connection has "been
done in this country, the American aircraft industry has gone further
and found that, for speedy initial production, valuable tool work can be
saved by employing this casting technique. The resultant castings are
of equal finish to gravity die castings and the process permits very
intricate coring. It was not possible to obtain details of the plaster
used, but it is thought that sufficient knowledge exists in the
specialist firms in this country to undertake this form of work.
It is urged that Light Alloy Control interest themselves in this
technique, which it is felt might avoid many bottlenecks which at
present exist.
CHAPTER 17 - POWDER METALLURGY
28-l7*ol The original development of this process by the Chrysler Corporation
was in the direction of self-lubricating bushes and carbide cutting
tools, the former being made in the various bronze bearing alloys.
Recent research has shown the ability to produce components in ferrous
materials, and the production of a large amount of machine guns and
hydraulic pump parts has already commenced. This process, although in
its early stages of development, shows great promise, and it is
recommended that research be continued in this country with a view to
its wider application in the aircraft and accessory industries.
Another application is that of fuel filters made entirely of
powdered metal. It is claimed that the resulting element has filtering
properties equal to a gauze of 180 mesh and gives less back pressure.
CHAPTER 18 - RIVETING
28-18.01 Plush riveting of skin surfaces was carried out "by drill and
countersinking, pre-dimpling or automatic machine riveting.
Drill countersinking was carried out in the normal manner with
power drills fitted with an adjustable stop to control the depth of
countersink. (Pig. 37) • This method did not, however, appear to be
used on sheets thinner than .051" whereas it is common practice in
England down to .028”.
Pre-dimpling was in some cases carried in situ by a special head in
the rivet gun and suitable holding up dolly. Other firms broke down the
work after drilling and dimpling both skin and former separately by
machine, while in seme cases, only the formers were dimpled by this
machine and they relied on the heading up of the rivet to pull the
thin skin into the dimple.
Experiments appear to have gone ahead simultaneously in both Countries
to make it impossible for unskilled labour to damage the akin when heading
flush rivets. It is interesting to note that the results are basically
similar, in that both have developed a riveting set with a large
slightly convex face that is able to swivel and take up a natural angle
when not held normal to the skin surface. Not only is skin dajpage
and quilting minimised, but riveting time is speeded up. Pig.3B shows
■typical examples of these sets as used in America, and their use is
advocated on all flush hand riveting.


A careful study was made of
the new Erco machine 'which combines
the operations of punching and
countersinking the hole and
automatically feeding and heading
the rivet without moving the
work until all operations are
complete. The first stroke of
the driving plunger carries the
punching die to the work, punches
the hole and dimples it, while
the second stroke places the
rivet in the work and heads it.
Each stroke of the driving
plunger is controlled by an
individual remote controlled
foot operated air valve, and
this also makes possible the
selection of either punching
holes only on feeding, and
heading rivets only in holes
already established. The spring
stripper which gave trouble
on early Erco machines in this
country has been replaced by an
air pressure type, which can
be varied from 0 to 50 lbs. to
suit the thickness of metal being
punched.
One of the Mission used this
machine for some half an hour and
worked up to a speed of 14 rivets
per minute, while skilled operators
Fig. 37.
were exceeding 25 on straightforward runs.
F IG 38
While this machine and the 8.1. P machines already extensively used
in this country can be applied with advantage to current production in
both countries, it must be pointed out that neither will be able to cope
with the thick skins now prevalent in the latest American designs, and
new riveters must therefore be designed.
Examples of extremely cheap and effective jigs to locate the stripper
relative to the work were noted in masonite and metal. Pigs. 59> 40 and
41 show a view of the Erco riveter and typical jigs.
It has been proved in both countries that automatic rivet machines
show at least saving in man hours over drilling countersinking or
pre-dimpling and advantage should be taken of this on existing types
where design considerations permit, and new designs should be carefully
studied to enable it to be used to the fullest extent.


Fig. 39.
Erco riveter.
Fig. 40.
Fig. 41.


A number of films made their own rivets by the cold head-up method and
although no direct check was taken, they appeared to be superior to the
normal rivets in use in this Country.
CHAPTER 19 - SPOT WELDING
28-19.01 At present spot welding is generally confined to secondary structures
with one or two exceptions, the most notable being the Lockheed Constellation
in which stringers and ribs have been spot welded#
In order to overcame any lack of confidence in the weld, it has been
found necessary to appoint spot welding Engineers, solely responsible for
electrode design, maintenance of machines, cleaning processes, inspection,
collaboration on aircraft design and periodic testing of samples# This
practice has now largely overcome the initial prejudice. Aircraft
designers now appreciate the need for the consideration of spot welding in
the project design stage; recent aircraft bear witness to this trend of
thought &n& a considerable extension of the use of spot welding for primary
structures is to be expected#
The spot welding machines generally used in America are of the
condenser discharge type, certain special machines having been designed for
the high production multiple welding of ammunition boxes and similar
components# Experiments have been carried out with refrigerated tips,
but no conclusive evidence could be obtained as to their efficacy, the
opinions of many firms being at variance#
The rotary electrode type of spot welder has been developed for spot
welding of long seams, stringers, etc. and is of particular importance"
for the production of aircraft of which the construction consists of long
panels, and for wings of the laminar flow type, where a superfine finish
is required*
The machine is of similar design to the orthodox type, but carries
two cooled rotary electrodes, continuously revolving, in place of the two
normally fixed electrodes* This pemits the automatic feeding of work, the
adjustment of speed of rotation and discharge regulating the pitch of the
welds*
The cleaning of the electrodes can be carried out concurrently with
welding by means of revolving wire brushes. A development of this machine
carries two trailing pressure rollers for relieving the contraction stresses
surrounding each weld by work hardening the surrounding material.
Probably the most important
operation in spot welding is that
of cleaning the material, and a
great deal of development work has
been carried out in America, the
latest process being that of
phosphoric acidetch which pemits
the cleaning of sub-assemblies
without dismantling#
Fig*42 is a sketch of the
Rotary Electrode Spot Welding
principle#
Fig. 42.
CHAPTER 20 - FLASH WELDING- OF TOTOERCARRIAG-ES AMD ENGINE MOUNTINGS
28“2®#01 At the moment, undercarriages in England are largely made from very
heavy forgings. This, in turn, demands an excessive amount of machining.
For example, the reduction in the weight of a Spitfire oleo from the
forging to the finished part is in the order of 83 lbs#


It is the American practice to manufacture oleo legs and under-
carriage parts from small forgings and steel tube, which are individually
rough machined, then projection or flash-welded, after finishing
operations are carried out. As a rule, this occupies approximately
s(s of the man hours used in the normal British procedure, and as
machine capacity is a bottleneck in this country the introduction of
this method is of paramount importance.
This also, in some measure, is true of engine mountings,, although
in some cases attempts have been made to employ arc-welding. In this
country, however, this is not entirely satisfactory as flash welding
can be much more effectively controlled.
With regard to undercarriages, attempts have been made here to
incorporate the welded type but, due to the inability to obtain material
of the correct specification, these efforts have proved abortive.
It is strongly recommended, therefore, that material, similar to
the 5. A.E.43-40 should be put into production immediately, and under-
carriages redesigned where practicable to take advantage of the welding
technique.
CHAPTER 21 - HELIARC WELDING
28-21 ,01 This process, developed by the Northrop Corporation, primarily for
use with magnesium, has been found to have a much wider application.
Not only is the process much simpler than oxy-acetylene welding, but due
to the gas curtain surrounding the weld, no flux is required, thereby
obviating one of the causes of corrosion. The process is similar to
that of atomic hydrogen welding, developed by Metro-Vickers Ltd. in this
countiy, the main difference being that, instead of striking the arc
between two tungsten electrodes shrouded by hydrogen gas, the arc is
struck between a single tungsten electrode and the object being welded,
the electrode being shrouded by helium, argon or a similar inert gas.
With the expansion of the
production of magnesium alloys,
it is desirable that development
work in this countiy follow the
lines of that being carried out in
America, and to this end it is
suggested that sample torches and
equipment be obtained from
America for use by the British
aircraft industiy. Fig. 43
shows a diagrammatic sketch of
a torch.
Fig. 43.
CHAPTER 22 - CYCLE WELD
28-22.01 This process, developed by the Chrysler Corporation,is not welding,
in so far as it is not a fusion of metals, but a bonding process, using
what appears to be a form of thermo setting plastic, the details of
which have remained a secret. When fully developed, cycleweld will
provide a very rapid production method for such components as flaps,
wing panels, etc,, and a finish of a high order can be obtained.
A start has been made in America on floors, flaps and simple open
type components, which are already in full production. The process
is de sc Abed fully in Section 3, but the following is a summary of the
main points as they affect production:-
The joining centres are first degreased and the bonding medium
sprayed, brushed or applied as a paint.


The possibilities of
this process are considered
very great, and it is urged that
experimental -work be undertaken
in this country. It should be
pointed out, however, that
components as at present
designed are generally
unsuitable for bonding by the
cycleweld process, it being
necessary to consider this
technique in the early design
stages.
Fig.4k shows a sketch of
a typical bonding and curing
unit.
The mating parts are then placed in a rig, consisting of rigid
formers and a deformable thin steel tube -which, when filled with
heated oil at a temperature of 320°P and a pressure of 200 lbs,
per sq.inch, provide the necessary characteristics for bonding
and curing, this taking some 15 minutes.
Fig. 44. Cycle weld bonding and
curing unit.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




