

I THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL
.... and DISTRICT ....
Introducing ULTIMA, LAKE BOGA, NYAH, etc.
A Great WHEAT, WOOL
and DAIRYING CENTRE
THE HEART OF
IRRIGATION SETTLEMENT
■ - '!• 1 ' 1 -- ■ =1
Wilke, Mitchell & Co., Printers, 7 Flinders Court, Melbourne.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
My Motto for 1912: “I lead, follow who carT
1. An exterior view,
from Campbell St., of
Mr. Barwick’s store.
To come to a town unknown, practically friend-
less, without any visible prospects of succeeding in
life, and yet within four years of that time to
engage in business on his own account, with
practically no capital except an unlimited overdraft
on the “ Bank of Perseverance and Ambition,”
sounds like a page of romantic impudence from the
book of an American writer.
And yet this is exactly the position that
T. H. BARWICK
stood in nine years ago, when, together with Mr.
T. Growl, he started the firm of Barwick and Crowl
in Campbell-street, Swan Hill.
Thirteen years ago he landed in Swan Hill as
a salesman for Staley and Connell. Mr. Barwick kept
then, as now, his weather eye open, and four years
2. An exterior view
of Mr. Barwick’s com-
modious stables.
Martin, photo.
later, noticing business premises on a good site ii
the main street of Swan Hill, where several firms
were essaying to make a do of it and failing each
time, thought he would see what dogged per-
severance and hard graft would do, and so, in con-
junction with a partner, originated his present
STOREKEEPING BUSINESS.
As they had practically no capital, it was looked
upon as “ colossal cheek ” and “ amazing presump-
tion ” for this young firm to open as they did.
In spite of criticism, “ Dick ” Barwick cheerily
kept on his way, steadily increasing his turnover
and extending his business, until to-day, nine years
afterwards, he is one of the leading storekeepers
in the Swan Hill district.
3. Interior view of one side ol this large and prosperous stor


THE PROGRESS OF SWAft HILL AND DISTRICT.
His stock is varied and useful, comprising many
departments, viz., grocery, drapery, boots, iron-
mongery, saddlery, produce, crockery, etc., etc., etc.
In fact, it is in the etceteras that “Dick” Barwick
makes a speciality. Whatever you want he stocks,
or will get it for you if procurable at all in the
Commonwealth-—it will be fulfilled, and that with
the promptest despatch possible.
The accompanying views of his main premises
give nothing like an adequate idea of the ramifica-
tions of his ever-increasing and extending business,
1. Interior view of
portion of the chaff
store, where thousands
upon thousands of bags
of chaff, pollard, bran
oats, etc., are stored.
and his staff of courteous assistants seem imbued
with their employer’s zeal for attention and civility
to all customers. His
HAY, CORN AND PRODUCE DEPARTMENT
is the largest business of its kind north of the
Divide, and the produce warehouse is the most
commodious outside Melbourne, being 150 ft. x
80 ft., and is well equipped with every appliance
for doing successfully the immense business in this
department. His trade in produce of all kinds
probably totals more than his competitors in the
northern province altogether. We used the word
“ colossal ” in a different sense at the commence-
ment of this article; yet “colossal” is the correct
word in regard to Dick Barwick's operations in
the produce business.
Of a genial and homely disposition, a kindly
friend, with a keen interest in all matters of local
import, is it any wonder that
DICK THE SPORT
(as he is respectfully called by the manhood of
the community), is popular and well liked? His,
2. Exterior View of
this modern store.
3. The commodious
stables,! where 2 many
horses are stalled.
cheery smile and happy-go-lucky style are welcome
anywhere, and the many kindly actions proclaim
him of a humane and sympathetic disposition.
Always of the mind “to go one better than
others,” he has been waiting patiently to see what
others are doing to their shop-fronts, and it is
understoood that when “ Dick ” is ready he in-
tends to alter his shop-front in the most up-to-date
fashion, with towering glass facades and mirrored
windows, so that the familiar appearance will be
entirely changed, and the public then will under-
stand his motto —“I lead; follow who can.”


STALEY & CONNELL, General Merchants & Importers
One of the Best Equipped, Most Modern and Largest Stores in Provincial Victoria.
1. An interior bird's eye view of this fine store.
3. These bulk stores are quite the largest in the
north.
5. One of the handsome show cases.
R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
2. The grocery department.
4. A glimpse at the millinery department (a spe-
ciality at Staley and Connell’s).
6. The drapery department—a department Staley
and Connell are unbeatable in.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
H. GERRAND,
CAMPBELL. STREET, SWAN HILL.
Agencies.—Massey-Harris Farm Machinery and Cycles. John Darling and Son, Grain Buyers.
South British Fire Insurance Co. Mt. Lyell Manures: Large stock on hand.
3 and 4. View showing portion of the cycle depot
and machinery store, where thousands of parts are
stocked.
1 and 2. Exterior and interior of Mr. W. H. Ger
rand’s handsome modern premises.
LEADING LINES OBTAINABLE AT GERRAND’S
All parts of Massey machinery stocked. Massey
Cycles and other serviceable machines. Agent for
“ Ford ” and “ Russell ” motor cars. Splendid
range of Gramophones, Zonophones, Phonographs.
Thousands of finest Records to select from.
Binder Twine, Corn Sacks, every description of
Oils, best quality assortment of Saddlery.
Agent Sutton’s. The renowned “ Schiedmayer ”
and “ Cable ” Pianos obtainable at Gerrand’s.
Musical Instruments and Music of every kind.
All classes Sporting Goods. Pleasing selection of
Prams and Go-Carts. Guns and Ammunition. Sin-
ger’s Sewing Machines. “ Crown ” and “ Princess ”
Separators. Churns. Oil Stoves and One-fire
Stoves. Wringing and Washing Machines (all
household requisites). Monarch Typewriters. Fish-
ing Tackle.
Repairs to Cycles carried out promptly. All ac-
cessories in stock.
Agents Blackstone and New Way Oil Engines.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
i SWANiiHILL DENTISTRY PARLORS
Conducted by Mr. F. WHITTAKER (Recorded by the Dental Board of Victoria),
CAMPBELL STREET, SWAN HILL.
R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
Mr. F. Whittaker, who has so successfully con-
ducted “ The Swan Hill Dentistry Parlors ” during
the past four years, has undoubtedly worked up
one of the largest, most influential dentistry prac-
tices in the northern provinces of Victoria. He
settled in Swan Hill with a splendid reputation,
and his cleverness, adaptability, courtesy and great
skill have entitled him to not only well uphold
that reputation, but considerably add to it. Mr.
Whittaker has been right through every branch
of his profession, and practically became appren-
ticed to a leading firm when but a boy. Thus he
slowly but surely mounted the ladder of success
rung by rung, until to-day, after 12 years’ solid
study and work, he stands right at the top of his
Mr. WHITTAKER
... visits ...
ULTIMA
(at Rogers’ Hotel)
EVERY
SALE DAY.
profession, and it is questionable if one more skilful
than Mr. Whittaker could be found in the dentistry
profession right throughout Victoria. His parlors
in Campbell-street, Swan Hill, are beautifully fitted
up with reception parlor, waiting room, private
office and modern, splendidly-lighted surgery,
superbly fitted with every modern instrument
necessary in the profession. All classes of bridge,
crown work, etc., are carried out promptly; also
fillings and absolutely painless dentistry, local
anaesthetics being used. The public can feel assured
in entrusting their work to Mr. Whittaker that they
will receive the greatest modicum of satisfaction
both in quality and price. Advice is given with
pleasure. Correspondence promptly attended to.
Mr. WHITTAKER
... visits ...
PYRAMID
(at Kelly’s Hotel)
every alternate
Monday & Thursday.


Mr. THOMAS PHYLAND : : : Progressive Farmer and Contractor.
One of the oldest residents of the Swan Hill dis-
trict is Mr. Thomas Phyland, who some 20 years ago
took up land 25 miles from Swan Hill, on the New
South Wales side. He battled hard through the
drought years, and, not finding great success in tann-
ing, commenced contracting work. He sank the first
large tank that was financed by the Castle Bonington
Shire 18 years ago; it was known as the 19-mile tank.
Since that time Mr. Phyland continued to increase
secured 150 acres of irrigable Murray Flats land, and
to-day their farm is quite one of the finest, best im-
proved and most valuable properties in the district.
A comfortable modern homestead has been erected,
and various improvements made, making the property
one of the district show places, and clearly and forcibly
demonstrating what the Murray Flats land is capable
of producing when worked systematically with brains,
muscle and energy.
1. Forty-acre paddock, luxuriant lucerne and dairy cows. 2. The comfortable homestead. 3 and
4. Two of Mr. Phyland’s teams at work. 5. Cattle grazing on a magnificent 40-acre crop of millet.
6. Mr. Phyland and his favourite buggy horse.
his equipment for carrying out the larger class of con-
tracts, making a special feature of tank sinking, and
is now the recognised leading, largest and most suc-
cessful contractor, possessing the finest plant in Nor-
thern Victoria. Vlr. Phyland, however, ' has always
stuck to the land as well, and, finding dry farming
was not very payable, in 1906 decided to purchase 900
acres of Murray Flats land outside the irrigation area.
111-fortune, in the shape of dry seasons, followed him,
however, and once more he purchased land in New
South Wales. “ Experientia docet ” can be applied
to Mr. Phyland aptly, and eventually he and his son
Mr. Phyland, who has erected a handsome private
residence in Swan Hill, goes in extensively for dairy-
ing, and possesses one of the best bred and most even
herds of dairy cows in the district. As previously
mentioned, he is the recognised largest contractor
in the north. All the big dams and lengthy irrigation
channels between Balranald', Wentworth, Hay, etc.,
have been carried out by Mr. Phyland. At the present
time his plant is engaged on a big work 300 miles from
Swan Hill, laying 18 miles of channelling from the
Darling River to supply settlers in the Lake Vic-
toria district.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
1. The pumping plant which supplies the irriga
tion area in Swan Hill district.
2. Mr. P. A. Kelly’s handsome private residence,
Swan Hill.
3. Miniature view, showing wharf and Murray
Flats at Swan Hill.
4. Miniature view of Swan Hill Hospital taken
some 20 years ago.
5. Miniature views of Swan Hill.
6. Snapshot taken of Mr. W. Kimberley, J.P.,
driving his handsome pair of horses.
7. Members Church of England Tennis Club
Swan Hill.
8. Swan Hill is a great stock sale sentre. This
snapshot shows the head of a mob of sheep number-
ing 10,000;, brought in by the big stock dealers,
Messrs. Tom Standen and Abe Neill, for disposal
at Messrs. Edward Trenchard and Co.’s record
sheep sale held recently, when some 26,000 sheep
were yarded.
Mr. T. Phyland is noted as being the largest contractor in the north. This view depicts a portion of
his “contract” plant returning to Swan Hill from New South Wales, having finished a six months’ contract
for the Wahool Shire 'Council.


ITS EARLY HISTORY.
WAN HILL is undoubtedly one of
the oldest inland towns in Victoria,
and is rich in historic association.
Situated on a pretty slope, over-
looking the banks of Australia’s
great river—the Murray—it was
given its name in 1836 by the
famous explorer, Major Mitchell,
who camped on the hill near the
junction of the Little Murray with
the parent stream. All night long
the slumbers of the party were
seriously curtailed by the wild ones
of a large flock of swans on a
small lagoon on Pental Island,
and two of them, Bobby and Ptolemy, were executed
for the crime in the Melbourne gaol. The old
station was purchased by the present owner, Mr.
George Holloway, in 1877.
The nucleus of the township was the building
of the Lower Murray Hotel by Rutherford and
Mcßae in 1848, on the site now occupied by the
London Bank. This hotel subsequently belonged
to Mr. Jas. Gray, whose son now represents the
district in Parliament. A punt soon followed, and
Swan Hill became at once a crossing place for the
great overland traffic of the early fifties.
Mr. John Comb first saw Swan Hill in 1850, when
he arrived from South Australia with his bullock
team. He is probably the only survivor of that
adventurous band of overlanders which traversed
the roads in the very early days. He has resided
here practically ever since his first visit, and has
experienced many turns of fortune’s wheel. His
eighty odd years, though, have treated him kindly.
He is still hale, hearty and wears a happy expres-
sion when he recalls the stirring incidents of 50
years ago.
formed by the flood waters of the river. There
may have been thousands of these birds, but so im-
pressed was the explorer by the sleepless night and
the beautiful sight of this magnificent flock by day
that before leaving his camp he named the spot
“ Swan Hill." This name was indeed eminently
suitable, for there are still larue flocks of swan
to be seen in the district on river, lagoon and lake.
The indomitable major then yoked up his bul-
locks, proceeding to Lake Boga. He arrived there
on 20th June, 1836. The wheels of his bullock
drays cut deeply into the earth, softened by the
copious winter rains, and the blacks, gathering in
the rear, gazed with superstitious awe at those
ruts, and wondered what strange animal had made
such huge tracks. Some ten years later the major’s
tracks were still plainly visible to the first settlers
along the Murray.
Swan Hill was first occupied by Mr. Curlewis in
the year 1844, when it formed the northern boundary
of the Reedy Lake station. Beyond was No Man’s
Country, reputed to be overrun with numerous
bands of fierce and treacherous aborigines. Into
this unknown land the brothers Beveridge trecked,
with a large mob of cattle, in 1846, and built their
huts at Tyntynder. The blacks soon became
troublesome, and cattle spearing was an every-
day incident. A few months after the establishment
of Tyntynder the strained relations existing be-
tween the white usurpers of the soil and its aborigi-
nal owners culminated in the brutal murder of
Mr. Andrew Beveridge at Piangil. The body was
brought to Tyntynder and buried near the home-
stead, and a granite slab and iron railings mark
the spot where he was buried. Some time later-
three of the blacks who did the spearing were cap-
tured under circumstances of thrilling excitement,
Captain Francis Cadell arrived from Adelaide in
1851, and put together a small canvas boat, in which
he drifted down the Murray to Goolwa, as a pre-
liminary to navigation by steamboat. Two years
later he returned in the Lady Augusta, accompanied
by Sir Harry Young, Governor of South Australia,
and party, which included a number of ladies. Sir
Harry wrote a long despatch to the Duke of New-
castle, Secretary of State, dated, “ Swan Hill, 17th
September. 1853,” in which he related the impor-
tance of this first voyage on the river.
Great progress took place in the town and dis-
trict during the fifties. A police district was formed,
with headquarters at Swan Hill, where a strong-
force of troopers was stationed under Superinten-
dent Cobham. A resident police magistrate (Capt.
Pasco) and a clerk of courts (Mr. Robert
McPherson) were also appointed to the place,
which at once became an important centre. The
first hospital was built in 1860, on land granted
for the purpose near the river, with Dr. Gummow
as its first medical officer. The extension of the
railway to Swan Hill rendered the removal of the
early institution a necessity.
Whilst the old hospital was being built the Burke
and Wills exploring party arrived on the scene,
amid most hearty demonstrations of welcome.
The long string- of camels and the drays laden
with stores roused the adventurous spirit of the


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
community, and the pioneers extended unbounded
hospitality and good wishes to the explorers.
Charley Gray, the first victim of the expedition, was
a resident of Swan Hill, and joined the party here.
On Wednesday, 12th September, 1860, the expedi-
tion set its face to the north. The public farewell
took place near the old court house, and drew
forth many kind words. The party then began
that long journey from which many of its members
never returned.
On this historic spot the residents proceeded to
erect a memorial of brick to commemorate the
expedition, but the depressing influences of dry
years and the migratory habits of the people pre-
vented its completion. After the lapse of half
a century a movement has been started and a
large sum of money collected for the purpose of
carrying out the idea which the pioneers failed to
accomplish in the sixties.
In those days the country was wholly devoted
to the squatting industry; agriculture was not
thought of. Hay was invariably brought in on drays
In the early seventies there arose a great political-
cry to “ unlock the lands,” and the passing of a.
liberal Land Act created an epidemic of land selec-
tion. All sorts and conditions of men left their
occupations temporarily while they joined in the
rush for land. In every part of Victoria, in the
bush and on the plains, selectors’ pegs could be
seen. The wave of selection penetrated as far
north as Swan Hill, and on its crest came William
and George Bruton. Pat and Mick Boyle, the Rohan
family, the brothers Hobson, and others, who soon
occupied the river flats from Swan Hill to Tyn-
tynder. The residents of the township, being on
the spot, had the first choice of the available
country. Thus Tom and Harry Pye secured their
holdings adjoining the town boundary. The Bur-
tons had the whole district to choose from, and used
wise discrimination in selecting; while the late Mr.
Geo. Walker and his sons picked the best country
in the neighbourhood of Lake Baker.
At this time Swan Hill was a decidedly small and
primitive place. Coaches ran to Sandhurst, Bal-
Interesting view at opening of Swan Hill Bowling Green; and a group of representative Swan Hillites,
with the beautiful Swan Hill Club’s Tropical Gardens in the background.
from the coastal districts, or up the river by steam-
boat from Adelaide, and generally cost about £2O
a ton. The first record of locally grown fodder
dates back to 1862, when the late Donald Mclntosh
produced an excellent sample of hay at Lake Boga,
which was purchased by the Swan Hill police at
£lB per ton.
Mr. Robert Hastings and his brother, William,
carried on dairying largely at Tyntynder station
in 1863, and found a ready market for butter, and
cheese at prices which would be considered fabulous
in our time; but an outbreak of pleuro-pneumonia
among the cattle effectually nipped this promising-
industry in the bud. These hardy pioneers were not
discouraged, however, and later on selected land on
the site at the hive Mile Point now known as
Tyntynder South. There the veteran dairyman,
still hale and hearty, successfully manages his own
farm, and out of his long store of experience is
ever ready to give advice and assistance to the
newly arrived settler.
ranald and Wentworth, and bullock teams brought
up stores in the summer', whilst steamers plied on
the river in the winter. Profitable business was
done in the stores, and there was no competition
and no hustling. With the advent of the farmer
better means of transit were required, and the
agitation for railway extension was loud and con-
tinuous, with the result that the line from Kerang
was built in 1889, and opened by the late Earl of
Hopetoun, then Governor of Victoria, with great
festivity. About this time the Irrigation Trust was
formed to carry out important reclamation and
irrigation works in the irrigable area, and a new
era of progress and prosperity dawned upon Swan
Hill. The invention of the mallee roller and the
stump jump plough added a new and a rich pro-
vince to Victoria, and at once solved several pro-
blems which had been the despair and dread of
governments and the settlers on the mallee fringe.
For years before the invention of wire netting that
hopeless and impenetrable jungle—the mallee —


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
5. General view of Swan Hill bridge, water tower
and steamers.
1. Bird’s eye view of Swan Hill bridge, overlook-
ing New South Wales border.
6. A typical settler’s team and waggon.
7. Picnicking on the River Murray.
8. A picturesque spot at Malian, noted as a splen-
did fishing ground. R. W. Martin, photo.
2. The M err in bridge.
3 and 4. Two fine bullock teams arriving at Swan
Hill with the golden grain.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
poured out at intervals on the struggling settlers
devasting hordes of rabbits and wild dogs, which
ate up the pastures and slaughtered the sheep and
lambs in hundreds. In desperation many of the
farmers cut down acres of pine trees, and with great
labour erected miles of close stubb fencing in a
vain endeavour to keep the rodents off their hold-
ings. When the settler ceased work for the day
he would leave perhaps a chain or two of the
fence just rammed in and completed. Next morn-
ing he would find much of the loose earth scratched
away, many posts on the ground, just, as it were,
to remind him that his enemies had been working
night shift.
1
However, the discovery that the scrub could
be cheaply cleared, and the land would produce
profitable crops of wheat, changed the whole aspect
of affairs, and the demand for holdings became so
great that for a time there was quite a boom in
mallee land. In 1890 the first settlers began to
arrive in the mallee around Swan Hill, and since
were among the first batch of South Australians-
who have managed to surmount all obstacles and
retained their farms, and who, with convenient rail-
waif facilities and an assured water supply, are now
reaping a somewhat tardy reward for the hard-
ships of years gone by.
In the early days Swan Hill and district formed:
part of the Lower Murray Riding of the old Shire
of Swan Hill, the headquarters being at Kerang,
where Messrs. John Gray, F. G. Boys, Richard:
Hughes and others were wont to journey by coach
once a month to represent the ratepayers of this
part of the shire. Subsequently Mr. Gray, with
characteristic energy, took up the question of sever-
ance, and in 1893 was successful in having a new
shire formed at Swan Hill, of which he was elected
the first president, and Mr. C. E. Albrecht secretary
and engineer. In a short while the handsome,,
well-equipped Shire Hall and offices were built,
which has proved a most useful and profitable un-
dertaking.
The original Royal Hotel, taken some 40 years
ago, the proprietor then being the late W. Garden.
then the whole area has been cleared and brought
under grass or cultivation.
A number of farmers from Donald and Mt. Jeff-
cott settled around Goschen and Boga districts, of
whom Messrs. Greenham, Stevens, Fletcher, Sellick,
Coburn and Cr. Le Lievre are successful types.
A party of South Australians drove their teams
overland, and took up holdings at Waitchie, where
they endured cruel and bitter hardships for the
first few years. The nearest radway station and
permanent water supply was at Swan Hill, and the
unfortunate pioneers, when they had succeeded in
raising some wheat, were obliged to cart it to the
township, with several empty tanks lashed on
on top of the load. To deliver a load of wheat and
toil back over thirty miles of bush tracks and
heavy sandhills with a weighty load of water oc-
cupied three or four days of valuable time, and
was quite calculated to break the hearts of any
team of horses. After facing these troubles for a
time many of the settlers were obliged to relinquish
their holdings at great loss, and to seek homes
elsewhere. Messrs. Sutton, Jury and J. J. Roberts
An interesting group of Swan Hill old identities
taken many years ago.
To record the names of all who have in years
past done yeoman service in the interests of the
town and district would fill a volume, but this
book would be incomplete were mention not made
of a few who have borne the heat and burden of
the early pioneering days. Conspicuous in trade
and finance were Richard Hughes, P. Kennedy,
the late Wm. McMonnies, F. G. Boys, W. Evering-
ham, the late Thos. Pye, and Wm. Pratt. Successful
irrigation methods, together with the dairying, agri-
cultural and horticultural industries, owe much to
the pluck and persistent energies of men like A. E.
Flight, Robt. Hastings, j. H. W. Baker, Samuel
Winzar, and the late Jos. Hocking, who, after
much experimental work and frequent failures, were
eventually able to show profitable results, and hand
down their valuable and hard-earned practical ex-
perience to posterity.
From 1894 onwards new settlers and business
men coninued to arrive and assist to build up a
town and district that is generally recognised, and
actually is, the most go-ahead, progressive modern
town in provincial Victoria to-day (omitting Ben-


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
1 and 2. Magnificent crop of maize and amber-
cane grown by Mr. Hastings at Tyntynder.
6. Harvesting a magnificent first crop, Mr. F
Mclver’s property, Murray Flats.
3 and 4. Fine crop of lucerne grown on the Mur-
ray Flats by Mr. Nolan.
7. Carting in wheat to Swan Hill.
8. A typical settler’s home—Mr. G. Phillips, Mur
ray Flats.
5. Splendid dairy herd on Murray Flats, showing
irrigation channel.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
digo and Ballarat), and possesses one of the finest
and most fertile districts, capable of growing sor-
ghum, maize, ambercane, lucerne, ordinary grass,
citrus, grapes and other fruits equal to that cul-
tivated in any portion of the Commonwealth. I
shall now proceed with my article under the
heading—
The New Progressive
Swan Hill and District
ITS POSSIBILITIES,
ITS WORTH,
PRESENT,
ITS IMPORTANCE
FUTURE
Swan Hill, naturally termed the “ Heart of the
Irrigation Settlements,” is situated on the River
Murray, with a fine drawbridge spanning the river
into New South Wales, and is distant some 214
miles by rail from Melbourne. The principal fea-
ture of this progressive centre is its agricultural and
pastoral pursuits, and the main industries now are
grain, wool, dairying, lamb raising," cattle and sheep
breeding, fruit growing, and intense culture by
intention of testing the fertility of its rich soil,,
with its splendid clear climate. The last three years’
average summer heat has been lower than many-
other parts of Victoria; this is merely mentioned
because an exaggerated idea of the heat in Swan
Hill prevails in the minds of the public down south.
It seems inexplicable that so many have in the
past been led to believe that heat of an extreme
nature often occurs during the summer. Even as-
The original Swan Hill Hospital, which was
dismantled soon after the arrival of the railway line.
irrigation. As previously mentioned, it is one of
the oldest inland towns in Victoria, and can safely
lay claim to being the most prosperous. On account
of the increasing rise and rapid progress that the
town and district are making, it is safe to assume
that Swan Hill will ere long become a capital of
no mean dimensions and importance.
When taking into consideration the very large
area of some 3000 square miles of territory it
governs, the future promises to still further bring
the district into greater prominence. Never at any
period in its history has such a change taken
place which has sent the town and district in the
glorious march of progress as during the last two
years, and it has proved, and should continue to
prove, a happy hunting ground for farmers,
graziers, dairymen, business men and speculators
in the future, as it is during the next 10 years that
the land values will realise to the full what they
are capable of producing, when the land is more
populated and worked to even greater advantage
than now; and, therefore, Swan Hill is at the dis-
posal of all-comers, with the one main object—the
The original Swan Hill Post Office.
this article is being written, in the middle of Feb-
ruary, when the yesterday’s Melbourne daily news-
paper proclaims aloud to the world that the Vic-
torian capital was suffering from a sweltering heat
registering 107 deg., yet the people of this district
were enjoying a comparatively delightfully clear
atmosphere at a temperature of 103 deg. The cri-
terion is not only in the degrees registered: it is
more in the fact that the air in the northern dis-
tricts is lighter, clearer and less unpleasant than
in the districts of the southern portion of the State.
Swan Hill being recognised, as previously men-
tioned, as “ the Heart of the Irrigation Settlements,” -
a few facts concerning the immense amount of work
which has been accomplished (although still in its
infancy), and the millions of gallons available from
the Murray waters flowing through parts of the
district from this magnificent river have but barely
been utilised, and are capable of supplying a much
larger area. At the present time hundreds of
miles of channels have been made, covering a
vast area, extending from Nyah as tar north as
the Wood Wood district to Waitchie, the Tyntynder


1 and 4. Chaffcutter at work in Swan Hill district.
2. Interesting snapshot at a settler’s homestead.
3. Messrs. Staley and Connell’s Swan Hill brick
yards.
5. Departure of A.N.A. (Foundation Day) ex-
cursion from Swan Hill.
6. Panoramic view of 1911 Agricultural Show,
Swan Hill.
7. The State Rivers and Water Supply Commis-
sion Offices, Swan Hill. This handsome building
was erected by Mr. H. Codling.
8. The goods shed on Murray River wharf at
Swan Hill.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
district, right beyond Ultima, around Lalbert, while
channels are now being laid through the Chillin-
gollah districts. There are three distinct pumping-
plants, one at Nyah (the embyro Mildura), another
at Swan Hill, and the third, known as the Long
Lake pumping plant, situated in the Lake Boga
district. These powerful pumping plants are enabled
to supply a constant and reliable quantity of water
for domestic, stock and irrigation purposes. Yet
the prominence and wonderful success attending the
efforts of the State Rivers and Water Supply Com-
mission have only in recent years been brought into
considerable prominence. It was a subject Aus-
tralians, generally speaking, were very deficient in
knowledge of, and it is mainly due to Mr. Elwood
Mead and his enthusiastic officers that the public
of Australia, and in other portions of the world,
have been enabled to grasp the wonderful fertility
of the soil in the Swan Hill and other irrigation
districts when the use of water and labour are judi-
ciously applied. Every year that comes will, no
doubt, witness the further great -extension of our
Murphy’s, Mr. Lee Bake’s, and many others to be
thoroughly convinced of the wonderful fertility and
potentialities of the soil, where dairying and the
growing of lucerne and fodder crops under the
modern system of cultivation and watering are
giving results far beyond the expectation of the
most sanguine. This system has greatly enhanced
the value of the smaller holdings. The area of
the flats comprise some 15,000 acres, and the water
scheme is under the control of the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission, with a powerful and up-
to-date pumping station situated within three-
quarters of a mile of the town. Many of the
new settlers on the flats have planted a large number
of citrus and lemon trees, etc., and the growth has
been remarkable.
Information secured by the compiler from various
sources and from personal conversations, together
with inspections of many orchards in the district,
extending to Nyah, tends to show that fruitgrowing
is likely to prove one of the most remunerative
industries- of these northern irrigation districts. On
Two interesting views of the main thoroughfare, Swan Hill, in the early sixties,
THE DEAD PAST—OLD SWAN HILL.
irrigation system, and we may confidently rely
on the erection of other pumping plants in the near
future along the banks of the Murray River both by
the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission and
by private enterprise.
Land under irrigation on the Victorian side of
the River Murray is changing hands at as high
a price as £22 per acre, though the tair market
price of irrigated Murray flats can be estimaaed
at anything from £l4 per acre upwards at the
present time, and it is safe to say that this land,
when thoroughly and systematically cultivated and
improved, will realise from £4O to £BO per acre
within the next seven years, more especially if
intense culture predominates and is carried to a
high state of proficiency and to its fullest possi-
bilities.
One has only to secure practical demonstration
of what the possibilities of the Murray flats can
produce, and to drive through the district and visit
such well-improved properties as Mr. Nolan’s, Mr.
John Ferguson’s, Mr. Thomas Phyland’s, Mr. John
an orange grove situated near the Murray River
it was ascertained that trees were raised with the
aid of irrigation, developed a vigorous growth, and
when three years old produced a crop which was
marketed for a sum covering the whole outlay on
the plantation. The return for the fourth year was
at the rate of £125 per acre, practically all profit.
The oranges could hardly be surpassed for .quality
and condition.
The following figures are borne out by expert
experience as to what it is possible to accomplish:—
Average citrus return, 8 tons per acre, or £9O;
tomatoes, 15 tons, or £l2O. Fruits such as apples,
peaches, apricots and plums average from 7 to 8
tons per acre, or £45. Vines (dried fruits) give
a return of £46, and as fresh fruit £6O. But when
returns from roots, peas, beans, grain, dairying,
etc., are added the export trade should eventually
reach huge dimensions. Nature has endowed these
irrigation settlements with a wealth of soil re-
source which makes it admirably adapted for the
purpose to which it is being applied. The climate


R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
Nos. 3 and 5 kindly supplied by Mr. Alan Connell.
1. Members of the Excelsior Tennis Club.
2. Some members of that progressive lodge—the
A.N.A.
3. Record load of wheat from Swan Hill on barge
passing down the Murray River.
4. Some officers and members of the Druids’
Lodge, Swan Hill.
5. Steamer passing under the Murray Bridge at
Swan Hill.
6. The National Bank of Australasia Ltd.’s
branch, Swan Hill.
7- The Swan Hill Hospital.
8. Swan Hill branch of the Bank of Victoria.
9. The London Bank of Australia’s branch at
Swan Hill.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
stimulates growth and ensures maturity and robust-
ness of product, ensuring in time much richness and
benefits to be derived from those capable of work-
ing to the full the land under cultivation.
As an example of the advantages of Closer Settle-
ment under this modern system of irrigation, it came
under the compiler’s notice that on the old Napthine
Estate on the Murray Flats, where there was but
Bridge over tl e Little Murray, erected by
Drummond and Snell.
recently only one tenant settled, who kept about
80 cows, there are now settled 91 persons on 15
separate farms. Though this is only their second
year there, they have already some 380 cows. Those
settlers who have taken up land in the area men-
tioned under the Closer Settlement Board, are more
than satisfied with their future prospects, and
especially those who are carrying on dairying. As
showing what small allotments are capable of doing,
one man, who hails from the Western District, took
up 50 acres, and is now milking over 50 cows. He
considers his block now worth £5O per acre on his
actual returns per annum. Prior to taking up this
holding he was working on the share system, and
thereby acquired a good knowledge of the soil and
its treatment. The pasture is lucerne, and he has
a luxuriant crop.
An ex-dairy expert, who has a good knowledge
of the dairying districts of the State, has seen
nothing better than the Murray fiats; consequently,
when the land was thrown open, he made applica-
tion for and secured an allotment, which was
granted to him, and has been very successful in his
efforts.
Mr. R. Hastings, of Tyntynder South, was suc-
cessful last season in raising maize on three acres
with marked success, and in four months obtained
20 1-3 tons to the acre. The commercial value of
maize is £l per ton, therefore he received a hand-
some return for his crop.
The fact that five fine crops of lucerne, and even
six, is possible to secure in one season demonstrates
the wonderful soil and climate of the district. The
compiler has noted instances where patches not
actually irrigated, that have been practically bare,
have by the application of water by hose—one ap-
plication only—sprung up, and within a fortnight
lucerne has been quite 18 inches to 2 feet high.
Such rapid growth is certainly phenomena!.
THE MALLEE.
A healthy condition of affairs exists in the Mallee
to-day. A few years ago this land was looked upon
by many as being useless and uncertain of cultiva-
tion; time has changed all this, and to-day it has
proved itself country of a resourceful nature, Cap-
able of filling the bags with the golden grain in a
good season, as much as from 8 to 10 bags in some
places having been secured, and it has worked out
very profitably to the Mallee farmer. No fewer than
130,000 bags were sent away from the Swan Hill
railway station last season with the land under
cultivation then. Now it is assured that the future
crops will be very heavily increased.
The method of cultivation nowadays is on scien-
tific principles, and with the latest type of ma-
chinery the farmers are growing in financial
strength and stability. The future of the all-impor-
tant Mallee will suffice to show that upon this soil
alone the wheat produced will astonish the com-
munity as to its future output, which is but now
merely a trifle of what it is capable of producing.
Moreover, the Mallee farmer’s condition of life
has greatly improved, and it is noticeable on all
sides—the comfortable homes and outbuildings of
a substantial nature that are taking the place of
the old style of buildings.
Lamb raising is carried on to a great extent in the
Mallee, and mixed farming generally, two or three
weeks in the open country sufficing to put condi-
tion on cattle and sheep.
Many of the more prosperous farmers in this
district have residences in Swan Hill, and are now
able to give their families the educational advan-
tages and social surroundings enjoyed by the re-
sidents of the larger towns. Teams of bullocks are
principally used for traction purposes, nearly every
farmer having one or more teams at his disposal.
Years ago the Mallee farmer had to be content
with seasons which proved themselves either par-
Group photo, of Swan Hill Hospital Committee,
some 16 years ago.
From left to right:—Messrs. H. V. Cato, T.
Wilkins, W. Moore, C. Mellor, D. J. Wallace,
Dr. John Mitchell, J. H. Stewart, Rev. J. Patterson,
A. K. Chapman, C. E. Albrecht, J. H. Barker, G.
T. Maddison, J. H. Bell, sen., David Johnston


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
1 and 2. Views of two wards of the Swan Hill Hospital. 3. Drs. F. R. Legge and Colquhoun
with hospital staff. 4. Church of Christ, Swan Hill. 5. Presbyterian Sunday School, Swan Hill (a
new, handsome edifice is to be erected on this site). 6. Swan Hill Fire Brigade—an efficient body
of men. 7. Interior of Swan Hill Methodist Church. 8. Interior of Roman Catholic Church, Swan
R. W. Martin, photo, and design.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
tial or complete failures, but this was found to be
more attributable to his lack of knowledge, the
'Conditions of toil, the state of the season, and the
insufficiency of up-to-date machinery and imple-
ments. But times have changed all this, and to-day,
with practically everything at his command, he has
in a large measure mastered the problem of suc-
cessful cultivation, and has proved beyond doubt
that good crops can be obtained even under un-
favourable climatic conditions.
It is only of late years that the great development
of this part of Victoria has taken place, which is
wholly owing to the forward policy of private en-
terprise in the cultivation, not only of wheat, but
also barley, rye, hay, lucerne, maize, ambercane,
Japanese millet, and other crops of various kinds,
which all tend to prove the increasing interest and
progressive ideas of the farmer, and his strong faith
in the capabilities of this wonderful soil.
Another great factor in the success the mallee
iarmer enjoys lies in his now being enabled to
hotels, splendidly equipped and managed club,
comfortable and artistically designed private resi-
dences, surrounded by well-cared-for lawns and gar-
dens, together with a decidedly sociable class of
people, Swan Hill is a comparatively happy
place to live in. ’Tis true the dust is troublesome
in summer time, but not by any means worse than
in other parts of Victoria. Dust is always dis-
agreeable. The compiler would infinitely prefer a
dusty day in Swan Hill to one in Melbourne when a
north wind is raging. Still, the Swan Hill Council
should most certainly endeavour to mitigate the
dust nuisance during next summer.
For a progressive, go-ahead town like Swan Hill
the train service is quite inadequate and unsatis-
factory in every way. Representations have been
made to the Railway Commissioners, who have pro-
mised reform that has not yet come. Still, the
increasing importance of this town and district
makes it imperative that faster trains should be
run. It is merely a matter of waiting until suffi-
1. View of Swan Hill Hospital taken nearly 20 years ago, with some of the most prominent
citizens and interested workers of that grand institution. 2. View of the Wharf at Swan Hill,
showing portion of the Murray Flats before the arrival of settlers. Nowadays it is studded thickly
with many comfortable homesteads.
secure an ample supply of water through the State
Rivers and Water Supply Commission’s channels
for domestic and stock use. He is each year in-
creasing the capacity and number of his dams, and
nowadays he is relieved from the tension and re-
verses of a drought year, should one ever again
occur. Gradually, though surely, settlers in the
Swan Hill district are having windmills erected,
and this assures a certain supplementary supply.
Then the lesson of past years of stock dying from
starvation has ingrained itself in the settler’s mind,
and practically almost every settler possesses his
reserve stacks of fodder, paradoxically speaking,
■“ for a rainy day in the event of a drought year.”
PROGRESS OF THE TOWN.
During recent years considerable progress has
been made in many creditable directions, whicn has
now placed Swan Hill quite equal to the most
modern towns in the State. With its fine wide
streets, handsome public buildings and banking insti-
tutions, modern business premises, well-conducted
cient new engines can be built to replace the many
wornout ones that might have been put on the
scrap heap years ago. As a straight, broad matter
of fact, the Railway Commissioners have not kept
pace with the great and wonderful growth of Vic-
torian districts during the past seven years, and
nowadays rising towns like Swan Hill suffer great
inconvenience, and progress is considerably re-
tarded. The distance from Melbourne to Swan
Hill is 214 miles, and the time occupied on the
journey (since the great speeding-up policy was
adopted) is 11 hours 35 minutes. The population of
Swan Hill and district fully warrants a daily pas-
senger service, and the journey should be accom-
plished with ease in hours.
The building of artistically designed residences
continues apace in every part of Swan Hill, which
is a sure indication that residents intend to make it
their permanent home. Contractors find the great-
est difficulty in securing labour, especially brick-
layers, as most of the structures now being erected
are of brick, of modern design, carrying all the


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
1. Some members of the Rechabite Lodge, Swan Hill. 2. The Swan Hill State School and
pupils. 3. Mr. David Gerrand and family outside their private residence, Swan Hill. 4. Mr. Ralph
M. Drummond’s comfortable residence. Swan Hill. 5. Despatching wheat from Swan Hill Railway
Station. 6. Mr. J. Ramsay’s comfortable residence, Swan Hill. 7. Mr. T. H. Barwick’s neatly
designed and artistic residence, Swan Hill. 8. Members of the Swan Hill (A) Cricket Team.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
latest up-to-date improvements. Amongst the more
important buildings recently erected might be men-
tioned the double-storied handsome Commercial
Bank, Gerrand's Buildings, the large additions to the
Commercial Hotel, Messrs. Staley and Connell’s
splendidly equipped commodious bulk store, two-
storied additions to the White Swan Hotel, and the
State Rivers and Water Commission offices, which is
Mr. A. Neill’s comfortable residence at Swan Hill.
one of the most artistic buildings in the town. It
is of Queen Anne design, and was erected by Mr.
Codling. A fine commodious billiard room, splen-
didly fitted up with two tables, etc., has
been built and furnished for the Swan Hill
Club. Amongst the most handsome and com-
fortable residences that immediately strike the ob-
servant eye of a visitor are those of Messrs. McLean,
Kelly, Drummond, James, Barwick, Monahan, Ram-
say, Pye, Dr. Legge, and many others. There being
a plentiful supply of water, which is pumped from
the River Murray to the reservoir tanks, whence it
is reticulated throughout the town, nearly every
resident has laid out his garden, and there are
some particularly fine ones in the town, decidedly
pleasing to the eye. The various streets are well
planted with .pepper trees and gums. The com-
piler has travelled somewhat, and was struck with
the remarkable growth of the former, which give
a fine luxuriant shade in the summer months. It
is rather a matter for regret, however, that the
banks of the Murray River have not been planted
with willow trees or other suitable flora. Were
this done, it would, within a few years, greatly
improve the surroundings, from an artistic and
pleasurable standpoint, of the town.
Sporting Clubs. —Swan Hill possesses a healthy
sporting spirit, and it is therefore not surprising to
find the various clubs well supported. The Swan
Hill Jockey Club holds a meeting each year. The
last was probably the most successful ever held.
It is intended to carry out many improvements,
notably the erection of a fine commodious grand
stand, and in all probability two meetings will be
held annually in the future. Mr. Janies Garden is
President and Mr. Cameron Secretary. Two Picnic
Race Meetings are held annually, and invariably
pass off most successfully. There is also a strong
Football Club, three Tennis Clubs, two Cricket
Clubs, a Bowling Club, Gun Club, Coursing Club,
and Rifle Club.
Electric Light. —A modern electric light plant is
now being installed by the well-known contractors,
Messrs. Siemens Bros. Ltd. The power house is
in course of erection, and the principal streets of
the town will be well lighted up. The majority of
the business men have decided to secure electric
light, and in many cafes, hotels, clubs, and busi-
ness places electric fans are to be installed, which
will no doubt be highly appreciated by the public.
Electric motive power will be utilised for driving
the machinery in many of the larger establishments.
Electric light will prove a great boon and of much
utility; it will also prove of considerable value
from an economical standpoint and convenience to
Swan Hill residents. The Swan Hill councillors
who voted for this progressive movement have
earned the thanks of the whole community. Elec-
tric light was the greatest need in the embryo
up-to-date “ city ” of Swan Hill.
The Swan Hill Hospital. —Probably the most
handsome building in Swan Hill is the hospital,
which was erected shortly after the railway line
reached Swan Hill in 1888. It stands on a com-
manding, healthy position, surrounded bv beautiful
grounds, overlooking the town, and is probably the
best equipped institution of its kind north of Ben-
digo. It has a modern operating theatre, and
there are two large public wards (one for
each sex), and two private wards. Comfortable
nurses’ quarters are provided, and it is the intention
of the committee to shortly erect an infectious
diseases ward. A hot water service is to be in-
stalled, together with other improvements. The
president is Mr. E. G. Gray; vice-president, Mr.
Approach to Swan Hill from N.S.W. over the
Murray River Bridge.
C. McDonald; secretary, Mr. W. Bell; treasurer,
Mr. W. Moore; medical officer, Dr. F. R. Legge;
matron, Miss C. McGillivery; nurses, Miss J. Grimir-
son and Miss Olive Carter; probationers, Misses E.
Pettifer, G. R. Grimirson, K. Hayes and Adele
Rennison.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT,
Churches. —The spiritual life of the people is well
attended to, there being five churches—Methodist,
Church of England, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian
and Church of Christ. Each denomination has a
large number of adherents, and, with the exception
of the Presbyterian Church, edifices that are dis-
tinctly creditable and satisfactory in every way.
The Presbyterian Church is shortly to be erected,
The president and committee, officers of “ The
Swan Hill Club.”
and it will probably be a handsome, commodious
edifice. At present services are held in the Sunday
school. The Salvation Army is also doing good
work in Swan Hill. They have a numerous fol-
lowing, and it is understood that commodious bar-
racks are shortly to be erected.
Fire Brigade. —The Swan Hill Fire Brigade has
been formed many years. Its full complement is
15 members. The station is a commodious one,
centrally situated. Amongst the appliances for fire
fighting are two reels, 800 ft. hose, 6 branches,
hydrants and ladders. A powerful engine is an
absolute necessity in a large town like Swan Hill,
and tenacious efforts should be made by the towns-
people to secure one from the authorities. The
captain is Mr. A. H. Ledwidge; lieutenant, Mr. R.
Walker. The members of the brigade are a fine
active body of men, and have been successful in
many competitions. They are fortunate in having
the services of an exceptionally keen and energetic
captain in Mr. Ledwidge.
Lodges. —There are several lodges in Swan Hill,
namely, A.N.A. (Mr. P. Real, secretary), U.A.O.
Druids (Mr. W. Moore, secretary), M.U.1.0.0.F.
(Mr. C. Herridge, secretary), Rechabites (Mr. G.
Kenley, secretary), Masonic, Irish National Fores-
ters and Orange Lodges. Each has a large mem-
bership, and is in a prosperous state.
Swan Hill Fire Brigade Brass Band. —The Swan
Hill Brass Band has gone through many vicissi-
tudes since 1886, when it was formed. Mr. Farrant
was the first bandmaster, and he was succeeded by
several others, namely, Messrs. Brine, Clayton,
Ovens and H. Uehlman. At one time it was known
as the “ Town Band,” but the committee of towns-
men appear to have been rather apathetic concern-
ing its welfare, with the result that the financial
position became somewhat embarrassing, and the
subsequent outcome was that the hire Brigade
members assisted materially, and the band became
affiliated with that body. It is now known as the
“ Fire Brigade Band,” and, under the capable
leadership of Bandmaster G. R. Walker, who suc-
ceeded Mr. Uehlman, the members have progressed
splendidly, and in 1911 were successful in securing
two first awards at the Kerang band contests. This
band assists considerably in enlivening Swan Hill
on occasions, and their services are invariably at
the service of any charitable object. Mr. Walker
has proved an energetic and capable master, and
has brought the band up to a high degree of ex-
cellence.
From an educational standpoint Swan Hill is well
provided for. The Stare school is a commodious,
modern one, standing in some two acres of ground.
The average attendance is over 200 pupils.^
Although Swan Hill possesses such a singularly
fine climate, there are four doctors in practice, and
four firms of solicitors are carrying on lucrative
businesses.
One of the surest signs of Swan Hill’s prosperity
is the fact that there are nearly thirty motor cars
of the latest type owned by business men and resi-
dents. The compiler believes this to be a record
for any town of similar size and population in
Australia.
The Swan Hill A. and P. Society hold a show
annually on their conveniently situated, well im-
proved grounds, and each succeeding year there is
considerable improvement in the class of stock ex-
hibited, both in quality and numerically. The so-
ciety is well supported by the public, and the Swan
Hill show well upholds its prestige, and compares
favourably with those held in other Mallee towns.
During recent years more attention and keenness
The handsome Commercial Bank Building, Swan
Hill.
have been shown by farmers in improving their
stock, and some exceptionally fine dairy herds, flocks
of sheep, and stamps of thoroughbred and draught
horses are to be found in the district.
The member for the district is Mr. John Gray,
who most fittingly and satisfactorily represents the


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
large constituency of Swan Hill in the State Parlia-
ment —fittingly, because Mr. Gray is a native of
Swan Hill, and understands thoroughly the needs
of the district; and satisfactorily, because he gives
his earnest, sincere and thorough attention to the
requirements of his constituency. At every avail-
able opportunity Mr. Gray brings before the public
and Parliament the wonderful and great progress
Lieutenant R. M. Drummond.
his constituency has made during recent years, and
emphasises its just claims, either as leader of a
deputation or on the floor of the House. Swan
Hill is indeed fortunate in having such an energetic
and painstaking member to represent it.
There are four hotels in Swan Hill—namely, the
Commercial (proprietor, Mr. J. A. Garden), th-
White Swan (proprietor, Mr. Thomas Wilkins), the
Royal (proprietor, Mr. Featherstone), and the
Federal (proprietor, Mr. D. Urquhart).
The Swan Hill “ Guardian ” is published bi-
weekly. The “ Guardian ” is an able advocate of
the requirements of the town and district. The pro-
prietors are Messrs. Chapman and Smith.
THE SWAN HILL-PIANGIL RAILWAY.
The building of the already sanctioned railway
from Swan Hill northwards to Piangil—a distance
of 29 miles —will open up a magnificent fertile tract
of country, which will unquestionably add consider-
ably to the importance of Swan Hill as a commer-
cial centre; also it will give a great impetus to the
districts it passes through, notably Nyah, and the
terminus, Piangil. The cost of the line is estimated
at £84,000, and already land through which the
railway passes has risen in price.
The River Fleet. —Swan Hill wharf is quite a
busy business centre during the shipping season, and
immense quantities of wheat, wool, merchandise,
etc., are shipped to and from Swan Hill. Locally-
owned boats are Messrs. Staley and Connell’s Suc-
cess, Capt. Hunt’s Invincible, while Permewan,
Wright and Co. Ltd. have a large fleet of boats,
many of which call regularly at Swan Hill during
the busy season. In the summer months they “ lay
up ” at Echuca.
Excellent shooting and fishing is obtainable in
the district. Quail, plover, snipe, and duck are
usually plentiful in the season, and good sport can
always be relied upon in the waters of the Murray,
Wakool and Edwards rivers.
THE DAIRYING INDUSTRY.
The dairying industry is an important one at
Swan Hill, and dairying on the Murray Flats under
irrigation has proved a decided and unqualified suc-
cess from every standpoint. At one time the
“ North of Victoria” was not recognised as a dairy-
ing centre, and the general opinion in the southern
portion of the State was that it never could be.
That, however, has proved a barren fallacy, and the
compiler is satisfied that the north is more suitable
than the south for these reasons. The unusual
mildness of the climate allows an abundant growth
of suitable fodder, such as lucerne, amber cane,
Japanese millet, sorghum, etc., in winter and early
spring. The delightfully even climate does not af-
fect the dairy herd to the same extent as in the
colder climate of the south. Then, in the summer,
irrigation enables the farmer to grow a plentiful
supply of green fodder to keep up the milk supply
from his herd. Dairying under irrigation has been
a great success, and it has been proved to pay—and
pay well.
Some time ago a block of land in Swan Hill was
secured by the Savings Bank Commissioners at a
high price, and the town is shortly to be further
improved by the erection of a handsome building
for the Savings Bank. This, coupled together with
the fact that the four banks at present established
have erected such handsome buildings, demonstrates
and emphasises solidly the satisfaction of the
various directors of these institutions at Swan Hill’s
progress and its future solidity. The town and dis-
A typical “back-blocks” scene—Welcoming the
arrival of one of Binns and Co.’s travelling vans.
trict are well served with a telephone service to
Nyah, Piangil, Tooleybuc, Wakool, Moulamein, and
Stony crossing (N.S.W.), while it is quite probable
telephonic communication will be established with
the important town of Balranald (N.S.W.) in the
near future.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
SWAN HILL—A GREAT STOCK SALE
CENTRE.
There are three important stock and station firms
in Swan Hill—Andrew Muir and Co., Donald
McDonald, and Edward Trenchard and
Co.—and therefore it is not unnatural
to find that Swan Hill has, with such
enterprising, progressive firms, and surrounded
by such a magnificent, rich district, become one of
the largest and leading stock sale centres of the
State, which is attended by buyers from N.S.W.,
Kerang, Ultima, Lake Boga, Goschen, Chillingollah,
Mystic Park, Lake Charm, Nyah, Piangil, and va-
rious districts and towns, including Bendigo. The
Swan Hill yards can accommodate over 30,000 sheep
and 2000 head of cattle at one sale. To emphasise
Swan Hill’s importance as a stock sale centre, it
might be mentioned that, for the twelve months
ending December Ist, 13,852 head of cattle and
298,540 sheep crossed the Murray to and from Swan
Hill. Land sales in the town have been effected
at £25 per foot in Campbell-street, while half-acre
township blocks have fetched from £l5O to £250,
according to position. These are not boom prices,
only exceptional ones, and speak loudly of the im-
provement in values at Swan Hill during the past
few years.
SWAN HILL’S INDUSTRIES.
There are several important industries in Swan
Hill, which are gradually developing, and, together
with the primary producers, form the backbone of
the town and district. The butter factory has
proved an important element in the development of
the district as a dairying centre, while the flour
mills have also assisted materially in its progress.
The proprietors, Messrs. Ross Bros., have purchased
a vast amount of wheat during recent years at
favourable prices to the farmers, and have supplied
the various northern towns and the Western Rive-
rina with an excellent, unbeatable quality of flour.
It is solely through this industry that pig-breeding
has increased to the importance and significance
already attained, for, without the bye-products
known as offal, there would be practically no rais-
ing of pigs in the district. Mr. John Murphy’s
cheese factory is also assuming considerable impor-
tance, and, with the contemplated extensive im-
provements and additions, will still further add to
the progress of the district’s commerce. Cheese
from this factory is gaining a splendid name right
throughout the State, and deservedly so, for in
quality and flavour the compiler firmly believes it
to be the equal of the best obtainable (produced in
Australia) in the whole Commonwealth. There are
three modern brickyards engaged in turning out
bricks of excellent quality. The proprietors are
Messrs. Whitham and Son, Messrs. Staley and Con-
nell, and Mr. R. M. Drummond. Swan Hill dis-
trict, being a great agricultural centre, has its im-
plement, coach and waggon building factories.
Those of Messrs. Ramsay and Watson and
Walker and Real are both modern, well-equipped
ones, where an enormous amount of work is car-
ried out each year. Probably 60 to 70 men are
permanently employed by these firms in the various
departments. As the proprietors of both factories
are live, energetic men, whose businesses are ex-
panding with the progress of the district, the bene-
fit of these industries to the town and district can
be readily understood is considerable. The com-
piler would not be at all surprised within the next
five years to see these factories employing over 100
hands.
Interesting view of Mr. Ted Binns’ well laid-out and prolific orchard, near Swan Hill.R- w - Martin, photo,
Mr. Ted Binns, who is one of Swan Hill’s lead-
ing business men, is also an enthusiastic and keen
horticulturist. He is the owner of one of the
finest orchards in that fertile district. The area
is 27 acres, of magnificent soil, which is planted
with some 1500 trees, comprising apple, citrus,
pear, apricot, cherry, peach, and several other varie-
ties of fruit trees, many of which were carrying
fruit of superb quality, shape and size at the time
of the compiler’s visit. A comfortable private resi-
dence has been erected by Mr. Binns, and many
modern improvements made. When the citrus and
other trees are in full bearing this splendidly laid
out orchard will become an exceptionally valuable
property, and will probably be worth from £BO to
£lOO per acre. It is well watered, there being a
lengthy frontage to the River Murray. Mr. Binns
also has 75 acres of rich Flats land adjoining his
orchard, on which were noticed grazing a fine dairy
herd of 25 cows and over 40 horses.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT,
BANKS.
The Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd. was
established in 1905 at Swan Hill, and the volume
of business increased so rapidly, and so popular
did this institution become, that handsome new
two-storey premises of modern design were erected.
This building is quite one of the ornaments to
Campbell-street, the principal thoroughfare. The
Commercial Bank opened their doors in Swan
Hill, not in a time of prosperity, but when financial
assistance was badly required by many settlers and
business men, and in a great degree is this institu-
tion responsible for the present prosperity of Swan
Hill and district. Mr. C. N. Bradly has proved a
popular manager during the past two years, and
Mr. Donald McDonald.
has extended assistance in many ways in forward-
ing the interests of town and district. There is a
staff of five, Mr. G. Jennings being the accountant.
The National Bank of Australasia Ltd. was es-
tablished at Swan Hill in 1888, and the growth and
importance of this branch have been considerable
ever since, though more particularly so in recent
years. Branch offices have been established at
Nyah (in charge of Mr. A. J. Parry) and Lake
Boga (Mr. A. Pick, manager). Handsome banking-
chambers, with commodious strongroom and com-
fortable residential quarters for the manager, Mr.
H. O. Appleby, have recently been erected on
the corner of McCallum and Curlewis streets, at a
cost of nearly £lOOO. So great has been the pro-
gress of this institution’s business that, whereas a
year or two ago only three were on the staff, to-day
the Swan Hill, Lake Boga and Nyah staff totals
ten officials. Mr. Appleby is a decidedly courteous
manager, who takes a keen interest in the welfare
of the town and district. The accountant is Mr.
H. L. Dwyer.
London Bank of Australia Ltd. has been con-
nected with the commercial and financial world of
Swan Hill for a quarter of a century. This institu-
tion was founded in the days of the gold rush—
-60 years ago—and has held a foremost position in
the banking world ever since. The Swan Hill
branch, which has been in charge of Mr. T. M.
Bowe during the past four years, with Mr. B. J.
Thomas as accountant, is a decidedly prosperous
one, and their handsome banking chamber and
manager’s residence on the corner of McCallum and
Campbell streets are amongst the most modern in
Swan Hill. The London Bank gives their clients
ever assistance, and studies them to a great degree.
These are two of the main factors in the popularity
and success enjoyed by the Swan Hill branch.
The Bank of Victoria Ltd. is another of the
flourishing financial institutions of Swan Hill. The
doors were opened at this branch on 12th Septem-
ber, 1910, by Mr. F. A. Street, who has retained the
management ever since, with Mr. McPhee as ac-
countant. This bank has secured a very
fair share of business, and it is highly probable,
with the great progress Swan Hill and district is
making, that the Bank of Victoria will find it
necessary to build more commodious premises in
the near future. Their present position is an ideal
one for banking chambers, being centrally situated
in the main thoroughfare—Campbell-street.
A REVIEW.
From a commercial, financial, pastoral and farm-
ing standpoint the outlook of this progressive, pros-
perous town and district was never brighter in its
history. Many .obstacles have been overcome in the
past, and now the future path is straight and well
defined. It must not be understood from these re-
marks, however, that Swan Hill and district have
reached their highest point of prosperity and suc-
cess. Quite the opposite; the development of the
district is merely in its infancy. There are yet tens
of thousands of acres of fertile land awaiting to
be cut up into small holdings. The Murray Downs
estate, which is on the N.S.W. side, has an area
of 86,000 acres, merely carrying comparatively a
few sheep, cattle and horses. A great portion of
it is magnificent land, and there is a frontage for
miles along the Murray River. These flats at the
present time appear to be mostly growing “ tus-
socky ” grass. With the assured “bursting up” of
this estate, sooner or later, it will be a fine thing
for the whole State and Swan Hill. It might and
should be carrying 500 people to-day. Land is still
being acquired by the Closer Settlement Board,
which naturally spells further enrichment and
greater impetus to the district. Mr. Ellison's fine
block of land, 821 acres area, on the Murray Flats
land, 8| miles from Swan Hill, would be eminently
suitable for closer settlement. It is well irrigated,
and the owner has erected a pumping plant at great
cost. The estate is splendidly improved, and should


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
be carrying at least 20 families. Another pros-
perous year is hopefully predicted, a prediction the
compiler trusts will materialise, so that the sweep-
ing progressive movement and activity which have
been displayed by the business men and farmers
during recent years may continue unretarded, and
the development of the district and im-
provement to the town may continue apace and
uninterruptedly. There is one thing certain, and
that is—the past is dead, the present is solid, and
the future bright, for no district and town in the
State has been built upon a more solid, more sound
foundation than Swan Hill—the brightest, most
progressive, prosperous town to be found to-day on
the map of Victoria.
THE SWAN HILL CLUB.
It is questionable if there is another similar insti-
tution in the State that has made such rapid and
successful progress within twelve months as the
Swan Hill Club, which the compiler believes is one
of the best conducted and finest clubs, in the real
meaning of the word, in the provincial districts of
the Commonwealth. It occurred to several leading
townsmen in April, 1911, that a club, where the
evenings could be pleasantly spent, was a necessity
in Swan Hill, and amongst the most prominent
founders of the institution were Messrs. J. Ramsay,
E. G. Gray and E. A. Flight.
The late Mr. William Garden’s comfortable, com-
modious residence, surrounded by a beautiful tropical
garden, standing in an ideal position almost on the
bank of the Murray River, was secured, and the
club was formed, with a membership roll of sixty.
Application in due course was made to secure a
licence, which was granted. Mr. J. Ramsay was
elected first president, and no one has worked
more indefatigably than he to bring the club to its
present high financial and social standing. Mr.
James Douglas, J.P., accepted the secretarial duties,
and has carried them out most capably. The com-
mittee elected proved a decidedly energetic one,
thoroughly imbued with the idea that to make a
success no reasonable expense must be spared. A
magnificent billiard room was erected —area over
1000 feet —and two of Alcock’s standard tables were
purchased, cues were carefully selected, and, in
fact, all accessories were of the highest quality.
The room is well lighted with acetylene gas (used
throughout the building, but electric light is shortly
to be installed in its place), and comfortable seat-
ing accommodation was provided. The room is
exceptionally well ventilated, and even during the
hottest summer day a game can be enjoyed with
every degree of comfort. The building was reno-
vated throughout, and the club bar was well stocked
with all the best known wines, spirits, imported
1. Snapshot of the
chief steward and
his pet bird, “Major
Mitchell.”
2. The entrance to
the Club.
3. Portion of the
fine billiard-room.
4. View of the well-
stocked bar.
K. W. Martin,
photo.
ales, etc., while Carlton ale is drawn. A well ap-
pointed reading room is provided, visitors’
room, private rooms for the transaction
of business, rooms for recreation of va-
rious kinds, lavatory and bathing accom-
modation, and stabling accommodation for
country members’ horses. The club membership
now totals nearly 200 members, and it is quite
probable that in the near future residential quar-
ters and sample rooms will be erected. From every
standpoint that work should prove beneficial and
entirely successful financially. Two stewards are
employed, and the members are splendidly catered
for in every detail, the chief steward being Mr. H.
Williams, who, by his unassuming courtesy, ability
and attention to details, has assisted very materially
in building up the success of the institution under
review. The writer is glad to have visited this
club. It is a credit to the committee, members,
and the town of Swan Hill.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
NURSE WHITHAM’S PRIVATE HOSPITAL (Established 1901),
Corner of HIGH and RUTHERFORD STREETS, SWAN HILL.
Delightfully situated. Highest and healthiest part of the town. No infectious cases received
Nurse Whitham’s handsome and splendidly equipped Hospital, and portion of one of the Wards
One of the best equipped, most popular and com-
fortable private hospitals in provincial Victoria is
that controlled by Nurse Whitham, who possesses
many years’ experience gained at the Alfred Hospi-
tal, Melbourne, and the Women’s Hospital, Sydney,
previous to founding her private hospital in Swan
Hill some eleven years ago. This institution has
been a great boon to hundreds of patients, and it
is still at the zenith of its popularity, so well
R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
managed, comfortable and convenient has it proved.
Large additions to the present building are con-
templated in the near future. The hospital is a
prettily designed one, built of brick, and is sur-
rounded by a well-kept garden, with two fine lawns.
Every possible comfort is provided for patients, who
one and all speak enthusiastically of the skill and at-
tention received at the hands of Nurse Whitham
and staff.
Champion hack of the north, “ Model,” by “ Dex-
ter.” Model has won innumerable prizes wherever
shown, and holds a wonderful record. Mr. Thomas
Wilkins is the owner.
The magnificent trotting stallion, “ Dexter,” win-
ner of many prizes, by Sir Walter Scott (imp.)
from Kathaleen by Panic, was 28 years old at his
death. Mr. Thomas Wilkins, owner.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
“THE, IDLAL"FRUIT PALACE.” :: :: W. H.|WlLsoN,lProprietor.
TEie Modern, Ideal Palace for Light Refreshments, Soft Drinks of every kind, FresEi Fruit, and High-class Confectionery.
The “ Ideal ” Fruit Palace’s exterior. 2. The Confectionery Department. 3. The delightfully
cool, comfortable Lounge,
Have you inspected our delightfully cool, com-
fortable, spacious and quiet lounge refreshment
rooms, over 66 feet in length? Can accommodate
conveniently over 70 people.
At “ The Ideal Fruit Palace ” lounge you can
enjoy rest, comfort and refreshments, surrounded
by beautiful ferns, creepers and sweet-scented
flowers.
The Soft Drinks Department
R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
“ The Ideal Fruit Palace,” having only recently
been erected, is modern, up-to-date, and well
equipped in every detail. Inspection invited.
Fruit arrives daily, selected from the best markets
of the State.
Innumerable kinds of soft drinks; splendidly
assorted stock of the highest-class confectionery;
full stocks of biscuits, cigarettes, tobaccos, etc.
4.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
The Swan Hi
Flour Mills..
ROSS BROS., Proprietors.
1. View of portion of the machinery. 2. One of the commodious wheat sheds. 3. View showing
the flour packers. 4. The flour mills—showing load of flour off to the Riverina. 5. View of the
The Swan Hill Flour Mills were erected in 1895
by the Messrs. Gillespie Bros., and operations were
carried on until 1902, when, owing to the poor
harvests and consequent shortage of wheat, the
mills were closed down. In 1908 Messrs. Ross
Bros. (W. T. and D. A. Ross) took over the pro-
perty, and since their advent the mills have become
a thriving, progressive and important industry in
Swan Hill. The prevent proprietors are keen, level-
headed business men, and they quickly decided to
equip their mills with a thoroughly modern plant
in every detail, and generally install labour-saving
machinery. To-day they can justly claim flour mills
R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
that are equal to the finest in the Commonwealth.
The “ White Swan ” brand of flour has secured
innumerable first prizes, and it is shipped to all
the principal markets of the world, where it holds
its own with the world’s best product. A large,
regular trade throughout the States has also been
secured, and the Western Riverina and Northern
Victoria practically secure all their supplies of flour
from Swan Hill. As demonstrating the hugeness of
this concern, it might be mentioned that 360 bags
of flour per day can be manufactured, and, as these
mills are at work continuously throughout the year,
the total is enormous. Th, grain sheds are capable
of holding from 30,000 to 4u,000 bags of wheat, and
loading stage.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
each season are usually taxed to their utmost.
The value of these mills to the district is incalcul-
able. The offal from them practically makes the
pig industry a successful and payable one, while
farmers invariably receive a higher price for wheat
when dealing with Ross Bros., who are not tied
down to any combine or “honourable understanding.”
Also they require it, not to make a profit on the
wheat, but on the manufactured article—flour.
The consummation of the Swan Hill-Piangil rail-
way will be of considerable importance to the firm
under review, as it will open up some very fine
wheat-growing country, and, as the Nyah, Piangil
and other towns further north of the former are
established, it will mean, in the course of time,
another large, prosperous district for the distribu-
tion of their products. The grain sheds are con-
veniently situated for the receiving of wheat at the
proposed railway terminus in Swan Hill.
Messrs. Ross Bros, are both good townsmen, who
have well earned by hard work their present pros-
perity and high reputation in the commercial world.
Quotations forwarded for the Renowned “WHITE SWAN” FLOUR to any part of Commonwealth,
Prompt delivery.
We are large BUYERS OF WHEAT, and offer highest prices.
BRAN, POLLARD, etc., on sale.
ROSS BROS.,
PROPRIETORS
THE SWAN HI
MILLING CO.”
SWAN HILL.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
THE SWAN HILL BUTTER FACTORY. R kelly.
The most important industry in the Swan Hill
district is the modern equipped and thoroughly
up-to-date butter factory controlled by Mr. P. A.
Kelly. To a very great extent can be traced the
present prosperity of the district and the settlers
to this industry, and the large amount of money
paid to suppliers each week very much surprised
the compiler of this work. A few facts concerning
the infancy of this now healthy, solid and pro-
gressive concern may be of interest. It is just
19 years ago since the first creamery was opened in
the district, at Tyntynder South, by Mr. Kelly.
The small quantity of 150 gallons of milk was
delivered during the first few days; the supply
gradually increased, however, and the establishment
of that creamery was the beginning of the dairying
industry which to-day has grown to such important
dimensions. For several years after Mr. Kelly
built his creamery the improvement was not con-
siderable, only a few settlers going in for dairying
on a moderately large scale, chiefly due to two
reasons —the low price paid for milk (sometimes
as low as 2jd. per gallon), and the fact that at that
time no suitable fodder was grown. Without green
food it was naturally impossible to secure a supply
of milk through the summer months. Lucerne
16 years ago was practically unknown and untried
in Swan Hill district.
The Fresh Food and Frozen Storage Co., Mel-
bourne, erected a creamery, Mr. Kelly becoming
manager. However, with the advent of hand separa-
tors, the supply of milk decreased, and in 1904
it was decided to suspend operations. Mr. Kelly,
however, believed even then strongly in the future
of the district as a dairying centre, and obtained
a lease of the building, and subsequently pur-
chased it outright. His initial troubles were many,
and in his own words he says;—
“In 1904 the supply was so small that selling
cream in Bendigo or Melbourne did not leave me
sufficient profit to exist on, so I thought t’would
be better to make it into butter and sell to the
stores. How to make it into butter, however, was
a puzzler. On making inquiries, I found a small
hand churn was obtainable from a neighbour, which
I borrowed, and turned out my first churn of
butter. Then to work and salt it was the next
trouble; but I was determined not to be beaten,
so drove into Swan Hill and procured a good broad
board to salt on. I then packed it into a box and
next day submitted it to the scrutiny of Mr. Fred
Boys, who pronounced it good and bought it.
Crowned with success, I later on installed a small
Power Cherry churn, and worked also a small re-
frigerator, and secured as a partner Mr. O. P.
Higgins, then employed by the Bendigo Butter
Factory as buttermaker. I was now enabled to
turn my attention to buying the farmers’ cream.
The Swan Hill butter met with a ready sale, not
only locally, but throughout the State. The fol-
lowing spring found the industry expanding right
through the Swan Hill district and even far into
the Mallee. The Murrav Flats by now ’"ere dotted
here and there with small plots of lucerne. Land
was advancing in price, though as yet slowly; the
choicest blocks on the flats were procurable at
£5 per acre, and even lower, though an odd farmer
was beginning to see that the land was worth a
great deal more for dairying than previously be-
lieved. The cheques from the factory were slowly
but surely lifting the mortgage front his farm, that
was necessarily placed there by previously trying
to grow grain that was not golden.
In 1906 two exhibits of butter were forwarded
to the Islington Dairy Show (London), and they
were awarded second prize for the salted section


1. The churning room. 2. A corner of the room where customers’ cans are stored, awaiting return.
3. A portion of the machinery. 4. The packing room. R. w. Martin, paoto. and design.
and special reserve prize for fresh and unsalted
butter. The awarding of these much-coveted prizes
(by buttermakers throughout the world) to the
Swan Hill Butter Factory affords ample proof and
demonstrates emphatically that butter of the very
finest quality and flavour can be manufactured from
the pastures of the Swan Hill district. In 1908
the Melbourne Chilled Butter Co. decided to erect
a factory in Swan Hill on the site opposite the
present factory. The directors’ enthusiasm, how-
ever, vanished before the factory was completed.
Mr. Kelly secured the building, removing same
immediately to the present position, where the com-
manding modern factory now stands. Mr. Kelly
in an enterprising manner spared no expense in
thoroughly equipping the factory with the most
modern machinery, which enables him to cope with
the increasing supply of cream each year and export
butter on a large scale throughout the Common-
wealth and the world's markets. Large ice works
have been installed, and about 12 tons of butter
per day can be turned out at this factory, which is
quite amongst the best and most modern in the
State. The highest price is paid for cream, and,
judging by the practically universal support ac-
corded this industry, Mr. Kelly’s customers are
well satisfied with the treatment received.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
1. Chaffcutting on Mr. Darnley’s estate. 2. Mr. Darnley’s beautifully proportioned and well bred
5-year-old mare “Rose Isle” (Gluten —Sallyport). 3. Some of the cattle on the estate. 4. A flock of
sheep “ watering ”in one of the several large paddocks. 5. A small mob of horses on the estate.
6. One of the teams at work. 7. Mr. and Mrs. Louis Darnley at their homestead. 8. Another team
at work with disc plough.
Mr. Louis Darnley is one of the oldest pioneers
of the Swan Hill district, having resided on his
splendidly improved property, comprising 3500
acres of rich fertile soil, situated some 6 miles from
the town of Swan Hill, some 20' years. During that
period he has been busily engaged in the noble
work of solving the many difficult problems of suc-
cessful cultivation that confront “ the man on the
soil,” and gradually improving his property, until
to-day he can justly claim it to be one of the best
and most up-to-date estates in the north. In his
younger days Mr. Darnley was a sailor in the
mercantile service—a fact he is still proud of.
This estate is eminently suitable for wheat growing,
and magnificent yields of wheat, as high as 33
bushels, have been secured. Mr. Darnley’s history
Is indissolubly linked with the history of the Mallee
—with the many vicissitudes and bulldog perse-
verances exhibited by the early settlers, and the
ultimate triumph through difficulties and obstacles
that seemed insuperable to many with less tenacity
and courage than men of Mr. Darnlev’s stamp.
Amongst the many improvements noticed were a
handsome homestead in place of the old Mallee
house which still remains, large dams, excellent
fences, well subdivided paddocks, a great quantity
of modern machinery and implements necessary in
the thorough working on scientific principles of
the land. There are nearly 2000 fine sheep on the
estate, over 50 horses (many exceptionally well
bred), and 200 head of cattle. Undoubtedly, Mr.
Darnley is one of the most enterprising and suc-
cessful farmers in the district, and a visit to his
estate is not only interesting, but is an object lesson
of what can be attained by scientific farming.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
The Handsome Chestnut Trotting Stallion,
“Honest.”
He is a natural gaited trotter, fast, stylish,
and of sweet temperament. He traces
back to a fine strain, being by “ Bonnie
Lea” from “Lady Ginger.” Mr. W. Gil-
lard is the owner.
WALKER BROS., Plumbers, Gasfitters, Tinsmiths, etc.,
Established 26 Years. CAMPBELL STREET, SWAN HILL.
Estimates given for all classes Galvanised Iron, Plumbing and Tinsmithing Work. Tanks built to any size.
Iron Chimneys. Oat Bins. Cream Cans. Repairs executed promptly.
Views of Messrs. Walker Bros.’ Premises, Campbell-street, Swan Hill. it. W. Martin, photo.
The successful business carried on by Messrs.
Edgar, Alfred and Roy Walker was established
some twenty-six years ago by the late Mr. Slater
Walker. Contracts are taken for plumbing, gal-
vanised iron work and tinsmithing in any pan of
Swan Hill district. Messrs. Walker Bros, have
secured u splendid name for the quality of their
work and promptness in execution. Many of tne
larger contracts in Swan Hill, the district, Riverina,
and even in Balranald, have been carried out by this
firm’s first-class tradesmen. Mr. Edgar Walker takes
a keen interest in the Swan Hill Brass Band. For
the past seven years he has acted as bandmaster in
a decidedly capable manner.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
The COMMERCIAL HOTEL
CAMPBELL ST
SWAN HILL.
JAMES A. GARDEN, Proprietor.
Large Additions. Renovated Throughout.
First-class Accommodation for Travellers. New, Modern Sample Rooms. Cab Meets Trains.
Conveniently Situated. Livery and Bait Stables. Commodious Billiard Room.
First-class Menu; No. 1 and No. 2 Tables. Large Yards for Farmers’ Vehicles.
Fine glass of Sparkling Ale can always be relied upon at “ The Commercial,” and the Best
Brands of Wines and Spirits.
1. Exterior of “ The Commercial,” showing recent improvements. 2. One of the Commodious Dining-
rooms. 3 and 4. Views of the Accommodation Yards at “The Commercial.”
The Commercial Hotel, which is now one of the
most modern and well-managed hotels in provincial
Victoria, is conducted by Mr. James A. Garden. On
account of the popularity enjoyed, the proprietor found
it necessary to erect handsome two-story additions
to the hotel. These have been completed, with the
result that the public can now rely on receiving the
greatest convenience, attention and comfort at “ The
Commercial.” The domestic arrangements are very
capably supervised by Mrs. Garden, the general result
being that the great popularity of this hotel is not only
well retained, but continues to gradually expand.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
THE OLDEST AND MOST NOTED BUTCHERING ESTABLISHMENT
ARTHUR TRAINOR,
Campbell Street, Swan Hill
Established 18 Years
PRIMEST OF MEAT
BEST OF SMALL GOODS
Mr. A. Trainer’s premises, Campbell-street, Swan Hill. R - w - Martm > photo
Meat delivered promptly. The requirements of every customer studied. My business is keeping ahead
of the times. Electric light, fans, machinery driven by electricity, all to be installed shortly. No
effort has been nor will be spared in the future to give my hundreds of customers the best of goods.
INSPECTION INVITED, AND A TRIAL WILL BE APPRECIATED.
ARTHUR TRAINOR,
Large Buyer of Fat Stock. Communications Receive Prompt Attention


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
onald McDonald, Stoc ag E nT ation
1. Mr. Donald McDonald’s Offices, Campbell-street, Swan Hill. 2. One of his large horse sales.
C. A sheep sale at Swan Hill. 4. A cattle sale at Swan Hill. 5 &6. Interesting views of McDonald’s
commodious sale yards. R. W. Martin, photo.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
donald McDonald, Stock and Station
Agent
Head Office: KLRANG.
Branches: SWAN HILL, PYRAMID HILL and MYSTIC PARK
m
m
The extensive and important stock and station
agency business conducted by Mr. Donald McDon-
ald was established by him 16 years ago at Kerang.
Its growth was gradual and solid until recent years,
when branches have been established at Pyramid
Hill, Swan Hill (with an agency at Mystic Park),
and the progress, expansion and influence have be-
come more marked, until to-day it holds rank with
the best-known and influential auctioneering firms
in the State. Mr. McDonald is a progressive busi-
ness stamp of man, who has always stoutly believed
in the possibilities of the “ North,” and no one has
through bad and good seasons more staunchly kept
to these beliefs. To-day he is sharing with others
the wave of prosperity which has rightfully come
to the north. Although the head office is at Ke-
rang, he frequently visits his branches, and takes
the keenest interest in their welfare. The Swan
Hill offices are in Campbell-street, in charge of
Mr. W. A. McDonald, who is an extremely cour-
teous, able and popular manager. He possesses a
thorough knowledge in the buying and selling of
stock to the greatest advantage, as well as in every
feature of the land and stock agency business.
Stock sales are held at Kerang every alternate
Friday, and pig sales fortnightly; Pyramid Hill
monthly, and at Swan Hill fortnightly, when a full
#
#
#
#
The head office at Kerang.
yarding can generally be relied upon by buyers. The
yards at Swan Hill are well equipped, commodious
ones, costing nearly £lOOO. In furtherance of Mr.
McDonald’s progressive policy, he intends to erect
in the near future a comfortable office at the yards,
and have water laid on to every part of them.
Feed and water troughs will be provided. The
patrons of this firm will no doubt fully appreciate
this latest, up-to-date improvement. Clearing sales
are held throughout Victoria and N.S.W., and Mr.
McDonald, who has a splendid connection right
throughout the Riverina, has been successful in dis-
posing of an immense amount of land. Land sales
are quite a feature, in fact, of the business under
review. The horse sale, which is generally styled
“ McDonald’s Annual Horse Sale,” is one of the
largest held in the State, and is attended by buyers
from various parts of the Commonwealth. It is
held on the day after the Kerang annual show. The
trucking of stock is superintended by the firm for
all clients desiring it, and generally every effort is
made to study their interests to the utmost. Mr.
McDonald’s capable, lengthy experience and guid-
ance are always cheerfully extended to every farmer
and business man when required, and these, coupled
with the progressive spirit animating this firm,
have been the greatest factors in the success and
wide influence at present commanded.


WINES AND C 1 1Y MERCHANT AND
SPIRITS. JC 'I liM V7U 1 IMPORTER,
SWAN HILL. ULTIMA. CHILLINGOLLAH
Agent for H. V. McKay’s Agricultural Implements, Mount Lyell Manures, Atlas Assurance Co., Na-
tional Mutual Life Association.
Views of the Extensive and Various Departments of the Store.
No business in Swan Hill has progressed more
rapidly, solidly and extensively than the modern
general store of Mr. John Guy, who is well and
popularly known throughout the district. Eighteen
months ago Mr. Guy, with creditable enterprise,
purchased the general store carried on by Mr. J.
McKay, in McCailum-street, Swan Hill. Mr. A. H.
Chambers was appointed manager, and improve-
ments were immediately made in every department.
Stocks were heavily increased, alterations made to
the interior arrangements, and every detail was
studied with the view to bringing this store into line
with the best in the State. Farmers and residents
of the town gradually found that “ Guy’s Store ”
was catering for them very thoroughly at satisfac-
tory prices, hence a steady improvement in the cus-
tomers, who showed their practical appreciation of
the man who was placing first-class top quality
goods at low prices within their reach. It is only
fair that kudos should be extended to Mr. Cham-
bers, who, through his energy, courtesy and popu-
larity, has been a great success in the prosperity
and progression of this flourishing concern. There
are several departments—drapery, grocery, iron-
mongery, wines and spirits, boots, shoes, etc., etc.
Every possible article one could name required for
the farm and home is obtainable at “ Guy’s Store.”
Orders are delivered promptly, and anything within
reason will be carried out to meet patrons’ desires.


SOME INTERESTING VIEWS OF MR. JOSEPH LOCKHART’S
ESTATE, “GOODNIGHT,” BURRA.
Mr. Joseph Lockhart, jun. of “Goodnight,” Burra, is
one of the largest landowners, most successful graziers
and wheatgrowers in the Northern district. For fif-
teen years he was farming at Sea Lake, in the Mallee,
his success there allowing him to take up the large
area he now occupies, which comprises some 8000
acres of the choicest land of belah, pine, box and red
4?um country. The property is now being subdivided.
Wheat, oats, lucerne, etc., are being cultivated, and
1500 acres are cleared. A large creek runs through
secured nine bags of wheat to the acre, and is hopeful
of obtaining 33 bags by the aid of irrigation.
A factor that adds considerably to the value of this
splendid property is a three miles’ frontage to the
Murray River, and a permanent running creek right
through the centre at right angles to the river; also
there is a fine natural lake, about 80 acres in extent,
named “ Lake Wannah,” in the middle of the estate.
There is also an ample supply of water for domestic
purposes. Mr. Lockhart is one of the most enterpris-
ing. energetic and successful men in the North, and is
a live man in every sense of the word. He employs
1. A Pretty Murray River Scene at Burra. 2. The 75 h.p. Pumping Plant which irrigates the estate.
3. One of the Large Channels on the Property. 4. A Flock of Sheep at one of the fine Dams on
“ Goodnight.” 5. Mr. Lockhart’s Handsome Modern Homestead. 6. One of the Teams at Work
Drilling. 7. A Mob of Pigs (nearly 100). 8. Teams at Work on the Estate. r. w. Martin, photo.
the land, and five miles of channels intersect this
estate. The splendid and powerful pumping station
owned conjointly by Mr. Lockhart and Mr. T. E.
Hickey enables the former to irrigate direct from the
Murray River. It is of 70 indicated horse-power, and
is capable of pumping 7500 gallons a minute. Two
hundred acres are now irrigated, and no doubt that
area will be gradually greatly enlarged. The handsome
and newly-constructed residence is one of the most
artistic farmers’ abodes to be seen in the North, and
speaks well of Mr. Lockhart’s enterprise, who has
some fifteen hands on the estate, energetically per-
fecting and improving it. He is president of the
Wakool branch of the Farmers and Settlers’ Associa-
tion, N.S.W., and takes a keen interest in advocating
any object tending to bring the district into promi-
nence and secure for it some recognition of its com-
mercial importance. The estate carries several thou-
sand well-bred sheep, many cattle and horses, while
the machinery is of a modern pattern, thus allowing
Mr, Lockhart to work his property on the most advan-
tageous and scientific principles.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
The swan Hill Implement and Coachbuild-
ing Factory,
RAMSAY & WATSON,
Proprietors,
Campbell Street, Swan Hill
Established 15 Years.
Two Exterior Views of Messrs. Ramsay and Watson’s thriving and extensive Factory at Swan Hill
Horses Shod Carefully and Skilfully.
Implements of Every Kind Manufactured.
Machinery Repairs Executed Promptly.
Vehicles of Every Kind Built to Order.
Our Special Feature:
The Building of Waggons


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
The swan Hill Implement and Coachbuilding Factory
The wonderful growth of Messrs. Ramsay and Wat-
son’s extensive business is quite in keeping with that
of the Mallee province. Established fifteen years ago
by Mr. John Ramsay, who has been connected with the
district some 20 years, the proprietor had but the
assistance of a boy. He saw the town and district go
through many vicissitudes, and shared them himself
However, the drought years were weathered, and
Portion of one of the Machinery Shops.
1905 saw the commencement of a great expansion—
the latest and most modern machinery was installed,
the premises were considerably enlarged, many addi-
tional tradesmen were engaged, and that expansion has
been well maintained; so that to-day the compiler, m
The Shoeing Forge.
inspecting the factory, found nearly forty hands
engaged in the various departments coach-
building, implement making, trimming, paint-
ing, shoeing, etc. The firm under review have
played no small part in the development of the dis-
trict, for hundreds of miles north, south, east and
west of Swan Hill, by building and supplying the
settler with small capital, machinery to clear his land,
to cultivate it, and to cart the golden grain, cream
and other farm products to the various market centres.
They have not only given the farmer the best of
implements, waggons, vehicles, etc., but on most
favourable terms, and if ever there was a firm who
The Workshops and some of the Employees.
deserved the hearty vote of thanks from a community
it is Mr. John Ramsay and Mr. J. C. Watson. This
firm has a great reputation amongst its clients, not
only for good work, but for straight dealing. Farmers
who have dealt with the local manufacturers have
never had reason to regret their choice. Mr. Ramsay
is one of the leading townsmen, and has been Chair-
man of Water Trust, President of Hospital, and, in
fact, has been a leading spirit in practically every
social, sporting and public institution in Swan Hill.
RAMSAY & WATSON, Proprietors


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
D. J. CONNELL 8c CO..
Land, Stock, Finance, Machinery and General
Commission Agents.
Agents for—Sunshine Farm Machinery, Rawling and Co.’s Agricultural Implements, Cuming
Smith and Co.’s Manures, The Guardian Fire and Accident Insurance Co., Hornsby and Son’s
Engines and Machinery, Renowned “ Golden City ” Windmills.
R. W. Martin, photo.
Messrs. Connell and Co.’s modern offices and machinery department, Swan Hill (recently completed)
Although the firm of Messrs. D. J. Connell and
Co. was only established by Mr. D. J. Connell some
12 months ago, their record of progress is indeed
a striking one. Anything Mr. Connell takes in
hand he does well and thoroughly, and perhaps
that is one of the chief reasons of his great success
as a business man. The volume of business in-
creased so rapidly that the original proprietor found
it impossible to give the many clients and their
wants the fullest and necessary attention; there-
fore, he admitted Mr. W. Faulkner (who had been
manager for Mr. Connell) and Mr. J. W. Stephenson
(late manager of “ Gray’s general store,” Lake
Boga, during the past 7 years) into partnership.
The combination has proved a decidedly successful
one, and farmers, business men and the general
public can rely on receiving the most prompt at-
tention to any matter entrusted into the firm’s hands*
They are making a special feature of land sales,
and have many valuable properties on their books.
Clearing sales are conducted throughout the dis-
trict, and it is worthy of mention that the value of
this firm’s sales of Sunshine farm machinery re-
presents an immense sum in the Swan Hill district.
The several agencies held are the recognised lead-
ing ones in the State. Connell and Co. have recently
erected fine modern offices in Campbell-street, with
commodious show-rooms adjacent. They are
agents for various makes of motor cars, and utilise
three in the conveyance of land-seekers, buyers at
their clearing sales, and for other business purposes.
The members of the firm are much respected, both
as townsmen and business men, throughout the
district, and all possess a vast and sound know-
ledge of land and stock values, together with ex-
cellent judgment of the farmers’ requirements in
land, stock, finance and machinery. Advice is cheer-
fully extended to one and all. Correspondence
promptly attended to.


Views of “Saxilby Park” Estate, Tooleybuc, the property of Mr.
Septimus Broomhead.
Mr. Septimus Broomhead, of Saxilby Park, Tooley-
buc, ISr.S.W., came from Yorkshire in 1892 to Swan
Hill, and gained on the Springfield sheep station four
years’ practical experience in sheep-raising with Mr.
W. Macfarlane, one of the oldest pioneers. He then
prospected in Western Australia, and afterwards volun-
teered for the South African War in the fifth West
Australian Mounted Infantry, under General Walter
Kitchener’s command, and saw much active service.
He visited England later, but returned to South Africa,
acres are irrigable direct from the River Murray, which
runs through the property. He has secured some
very fine crops of wheat, and grazes a large number
of sheep and cattle. A very large area of mallee,
which comprises belah, pine, box and red gum, with
the pine predominating,, is now being rolled down and
cleared for cultivation on a large scale. There is a
comfortable homestead, surrounded by a lovely garden.
Mrs. Broomhead is an enthusiastic horticulturist, and
takes a keen interest in all matters appertaining to
1. A Mob of Cattle. 2 and 3. Rolling Down Mallee Scrub on the Estate. 4. The Handsome Home
stead on Saxilby Park. 5. A Fine Flock of Sheep
Horses bred at Saxilby Park.
and was engaged for three years in tobacco growing.
In 1905 he decided to came back to Springfield, an
started grazing at Ultima on 1260 acres, where he met
with much success. He disposed of his Ultima pro-
perty, and took up land at Tooleybuc in 190?- Mr.
Broomhead can be described as one of the most pro-
gressive farmers in the Northern area, and is now
the possessor of 5000 acres of the best pine country
north of Swan Hill—land which is capable of growing
cereals and fruits of every description. One thousand
6. One of the Teams at Work. 7. Some of the
R. W. Martin, photo.
the land and in local affairs generally. Mr. Broomhead
is interested in matters for the welfare of the
district, and is urging the necessity of closer settle-
ment and peopling the land, and will answer any let-
ters addressed to him as to the nature of the soil, its
resources, and the future prospects of the Mallee
country surrounding him. The new railway line to
Piangil, where Mr. Broomhead also owns some 400
acres of land, will run to within three miles of this fine
estate.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
The Progress of Ultima
A Town and District of Great Promise.
Ultima is not a town with a very momentous past,
but it is one tnat is assured, from every standpoint, a
splendid future. When one realises that only a score
or years ago tne spot where this progressive, modern
town stands to-day was but a portion of a sheep sta-
tion, he appreciates the wonderful transformation scene
and progress made more fully. Ultima is situated 121
miles from Bendigo, and has recently been raised by
Government proclamation to the prestige of a town.
In the early days miles of country surrounding were
known as the Ultima station. Some twenty years
ago James O’Connor entered into possession, and about
1894 the land was subdivided into large holdings. It
was at this time that wheat was first grown in the dis-
trict, and the fact that 30 bushels were obtained 18
years ago, when decidedly primitive methods and ma-
chinery were in vogue, anl no fertilisers used, goes
to prove beyond the shadow of doubt what fine natural
wheat-growing country there is in the Ultima district.
The town is built on land a pre-emptive right was
held over. That right, which cost but a few hundreds,
to-day is worth more than a few thousands of pounds.
Wonderful what development and the march of pro-
gress do. Now it is very nearly the largest wheat-
growing district in the Mallee province, and is a close
third to Swan Hill and Kerang in railway receipts.
In the early days water was carted from Boort,
and wheat taken by bullock teams mostly
Swan Hill. In 1904 the price realised was 1/4 per
bushel. It would be interesting to hear farmers’ re-
marks were they offered that price nowadays. Amongst
the most prominent and stalwart early settlers mention
must be made of Mr. Jury, whose two sons (A. T. and
J. A. Jury) are amongst the most progressive farmers
of the district, Mr. Wm. Jilbert and Messrs. A. and
W. McLean. Amongst the leading and principal land-
owners of the district are —Messrs. Chambers Bros.,
A. T. Byron, Connor Bros.. O’Brien Bros., McLean
Bros., R. Donoghue, Curnick Bros., T. Ryan. C. P. A.
Anders, Douglas Bros., Sutton Bros., A. Hood, M.
Kelly, J. A. and T. A. Jury, Richardsons, Dagge
Bros.
The present population of Ultima is in the neigh-
bourhood of 400. The spiritual life is well repre-
sented, the Wesleyan and Roman Catholic hav-
ing erected pleasing, suitable and adequate edifices,
while the Presbyterian Church is now in course of
erection. For a go-ahead, progressive town with up-
to-date people as residents the post office facilities are
totally inadequate for even nresent requirements. It
is a dingy, small, crude, primitive office, boasting of no
embellishment, convenience or suitability to the public.
A business man of Ultima would be ashamed to attend
to his customers in such a nlace. Also another matter
worthy of mention is the arrangements made, or,
rather, not made, for telegraphic business. There is
hardly room for two adults at the counter simultane-
ously, and certainly no privacy. Strong reoresenta-
tions should be made tn the Postmaster-General on
the subject. Another thing that should eventuate—
and that at once—is the installing of a telephone service
between two such important towns as Swan Hill and
Ultima. Ihe cost would be almost infinitesimal; the
gain and convenience to hundreds of business men,
'commercials, ordinary travellers and farmers great;,
and the line would pay handsomely. Is it not possible
for representative townsmen of Ultima and Swan Hill
to approach the Postmaster-General? The arguments
in favour of it are strong and irrefutable, and all that
appears necessary is to agitate, and keep
on agitating, until the necessary work is con-
summated. A branch of the Commercial Bank has
been firmly established, and there should be an excel-
lent opening in this progressive town for another simi-
lar institution. The Ultima residents are all a good
sporting community should be, and in addition to
Football, Cricket, Tennis and Rifle Clubs, the local
Racing Club holds two successful meetings annually.
An excellent rifle range has recently been completed. It
is conveniently situated, and is thoroughly up-to-date in
every detail. Ultima is under the Swan Hill Shire,
and is styled the South Riding. Now that it has been
proclaimed a town the streets and roads will be pro-
perly formed and laid out. Hitherto the council were
not empowered to spend money on improving the town.
The main thoroughfare is a fine wide one, half a mile
in length, and the numerous modern business premises,
with artistic, imposing signboards, large plate glass
windows, well arranged and set up with goods, at
once give the visitor a pleasing and excellent opinion
opinion of the town One doesn’t become disillusioned
on acquaintance with the people and the place; indeed,
it improves considerably, and there are few more
healthy, from a business standpoint, and more sociable
towns in the State than Ultima. If there are, the
compiler hasn’t found one. One thing that will
greatly improve the appearance of the town is tree-
planting. Could not working bees be formed occa-
sionally? and if a few energetic men took the matter
in hand great improvements could lie effected without
practically any cost. Suitable flora in and around a
town has a distinct tendency to increase the value of
property; also the shade is appreciable in summer,
and the pleasing effect to the eye and senses alone
returns quite sufficient reward for any labour or cost.
There are three exceedingly well conducted Coffee
Palaces —“ Rogers’ ” and “ Brooks’ ” —both have wine
licences. ■ Mr. Drewett, one of Ultima district’s
most respected farmers, has taken over the L Itima
Coffee Palace, and is conducting it on most commend-
able and excellent lines. He is also establishing a
motor garage. The convenience of being able to hire
motor cars will be much appreciated by many, and this
venture brings the town even still more up-to-date.
The main industry of the district is wheat-growing,
though a great deal of land is merely used at present
for grazing purposes. The annual total wheat yields
of the district have been about 75.000 bags during the
past five years, an average return over that period being
from eight to ten bushels to the acre. Considerable
improvement in the working of the land has been
manifest during recent years, with the result that the


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
magnificent soil has had an opportunity of demonstrat-
ing its great wealth and resource. Many of the more
progressive type pf farmers have secured over thirty
bushels of wheat to the acre. The best land in the dis-
trict is usually of a red sandy nature, and the present
value is from £3 to £5 per acre. That, of course,
is for cleared land ; natural Mallee country, in its
native state, is cheaper. There are undoubtedly some
grand opportunities in the district for settlers. A con-
siderable amount of land is available at reasonable
prices, and it only means .one or two good seasons to
pay off the capital paid on the land, so prolific are
the wheat yields. Ultima is indeed fortunate in being-
well provided with water, which is obtained from the
Long I ake plant. The water is stored in two large
reservoirs with a capacity of 40,0-00 yards. The re-
servoirs are so built that one can be emptied while the
other is being replenished. Water from the reservoirs
is pumped by an immense windm'll, 25 feet in dia-
meter (probably the largest in the State), into a con-
crete water tower, which holds a week’s domestic
supply for the town. This tower is 40 feet high, and
is fed from the bottom, the water gradually rising to
the top. The windmill can raise 80.000 gallons into
it every twenty-four hours. Water is reticulated
through a 3 in. main throughout Ultima. Larger pipes
are required though, the present pressure being quite
inadeouate. The simply is snlendid, but the reticula-
tion of same directly opposite.
As previously mentioned, Ultima is one of the most
progressive towns in the State, from every standpoint.
It has gore ahead fast, and is likely to continue, for
it is surrounded by thousands of acres of magnificent
wheat-growing and grazing land. The business men
are energetic and public-spirited in every possible way,
and the future is bright. Within a few years Ultima
must become a decidedly large and important com-
mercial town, with a wonderfully thriving, numerous
and prosperous farming community.
An important town and district like Ultima most
certainly should have a hotel; the fact of it not being
able to secure a licence is generally recognised as an
injustice from every standpoint. It appears that an
amendment of the present licensing laws is necessary
before Ultima can secure justice. However, the resi-
dents of the whole district are energetically moving in
the matter, and are to interview Mr. Murray, the
Premier. As they have a good strong, solid, unques-
tionab'y just case, they must eventually succeed.
Ultima is becoming an important stock sale centre.
Messrs. Morrow and Co. have been established some
time, and recently large, commodious yards have been
built for Edward Trenchard and Co., who will in all
probability shortly open a branch at Ultima. There
are two firms of solicitors practising, and the resident
medical officer is Dr. James Rowan.
The Ultima Coachbuilding and Repair Factory
J. H. HOGAN, Proprietor.
Interior and Exterior of the Ultima Coachbuilding Factory. R. W. Martin, photo
VEHICLES OF ANY DESIGN AND STYLE BUILT TO ORDER
REPAIRS PROMPTLY CARRIED OUT.
.*. Re-Hooding, Painting, etc, Undertaken..’.
All work done by competent tradesmen under the direct supervision of the proprietcr,


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
JOHN GUY, JNR.,
General Merchant and Importer
THOUSANDS OF POUNDS’ WORTH OF GOODS TO
CHOOSE FROM.
1. The exterior of this progressive and enterprising business. 2. The grocery department. 3. The
drapery department. R. w. Martin, photo.
HIGH - CLASS QUALITY ARTICLES AT REASONABLE
PRICES.
ULTIMA,
Chillingollah
Swan Hill,
and...


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
JOHN GUY, JNR,
GENERAL MERCHANT AND IMPORTER.
ULTIMA,
SWAN HI
AND CHILLINGOLLAH.
LEADING DEPARTMENTS:
Drapery, Grocery, Millinery, Ironmongery, Boots and shoes. Large 5 took of
Timber and All Classes Building Material.
Agent for H. V. McKay’s Sunshine Agricultural Implements, Mt. Lyell Manures, Atlas Assurance
Co., National Mutual Life Association.
One of the best known and most respected men in
the Swan Hill district is Mr. John Guy, jun., who was
engaged for many years in farming pursuits. While
retaining an interest in the land, he decided, towards
the latter end of 1904, to establish a general store at
Ultima. To term it a primitive store would hardly
be correct, but it certainly was by no means a large
and comprehensive one. The growth, though, was
phenomenal, Mr. Guy proving himself even a better
man in business than at farming. He possessed a
vast knowledge of the Mallee farmer’s requirements,
and catered for them on liberal and scrupulously fair
commercial lines. Hence his great success, until to-day
the Ultima store is one of the most modern and best
equipped north of Bendigo, with a consistently in-
creasing turnover. However, Mr. Guy’s energetic and
progressive natured spurred him on to further creditable
enterprise. He recognised that by importing and buy-
ing in large quantities it was possible to secure better
terms and prices for goods, which would enable him
to sell with advantage both to the customer and to
himself. Therefore an up-to-date branch, in charge
of Mr. L. Williams, was established at Chillingollah,.
and eighteen months ago the general store conducted
by Mr. J. McKay at Swan Hill was acquired by Mr.
Guy, Mr. A. H. Chambers being placed in charge.
Both these branches have made wonderful strides, in
keeping with the parent store at Ultima, and have
proved a splendid acquisition to the commercial world
of Swan Hill and district. The proprietor endeavours
very successfully to give the public a high-class quality
article at reasonable prices, and at his stores will be
found thousands of pounds’ worth of goods to choose
from. The very fact of the remarkable growth of
the stores under review amply proves that Mr. Guy
has satisfied the public well, and they are showing their
practical appreciation by the hearty and extensive sup-
port accorded him.
It is only fair to mention that m a great measure
the prosperity enjoyed is due to Mr. Guy’s managers
at Chillingollah and Swan Hill, for both Mr. Williams
and Mr. Chambers are decidedly courteous, prompt and
energetic in business, while they enjoy much popularity
as townsmen.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
W. and A. SMITH,
General Storekeepers and Butchers, Ultima
Proprietors Ultima Ice Works
Exterior of Messrs. Smith’s premises, and view showing their small goods factory.
The progressive firm of Messrs. W. and A. Smith,
general storekeepers and butchers, of Ultima, have
made rapid strides during recent years. Their estab-
lishment is now a thoroughly up-to-date one in every
respect. The drapery and grocery departments are
well stocked, and there is a considerable yearly turn-
over, which must aggregate many thousands of pounds.
Farmers are catered for liberally in every detail. Large
o nan titles of building material of every kind are on
hand, and, in fact, every class of article a sound,
flourishing, first-class store should have can be obtained
at Messrs. Smith’s establishment.
The butchering business adjoins the store, and is a
most complete, modern one from every standpoint.
All small goods are manufactured on the premises,
and the primest of meat can be relied upon. In connec-
tion with the successful carrying on of this business,
two oil engines— 6 and h.p.—have been installed.
The larger one is utilised for the modern ice works,
and the smaller for small goods work. Meat is kept
in cool storage chambers, and Messrs. Smith supply
Ultima and d;U~ict with ice, while quantities are de-
spatched to Chillingollah, Quambatook and other dis-
trict towns.
Large Quantities of Building Materials of Every Kind On Hand.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
The . Ultima Coffee Palace
A MODERN ESTABLISHMENT,
Conducted to give
every comfort and
convenience to the
travelling public.
Splendid Accommoda-
tion.
Fine Airy Rooms.
First-class Menu.
Meals at ail hours.
Afternoon Tea a spe
cial feature.
Commercial Room.
Private Parlour.
Large Accommodation
Yards.
Considerable additions
to the Stall and Stab-
ling Accommodation.
1. Drewett’s Coffee Palace, Ultima. 2. A side view of this modern building. 3. Mrs. Drewett
and her daughters, who attend most assiduously to the comfort of the travelling public. 4. The
large, comfortable dining-room. R. W. Martin, photo.
J. DREWETT
... PROPRIETOR ~.
ULTIMA COFFEE PALACE
ULTIMA MOTOR GARAGE
That well-known property, the Ultima Coffee
Palace, has recently been taken over by Mr. Joseph
Drewett, one of the best known and esteemed resi-
dents of the Ultima district. He proved himself an
excellent farmer during a period of thirty years, and
in his new sphere is equally as successful. The
Ultima Coffee Palace is splendidly managed and
conducted in every detail, and the domestic arrange-
ments are ably and creditably carried out by Mrs.
Drewett, assisted by her daughters.
Mr. Drewett, being a progressive, enterprising
man, recently decided to establish a motor
garage at Ultima. Such an establishment was most
certainly necessary, and it is pleasing to record the
success attending this venture.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
ULTIMA RAILWAY HOUSES ULTIMA.
Conveniently Situated Opposite Station.
ALEX. ROGERS. PROPRIETOR
FIRST-CLASS ACCOMMODATION FOR FARMERS AND THE TRAVELLING PUBLIC.
No. 1 and No. 2 Tables. Excellent Menu. Splendid, Airy, Comfortable Bedrooms. Large Accommodation Yards.
A Feature Worth Noting—the Best Brands of Wines and Cigars.
1. Exterior of Mr. Rogers’ handsome property, Ultima. 2. The commodious public dining-room.
3. The No. 1 dining-room. 4. Illustrating the large accommodation yards. 5. The up-to-date bil-
liard saloon.
In one respect Ultima is unfortunate —i.e., in not
possessing an hotel. In another it is fortunate in
having such a fine, well-managed, commodious
house of accommodation as that which has been so
well conducted by Mr. Alex. Rogers during the past
four years. He is a keen, observant, genial, pro-
gressive business man, eminently adapted for the
c l ass of establishment now under review. Since his
securing the property considerable structural im-
provements and additions have been carried out.
with the result that the “Ultima Railway House”
can now accommodate some forty persons with
beds, and offers the greatest possible comfort and
convenience to the farming community and travel-
ling public.
The public dining-room, which is one of the
largest in the Mallee, can accommodate over eighty
persons at one sitting. The smaller one is known
as the No. 1, and is chiefly patronised by commer-
cial and other travellers. The billiard room is well
fitted up, and an enjoyable game is invariably as-
sured on an excellent table. Mr. Rogers is careful
in the selection of the wines sold at his establish-
ment, and on his shelves will be found all the noted
and generally recognised wines—wines that will do
one good. Another improvement is the large ice
chest, which enables the proprietor to give his cus-
tomers a delightfully cool, refreshing drink. The
domestic arrangements are ably carried out by Mrs.
Rogers, and the great success of and patronage ac-
corded this “ House ” is in a great measure due to
the smooth working of the domestic arrangements.
Mr. Rogers has fought strenuously to further the
interests of the town and district in every conceiv-
able manner, and was a decidedly energetic secre-
tary of the Progress Association for two years.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
R. FAULKS, Proprietor Ultima Saddlery Establishment
Large Stock of Saddles, Harness, Whips, Rugs, Chains, etc. Collars made to any size required. Re
pairs executed promptly.
Mr. R. Faulks’ modern, well stocked and managed saddlery premises, Ultima.
It is not often that one finds such an up-to-date
saddlery business in a comparatively small town as
that so successfully carried on by Mr. R. Faulks at
Ultima. The premises are of modern design, thus
allowing the proprietor to display his large, well-
selected stock to the greatest advantage. It is pleas-
ing to record the complete success ana progress
made. The community evidently recognise that the
prices are right, and the quality of work first-class.
1. The busy season at Ultima. 2. One of the pretty gardens in Ultima. 3. A remarkable
growth of pie melons and marrows, illustrating what the Ultima soil can produce; 1280 lbs. weight
was taken from two plants. R. W. Martin, photo.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
BROOKS’ COFFEE PALACE,
ULTIMA.
Splendid Accommodation.
Billiard Room.
Magnificent, Healthy Position
Stabling and Large Accommodation Yards
Best of Wines, Cigars, etc.
1. General View of “ Brooks’.” 2. One of the dining-rooms. 3. The well fitted up billiard saloon.
4. “ Brooks’ ” large accommodation yards are much availed of by the farming community.
Ultima has three excellent coffee palaces, and
that conducted and managed by Mr. and Mrs.
Brooks is one of them. This establishment stands
on the exact position of the old Ultima station
homestead, and, in fact, portion of the outbuildings
are still standing. Mr. M. Brooks has only had this
property some three years, but he has made great
improvement and additions in scores of ways.
Nearly twenty extra bedrooms have been erected;
large dining-room, capable of seating with ease over
sixty persons; stabling for twenty-five horses, and
large accommodation yards for the convenience of
the farming community. The saleyards adjoin
Brooks’ Coffee Palace, and Mr. Brooks, in an en-
terprising spirit, has, at considerable expense, had
a modern public sheep dip built. It has proved a
great convenience in every way. Amongst other
improvements noted were underground sewerage,
and large tanks for conserving water for domestic
use. Water is reticulated from these tanks through-
out the house. Acetylene gas has been installed
in the premises, and the Italian bowling
rink is well lighted at night. Mr. Brooks, who takes
a keen interest in the welfare of Ultima, is agent
for the Manchester Fire Insurance Co., Norwich
Union, and Phoenix Fire Co. Mrs. Brooks super-
vises the domestic arrangements smoothly and well,
and in every way the management reflects the
greatest credit on them.


WILLIAM J. O’BRIEN, Ultima Implement & Coachbuilding Factory
PROPRIETOR.
Repairs promptly executed to Farming Machinery of every kind. Horses Shod scientifically and
carefully. Vehicles of every description built to order. Waggons a special feature- Buggies, etc.,
repaired, painted, rehooded, etc.
R. W. Martin, photo.
Interior and exterior views of the Ultima Implement Factory. Mr. W. J. O’Brien, proprietor.
The Ultima Implement and Coachbuilding Factory,
which has been controlled by Mr. W. J. O’Brien dur-
ing the past two years, is well equipped for the carry-
ing out of repairs to machinery, vehicles, etc. Waggon
building is a special feature. Several competent me-
chanics are employed, and all work is under the per-
sonal supervision of the proprietor, who is a thorough
tradesman in every branch of the successful business
he controls. The best of material is used in the
building of vehicles, the various farm implements
manufactured and in repairs, and while Mr. O’Brien
treats his clients so fairly, squarely and liberally his
business should continue to expand rapidly and solidly
in the future, and the splendid reputation he has
secured for good honest work should be well main-
tained.
Panoramic View of Ultima. 2. Portion of the large reservoir at Ultima. 3. The State School
and the Rising Generation. R. W. Martin, photo.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
H. E. & M. A. CUTTLE,
ULTIMA.
General Merchants, Builders and Contractors, Wheat Buyers.
Branches at MLATIAN and WAITCHIL.
AGENCIES: Vacuum Oil Co., Edison Phonograph, Cuming, Smith and Co.’s Florida Manures. Ma-
chinery: T. Robinson and Co. Propty. Ltd., Spotswocd, and International Harvester Co., Farm Ma-
chinery and Implements; Rawling and Co., Warracknabeal, Wool Presses; Thos. Howlo. Footscray,
Gasolene Tractor Engine. Cyclone Woven Wire Fence and Gate Co. Allan and Co.’s Pianos and
Organs. NEWS AGENTS, etc
Messrs. Cuttle’s modern, splendidly
Messrs. H. E. and M. A. Cuttle’s was the first
store established in Ultima and district. That was
in 1900, in a small weatherboard building in the mam
street, upon which their private residence now
stands.
As the district developed in its wheat and grazing-
industry, so has the business expanded, and, upon
the completion of the Long Lake water scheme, it
was found necessary to erect more commodious pre-
mises. These were erected in 1907, and are con-
stantly being added to, the increasing trade making
this absolutely necessary.
The business has been conducted on the lines of
the firm’s motto, viz.—“ To buy everything a far-
equipped General Store, Ultima. R - w - Martin, photo
mer has to sell, and to sell everything a farmer
wants to buy.”
The fine grain store recently erected by the side
of the railway line, the plant of which was specially
imported from America, is the only one of its type
in the north-western district of Victoria, and is
worked by a 10 h.p. engine, and is constructed to
not only thoroughly clean the wheat, but to grade
any “ off ” samples of wheat, and is capable of work-
ing some 500 bags per day.
This well-conducted business establishment is one
of the largest and most enterprising in Northern Vic-
toria, and is a splendid illustration of the achievements
and possibilities of the Mallee.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
Over IGO,COO bags of wheat were handled in their
three depots during the 1910-11 season, which proves
beyond doubt the power of production of this por-
tion of the mallee.
Apart from Mr. and Mrs. Cuttle, who are the part-
ners in the business, and their efficient staff, Mr.
Herbert Cuttle, their eldest son, takes a very pro-
minent part in the business.
The fine and well-equipped stores carry a full
tock in the various departments, comprising dra-
attention to the requirements of the district.
Quality, fair prices, courteous and generous treat-
ment and consideration, with a heavy, well-selected
stock in every department, are the principal factors
in the great success achieved by this firm, and the
successful and excellent management shown by this
firm has raised it to the high pinnacle attained.
Since its foundation everything has been done
thoroughly on a large scale. The drapery and gro-
cery departments, for instance, are so extensive
that one wonders if there is sufficient local popula-
Interior Views of Cuttle’s Store, Ultima
pery, grocery, boots and shoes, millinery, ironmon
gery, crockery, glassware, stoves, furniture (well
selected stock), pianos, windmills, iron tanks, paints,
paperhangings, linoleums, timber, building mate-
rials, fencing, horse feed, etc., etc., etc.
At their Ultima branch can be inspected the lar-
gest and most complete stock of up-to-date ma-
chinery and farming implements in the northern
districts.
The firm’s success is mainly attributable to con-
sistent efforts and unlimited work, directed by close
J\. W. Martin, photo.
tion to use up such a large stock. As a matter of
fact, there is not, but the operations of Messrs.
Cuttle have an ever-widening scope. The firm keep-;
pace with the march of settlement in the Mallee.
Scores of miles north and north-west of Ultima
embryo towns are springing up, and Cuttle’s are as-
sisting to build them. Messrs. Cuttle have estab-
lished flourishing branches at Waitchie and Meatian.
With the advent of successive good seasons there
became a great demand for houses and buildings of
various kinds in Ultima, and this enterprising firm


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
decided to erect timber yards with all necessary ad-
juncts. A competent staff of workmen are engaged,
and this additional branch is now an important one,
building of every description being undertaken.
Both Mr. and Mrs. Cuttle have identified them-
selves with every movement for the advancement of
the district, and have done all that good citizens
should do.
Mr. Cuttle is a J.P. for the Midland Bailiwick.
He is president of the Ultima Progress Association,
and is closely associated with all local affairs gene-
rally, and is always willing to support any good
movement.
Mrs. Cuttle is president of the Australian
Women’s National League, and is registrar of births
and deaths for the district.
Mrs. Cuttle.
Mr. H. E. Cuttle.
1. The Waitchie Store. 2. Interior of the Waitchie Store. 3. The Meatian Store. 4. Portion
of the machinery in the Grain Store. 5. The Grain Store, Ultima. r. w. Martin photo, and de?
R. W. Martin, photo, and design


THE progress or swan hill and district.
1. Dr. F. R. Legge’s residence. 2. Mr. O. P. Higgins’ residence. 3. Mr. W. McLean’s residence
(erected by Mr. H. Pye). 4. The Shire Hall, Swan Hill. 5. The River Murray at Nyah. 6. Four-
teen bullock teams carting wheat to Swan Hill. 7. Some prominent members of A.W. National
League, Swan Hill (Mrs. Knox Chapman president). 8. A beautiful spot near Swan Hill—Murray
Downs Lake. 9. The Swan Hill cricket (B) team. R. w. Martin, photo.
Some fine large wheat stacks at Swan Hill-


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT,
Mr. Andrew S. Muir, head of
the important auctioneering
firm of Andrew S. Muir and
Mr. O’Donnell, Messrs. Andrew
S. Muir’s capable and popu-
lar auctioneer.
Mr. Angus K. Chapman, editor |
and part proprietor of the
“ Swan Hill Guardian.”
THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
QTHNV rDHQQIMr /WC sowing. The country in the neighbourhood of Stony
O IUIN I Crossing ig undulat ing, picturesque, and well-wooded,
and an inspection of this country creates a very favour-
Stony Crossing is in the Shire of Wakool, and is a ble impression, inasmuch as it is also eminently suited
recognised by farmers generally as being a splendid f o r closer settlement and can be easily irrigated. Most
district for wheat-growing and grazing, especially the Q f the farms have their own irrigation plants, and the
land situated near the Murray River. There are eight water is obtained from the river in some instances,
large lakes extending from Heatherbell to the Wakool. an d j n others from the fine lakes which are on their
These are of great advantage to the farmer. properties.
The land is split up in large areas of from 3000 to St Crossing can safe l y be described as the pick
6CCO acres, and there the most prosperous and up-to- Qf th / ]ant , on ° the New South Wales side, judging
date farmers have settled, incliuhng such men as Mr. frQm the turnover in sto ck, etc., and because of its
t' E ' °ii d, n Mr \/‘ p L^ nU o\: w Y , RrlTw w‘ easv access to Swan Hill ancl its nearness to the new
James Kelly Mr. R. T. Scott, Mr. J Brock, Mr. W. rai f wav line to Nyah. which will necessitate a pum
R. Holmes Messrs, Crcmie Bros., and others who go ])d * jnto use very shortly.
m largely for grazing and the breeding of stock and R
wheat-growing The Poon Boon Estate is a part of The compiler is glad to be enabled to bring the
Stonv Crossing Stony Crossing district prominently before the public,
Intending settlers might with advantage visit the as the great fertility of the soil and its splendid adap-
Stony Crossing district if desiring suitable land. As lability for intense culture, together with the immense
an illustration of its great fertility, one instance might scope that exists for successfully irrigating the land are
be given. Last season Mr. F. E. Old secured the not generally recognised by settlers and buyers of land
magnificent yield of 60 bushels of oats to the acre from in New South Wales and Victoria. It is also a fine
a SO-acre block. Many more instances could be given pastoral country, and stock fatten rapidly on the grass
of large yields. It must be taken into account, how- which grows so abundantly in the Stony Crossing dis-
ever, that Mr. Old’s land had been flooded previous to trict.
A General View of Swan Hill
R. W. Martin, photo.
Mr. R. M. Murdoch, one of Mr. C. E. Campbell, of Ballarat,
who executed the blocks ap-
pearing in this book.
Swan Hill’s first business
men.
Messrs. D. J. Connell, J. W.
Stevenson, and W. Faulkner,
of Connell and Co,, land and
machinery agents, etc.
Mr. John Guy, jun., the success-
ful and enterprising Ultima
and Swan Hill business man.
Mr. Alex. Rogers, the success-
ful and popular proprietor of
the Ultima Railway Coffee
Palace and Wine Saloon.
Mr. Chris. Maloney, an earlj
pioneer, who discovered mant
years ago the Gypsum de
posits at Lake Boga.




THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
EBB BROS. 8c CO.
General Engineers, rercv b. webb,, WARRNAMBOO
Steel, Brass and Iron Workers; Steel, Brass and Iron Founders, etc.
Manufacturers of Patent Double Crank and Quadrant Gear All-Steel Windmills,
All Appliances Supplied for Watering Stock or
Garden, Farmers’ Steaming Apparatus, Windmills,
Steam Boilers, all Fittings for Butter and Cheese
Factories.
Windmills, for water supply and irrigation, are
necessary on every farm and station in Australia.
It has been proved beyond doubt that your stock
matic oiling (their own invention) is used, ensur-
ing a good supply to the bearings when the mill
is working, and stopping the waste of oil when the
mill is idle. Everything is made exceptionally
strong, and the windmills are made in all sizes, from
the small mill with 6 feet wheel, for lifting from
shallow depths, to the large 25 feet wheel for great
depths and for irrigation. Several large mills have
1. One of “Webb’s” Windmills on Mr. J. E. Jones’ property, Swan Hill. 2. “Webb’s” Patent Wind-
mills at Windmill Valley, Swan Hill. 3. The Head Office and Factory, Lava Street, Warrnarnbool.
4. “Webb’s” Windmills are found everywhere in the Mallee, giving the greatest possible satisfaction.
must have water, and water is necessary. Messrs.
Webb Bros, have a most extensive plant for the
manufacture of these useful machines. They have had
unlimited experience extending over a number of
years, and it is claimed that their mills have advan-
tages which are to be found on no other mill on
the market. They use the Patent Double Crank
Gearing, which gives a central and direct lift to the
pump rods. No uneven wearing of the bearings;
the bearings are gunmetal, and are adjustable. Pit-
man’s steel—an important factor in the windmill
—is used throughout. A perfect system of auto-
been supplied, and they have all given the greatest
satisfaction. Mr. (no. Crane, of Nathalia, has a
number, and he is so well satisfied that orders are
coming in every day from neighbours. The Vic-
torian Government are using them for their bores
on the Closer Settlement areas, and for supplying
water for the train services at the railway stations.
Mr. J, E. Jones, of Swan Hill, is the district agent,
and he will be pleased to give all information and
catalogues, with details of the mills, which will be
found decidedly useful to those about to install irri-
gation plants.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
Mr. James Brock’s “Poon Boon” Station, N.5.W
1. Beautiful View of Lake Poomah, Poon Boon. 2. Poon Boon Homestead as viewed from Lake
Poomah. 3. Mr. James Brock’s Homestead, Poon Boon. 4. Snapshot of some of the 3000 sheep
on Poon Boon. 5. Engine-House and Irrigation Plant. 6. A few of the horses bred on Poon Boon.
7. Mr, Brock’s bullock team.
R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
One of the finest and best improved properties
in the Stony Crossing district is “ Poon Boon ” sta-
tion, which was purchased by Mr. James Brock,
of Hamilton, Tasmania, some two years ago. The
area acquired was 5000 acres of freehold land, but
1000 acres have since been disposed of by Mr. Brock,
who goes in principally for sheep raising and fat-
tening lambs for export on his lucerne paddocks.
He is also a large and enthusiastic breeder of blood
stock. There are two beautiful lakes on this pro-
perty —Poon Boon, three miles wide, and Poomah.
This property has a mile frontage to the former,
and li miles to the latter. On both lakes native
game abound. Mr. Brock, being of an energetic and
progressive nature, quickly decided to make use of
the bountiful supply of water these lakes give, and
installed a powerful pumping plant, which supplies
ample water to irrigate over 300 acres of lucerne,
oats, etc., and for domestic and stock requirements.
The comfortable homestead stands on a gentle rise,
allowing an uninterrupted, magnificent, picturesque
view of Lake Poomah and the surrounding coun-
try. There are many building improvements on
this estate, the shearing shed being quite one of the
most modern and largest in N.S.W. The grounds
surrounding the homestead are splendidly timbered,
and are well laid out and sub-divided into flower,
fruit and vegetable gardens. With characteristic
energy, Mr. Brock is gradually clearing the whole
of his estate, and the extensive and modern irriga-
tion scheme should be of incalculable benefit during
a dry spell. Some 400 acres are now being ploughed,
and the owner intends to enter into cultivation on a
large scale. The latest type of machinery is in use,
and farming is carried out in the most scientific
manner and with modern methods. Mr. Brock has
in innumerable ways so improved “ Poon Boon ”
that it certainly now ranks amongst the most valu-
able properties in the Swan Hill and Stony Crossing
districts.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
Some Interesting Views taken on Mr. L. H. Chapman’s estate,
Glencoe, Stony Crossing.
1. A flock of sheep on Mr. Chapman’s Estate. 2& 3. Bullock and horse teams at work on the
estate. 4. The large windmill on the estate. 5. Mr. Chapman’s pumping plant. 6. The Wakool
at Stony Crossing. 7. Mr. Chapman’s comfortable homestead. r. w. Martin, p ll0 to. and design.
Mr. E. H. Chapman, Glencoe, Stony Crossing, is one
of the oldest residents on the Poon Boon Estate,
having been associated with same for the past 28 years.
He carries on grazing and wheatgrowing on an exten-
sive scale, and owns 3300 acres of fine country, prin-
cipally box, pine and red gum. He is the son of the
late Mr. Robert Chapman, who originally owned about
10,000 acres of Poon Boon, and who was one of the
most respected men of the district. This estate
has since been subdivided, and the present property
forms part of the original holding.
Mr. Chapman gives his whole attention to farming,
and is certainly one of the leading graziers and farmers
in the Swan Hill district. His success is undoubtedly
attributable to his persistency in farming and long
acquaintance with the district. There is a lengthy
frontage to Lake Poomah, and there are eight large
dams on the property; 700 acres are at pre-
sent under wheat cultivation; the remainder is first-
class grazing land. Five hundred acres, however, are
under irrigation from the lake, with the aid of a
powerful pumping engine; the land is eminently
suitable for closer settlement. Lake Poomah has never
been known to be dry. Directly opposite this property
is the well-known Poon Boon station.
Mr. E. H. Chapman was a director of the Moula-
mein Pastoral Protection Board for some years. He
is the owner of 3000 sheep, a large number of cattle
and bullocks, 25 horses, and a considerable number of
modern farming implements. The proposed railway
to Piangil will undoubtedly still further enhance the
vahte of this fine property, as the nearest suggested
station will be only six miles from Mr. Chapman’s pro-
perty.


Some of the leading Business-men
and Farmers
in the Swan Hill district.
1. Mr. W. H. Gerrand. 2. Mr. T. Phyland. 3. Mr.
J. Ferguson. 4. Mr. S. Broomhead. 5. Mr. J. C.
Louttit. 6. Mr. W. A. McDonald. 7. Mr. J. Whitham.
8. Mr. P. W. Martin. 9. Mr. A. H. Chambers. 10.
Mr. Thomas Morgan. 11. Mr. Wm. Bell. 12. Mr.
Wm. Moore. 13. Mr. T. Whitham. 14. Mr. J.
McDonald. 15. Mr. Will Filmer. 16. Mr. Ted
Binns. 17. Mr. F. Flarvey. R. W. Martin, photo.
Mr. J. Lockhart, jun.’s, White Arab Stallion Pony,
“ Sunshine,”
By Sunshine (imp.)—Lucy Dashwood (imp.). This
pony is beautifully proportioned, and formerly be-
longed to Mr, W. Dunbar Cormack.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
Andrew S. Muir & Co.,
Stock and Station Agents.
Head Office - KERANG.
BRANCHES:
SWAN HILL, LAKE BOGA, COHUNA.
Messrs. Andrew S. Muir’s Swan Hill Offices, McCaHum-street. R. w. Martin, photo,
One of the oldest and most important firms of
stock and station agents in the State is that of
Messrs. Andrew Muir and Co., whose connection
with the commercial world of Victoria dates back
a quarter of a century, when Richardson, Muir and
Co. so solidly laid down the foundation of this pros-
perous and extensive firm. Some fifteen years later
the name was altered to Andrew S. Muir and Co.
(Mr. Andrew S. Muir becoming head of the firm),
and since then business has extended rapidly and
solidly. Branches have been established at Cohuna
(the first one), Lake Boga, and Swan Hill. These
branches are supervised by Mr. Muir from the head
office at Kerang. Mr. A. M. Bell, who established
and placed the Lake Boga branch on such a sound
footing nearly two years ago, was succeeded by
Mr. Bert Hussey, and he has since capably and
judiciously managed the important Swan Hill
branch, where there is no gainsaying the fact that
the firm under review have forged ahead wonder-
fully. Commodious, modern yards have been
erected, and the saleyards office is connected with
telephone. Sales are held weekly at Kerang, fort-
nightly at Swan Hill, and monthly at Cohuna. Mr.
T. H. O’Donnell is the firm’s auctioneer. He pos-
sesses a vast experience in the disposal of stock,
and in every branch of the business he is popular
and respected. Mr. J. W. Hogan is the outside
salesman, and Mr. W. J. B. French chief accountant.
The head of the firm, Mr. Andrew Muir, is mucti
esteemed and admired for his sterling integrity,
both as a citizen and a business man, and is a well-
known and influential figure in the commercial
world of Victoria. The operations and influence of
the firm are still expanding, and, with such a pains-
taking, courteous and efficient staff employed, the
present importance and esteem held in the public
favour will not be only maintained but gradually
and surely increased.
Each client’s business receives prompt, earnest at-
tention, Messrs. Muir and Co.’s greatest aim being
to thoroughly understand their requirements, and,
if humanly possible, either by advice, financial assis-
tance, or in other ways, to study them in every de-
tail. That has been the chief factor in the great
success and esteem they are held in throughout this
State and the Riverina.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT,
1. A clearing sale] held
by Muir & Co. in the dis-
The Lake Boga office.
3. One of Muir &'Co.’s
sheep sales.
4. Another view of their
commodious yards at Swan
Hill.
W. Martin,
photo.
Mr. Andrew S. Muir (of Muir and Co., Stock and Station Agents) and his capable and courteous
Staff.
trict.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
ALSTON’S WINDMILL FACTORY
QUEEN’S BRIDGE JAMES ALSTON, Proprietor, MELBOURNE, Vic.
Manufacturer and Importer of all Requisites for Watering Stock, Home, and Garden
PUMPS, VALVES,
FITTINGS
Stocked and Made
to Requirements.
WINDMILLS
MADE,
sizes, 6 ft. to 25 ft.
One of the best-known
and largest manufactur-
ers of windmills in the
Commonwealth is Mr.
James Alston, whose im-
portant and extensive
factory is situate over
Queen’s Bridge, Mel-
bourne.
An Alston Windmill Assures a Plentiful Supply of Water for Farm and Home
In every part of Aus-
tralia “Alston’s” wind-
mills and other machi-
nery manufactured at
his factory will be no-
ticed assisting the pio-
neer, farmer, etc., to
procure at comparatively
small expense that valu-
able quantity water.
Mr. Alston has had
some 30 years’ experi-
ence in windmill manu-
facturing, and his repu-
tation never stood higher
than it does to-day. The
name Alston on a wind-
mill is quite sufficient
guarantee of its long
living, utility, and low
cost. His windmills are
so beautifully and simp-
ly constructed that they
rarely cause trouble or
unexpected repairing.
Hundreds of “ Alston’s ”
windmills are in use
throughout the Mallee, and, if requiring one, communi-
cate with Alston’s factory. They will forward a hun-
dred page catalogue promptly, and you can then choose
one to suit your requirements at leisure. On another
page of this work appears a photo, of the large wind-
One of Alston’s Windmills on a Mallee Farm.
mil! erected by this firm at Ultima, and through its
agency an admirable and plentiful supply of water has
been assured. In every way it has given the greatest
satisfaction to the townspeople.


Three Prominent Men in the Swan Hill Commercial World. r \y_ Martin
photo.
The late Mr. William Garden’s residence, taken
many years ago. This building, with considerable
improvements, is now leased by the Swan Hill Club.
Mr. R. W. Martin, who is responsible for
the hundreds of fine photographic views ap-
pearing in this production.
The Swan Hill Brass Band.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
W. BELL
(Established 20 Years)
McCALLUM ST.,
SWAN HILL.
Wheat Buyer,
Land and Commission Agent
AGENCY FOR
T. Robinson & Co.’s Machinery. J. S. Bagshaw’s Horse-
works, Winnowers, etc. Musgrave Seed Sower; this
machine is noted for its reliability and simplicity.
Farmers should inspect this sower and
secure one for the coming season.
This Handsome Building was Erected by
Mr. Gerrand.
Portion of the Recent Improvements at the Gypsum
Works, Lake Boga.
■v'oo'oo.c^^c^.o:oo^:^oo'ac(o'
| BLOCKS and DESIGNS.
O ?-r\
Q The blocks and designs for this publication were
g executed by Charles E. Campbell, London Bank
O Chambers, Ballarat. The quality is undeniable, and
O equal to any similar work in the Commonwealth.
8 Campbell’s p:ices are reasonable. Quotations sent
8 promptly. Work executed rapidly.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
Interesting Views on Mr. W. R. Holmes’ estate, “Genoe,”
Stony Crossing, N.S.W.
R. W. Martin, pnoto.
1. Cattle on the Bank of Lake Genoe. 2. Two of Mr. Holmes’ well-bred Horses, Calliope and Lily
Hobson. 3. A Mob of Horses on “ Genoe Estate.” 4. One of the Bullock Teams on the Estate.
5. A Fine Flock of Sheep. 6. Another Flock of Well-bred Sheep. 7. The Comfortable Homestead.
Mr. W. R. Holmes, of “ Genoe Estate,” came to Stony
Crossing in 1888. Previously he was farming in the
Nhill district for seven years. He goes in principally
for grazing and wheatgrowing, and the breeding ot
horses, sheep and cattle. The area of this estate is
4060 acres. The features of the land are red sand
rises, loamy plains, box flats and pine mallee. There
are two lakes on this fine property —the one known
as “ Genoe ” is 21 feet deep, and is the larger, being
4 1 /2 miles in circumference; and the other, called “Geer
Lake,” is 3 miles around, and is mostly used for water-
ing stock. Wild ducks and other birds abound in great
numbers on these lakes. He also has some 4000 merino
crossbred sheep, 60 Lincoln rams, 100 cattle, 60 horses
and foals, and two fine bullock teams. He is the popu-
lar president of the Stony Crossing Racing C lub, a
progressive member of the Moulamein Pastoral Protec-
tion Board, and invariably takes a keen and enthusi -
astic interest in the welfare of all public matters affect-
ing the interests of the district he is so greatly respected
in. He is a great lover of horses, and makes the
breeding of them a great hobby. His racehorse, Lily
Hobson, carries his colours on the course, and his fine,
beautifully bred stallion, Calliope, is one of the best of
his class in Northern Victoria. A large portion—
quite 1000 acres —of this valuable, well-improved es-
tate can be irrigated, and Mr. Ho’mes, being one of
the energetic, progressive stamp of farmer', has laid
down a large modern pumping plant, and is tackling
the irrigation problem solidly and soundly. “ Genoe
Estate ” is equipped with the latest types of machinery,
and in every direction the improvements noted empha-
';'e the practicability and good judgment of Mr.
Holmes, who is one of the largest sheep owners in
the Swan Hill district.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
AHvE BOGA,
The township of Lake Boga is situated on the main
railway line to Bendigo, and nine miles south of
Swan Hill. The name Boga is an aboriginal name
meaning “ big,” hence Lake Boga, “ big lake,” on the
bank of which this town is pleasantly situated. At the
present time it is a rising, progressive place, containing
modern business premises and many prettily designed
private residences, well laid out streets, and other im-
provements. The natural advantages and resources of
Lake Boga will compare favourably with any other
town in Northern Victoria, it being surrounded by a
rich fertile district and a line chain of lakes. To the
south is Lake Mannaer, which is fdled by the overflow
from Lake Boga and the drainage waters from the
surrounding country; then that beautiful sheet of
water, Lake Boga, whch has an average depth of 24
feet and is some nine miles in circumference. This
lake is one of the finest in the State, and excellent
fishing, shooting and yachting is to be found by sports-
men. The lake is fed by the Little Murray River,.
Baker Lakes will be found the Salt Lake, from which
a large quantity of salt is obtained each year.
On all these lakes private pumping plants have been
erected, and irrigation is gradually assuming more
important proportions in the Lake Boga district. Still
by no means are the magnificent resources of the soil
and splendid water supply even moderately availed of
at present, but the future is bright with promise. The
soil in the Lake Boga district varies considerably—is
mostly slightly undulating, and chiefly of a sandy
nature. The timber is principally mallee scrub and
pine, but towards the river and to the south of the
township there is found a considerable quantity of box
timber. As the frontage to the Little Murray River
is approached the land changes to a darker and heavier
soil, and is typical Murray Flats land, of magnificent
rich qualities, eminently suitable for irrigation. Land
values have risen considerably in this district during
recent years, and it is practically certain will realise
still higher prices now that the land is being given an
The Long Lake Pumping Station, and Mr. Chris. Maloney sampling a new deposit of gypsum at
and has a never-failing supply of water. Then fur-
ther towards the north is Lake Baker, another fine
sheet of water, the circumference of which is about
three miles. To the west of the township will be
found Long Lake, which is filled from the parent lake
—Boga. It is here that the Government pumping
plant has been erected which supplies the water to
Mallee settlers for domestic and stock purposes. Con-
nected by a channel from Long Lake, which is the
feeder, the compiler met with Round Lake, which is
perhaps the prettiest and also the deepest of this won-
derful lake chain. Lying midway between Round and
R. W. Martin, photo.
opportunity of proving its worth and wonderful fertility
in the growing of wheat, lucerne, oats, millet, maize,
atnbercane, etc. At the present time the market value
of hlats land is from £5 to £lO per acre. Probably
the best price on record is a block of irrigable box
Mats land, 84 acres, situated three-quarters of a mile
from the township, which was sold by the well-known
auctioneering firm of Edward Trenchard and Co. to
Mr. John Fletcher at £l4 per acre. The principal
industries of the district are wheat-growing and dairy-
ing. The value of wheat land ranges from £2/10/-
to £5 per acre. Gradually dairying is being more
works, Lake Boga.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
extensively and thoroughly entered into, and there are
Inow some fine herds to be found in the district. A
Vnodern, well-equipped butter factory has been erected
by Messrs. Holdenson & Nielson, the well-known and
successful produce merchants, and this has given a great
fillip to the industry, as farmers are recognising the
fact that they can rely on receiving high prices for
their cream at the Lake Boga factory. Another in-
dustry that is certain to bring Lake Boga into promi-
nence and importance in the near future is the gypsum
deposits. A brief review of this important industry
may be of interest. It is now 22 years ago since they
wealth, being satisfied that the Lake Boga gypsum was
exactly the material they required, which possessed
finer commercial qualities and was far less expensive
than the imported article, took over these deposits, and
the industry, though as yet in its infancy as regards
the Mack Company’s operations, is rapidly becoming
an important one. Large kilns, sheds, machinery, etc.,
have been erected, and it is intended in the near future
to build a railway siding to the works, which are situ-
ated IY2 miles from the town. There are four distinct
deposits at Boga—all in the beds of long dried up
lakes. The area held by the company is 700 acres
1. Distant View of Lake Boga Township. 2. The Main Street. 3. Another View of the Chief Thorough
fare. 4. The State School, 5. View Showing Part of that fine sheet of water —Lake Boga.
were discovered and worked by Mr. Chris. Maloney,
who, with indomitable pluck and perseverance, held to
the belief that the large gypsum deposits would some
day prove of considerable commercial value. Many
people were sceptical; but, undaunted, Mr. Maloney
went on gradually proving, by the sinking of shafts,
the immense deposits. Without considerable capital
it was difficult to handle the raw material profitably.
Therefore the rich, powerful Mack Slab Company,
whose operations extend throughout the Common-
R. W. Martin, photo.
The compiler on his inspection was struck by the
peculiarity of the strata —the top one is of an entirely
different material to the other, and is of great com-
mercial value as a fertiliser. The second strata is
the real gypsum, and after being burned in the kiln is
despatched to the company’s manufacturing works in
Melbourne, where it is made into plaster of Paris.
The Lake Boga gypsum is giving very satisfactory
results in every way, and is eminently suitable for
high-class stucco-work, slabs for buildings, sculptors'


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN FULL AND DISTRICT.
work, linings, and ceilings, etc. Air. Chris Maloney
is in charge of this important concern at Lake Boga—
a concern that will most assuredly assist materially
in forwarding the progress and importance of both
town and district. Ihere are several well supported
and successful clubs in Lake Boga, the principal ones
being the Gymnasium Club (secretary, Mr. W. Gray),
Cricket Club, Tennis Club and Racing Club (secretary,
Mr. J. Bell). The spiritual life of the people is well
cared for, there being four denominations represented
in the town—namely, Methodist, Roman Catholic,
Presbyterian, and Church of England. The Mechanics’
Institute is a great comfort and convenience to the
residents. The library contains a considerable num-
ber of books, etc., and subscribers have a wide choice.
Mr. Philip Steer is secretary and librarian. A fine,
commodious grain store, capable of holding 16,000
bags of wheat, has been erected by the farmers of the
district. It has proved a great convenience, and the
example of the Lake Boga farmers in providing such
a fine shed for their cereals might be advantageously
followed by the farmers in other Victorian districts.
Mr. Noske is secretary and caretaker.
There are several modern, well-stocked business
premises in Lake Boga. Amongst the leading ones
are Gray’s Store, Dew’s Bakery and Refreshment-
rooms, Steer’s News Agency, Lee’s Coffee Palace and
uniit Depot, and the Boga Wine Shade. Mr. Noske also
carries on a flourishing and influential commission
agency business. Two auctioneering firms are repre-
sented, Edward Trenchard and Co. (Mr. P, Cameron
in charge) and Andrew S. Muir and Co, (Mr. Hussey
1 epresentative). The National Bank of Australasia
have established a branch, which is progressing satis-
factorily under the management of Mr. Tick. There
is a flourishing business, however, that deserves
especial mention, and that one is the large and enter-
prising general storekeeping business of "Gray’s,”
which was established some twenty years ago in a
decidedly primitive manner by the late Mr. A. Gray,
who during his life-time did much in assisting to
pioneer the Northern district by his liberal assistance
to scores of settlers in the drought years. The growth
was gradual and solid, until to-day the compiler found
one of the largest, best appointed, most modern, and
excellently managed general stores in a comparatively
small township which compares favourably with any
similar business in provincial Victoria. There may
ge one or two larger, but there are certainly none
better appointed nor carrying a better class and quality
of goods than “ Gray’s Store.” Mrs. Janet Gray
carries on the business, and the manager is Mr, James
JOHN NOSKE, Land and General Commission Agent,
Grain Buyer. LAKE BOGA.
Agent for—Cuming Smith and Co.’s Manures, T. Robinson and Co.’s Farming Implements and
Machinery, Melotte Separator, Federal Milking Machine, Pearson, Rowe, Smith and Co., Live Stock
Salesmen, Melbourne, and London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Co.
Noske, one of the most public-spirited and
Mr. John Noske, who has been closely connected
with the progress of Lake Boga and district during
the past 16 years, is secretary and caretaker of the
Farmers’ Grain Store at Lake Boga, and has many
well-known and live agencies. His expert and solid
K. W. Martin, photo,
prominent men in Lake Boga; also his office
land value knowledge of the district makes his ad-
vice at all times valuable to a buyer or seller. Land-
seekers are driven out to inspect properties, and
every client’s business receives prompt and earnest
attention.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
McKee, who has a compe:ent and courteous staff.
This store has a very handsome appearance, wuh fine
plate-glass windows, and each department is so com-
modious that goods can be displayed to the maximum
of advantage. This modern store is lighted through-
out with acetylene gas, and amongst other up-to-date
features noticed was an overhead cash tramway system.
The Boga Salt Lake Works are owned by Mr. E.
Lewis. They are situated two miles from the town-
ship. Some 200 tons of crude salt are secured each
year, and many men are employed in this industry.
The Long Lake pumping plant, which is under the
control of the State Rivers and Water Supply Com-
mission, was erected in 1902 on the Long Lake, a
fine sheet of water, some two miles from the town
of Lake Boga. This lake is seven miles in circum-
ference, and has an average depth of 15 feet, though
it is fully 30 feet deep in certain parts. The machi-
nery is known as a high-class Reidlcr pumping plant,
supplied by Thompson and Co., Castlemaine, at a cost
of £12,000. It has a h.p. of 250 and a pumping
capacity of 316 cubic feet per minute. Water is pumped
from the lake through pipes ~j/x mi'es to Goschen
into commodious tanks, where it is lifted 90 feet, and
emptied into chanreK which extend right around the
Goschen. Lalbert, Ultima, and Chillingollah districts.
These channels supply water for stock and domestic
use. The Long Lake plant also supplies the town of
Lake Boga and Ultima with water. In addition to
the above mentioned, Long Lake also gives the
districts of Bulga, Yarrabee and Nyah their stock and
domestic supply. Altogether 400 miles of channels
are dependent on this plant for water. Mr. H. J.
Winstone is the engineer-in-charge of the pumping
station.
The compiler was very favourably impressed with
the Lake Boga district, and the occasional orchards
and areas of lucerne and ambercane met with quite
served to illustrate what the soil is capable of produc-
ing when irrigated and worked by a progressive
farmer on scientific principles. The feeling existed,
however, that it is most unfortunate that so much
rich, fertile land is held by men who are not making
by any means any attempt to gain a fair proportion
of the value that lies in the wonderful soil and the
water in the lakes and river. Still, the progressive
movement is extending rapidly, and one feeling pre-
dominant in the compiler’s mind is that Lake Boga
within the next few years must grow into an important
town, and the district progress and become a great
dairying, agricultural, and fruit centre. The soil is
equal to any to be found in the State, the supply of
water from lakes and river magnificent, and all that
is required are men of a progressive stamp, who will
go in extensively and thoroughly for irrigation, which
has been proved to pay, and pay handsomely.
The Lake Boga News Agency and Fancy Goods Depot,
PHILIP STEER, PROPRIETOR
Interior and Exterior of Mr
The Lake Boga newsagency and fancy goods
depot has now been ably conducted on up-to-date
and business lines by Mr. P. Steer, a resident of
Lake Boga for 20 years, during the past two years.
A large and varied stock of stationery and fanc} r
Steer’s Premises, Lake Boga.
goods is always on hand, and a varied choice of
the best-known writers’ books. Mr. Steer, who is
Registrar for Births and Deaths, is sole agent for
the “ Age ” and “ Argus,” and practically every
weekly and periodical journal published.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
Holdenson & Nielson Fresh Food Pty. Ltd.,
Butter Factory Proprietors and Farm Produce Merchants.
Factories at
Melbourne, Bendigo,
Ballarat,
Warragul, Hamilton,
Loch, Dean’s Marsh,
and Lake Boga.
Highest Market Prices.
Head Office:
521 FLINDERS STREET,
MELBOURNE.
During recent years the dairying industry has re-
ceived a considerable impetus in this neighbourhood by
the gradual extension of irrigation and lucerne grow-
ing, for which this district is particularly suited. Lake
Boga provides an unfailing source of water supply (the
lake being fed directly from the River Murray), and a
very large percentage of land in the district, when irri-
gated, cannot be surpassed for lucerne growing and
for the cultivation of nearly all other fodder plants
most valuable for dairy herds.
The Head Offices and Business Premises,,
Nielson, who are one of the leading firms in the butter
industry, and who already possessed large butter fac-
tories at Melbourne, Bendigo, Warragul, Ballarat,
Hamilton, Loch and Dean’s Marsh, realised the great
future of Lake Boga as a dairying district, secured the
property and butter factory, and at once set to work
to build an up-to-date factory, complete with the most
modern dairy machinery and appliances, the installa-
tions comprising a large tubular boiler and high pres-
sure engine, Linde refrigerator, two “Simplex” com-
The Lake Boga Butter Factory, one of the most modern in the State, and an Interior View of
Portion of the Factory.
The first butter factory in Lake Boga was established
in a building originally erected for an hotel on the
banks of the lake, and on the main Kerang-Swan Hill
road, near the railway station. For the first few years
the factory was worked by local people who did not
possess any special knowledge of the butter business,
but about three years ago Messrs. Holdenson and
bined churns and butter workers. The new factory
was also provided with large cream cooling and ma-
turing rooms, cool chambers, and all the usual appur-
tenances necessary for a first-class, up-to-date butter
factory. Steam and hot and cold water were also laid
on to all the rooms in the factory, thus ensuring
thorough cleanliness everywhere, a matter which is so


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
essential for the manufacture of prime butter. The
plant is capable of turning cut upwards of twenty tons
of butter weekly, a quantity which it is anticipated
will be reached in the very near future.
Since the factory was acquired by the firm mentioned,
its management has been in the capable hands of Mr.
A. Wilson, and the Lake Boga butter produced under
his direction has gained a high reputation in the dis-
trict and on foreign markets.
The larger landholders in and around the Lake Boga
district are now realising the necessity of cutting up
their holdings into smaller farms of from one hundred
to three hundred acres, as, under the present labour
conditions, they find it difficult to secure suitable la-
bour for irrigating and dairying successfully on large
properties, although some of the land-owners have in
recent years obtained very good returns from share
farming. Amongst these may be mentioned Mr.
Cornish, Mr. H. Angus, and the Winlaton Estate
Co. The Winlaton Estate Co. and Mr. Cornish have
recently had their properties surveyed and cut up
into smaller sections, and channels have been con-
structed to each holding.
This system, on extension, will rapidly increase the
production and prosperity of this district, which has
Been made one of the most valuable in Victoria by its
situation on the main railway line from Melbourne to
Swan Hill, and its proximity to the River Murray,
whose everflowing waters fill the large lakes, Boga,
Kangaroo and Tutchiwoop, ready made for the storage
of the winter flood waters, which are thus made
available for irrigation whenever required.
With these striking advantages, it is a district that
is sure to attract a very liberal percentage of the irri-
gation population emigrating to Victoria from America
and elsewhere.
Mr. Peter Cameron, representative Edward Tren-
chard and Co. at Lake Boga.
UNIVERSAL BAKERY AND TLA ROOMS, LAKE BOGA
L. W. DLW, Proprietor
Mr. Dew’s comfortable residence at Lake Boga, and his up-to-date business premises
The noted bakery for bread and small goods;
large assortment of high-class confectionery. Bread
delivered daily; various kinds of cool drinks. Just
the place for a nice, refreshing cup of tea with
a quiet rest. Wedding cakes a speciality.
Mr. E. W. Dew, who has lived some 18 years
in the Lake Boga district, has made a great success
of his business during the past 12 months. He is
catering very thoroughly for the public, by giving
the best of bread and small goods, etc. Also, his
comfortable, well fitted up tea rooms are a credit
to himself and this rising town.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
“The Big Stop
AKE BOGA
J. GRAY,
Importer, General Merchant, Builder and Contractor. Established 1893.
One of the Largest and most Modern in provincial Victoria. BRANCH STORE, MYSTIC PARK.
Agent for Allan’s Pianos, Royal Fire Insurance Company, J. Bell & Co., Mount Lyell Manures.
Large Timber Yards, carrying heavy well-selected range of Timbers.
2. The handsome new premises. Main Street, Lake Boga.
4. The Ironmongery and Crockeryware Departments.
3. Part of the Timber Yards.
1. The Grocery Department
A SPECIAL FEATURE—ALL CLASSES OF BUILDING MATERIALS, cement, lime, galvanised iron,
bricks, timber. A progressive Saddlery Department carrying well-assorted stock of rugs, saddles, harness ''single
and double), whips, hames, collars (made to order). First-class Tradesmen. Repair work executed promptly.
DEPARTMENTS AT THE BIG STORE
Drapery, Grocery, Ironmongery, Boots and Shoes, Millinery, Haberdashery.
Furniture, Tailoring Oils and Paints, Paperhangings. and Every Necessary
Requisite for Farm and Home.
Estimates given promptly for all classes of contracting work. Orders by mail receive prompt and thorough attention.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
J. GRAY’S "The Big Store,
AKE BOGA
1, The Drapery Department. 2. The Haberdashery Department. 3. Interior o' the Saddlery Department
This General Store, established 19 years ago by the late Mr. Alexander Gray, was the first in Lake Boga. To-day the new handsome modern
premises are amongst—in architectural improvement, quality and quantity of stock—the largest and finest businesses of the kind in
the Victorian provinces.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
Mr. JOHN
FLRGUSON, Progressive Farmer
1 and 2. Two of Mr. Ferguson’s bullock teams at work. 3. A Magnificent Crop of Amber Cane.
4. A Large Paddock of Lucerne on the Estate. 5. One of the Irrigation Channels running through the
property. 6. The Comfortable Homestead. 7. A Portion of the Dairy Herd, showing lucerne stacks
in the distance. 8 and 9. Some of the horses on the Estate.
One of the most progressive farmers and oldest
pioneers of Swan Hill district is Mr. John Ferguson,
who arrived in the town some 22 years ago. At that
time there were only about 12 buildings of a decidedly
primeval nature. Mr. Ferguson, who commenced in
business as a contractor, laid out and constructed the
streets of the town. He also built the Koondrook
tram line, and an 18 mile section of the railway to Swan
Hill, when over 100 men were employed by him. Later
he was engaged in conducting a butchering business, and
a 50-acre block of land 3 miles from the town was
purchased. Eventually Mr. Ferguson acquired 640
acres of Mallee land at Bulga, which is chiefly suitable


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT,
“Gay Gordon”
This magnificently bred stallion
is by “Tam o’ Shanter,” a great
prize taker. The dam, “ Kate,”
was also most successful in the
show ring.
“ Gay Gordon ” has won several
Ist prizes at the Northern dis-
trict shows. Amongst other wins
secured were those at Boort,
Charlton and Swan Hill. At the
latter town’s show in 1911 “Gay
Gordon ” was awarded the much
coveted blue ribbon.
for the grazing of sheep and cattle. This property
is well subdivided and watered, and is generally a
finely improved property. Mr. Ferguson's greatest
hobby in life has been the breeding of horses. The
well-bred Clydesdale stallion, Gay Gordon, by Tam o’
Shanter out of Kate (both great prizetakers), is the
property of Mr. Ferguson. A photo of this well-
bred, finely-proportioned stallion has been secured for
this production. Mr. Ferguson, in addition to the
Bulga property, has one of the finest farms on the
Murray Flats, 2(4 miles from Swan Hill. The area
is 300 acres, and this property can genuinely be styled
as the pick of the fiats. Every acre is heavy rich black
soil, irrigated thoroughly. Eighty acres have been
sown with lucerne, 80 acres with sorghum, and many
acres with amber cane. The photos appearing in this
book were taken at the worst time of the year—Feb-
ruary—so they clearly demonstrate the wonderful fer-
tility of the soil. In addition to the grazing of over
SO horses and several scores of bullocks, dairying is
entered into on a large and thorough scale. As pre-
\ lor.sly mentioned, Mr. Perguson is a progressive,
energetic farmer, and he shortly intends to go in foi
intense culture on a large scale. His land is eminently
suitable for the prolific growing of citrus and vines
and other fruits, and a modern pumping plant is to be
installed shortly. Seven working teams of bullocks
are employed in the continual improvements on the
farm, which is quite one of the best worked, equipped
and improved amongst the irrigation settlements of
Victoria. It is due in no small degree to men of Mr.
Ferguson’s stamp and grit that it is possible to publish
to the people of the world the grand results ob-
tainable from irrigation in this State.
Two interesting photos, of races held at Swan Hill, which are invariably a pronounced success,
both from a financial and racing standpoint. R - W. -uartin, pho-.0.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
JOHN A. RICKARD,
SWAN HILL
Painter, Paperhanger, signwriter, etc
Estimates Given. Work Executed Promptly.
Mr. John A. Rickard conducts the leading paint-
ing, paperhanging and signwriting business in
Swan Hill. His premises are situated near the
railway station, and a large, well-selected stock of
paints, brushes, wallpapers, glass, etc., is carried.
Contracting work is undertaken, and Mr. Rickard,
who employs a competent staff of workmen, has
successfully carried through many of the largest
and best painting and paperhanging contracts in
the town and district. Mr. Rickard enjoys much
artistic ability, and practically the whole of the
hne signwriting work on the shop fronts, which
gives Swan Hill such an up-to-date appearance, has
been executed by him.
A. A. LORD.
Chemist,
CAMPBELL STRLLT, SWAN HILL.
Mr. A. A. Lord’s pharmacy has now been estab-
lished some three years in Swan Hill, and during
that time he has secured a considerable clientele.
He possesses lengthy experience, having previously
been in business at Newstead and Castlemaine.
His pharmacy is exceptionally well stocked with
drugs, perfumes, soaps and every article that a
first-class chemist’s establishment should have. Pre-
scriptions are dispensed faithfully and promptly, and
only the purest of drugs are used.
With the continued great progress of Swan Hill
Mr. Lord is determined to keep pace, and within
a few months will have, when the intended new
building is erected, one of the most modern phar-
macies in the State.
OOC 00000000
Mrs. E. Long and Mr. T. J. Long.
Mrs. E. Long is one of the first resident white wo-
men in the Swan Hill district, having arrived there
some 40 years ago, accompanied by her husband. Their
bakery store was amongst the earliest businesses estab-
lished. Mrs. Long is still a resident of Swan Hill, and
is hale and hearty. Mr. T. J. Long, her son, has also
been connected with the commercial world of Swan
Hill for many years, and is one of the most open-heart-
ed, unassuming and esteemed townsmen. He has con-
ducted a large flourishing general store in Campbell-
street during the past five years. Previously he had
been engaged solely in the bakery business.
oooa3ao.ctaoooao.cto


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
BARTRAM & SON
Pty .... Manufacturers and Importers of ....
Lt d : DAIRY APPARATUS & SUPPLIES
Telegraph Address: -‘BARTRAM,” MELBOURNE.
Swan Hill Branch: Campbell Street, Swan Hill.
W. T. ALLEN, Representative.
Sole Agencies:—“ Alfa-Laval ” Cream Separators (over 1,250,000 sold), “ Lawrence-Kennedy-Gillies ”
Milking Machine (milking 200,000 cows daily), ‘‘Felix” Industrial Farm Motor (for all work), “Alfa”
Reliable Galvanised All Steel Windmill, Modern Portable All Steel Silo (for silage and grain).
One of Bartram and Son’s milking machines, giving great satisfaction in the Swan Hill district;
and an illustration of that wonderfully successful piece of machinery, “ The Felix ” farm motor.
The present great prosperity and progress of Swan
Hill are in a great measure due to irrigation and the
dairying industry, but that great success would not
have been attained had enterprising firms like the one
under review not have placed modern labour-saving
implements and machinery in the farmers’ hands to
make the greatest use of the water and the product
from their dairy herds. The extensive and important
firm of J. Bartram and Son Ltd., in opening a branch
at Swan Hill, which is capably managed by Mr. W.
T. Allen, brought many fine types of dairying and
farming machinery before the fanner, the most notable
being the “ Felix Farm Motor,” which is eminently
suitable for all pumping work. It is obtainable
at a price within reach of the smallest farmer, and,
being on w r heels, can be moved to any part of the land
required. This wonderful motor has proved a great
success ip every possible way wherever in use. The
many utilised in the Swan Hill district are busy assist-
;ng to build up the fanners’ incomes. Another leading
machine is the world-renowned “ Alfa-Laval ’ separa-
tor—the generally recognised best machine of its kind
on the market. The requirements of the farmer are
being judiciously studied by this firm through their
energetic representative, Mr. Allen, who travels the
district at regular intervals in his motor car.
Mr. Allen starting out for a country tour.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
Mr. John Ellison's Magnificent Property in the Swan Hill 7 District.
A SPLENDIDLY IMPROVED ESTATE.
821 acres of characteristic Murray Flats land, wonderfully fertile, capable of producing mag-
nificent crops of lucerne, ambercane, sorghum, wheat, oats, etc. Especially suitable for intense
culture. Lengthy frontage to the Murray River. Conveniently situated —eight miles from
Swan Hill. Three 60-ton, modern built silos. Well subdivided by stoutly built fencing into 10
paddocks. Over 100 acres under lucerne three feet high. 400 acres under cultivation. Two
five-roomed comfortable homesteads. Large modern pumping plant which assures a plentiful
supply of water to the several miles of channels on the estate.
1. View of the River Murray, which flows through part of this Estate. 2. One of the Comfortable
Homesteads. 3. One of the Teams returning from Work in the Paddocks. 4. View showing the
Two Modern 60-ton Silos and other improvements. 5. A Glimpse at Portion of Mr. Ellison’s large
Dairy Herd. 6. This Estate is a Network of Irrigation Channels; this View shows one of the larger
ones. 7. The powerful Pumping Plant and large Windmill in the distance. r. w. Martin, photo.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
MR. ELLISON’S ESTATE, SWAN HILL DISTRICT.
One of the finest and best improved properties in
the Swan Hill district is that owned by Mr. John
Ellison. It is situated some eight miles from the
town, and nearly the whole is Murray Flats land. The
soil is wonderfully rich and fertile, and is suitable for
growing almost every kind of cereal. This property
would also be eminently adaptable for fruit growing,
and citrus trees would flourish particularly well. When
Mr. Ellison purchased this valuable land, some
thirteen years ago, it was subject to constant inunda-
tions from the Murray River, creeks and swamps. A
the main channel is larger than any built by the State
Rivers and Water Supply Commission. The advan-
tage of a private pumping plant is considerable, as it
is possible to pump water and limit the supply just as
required. Dairying is extensively carried on, and the
compiler had the pleasure of inspecting a fine herd
numbering over 80 cows. The breeding of horses is
also entered into, and in one mob some valuable, well-
bred animals were noticed. Mr. W. Hamilton, who is
managing this estate for the owner, Mr. Ellison, of
237 Collins-street, Melbourne, deserves kudos for the
A Characteristically Heavy Crop of Oats raised from the rich, fertile soil on Mr. Ellison’s Estate,
and Hard at Work Filling the Silos on the Estate.
bold, progressive scheme was therefore carried out to
prevent these inundations. Levee banks were built,
swamps filled in, and other precautions taken to make
the property absolutely invulnerable against floods. It
is true the cost was great, but the enhanced value of
the land, together with the splendid crops of lu-
cerne, oats, etc., that are being grown has amply re-
paid the owner. But it was not only in making the
place secure against too much water Mr. Ellison was
concerned. He decided upon a complete and satis-
factory scheme to irrigate his estate thoroughly, and
to-day it is a living monument to the energy, dogged
determination and perseverance of what it is possible
for one man on his own behalf to do in irrigating the
land. A network of channels intersects the estate, and
excellent manner additional improvements are being
carried out by him. It is understood that the owner,
who is the senior member of the well-known firm of
solicitors, Messrs. Ellison and Hewison, is prepared to
dispose of this estate on liberal and reasonable term?.
The compiler thoroughly inspected this property, and
feels justified in recommending it to those desiring to
acquire land equal to any for fertility in this State.
Murray Flats land to-day is bringing from £l2 to £2O
per acre. Five years hence that same land, if properly
utilised, and if intense culture is applied, will be worth
£6O per acre. Even at the present time there are
several farmers who would refuse and even £5O
per acre for their land on the Murray Flats —farms al-
most adjoining the property under review.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
Some Interesting Views taken on Mr. J. C. Louttit’s estate, “Kora
leigh,” Stony Crossing district
R. W. Martin, photo.
1. A Flock of Well-bred Sheep at one of the Dams. 2. Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Louttit and Family at their
Modern Residence on “ Koraleigh Estate.” 3. Portion of the Stables. 4. A Pretty View of Some
Horses and Cattle on “ Koraleigh.” 5. Two Five-horse Teams at Work. 6. One of the Many Pic-
turesque Scenes on the Estate.
Mr. J. C. Louttit, of “ Koraleigh,” Stony Crossing,
who has had considerable experience in grazing and
general farming extending over a period of 37 years,
is now one of the most prosperous men on the Poon
Boon Estate, where he owns 6000 acres of same of
the finest land in the North. He came from Sea Lake,
where he remained twelve years, and met with great
si'.ccess with the 4000 acres of Mallee country at his
command, and which he sold at a very satisfactory
figure. There is a fine new homestead, recently built,
on his new property, and for the past two years he
has greatly improved his estate on the modern system
of cultivation. Already 4000 acres are cleared, which
carries some "000 sheep, too head of cattle and 55
horses Mr. Louttit is very fond of horses, and has
bred some exceedingly fine ones from his (New Zea-
land stock) thoroughbred stallions. Three harvesters,
binders, waggons, ploughs, drills, pumping plant, im-
plements and machinery of the very latest design are
employed on this estate in farming and carrying out
improvements. There are three big tanks and a large
lake —Lake Willaura—which give an abundant supply
of water for stock purposes. The land comprises
pine, bulloak and box country, while the River Murray
frontage is three miles; the river is very picturesque
at this spot, Mr. Louttit and his seven sons devote
their whole time to farming, and the district is fortu-
nate in possessing such an up-to-date farmer in its
midst.
Mr. Louttit is about to irrigate over 100 acres for
lucerne and green feed direct from the Murray, and
is now cultivating 1000 acres of wheat. There are
many clever, energetic and progressive farmers in the
Swan Hill district, and Mr. Louttit is one of them.
The general management of and improvements on his
estate reflect the greatest credit on himself and his
seven sons.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
The Noted Establishment for White, Spongy, Well-Made Bread and
Small Goods.
A. B. COMER
(ESTABLISHED 7 YEARS)
CAMPBELL STRLLT, SWAN HILL.
Catering carried out in its entirety in a liberal manner. All Small Goods are made from
only the best of ingredients.
Many businesses have progressed rapidly in Swan
Hill during recent years, but none more so than
Mr. Comer’s. Seven years ago he commenced his
present flourishing business, with only his own
hands and a boy’s; and to-day he employs several
first-class tradesmen, and has two carts and a large
modern bread van supplying his hundreds of cus-
tomers all through the district. From ten bags
only seven years ago to 40 bags of flour per week,
which is now used, is undoubtedly a great leap, and
clearly demonstrates the popularity and reputation
Mr. Comer’s goods enjoy. A great characteristic
of the bread sold at this establishment is its ability
to retain its full and fine flavour, together with its
sponginess, for quite a number of days. While a
great deal of credit is due to the manufacturing of
same in Mr. Comer’s up-to-date and scrupulously
clean bakehouse, yet much kudos must also be
given to Messrs. Ross Bros., of the Swan Hill flour
mills, who supply their noted flour to Mr. Comer.
The public of Swan Hill and district are indeed
fortunate in being able to secure bread and small
goods equal in quality to any not only in provincial
Victoria, but the city also, and it is pleasing to be
able to record the share of practical appreciation
the business under review is rewarded with.


EDWARD TRENCHARD 8c CO
Stock and Station Agents,
Head Offices: 468 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
Swan Hill Offices: CAMPBELL STREET. SWAN HILL
Characteristic views of sales held by Edward Trenchard and Co. at Swan Hill by their popular
auctioneer, Mr. W. D. Cormack. R. W. Martin, phpto. and design.


EDWARD TRENCHARD & CO.
Branches at CHARLTON, KERANG, WYCHEPROOF, SEA LAKE, QUAMBATOOK, BOORT, & BARHAM (N.S.W.)
Valuations and Advances Made. Clearing Sales held any part of Victoria and N.S.W.
The Trucking of Clients’ Stock is Supervised by the Firm.
Edward Trenchard and Co.’s Offices, Campbe 11-street, Swan Hill. This firm employs several
motor cars to take their clients out to various clearing sales held in the district.
The connection of the important stock and station
firm of Edward Trenchard and Co. in the northern
district of Victoria dates back to 1897, when a
branch was established at Kerang, which was
managed by the late Mr. Robert C. Patterson so
capably and judiciously for several years. In 1897
the value of Mallee and Murray Flats land was not
by any means even partially recognised, and from
£4 to £4/10/- was considered a high and full
market price for the primest land in the Swan Hill
district. Stock were comparatively scarce, and
there was, generally speaking, a lethargic feeling
amongst the farmers. Not unlike many other pro-
gressive firms, Edward Trenchard and Co., however,
worked hard to bring the value of the district into
prominence, and to a very great extent can be
traced the present wonderful prosperity of Swan
Hill and district to this firm, who by judicious and
considerate treatment of their clients have been able
to place them on land, secure stock, and tide them
over times of stress. Without sound advice and
reasonable assistance, no district in the State can
have rapid growth and develop its dormant re-
sources fully. Edward Trenchard and Co. have
always had the strongest faith in the great future
of Swan Hill, and in 1900, when business was by no
means prosperous there, they opened a branch office
in charge of Mr. Roy K. Patterson. Sales were
held monthly in the railway trucking yards, and oft-
times not a dozen head of stock were brought in
for sale. To-day what a wonderful comparison of
progress! Swan Hill is now the recognised great
stock sale centre of the north, where the firm under
review have put nearly 30,000 sheep under the
R. W. Martin, photo.
hammer on one day in their own splendidly
equipped, modern, stoutly built yards. Trenchard
and Co.’s fortnightly sales now attract buyers from
all parts of the State. In 1907, on account of the
great proportions the Swan Hill branch had as-
sumed, Mr. W. D. Cormack took over the manage-
ment, and he at once established himself popularly
with the whole community. The auctioneering work
is carried out by Mr. Cormack at Swan Hill, Lake
Boga and Kerang, and he is generally admitted to
be one of the most capable and thorough auctioneers
in the State. Sales are held fortnightly at Swan
Hill, and at regular intervals at Lake Boga and
Kerang; while clearing sales are conducted in any
part of the State and New South Wales.
In connection with this progressive business
several motor cars are used. They are
decidedly convenient and of great utility in
taking out clients to view land, stock, etc., also in
conveying intending purchasers to the many clear-
ing sales held in the district. Mr. Roy K. Patterson,
who also acts as auctioneer occasionally, is in charge
of the office staff, and Mr. Wm. Kimberley, one of
the most reliable and capable judges of land and
stock values in the district, has been in charge of
the stock department for several years; while Mr.
P. Cameron is in charge of the Lake Boga branch.
In every possible manner the firm under review
have studied their clients’ interests, and have worked
hard to forward the welfare of the town and dis-
trict they have such an immense interest in, and
if ever a firm deserved the entire thanks of a com-
munity most certainly Edward Trenchard and Co.
do.


TED BINNS & CO., Boot & Shoe Makers, Clothiers & Outfitters
“ THE ARCADE/’ CAMPBELL ST., SWAN HILL. Tailoring a Speciality.
The exterior and the several modern departments of this wonderfully thriving and progressive business.
R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
The largest, finest and best quality stock of
Clothing and Footwear in the northern parts of
Victoria.
son for our high standing in public opinion and the
wonderful growth of this business.
We are determined that Swan Hill shall always
have the latest and best in Footwear and Clothing.
It doesn’t pay us to supply a Suit or Footwear—
in fact, any article—that is shoddy. We live here,
and we’ve got a big reputation. That reputation is
valuable, and we’re going to do our utmost to not
only hold it fast but add to it.
We defy competition right throughout the State
for quality and prices in Footwear. Boots and
Shoes made to order by thorough tradesmen. Re-
pairs promptly executed.
For honest values we are right at the top of the
tree. We put that factor down as the biggest rea-
Orders by mail receive prompt attention.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
INTERESTING FACTS CONCERNING A PROGRESSIVE FIRM
TED BINNS & CO
It is a prominent idea among American journa-
lists when emphasising their great boast that a hoy
may rise in the States to any position in the public,
business or political world, to point to Garfield in
the book “ From Log Cabin to White House,” and
especially to W. J. Wanamaker, of Philadelphia
(a trader of even greater proportions than White-
leys, of London), who started as a boy in the very
store which enormous business he now controls as
proprietor.
The wonderful growth of the Swan Hill business
of Mr. Edward Binns is well worthy of record, as
it emphasises very decidedly what industry and
close personal attention to business, together with
selling the right goods at the right price, can do.
Starting as a boy in a general store over twenty
years ago, and steadily plodding on—watching, learn-
ing and originating—“ Ted” Binns, as he has always
been called, has ever had the far too uncommon
knack of “ seizing the opportunity,” and so when
a few years afterwards he was offered the position
of manager of a Cash Store in the town by a
rival firm he accepted it, and made a great suc-
cess of that business. Later on he saw an oppor-
tunity of starting on his own account, and, with
nominally no capital except that saved from his
earnings, he purchased the Boot Business of Mr.
S. John.
While conducting that business he seized the idea
of catering for the needs of the men of the district
by also opening in the Clothing and Mercery line.
This “ splendid ” idea prospered, and at the present
time Mr. Binn’s clients can be reckoned by the
thousand throughout the districts of the Mallee
and Riverina.
Soon his business became too large for the two
shops he occupied at the corner of McCrae and
Campbell streets, and therefore some two years ago
removed to his present commodious “ Arcade,”
which, as readers can readily see, is amongst the
most up-to-date in this progressive town. He has
had a new departure in existence for some years,
namely, hawkers’ waggons running right through
the Western Riverina from Swan Hill to Oxley and
the Darling River to Hay, traversing the watersheds-
also of the Murrumbidgee, Edwards, Wakool and
Murray Rivers, and the Back and Never Never
Country north of Balranald. His clients in these dis-
tricts can be numbered by the thousand, and no one
is more widely known among the back blocks than
Ted Binns.
His stock of boots and shoes is most replete
with every up-to-date line of footwear for man,
woman and child.
His drapery department is most complete with
everything necessary for the “ worser ” half of hu-
manity. A man (or boy) can walk into Ted Binns’
Arcade at one door dressed as “ Adam before the
fall and walk out the other “ the best dressed
man in the district." Ted Binns can fit one up
from head to foot, a most complete stock of out-
fitting garments and mercery being always on hand.
The working man or most fastidious “Johnnie”
can all be suited and satisfied in Ted Binns’ Arcade
—an Arcade standing on the same spot where Ted
Binns commenced to work as a boy some twenty
years ago.
The principal lines of clothing are the well-known
and time-proved “ Lion ” and “ Reliable ” brands,
and, while he stocks the best goods of the best
makes and keeps to “ quality ” as his watchword,
’tis not to be wondered that his “ Lion ” heart and
“ Reliable ” character bring him the success he
deserves.
TLD BINNS & CO.,
Boot and shoe Makers, :: Clothiers and Outfitters,
“THE. ARCADE” CAMPBELL STREET, SWAN HILL


THE SWAN HILL CHLLSL FACTORY,
Mr. JOHN MURPHY, Proprietor.
1. The commodious cheese room where hundreds of large cheese are placed until matured. 2. Mr.
John Murphy’s comfortable homestead. 3. An interior view of portion of the factory. 4. Snapshot of
portion of Mr. Murphy’s fine dairy herd. 5. The Swan Hill Cheese Factory. 6. The sanitary and
modern milking sheds, where milking machines are in use. 7. View of the prolific orchard on the
estate. R- W - ,Mart i n . photo, and design.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
THE SWAN HILL CHEESE FACTORY.
Mr. John Murphy, Proprietor.
Some two and a half years ago Swan Hill was
distinctly fortunate in securing one of the most
enterprising and progressively inclined farmers of
this State in Mr. John Murphy, who purchased 318
acres of the Murray Flats land, situated some four
miles from the town. A high price was paid—
£l8 —but the owner has, by scientifically improving
and working his estate, made it worth double that
figure, and one of the finest in the district. Two
hundreds acres have been sown in lucerne, which
grows luxuriantly, and usually many acres are
utilised for growing amber cane. Mr. Murphy is
admittedly an excellent judge of a cow, and he has
gradually secured a very fine herd, numbering over
70 head, chiefly Ayrshire. He intends eventually
to keep only the Ayrshire strain, which he con-
siders is the most profitable. One of the best
known milking machines is in use, and generally
the conditions for cleanliness, economy of labour
and despatch are everywhere evident. Mr. Murphy
is thoroughly satisfied that his land will carry double
the number of cows, and therefore intends to gra-
dually increase his herd until the required number
is reached. Amongst many modern improvements
on this estate are a comfortable, commodious home-
stead, and a large orchard in full bearing, export
apples of the Jonathan, Five Crown, etc., species,
being the predominant fruit. The citrus trees are,
however, growing splendidly and showing excellent
results, while pear and stone fruits do exception-
ally well. However, it is not only as a progressive
and successful farmer that Mr. Murphy is known.
He is also a successful business man, who has laid
'.he foundations well and solidly of an industry that
will bring Swan Hill and district into great
prominence in the near future. His cheese factory
was commenced in an unassuming manner, in keep-
ing with the man. It quickly grew to important
proportions, however. The establishment of the
factory was due to the fact that Mr. Murphy’s herd
gave a big supply of milk, and he determined to
utilise same for cheese making. An excellent article
was made, which met with a ready sale; in fact,
right from the commencement difficulty was found
in supplying the demand. Experts and ordinary
people pronounce the product splendid. Melbourne
produce agents communicated with Mr. Murphy,
who, satisfied with the safeness and undoubted suc-
cess of the venture, decided to erect a thoroughly
up-to-date factory and equip same with every mo-
dern appliance. That was in August, 1910. Out-
side supplies were invited, and the price offered
for milk being satisfactory—the central position of
the factory ideal—milk literally poured in from all
parts of the district. The fame of the Swan Hill
product is still increasing, and the demand at the
present time is so great that it cannot be met. Mr.
Murphy has, therefore, decided to considerably in-
crease the factory and plant, and thus the progress
of another important industry at Swan Hill con-
tinues prosperously on. The success Mr. Murphy,
who is one of the most unassuming and respected
men in the district has made in two and a half years,
both as a farmer and business man, surely speaks
loudly of the possibilities and wonderful fertility of
the soil on the Murray Flats.
GLRRAND’S LIVELRY STABLLS AND MOTOR GARAGL,
DAVID GLRRAND, Proprietor. McCALLUM STREET, SWAN HILL.
For the Latest Pattern Motor Car. Journeys undertaken, any distance, any part of Victoria and N.S.W. Comfort,
speed, and safety. Good riding hacks. Buggies on hire. None but good, stout, well fed horses allowed to leave my
livery stables. Charges fair and reasonable.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
The Leading, Most Successful Land Agent in the North.
J. M. MONAHAN,
The Land Specialist,
SWAN HILL.
nd Seekers conveyed by Motor Car anywhere in Victoria or
New South Wales.
Sole Agents Shearer’s Patent Stump-Jump Ploughs, Renowned V-shape Cultivators, The General
Insurance Co. (Haystacks and Growing Crops), Australasian Live Stock Insurance Co. (Every Type
Machinery and Live Stock), William Wallace and Co., Stock Agents, Melbourne and Bendigo.
M. Monahan and car outside his handsome residence, “ Uralla,” Swan Hill.
One of the most live, energetic and successful
land salesmen in Victoria is Mr. J. M. Monahan, the
well-known and highly popular land and commission
agent, who has been closely identified in the com-
mercial world of Swan Hill during the past twenty
years. He represented Messrs. Alfred Wallis and
Co., land and stock agents, of Bendigo, for several
years, and, being a man of considerable force of
character and a fine personality, has made
a great success of his own business, which
has never been in a more prosperous and
influential position than to-day. As an in-
stance of many similar splendid sales might be
mentioned two effected by him—3lB acres of free-
hold arable and irrigable land on the Murray Flats
to Mr. John Murphy at £lB per acre; 110 acres
Murray Flats freehold land to Mr. Con Ryan, at
£2O per acre. These were two of the best land
sales ever conducted in Swan Hill. Other land
sales in the district for 1911 totalled considerably
over £40,000. It is well for intending settlers and
purchasers of land to bear in mind that Mr. Mona-
han is in the position to offer some of the best land
available in Swan Hill district, and right through-
out the Mallee—at Nyah, Chillingollah, Piangil,
Southern Riverina, Wyalong and Condoblin (New
South Wales). He has many choice properties on
his list, and will be pleased to personally convey,
by motor car, intending purchasers of land over the
various properties. Mr. Monahan, who now con-
ducts business at his new handsome private resi-
dence, “ Uralla,” Swan Hill, can be recommended
with the utmost confidence to farmers and settlers.
His advice is valuable, and has been gained very
practically from an intimate knowledge of the
district extending over a period of 20 years. It is
at the service of every client. All business receives
prompt, earnest and personal attention, with in-
variably most satisfactory results.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
Why...
“ITbe Swan IbUl ouarMan”
is one of the best provincial papers in Victoria.
It is up-to-date, newsy, reliable, has a wide and influential
circulation both in Victoria and New South Wales, and is
a journal that brings a big return to its advertisers.
Published twice a week.
Proprietors, CHAPMAN & SMITH.
For about a quarter of a century “ The Swan Hill
Guardian ” has played no insignificant part in build-
ing up and developing this fertile northern district—
one of the richest and soundest financially in the
north of Victoria. The journal has been closely
identified with every progressive movement, and
not a little of what has been accomplished is due
to its able advocacy. This is recognised and appre-
ciated, with the result that “ The Guardian ” is
widely read by all sections of the community. It
is a popular journal in every sense of the word, for
it has made the interests of the district its own
concern, and in doing so has followed a policy which
always appeals to the people. By careful and con-
scientious work it has become a factor in every
sphere of action, and its influence in the cause of
progress is beyond dispute. It is now one of the
largest country journals in the State, and its cir-
culation covers large areas in both the Mallee and
New South Wales. The fact that the demand for
“ The Guardian ” is always on the increase is proof
that it is carrying out its functions with unabated
zeal and energy. It has been right in the forefront
of events for years, and still holds that leading
position. It has done as much, if not more, than
any provincial newspaper in Victoria to advocate
the claims of the Mallee as a whole, those of its
own particular district, and those of the Riverina.
“ The Guardian ” is published twice a week —on
Monday and Thursday evenings.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT
The .Federal Hotel,
New South Wales Side
SWAN HILL,
Donald Urquhart, Proprietor
The Federal Hotel, Swan Hill, and view of one of the sitting rooms,
The Federal Hotel, conducted so successfully and
well by Mr. and Mrs. Urquhart, is one of the oldest
and best known in Northern Victoria. It is con-
veniently situated, and is practically in Swan Hill,
though over the Murray Bridge, on the N.S.W.
side. The Federal Hotel receives a large share of
trade, and caters for the farming community on
a thorough scale. Mr. Donald Urquhart, who is a
popu’ar boniface, is ably assisted in the management
by Mrs. Urquhart, who superintends the domestic
arrangements of the house The' future of this
hotel is a bright one, with the almost-assured cut-
ting up of the Murray Downs estate of 86,000 acres
in the near future.
F irst-class Accommodation.
Large accommodation yards.
Excellent stabling. Loose boxes
— <§>_
The Hotel where the Public can
always rely on a fine, sparkling
glass of Ale, best of Wines and
Spirits.
Interesting photo, taken of the Federal Hotel
during a flood.


HENRY PYE, Builder, Joiner, Undertaker, etc.
(ESTABLISHED 189 V),
CAMPBELL STREET. SWAN HILL.
Builders’ Ironmongery and Building Material of Lvery Kind a Special Feature.
Full Stock of Paints, Oils, VarnisFies, Glass, PaperFiangings, etc.
Funerals conducted economically and in a tFiorougFi manner.
ESTIMATES GIVEN PROMPTLY.
1. Panoramic view of the timber yards. 2. Exterior view of these modern premises. 3 and 4
Interior views of this progressive business. R. w. Martin, photo.
One of the most up-to-date businesses in Swan
Hill is that which has been carried on so success-
fully during the past 15 years by Mr. H. Pye as a
builder and contractor. Four years ago, with the
great progress of Swan Hill, Mr. Pye erected
handsome, commodious premises in Campbell-street,
where an enormous stock of builders’ material and
general ironmongery, paints, oils, paperhangings,
furnishings, etc., are carried. A large quantity of
joinery work of every class is manufactured at
his factory, while at the commodious timber
yards, which are equipped with every necessary
kind of modern machinery and appliances,
will be found one of the finest assorted and largest
stocks of building material in provincial Victoria.
Swan Hill is noted for its many prettily designed
and comfortably built residences, and Mr. Pye has
played no small share in the erection of many of
them; also several business premises and offices.
He has recently completed, most successfully, the
important two-storey additions to the White Swan
Hotel. Mr. Pye, who is one of Swan Hill’s foremost
business men, is a prominent member of the Water
Trust. He employs a large staff of competent
tradesmen, and his present influential and solid
connection has been chiefly gained through his own
sterling worth, the reliable, competent workmen
employed, the excellence of the material used in con-
tracts undertaken by him, and the fair, reasonable
prices charged.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT,
R. M. MURDOCH,
BAKER AND CON FECTION ER.
Campbell Street, Swan Hill.
The oldest established bakery. Full stock of
: Confectionery
daily; district,
Small goods a special feature.
Bread delivered —town,
district, twice weekly.
The oldest established bakery business in Swan
Hill is that which has been carried on so well and
successfully during the past 32 years by Mr. R. M.
Murdoch, one of the oldest pioneers of the district.
Previously he had been in business at Marong.
Mr. Murdoch is principally noted for the splendid
quality of bread and small goods sent out from his
establishment. His reputation during his 32 busi-
ness years as a baker and confectioner has never
stood higher than to-day. He has a vast number
of customers right throughout town and district, and
it is worthy of mention that many of his customers
have been constant patrons for over 20 years. A
full range of biscuits and confectionery is stocked,
and it is pleasing to record the big success Mr.
Murdoch’s efforts to cater satisfactorily and
thoroughly for the public have met with.
Mr. R. M. Murdoch’s bakery premises, Campbell-st.,
Swan Hill.
THOMAS H. MORGAN
late with
A. WALLIS & CO.,
Campbell Street,
Swan Hill,
LAND, STOCK & COMMISSION
AGENT.
Mr. Thomas H. Morgan, who was favourably
known and connected with the late auctioneering
firm of Wallis and Co. during the past two years,
recently commenced in business on his own be-
half. He is bound to have a successful future, as,
in addition to possessing a vast and solid practical
knowledge of land and stock values, Mr. Morgan
is greatly respected by his fellow-townsmen and
the farmers of Swan Hill, who recognise that
any business entrusted to him will receive prompt,
satisfactory and keen attention in every detail.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
A NE
DEPARTURE
P. W. MARTIN , Fruiterer and Confectioner,
CAMPBELL STREET, SWAN HILL.
PROPRIETOR ...
swan Hill Dining Rooms,
MEALS AT ALL HOURS,
swan Hill Fish and Oyster saloon
REGULAR CONSIGNMENTS FRESH FISH AND OYSTERS
Views of Mr. P. W. Martin’s progressive and
One of the leading fruiterers and confectionery busi-
nesses in Swan Hill is that which has so ably been
conducted by Mr. Martin in Campbell-street. He has
worked up a splendid connection by his business-like
ability, and the splendid quality of fruit, vegetables
and high-class confectionery stocked. However, this
establishment is also noted and has recently come
into great public favour and prominence through the
excellence of the meals provided. The dining-rooms
are commodious and comfortable, while the meals are
delightfully served in the most appetising manner pos-
sible. Also a point worthy of mention is the scrupu-
lous cleanliness which everywhere exists. Meals are
obtainable at any hour up to 12 midnight, and they can
well-conducted business premises, Campbell-street.
be genuinely recommended by the writer to the farmer,
bank clerk, toiler and general public.
Having made such a pronounced success of the
dining-rooms, Mr. Martin recently established a much
required want in Swan Hdl—a fish and oyster saloon.
Arrangements have been made so satisfactorily that
the public can rely on receiving daily fresh oysters
and fish. The proprietor, who receives great assis-
tance from Mrs. Martin in the capable management of
this thriving, successful business, has fitted up the
saloon in an artistic, comfortable and creditable man-
ner, and the support already accorded this new ven-
ture clearly demonstrates that the public require and
appreciate a well-conducted fish and oyster saloon, where
they can have an enjoyable supper splendidly cooked
and nicely served.


J. C. SHIPP, Campbell Street, Swan Hill
1. Portion of the aerated and cordial factory. 2. The soft drinks department. 3. The motor
garage. 4. Mr. J. C. Shipp. 5. Mr. Shipp’s private residence. 6. The exterior of Mr. Shipp’s modern
establishment. 7. The livery and bait stables. R. W. Martin, photo, and design.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
J. O. SHIPP,
Fruiterer, Confectioner, Caterer, Greengrocer
General Carrier and Cab Proprietor
PROPRIETOR :
swan Hill Aerated Water and Cordial Factory,
Swan Hill Motor Garage,
swan Hill Livery Stables
A Special Feature—Soft Drinks (over 50 different
kinds) and two latest make Soda Founts.
Cab meets all trains.
Two large modern cars (the Argyle and Beeston-
Humber).
Commodious dining-room.
Delightfully cool underground refreshment room,
capable of accommodating over 100 persons.
Electric light and fans to be installed right
throughout this modern concern.
“ Shipp’s ” is the place where you can secure an
exhilarating cup of tea and light refreshments of
appetising quality.
“ Shipp’s ” is the noted place where everything is
carried out on a liberal scale.
“ Shipp’s ” is the place where an excellent meal,
well cooked, nicely served and of first-class quality,
is obtainable any time of the day until midnight.
“ Shipp ” caters thoroughly and liberally for each
and every one of his patrons, who number legion.
He buys in the best markets for fruits, vegetables,
etc., and every article he offers for sale.
He never surrenders to price if quality is ob-
tainable.
He has been 20 years before the public of Swan
Hill, and understands exactly their requirements,
hence his big support in the district.
STREET, SWAN HI
CAMPBE
TELEPHONE IT


THE PROGRESS OF SV/AN HILL AND DISTRICT.
JOHN McDONALD’S
OOT MANUFACTURING DEPOT,
Campbell Street, Swan Hill.
REPAIRS OF ALL KINDS OF FOOTWEAR PROMPTLY EXECUTED.
Best Quality Leather
Only Used.
Mr. John McDonald first saw the sun rise over
Swan Hill in 1887, and he was one of the first
business men to commence in that progressive
town. In addition to repairing work, which is a
specialty, a full range of useful and high-class
Boots and Shoes
Made to Order.
quality footwear is carried. If anyone desires a
boot made to order, which will give ease, solid
wear, obtainable at a moderate price, McDonald’s
Boot Depot, in Campbell-street, is just the place to
leave his order and measure.
THE SWAN Hll
PHARMACY.
Campbell Street,
Swan Hill.
J. H. BARKER,
Proprietor.
The well-known pharmacy in Campbell-street,
Swan Hill, has now been conducted by Mr. J. H.
Barker some 24 years. He was one of the first
half-dozen business men to commence in the town,
long before the building of the railway. He is not
only generally appreciated for his sterling worth
as a chemist, but also as a good townsman. His
premises are centrally situated in the main
thoroughfare. They are replete with a large stock
of the purest drugs, etc. Prescriptions are faith-
fully and promptly attended to, and from every
standpoint Mr. Barker gives the utmost satisfaction,
hence the big share of public patronage accorded
and maintained by him.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
For Quality of Meat and Prime Small-goods
JOE O’BREE’S Butchering Establishment,
CAMPBELL STREET, SWAN HILL,
cannot be beaten in provincial Victoria. The great progress this
business has made speaks for itself.
R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
Interior and Exterior of Mr. Joe O’Bree’s Butchering Establishment, Campbell-street, Swan Hill
The district residents say O’Bree sells the primest
and finest meal they have ever had, while the
townspeople endorse those remarks. Meanwhile,
the markets of the north are visited to secure the
primest cattle, sheep and pigs offering to maintain
the public opinion. Joe O’Bree intends to pur-
sue his progressive policy, and purposes erecting a
commodious modern refrigerator, with an electric
plant for the manufacture of small goods, electric
light and fans. Goods delivered daily; orders
called for. Every care taken in the handling of
meat, and the premises are always scrupulously
clean and wholesome.
Inspection invited.
A trial order solicited.
JOE O’BREE, Campbell Street, Swan Hill.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
Visit WILL FILMER’S SALOON
First-class Tradesmen
COURTESY. PROMPTNESS AND EXCELLENCE ASSURED,.
Wide range every possible kind Smokers’ Requisites,
Pipes, Tobaccos, Choice Cigars, Pouches, Knives, Cigarettes, Fancy Goods, etc.
Toilet Club, Is. per week.
Three Modern Chairs.
1. View of Mr. Will Filmer’s splendidly equipped,
handsome, and up-to-date saloon at Swan Hill,
which is quite one of the best in the Victorian pro-
vinces, and equal to any in the city. His staff are
exceedingly clever, courteous tradesmen, and an
easy, quick shave or hair-cut is always assured at
this saloon. Mr. Will Filmer has lived many years
in Swan Hill, and enjoys popularity both in and
out of business.
2. The exterior of a progressive business. A
large range of tobaccos, cigars, pipes and ail
smokers’ requisites of the finest quality is carried.
Prices are reasonable, with the result that the pro-
prietor is always busy. There is also another de-
partment which is heavily stocked with fancy-
goods and the finer and more choice quality of
vases, ornaments, etc.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
THE WHITE SWAN HOTEL,
THOMAS WILKINS, PROPRIETOR.
A splendidly appointed hotel throughout. First-class accommodation for the farming com-
munity and travelling public. Excellent tables kept. Large accommodation yards.
Modern Billiard Room.
Central position.
1 and 2. Views showing the splendid accommoda-
tion yards and stabling provided for the farming
Community. R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
3. The popular White Swan Hotel.
4 and 5. Portions of the dining rooms, where an
excellent meal is always assured.
Commodious two-storey additions now completed. Fine airy bedrooms.
Best Wines and Spirits stocked. The popular house for a fine, cool, sparkling glass of Ale.
Every attention and comfort is assured at this popular hostelry.
THOMAS WILKINS, PROPRIETOR.


THE SWAN HILL MACHINE BRICKYARDS
T. Whitham & Son, Proprietors.
1. A distant view of the brick kilns. 2. Bricks being stacked to await burning in the kilns,
3. The plant that supplies the necessary motive power. 4. The eight-brick wire cutter at work.
The proprietor of the large and important machine
brick yards at Swan Hill is Mr. Thomas Whitham. a
hale and hearty Yorkshireman, who landed in Australia
in 1886. He arrived in Swan Hill at the time the rail-
way was opened by Lord Hopetoun in 1890, and, with
his' family, took up a block of Murray Flats land —area.
21 acres. He shared his time between growing lucerne
and dairying on his block and contracting work in
Swan Hill. Mr. Whitham relates how lie brought three
cows into the district, and believes he was the first to
commence dairying on the flats. However, 4d. per lb.
was all he averaged at the stores for butter, so. not
having made a fortune at that price, he relinquished
dairying, and went in wholly for contracting work. He
became very successful, and some four years ago
erected brick kilns and a modern brick-making plant
equal to any north of Bendigo. The power for driving
the machinery, including the wire-cutting apparatus
R. W. Martin, photo, and design.
and for hauling, is secured from a powerful boiler. A
thousand bricks per hour can easily be turned out, and,
though every effort is made to cope with the enormous
demand, yet it cannot be met. The bricks manufac-
tured at this yard are undoubtedly of splendid quality,
and it is not surprising there is such a rush to obtain
them. Mr. Whitham, senr.. who is assisted by his son,
Mr. J. Whitham, is a decidedly progressive man, and
is engaging the services of a Newcastle expert to lay
out and draw plans of works to manufacture tiles and
designs in terracotta. This will be a fine thing for
Swan Hill and district, and we can safely assume a
ctill greater improvement in the style of buildings.
Mr. Whitham is now on a visit to his native county,
Yorkshire, and intends to profit by his trip by visiting
all the largest potteries and brickyards in England. He
promises to bring back many new ideas to put into
practice in his own progressive and thriving in-
dustry.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
H. CODLING, Builder and Contractor,
Estimates Given.
Plans and Specifications Prepared.
All classes of Joinery Work carried out expeditiously at the Factory.
Agent for the world renowned “Jeffrey” Filter, Nonpareil Stoves, Union Insurance Co..
Full stock of Ironmongery, Paints, Wallpapers, Guns,
Fishing Tackle, etc., carried.
Mr. Codling’s modern premises and joinery factory, Campbell-street, Swan Hill.
There is no gainsaying the fact that Mr. H. Codling
has made great strides as a builder, contractor and
joiner since commencing in Swan Hill some three
years ago. He employs many experienced tradesmen,
and is responsible for the erection of several fine build-
ings in Swan Hill, notably the State Rivers and Water
Supply Commission’s offices. Also it is due in a great
measure to Mr. Codling that the business men of Swan
Hill have such fine shop fronts and plate glass win-
dows, for it was he who introduced the metal fronts
R. W. -Martin, photo, and design.
and plate glass window to the town and district. One
of the most modern establishments in Swan Hill—that
of Messrs. Ted Binns and Co. —was executed by Mr.
Codling, who makes a special feature of joinery work,
and has turned out some fine jobs from his
notably ice-chests and show-cases. He quotes fairly
and squarely, and if the public require any contracting
work carried out, they can place implicit' faith in the
quality of the work done and the prompt manner in
which same is executed.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
SWAN HILL TIMBER YARDS
1. The old premises, erected 1894.
2. The present up-to-date establishment.
The large and important business (late Drummond
and Snell) carried on by Mr. Ralph M. Drummond is
one of the best-equipped and excellently conducted
businesses of its kind in the State. Established on
January Ist, 1894, its growth has been rapid,, and trade
has been secured north, east, south and west. The
erection of the majority of Swan Hill and district’s
finest private residences and public buildings has been
carried out by Mr. Ralph Drummond, the more notable
works being the erection of the bridge across the Little
Murray, the water tower. Shire Hall, that handsome
ornament of Swan Hill’s main thoroughfare, the Com-
mercial Bank, also many other homesteads, residences,
business premises and offices. The proprietor of the
Swan Hill timber yards caters very thoroughly for the
3 and 4. Two views giving a slight idea of the
enormous timber stocks held.
public, and an immense quantity and great assortment
of timber will be found, which is offered to the public
at Melbourne prices, plus freight. The store carries a
large stock of ironmongery, furniture, wall-paper, fur-
nishings. etc., and everything bears the brand of quality
and up-to-dateness. Mr. Drummond, who is a popular
lieutenant in the Rangers, has interested himself con-
siderably in the welfare of Swan Hill, and takes a
great interest in the A. and P. Society, and is a P.C.R.
of the 1.0.0. R. Lodge. The business under review has
been brought to its present state of prosperity and im-
portance by the judicious methods adopted, and in al-
ways giving the public a good article at a fair and
reasonable price, and also keeping large stocks to
select from. The future of the firm is indeed a
decidedly bright one.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
SWAN HIL
TIMBER YARDS
RALPH M. DRUMMOND
(Late DRUMMOND & SNELL),
Timber Merchant, Ironmonger, Builder and Undertaker,
Joiners work made to order. Estimates given for every class of work.
Large stocks of Furniture, Linoleums, Carpets, Furnishings, Dairying
Utensils, Wallpapers, etc.
Interesting View o£ Mr. R. M. Drummond’s Swan Hill Brickyards.
AGENT FOR
Norwich Union Fire Insurance Co., New Zealand Fire Insurance Co., Cyclone Fenc-
ing Co.’s Gates (a speciality), John Buncle and Sons’ Perfection Kerosene Stoves,
Sharpies’ Cream Separators, Machinery of every kind, Alston’s Windmills (a
speciality), and Abbott Filters.
PROPRIETOR SWAN HILL BRICK YARDS.
RALPH M. DRUMMOND
(Established 1894),
Corner BEVERIDGE and M'CRAE STREETS, SWAN HILL.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
J. Gl
ARD,
SADDLE. COLLAR 8c HARNESS MAKER.
CAMPBELL STREET.
ESTABLISHED 12 YEARS.
The Largest Manufacturer of Saddlery Goods, Horse
and Cow Rugs, Collars, etc., in the Northern District.
is approaching. Give me a call, inspect and order
early, before the rush sets in.
A LEADING FEATURE “HOLDFAST”
HORSE AND COW RUGS. Hundreds sold in the
district. They are extremely warm, and are so in-
geniously made that they cannot slip off—round or
over—an animal. In the morning they’re always
just as you placed them the night before. Winter
REPAIRS executed promptly by staff of ex-
perienced tradesmen.
COLLARS made to order,
A fine, well-selected stock to choose from.
INSPECTION INVITED.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
FRANK HARVEY & CO., GENE “A™ ANTS
LEADING DEPARTMENTS
Grocery, Ironmongery, China, Glass, Drapery, Boots and Shoes
SUITS TO MEASURE
Fresh Bread and Pastry delivered daily. Wedding Cakes beautifully designed
Catering liberally carried out is a speciality.
1. The drapery department.
2. Harvey and Co.’s fine, commanding and com-
modious premises, Campbell-street, Swan Hill.
3. Confectionery, bakery, etc., departments.
4. The grocery department. R. w. Martin, photo,
Fencing Wire, Roofing Iron, and every possible requisite for the home and farm will be
found at
HARVEY & CO.’S Campbell Street, Swan Hill
Proprietors—Swan Hill Hay, Corn and Chaff Store.
Agents—London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Co. Vacuum Oil Co.


G| 1 A/I I IS. IS * CYCLE AGENT. WHEAT BUYER
| # ] JVJV \J I I|>J V ~~J ; CAMPBELL. ST., SWAN HILL.
1. Interior of these fine, commodious premises. 2. The up-to-date exterior. 3. The proprietor of
this well-managed and progressive business, Mr. G. F. Dowling.
At my Campbell St. Depot are stocked scores of first-grade Cycles. Dux Cycles and Motor Cycles.
Full stock of Accessories. Cycle Repairs carried out promptly. All classes Oil on hand. Agent for
Mitchell’s Machinery and Oil Engines, Wertheim’s Sewing Machines and Pianos, Separators, Twine,
Cornsacks, Wischer’s Manures (the favourite of the north). Full range of Lucerne, Millet and other
Seeds. Quotations forwarded. Inspection invited. Inquiries by mail receive prompt attention.
J. H. BELL,
CAMPBELL STREET, SWAN HI
The noted and old established house for Ironmongery and Fancy Goods, where the public
will find a splendid range to select from.
“The Swan Hill Depot” for all kinds of Fishing Tackle, Guns, Ammunition, and every class
of sporting requisites.


INTERESTING VIEWS ON COUNCILLOR T. STANDEN’S ESTATE AT BULGA.
1. One of the bullock teams at v/ork.
2. The handsome, comfortable homestead
3. Horse team at work.
4, A flock of fine, well-bred ewes on the estate
One of the most respected and oldest pioneers
of the north is Councillor Thomas Standen, who
has been in the district some 18 years. He con-
ducted a saddlery business many years ago in a
decidedly primitive way at Mitiamo. After 7 years’
experience there, he sold out, and commenced a
saddlery business in Swan Hill, which became a
most successful one. He purchased a large tract
of land (some 5000 acres), situate about 12 miles
from Swan Hill, and for several years battled hard.
However, to-day he possesses one of the best-im-
proved estates in the district. A tine, modern, com-
fortable homestead has been erected, surrounded by
a well-kept garden, very pleasing to the eye. Water
is laid on, which is supplied by aid of a powerful
windmill. This estate is divided into 20 stoutly-
fenced paddocks, all of which have a plentiful water
5. Councillor T. Standen and Mrs. Standen with
family in their motor buggy on the way to Swan
Hill.
6. Large sheet of water,' showing cattle, on the
estate. R. w. Martin, photo, and design.
supply. Amongst other improvements noticed were
large, modern sheep-yards for drafting purposes,
and the sinking of additional dams, one with a
capacity of 5000 yards. Councillor Standen keeps
a good class of crossbred and merino sheep, while
he makes the breeding of horses a hobby, and this
year has over 50 young horsbs on his estate. Coun-
cillor Standen recently sustained a severe loss by
the death of his thoroughbred draught stallion,
“ Glen Hope.” Still, with his usual enterprise, no
doubt, he will purchase even a better one in the
near future. Over 40 working bullocks are used
on the estate, and they are quite amongst the finest
of many good teams in the Swan Hill district.
The surveyed route for the proposed railway from
Swan Hill to Piangil will pass within 3 miles of the
homestead, and that should further enhance the
value of this well-improved estate.


The SWAN HILL COACHBUILDING and IMPLEMENT FACTORY. Estab. 20 years.
WALKER & REAL NEIL ( BROWN), Campbell St., Swan Hill
Every class and design of vehicle constructed at our factory. We have large stocks of material, all
specially selected and seasoned. You can come and inspect your vehicle while being made, and note
the material we use, and the good, solid work our tradesmen put into our contracts. Our prices are
fair, reasonable ones. Every vehicle is guaranteed. Repairing work carried out expeditiously.
Tyring (new process) undertaken. Trimming, Coach Painting. Hoods re-covered. Our Shoeing Forge
in charge first-class man. Horses are shod with judgment. Faults remedied or mitigated.
This business was begun in a very small way by
Mr. Neil Brown about 20 years ago, when he turned
out the first buggy manufactured in Swan Hill. At that
time the mallee country had not been brought under
cultivation, and farming was confined to the river
frontage, and Swan Hill was consequently a very small
township. The advent of the mallee-wheat-grower and
the dairying industry gave a great impetus to the town
and district, and the factory had to be enlarged from
time to time and labour-saving machinery introduced,
to cope with the increasing business, until it has become
one of the largest and best-equipped country coach fac-
tories in the State. The firm always made it a rule to
manufacture their own vehicles in their own works, and
were thus enabled to design types which have become
standards for the whole district, and are everywhere
admitted to be the best for the work required of them.
The present proprietors intend to follow the methods
which have proved so successful in the past, and, with
a large and costly stock of seasoned wheels and mate-
rials to work on, will continue to keep right in the
front rank with the best vehicles for all purposes at the
lowest possible rates. Persons who have the idea
that the cities are the only places to obtain cheap
vehicles generally find out to their cost that they are
mistaken, for, after they have purchased and used
the vehicle a few months, it proves to be a very
inferior article indeed.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
WILLIAM MOORE’S
Hairdressing Saloon and Tobacconist’s Depot,
Campbell Street, Swan Hill
ESTABLISHED 12 YEARS,
Electrical Massage for the head and body just introduced and is proving a great success.
TOILET CLUB.
“ Argus ” Obtainable,
Inspection Invited. Splendid Stock of Smokers’ Requisites Carried.
First-class Workmen Engaged,
Promptness a Special Feature.
1. Mr. William Moore’s well managed, modern
hairdressing saloon.
Mr. William Moore has conducted a high-class
toilet saloon and tobacconist’s depot during the past
12 years, and its share of patronage has never been
greater than to-day. The saloon contains three
2. Mr. W. Moore’s well-stocked premises,
Campbell-street, Swan Hill.
chairs, with efficient tradesmen, and is a thoroughly
modern and up-to-date one in every detail. A
large and varied supply of smokers’ requisites and
fancy-goods is stocked.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
Renkin Bros.’ Butchering Establishment,
CAMPBELL STREET, SWAN HILL.
ESTABLISHED 1908.
The Public can always rely on Primest Meat and Small Goods.,
The exterior and interior views of this modern, scrupulously clean, and well-managed premises
OUR MOTTO is—the best—civility, and an ear-
nest endeavour to suit the desires and requirements
of every customer, casual or permanent.
Our carts deliver daily in all parts of Swan Hill,
and regularly in the district.
SMALL GOODS made by machinery. Finest
and purest ingredients used only.
We intend to continue our progressive policy, and
are installing electric fans and light throughout our
commodious premises.
All meat kept in modern refrigerating chambers
R. <3. AND A. J. RENKIN, PROPRIETORS.


THE PROGRESS OF SWAN HILL AND DISTRICT.
S. TRAVAGLIA, Fruiterer and Confectioner,
CAMPBELL STREET, SWAN HILL.
Fresh Fruit Daily. Splendid Range of High-class Confectionery
A Special Feature at Travaglia’s is Ice Cream and Soft Iced Drinks.
1. Exterior of the fruit department
2. The confectionery department.
3. View of hall leading through the large refresh
ment rooms.
S. Travaglia is proprietor of one of the most up-
to-date businesses of its kind outside the city.
The appointments are comfortable and modern,
while his refreshment rooms are capable of accom-
modating over 100 people. He keeps a splendid
quality of fruit, quite equal to the best obtainable
4. A corner of the soft drinks department.
5. Exterior of the confectionery premises, demon-
strating the fine stock of high-class confectionery
shown.
in the city. He has made wonderful progress dur-
ing the past 15 months, and, being a progressive
man, will no doubt have his palace lighted by elec-
tricity and install fans for the convenience of his
large connection. His success is well earned and
well deserved.


The SWAN HILL DINING ROOMS. " CA i 1 2i T i,l w . A^ H,LU
D. I STEWART. Proprietor
A First-class meal at any hour. Afternoon tea and light refreshments. Cordials of all kinds.
Catering carried out on a liberal and thorough scale. A special effort is made to cater thoroughly
for the farming community and general public. All articles of food prepared are of the best quality,
and scrupulous cleanliness is observed in every detail. If you have not visited my commodious
dining rooms, do so. The excellence of the meal, the promptness and the comfort will probably
surprise but certainly satisfy.
Harris’ Motor
Garage, Swan nm
The Garage to secure a Reliable Running, Modern Built Talbot Car,
Journeys undertaken any part of Victoria and New South Wales.
Mr. F. J. Harris, a resident for nine years of
Swan Hill, established a garage some four years
ago, and has always been noted for the splendid
running cars provided for a journey. He favours
the Talbot car, and has driven it exclusively.
Mr. Harris knows the district and country around
Swan- Hill for hundreds of miles thoroughly, and
those desirous to reach any outlying part quickly
and safely can rely on Mr. Harris, who is a thorough
mechanic and a careful driver.


NYAH. A District with a Great Future.
> Nyah is considered by many people best able to
iucige to be a second Mildura, anu rightly so, on ac-
count of the potentialities of its rich soil. Experts
have expressed belief in its future, and everything
tends to show, by the great and steady progress it is
now making, that it must eventually become a large
fruit-growing centre.
Nyah is situated amidst picturesque surroundings, is
well timbered, the land is somewhat of undulating-
character, and the River Murray flows past its very
door. The direction is north-westerly, and the dis-
tance some seventeen miles by road from Swan Hill,
From a farming and dairying standpoint also it is
growing into importance. Land has already risen con-
siderably in value, and those who could see the possi-
bilities of the future have, through good judgment,
especially with the small holdings, kept on planting,
with the result that the produce now about to be ob-
tained will ultimately bring this place into great pro-
minence as a fruit-growing district. In the near future,
from the area already planted with vines, fruit and
citrus trees, there should be an annual output of be-
tween £50,000 and £60,000.
As an irrigation settlement Nyah has natural advan-
tages which would be hard to surpass in any part of
Victoria, owing to its wealth of soil, resource and its
unquestionably excellent geographical position for des-
patching its produce by river, and soon by rail, to more
important parts, and for exporting purposes.
One is favourably impressed on a visit to Nyah with
the rapid strides it has made during the past two years.
The vines and fruit trees in the well laid out and
beautiful orchards present a pleasing spectacle, pre-
dicting the ultimate prosperity which the landowners
will enjoy. Hundreds of acres are noticeable under
intense culture; the soil is specially suitable for this
purpose.
The compiler of this work, after an exhaustive tour,
can strongly recommend this district to those desiring
suitable land for dairying and fruit-growing.
I desire to extend my sincere than!s
and appreciation for the courtesy and
assistance extended to me in connec-
tion with my book, and trust same
will prove not only a splendid adver-
tisement—with its wide circulation —-
for the .Swan Hill district, but a pro-
duction of considerable interest.
No reasonable expense, trouble, or
energy has been spared in the con-
summation of “ The Progress of Swan
Hill and District. ’ ’
J. EDWARD ROBERTSON,
Journalist and Publisher.
The printing of this book was en-
trusted to Wilke, Mitchell & Co., of
7 Flinders Court, Melbourne, who
have installed an up-to-date plant of
type and machinery, and can special-
ise in this class of work. The excel-
lence of this production speaks for
itself. They also execute job work of
all classes, besides lithographing and
book binding, and guarantee satisfac-
This “Alston” Windmill is one of the largest in the Commonwealth. Wheat stacks last year at . _ 11 ’ nrorrm t delivery
It pumps up sufficient water to supply the whole population of Ultima. Ultima Railway Station, tion as well as prompt uenver>.


STALEY and CONNELL,
General Merchants, Importers.
Drapery, Millinery, Grocery, Ironmongery, Boots, Shoes,
Dressmaking.
Wine and Spirit Merchants. Land Salesmen.
Timber Merchants and Builders. Proprietors Swan Hill
Brick Yards.
Staley & Conne
I*"
