

rt?r}4 < p ßmrs
5g%,9-
TIEiE
ARAWA GAZETTE
(COPYRIGHT.)
Published on board the R.M.S. “ARA WA ” during a passage
from London to New Zealand,
AUGUST AND SEPTEMBER, 1885.
CAPTAIN JOHN STUART.
H>unebin:
PRINTED AT THE “DAILY TIMES” OFFICE, CORNER OF HIGH, MACANDREW, AND DOWLING STREETS.
1885




THE “ARAWA’’ GAZETTE.
Published during the voyage of the S.S. Arawa from London to Otago.
fCOPYRIGHT. ]
THE ARAWA GAZETTE.
A Newspaper published on hoard the S.S. “ Arawa” during
a passage from London to New Zealand, August and
September, 1885.
EDITORIAL.
HP HERE is a maxim old but excellent which declares that
X if an object is good in itself it is better accomplished
“late than never.” Beneath the shadow afforded by this
rock of defence, we take our editorial refuge. Had our
present task been commenced a fortnight ago, doubtless the
final result would have been worthier. A fortnight of delay
in what will be a comparatively short voyage is an irreparable
loss to the “ Gazette.” Now we cordially invite all interested
in the general welfare in furthering for the next few weeks
the happiness and amusement of all on board. Placed to-
gether by chance, bound for a common goal, and actuated
perhaps by a common hope, surely we should unite in a
common effort to relieve the monotony of the journey.
“ Like driftwood spars that meet and pass
Upon the boundless ocean plain,
So on the sea of life, alas!
Man meets, man speaks, and parts again.’
Now let us act so that the necessary parting will be an un-
welcome one. 'We desire that this paper, which will be issued
weekly, should be a meeting ground, and afford opportunity
for the general exchange of ideas. Poetry, prose, humour—
especially humour—will be welcome, and in our selections we
shall follow no high literary standard. Should the project
be supported as we feel it will, we trust that when we reach
the “ Britain of the South,” it may take a more permanent
form, and thus serve as a pleasant reminder of the days we
spent together in the “ Arawa,” under the genial command of
Captain Stuart.
In launching forth the first copy to the criticisms of our
subscribers, we feel assured we shall meet with that support
so necessary to its existence. Though, in our humble editorial
mind, the publication may successfully compete with the
“ Times,” “ New York Herald,” or Melbourne “ Argus,” still
that opinion may not be universal. Our voyage has opened
under most auspicious circumstances, and has every promise
of being safe and speedy. The brilliant weather with which
we have been favoured, though perhaps too warm, has eradi-
cated the terrors anticipated by those travelling at sea for the
first time. — Ed.
On the 17th inst. a general meeting of passengers was
held in the saloon of the “Arawa” for the purpose of devising
and arranging entertainments and amusements of all descrip-
tions, with a view to the general enjoyment during the trip
to the Colonies. By general request Mr, P. Cunningham was
elected Chairman of Committee, and twelve members were
then ballotted for as follows : —Chairman : Mr. P. Cunning-
ham ; Ex-officio Members : Captain Stuart and Officers ;
Musical Sub-committee : Messrs. Mendershausen, Hunt, Mer-
ton, and Clayden ; Sports : Birdekin, Hall, Miller (speciality,
“sweeps”), Henderson (ditto), Crosthwaite; Whist, Chess,
&c. : Cotton and Jackson ; Honorary Secretary and Trea-
surer : Messrs. Pembroke and Busch ; Mr, Moffat and Dr.
Eccles, Members Ex-officio, to all Committees. To show the
energy which the Committee have worked, sports, cricket
matches, dances, and a concert have already been held,
descriptions and results of which will appear in our columns.
In order to defray necessary expenses a sum has teen
subscribed. Prizes will be given for athletic sports, &c.
On Wednesday, 19th inst , Mrs. Merton and Mrs. Dundas
received many distinguished visitors at their “At Home.”
Though some slight surprise was perhaps felt at the mercenary
ideas of the footmen who endeavoured to extort bullion from
unwary guests, the reception was extremely popular, and has
tended largely towards promoting general sociability.
In decidedly tropical heat the first series of athletic
sports was held on Saturday, 22nd inst,, in the presence of a
large and fashionable assemblage. The ■ various events were
contested for with much zeal, and afforded great amusement
and fun. Results as follows :
ATHLETIC SPORTS.
HELD ON “ARAWA” GROUNDS.
1. Flat Race. —Prize cup value 10s. Ist, Horrocks : 2nd,
prize, cup value ss, Dyson, 8 seconds.
2. Walking the Line. —Cup value ss. Ist, Moffatt, 7
competitors.
3. Potato Race. —Cup value 10s. Ist, Pembroke, 11
competitors.
4. Tilting at the Ring.—Cup value 10s. Ist, Jay and
Busch, 6 pairs competed
6. Sack Race.—Cup value ss. Ist, Jay, 4 ran.
7. Three-legged Race.—Cup value 10s. Ist, Moffatt and
Pembroke, 4 competitors.
8. Wheelbarrow Race.—Cup value 10s. Ist, McMurray
and Bews, 3 competitors,
9. Ladies’ Egg and Spoon Race. Cup value 10s. Ist,
Mrs. McWhirter, 8 ran ; 2nd prize, ss.
Judge, Mr. Sorby ; starter, Dr. Eccles ; clerk of the course
Mr. Miller.
The ladies’ race finished the events of a very successful
day. The clerk of the course was, in spite of an atmosphere
of 90 deg. Fahr,, most indefatigable in the execution of his
duties.
On Monday, 24th instant, a most enjoyable, though im-
promptu, hop was held on the citadel deck. The weather
favoured the dancers who evidently enjoyed the novel fun.
To many who have not made a trip before the idea of the
“ light fantastic ” on board ship has something entirely
original; the spacious deck of our vessel afforded roomy and
well-ventilated accommodation. Some amusement was caused
owing a slight difficulty in maintaining one’s equilibrium
owing to the motion of the ship, this, however, was no obstacle
to the enjoyment, in fact, rather otherwise, calling for the
more gallant assistance than is usually required. By the next
dance we hope to see that a general capture has been made of
sea-legs.
LOST.
Between sunrise and sunset, two golden hours, each set
with sixty diamond minutes. No reward is offered for they
are lost for ever.
CONCERT.
After unavoidable postponement, owing to the Indis-
position of the moving spirit (Mr. Menderhausen), a concert
took place in the saloon on Thursday, 27th inst. That we have


great talent on board cannot be doubted by the audience who
received the various items with loud applause. Mr. Hunt’s
song in character showed great versatility of genius. With
the exception of a slight interval the attention of the spectators
was held throughout, and we trust this will be the first of
many such successful entertainments.
“ Say, Doctor, can you tell me why a woman is like ivy 7”
“Well,” said our worthy Esculapius, “because the greater the
ruin, the tighter she clings.” “ Hold hard, hold hard,” replied
Joseph, a ray of pity at Pill’s simplicity illuminating his
handsome face. “ You have made a slight but too common
error, my friend, I think, should it not be, the tighter she
clings, the greater the ruin 7” Evidently the Doctor is an un-
happy unmarried man.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Messrs. Henderson and Miller, by special appointment,
“sweepists ” to the “ Arawa,” may be consulted on the actual
run of the ship each day. Fee, Is. Calcutta Sweeps every
Tuesday and Friday. Office —Smoke House, Citadel street.
Hours—From 10 to 6. No cheques taken.
(Ed. Obs.) —We have much pleasure in calling attention
to the simple but business-like advertisement of those eminent
specialists, Messrs. Henderson and Miller, who have so long
enjoyed the confidence of our subscribers. As sweep pro-
moters, they say, it is commendable the prompt manner in
which their engagements have been met (however we have
had no opportunity of testing this quality yet), for in spite of
all temptation (Nap, Teneriffe, wine bills, &c.,) they are still
honourable men. May it be ever thus. We may here remark
that we are not responsible for the opinion of our clients.
’Tis sweet to think that where’er we rove
We are sure to find something still that’s dear,
And though we are far from the lips that we love,
We always make love to the lips that are near,
(Not intended to be personal.)
On Sunday, 16th instant, Divine Service was held in the
Saloon by the Revd. C. Dundas, M.A. and the Eevd. G.
McMurray—an appropriate service was given by the first-
named minister to a large congregation.
CARICATURE OF A PASSENGER ON BOARD THE “ARAWA.”
He climbed with her on a lonely hill
And murmurmed : Look around,
Mark those tall firs which shadows throw
O’er every inch of ground.
And lower down the Oak, the Ash,
The Elm, the Hazel tree
All typify, in various ways,
The love I feel for thee.
They are not Firs but Pines she said ;
And really it is strange
That all the specimens you name
So badly you arrange.
You have a certain eloquence,
But method not a bit;
Why talk in such a rambling way 7
I see no sense in it.
A rosebud he for her had plucked,
She looked at it and smiled ;j
While he in dreamy mute delight
The moments thus beguiled.
What will she do with it he thought
When I am gone away 7
With reverent hands its blossom press
And opening every day.
The favorite volumes ’twixt whose leaves
She placed it with a blush,
Shyly lament that tyrant weight
Must my poor offering crush.
She spoke at length, her accent clear,
. Recalled his wandering thought ;
She said ’twill interest you to hear
This specimen you brought
Belongs to order Indica ;
The Stamens you will find
Bend inwards ; prickles are falcate,
(’Tis quite a common kind).
She saw his pain, yet tore his flower,
Destroyed it bit by bit ;
Such sentimental stuff she thought,
I see no sense in it
“ARAWA” SKITS.
Who is it that calls him a boy 7 and avers that though
they do sit so (ad-jay-gent) adjacent to one another, he will
soon recover Dorn his attack.
He has been cut-out lately pretty frequently, especially
at the ball, where she appeared in the dress of the evening,
and apparently enjoyed herself excessively. He poor fellow
being in a corresponding state of despondency.
Mr. Clerk, it is all very well to say it is the Children’s
health you so anxiously enquire after—but how about the
Nurses 7
A Cricket Match was played on Friday, 28th August, on
the Club ground, between teams from 2nd and Ist Saloons.
The visitors won the toss and went in and out for six runs.
The home team’s wickets fell quickly at first owing to the
bowling of McMurray (Capt.), but the fine batting of Hall
secured an almost certain victory with an innings of 26. In
the second innings the visitors scored 7 against the bowling
and fielding of their opponents.
Result —2nd Saloon, Ist innings, 6 ; 2nd innings, 7. Ist
Saloon, Ist. innings, 37.
Won by an innings and 21 runs.
Our ball took place on Thursday, 27th inst. The citadel
deck was gaily festooned with flags and bunting. The piano
being brought on deck, and the music being under the able
management of Misses Claridge and Sadd, with the aid of
a violin, proved most conducive to the enjoyment of the
dancers, and enabled them to spend a very agreeable evening.
We noticed with regret that two or three eligible young guests
were present who would not dance, though no lack of
partners. The gloomy visage of one youth when a “friend”
monopolized one lady, perhaps cast a gloom over some. It is
whispered though that his ruffled feathers were smoothed
anon. The supper and wines were enjoyed, and we must
thank our committee for the very able manner in which they
conducted a most successful ball, and gave us ail a very
pleasant evening.
PROGRAMME.
1. —Quadrille B.—Waltz
2. —Waltz 9.—Quadrille
3. —Polka 10. —Waltz
4. —Waltz 11.—Polka
5. —Lancers 12.—Lancers
6. —Waltz 13.—Sir Roger de Coverly
7. —Highland Schottische
Supposing you saw a young man on horseback who was
iccustomed to the exercise, what name in the Passenger
Supposing you saw a young man on horseback who was
not accustomed to the exercise, what name in the Passenger
List would you use in giving him advice 7 You’ll be sore by-
and-by. (Sorby)
2
THE “ARAWA” TIMES.


TALE FROM A PASSENGER LIST.
Once upon a time (as all stories commence) a youth who
made a bully vaunt (Bullivant) of his riding purchased a
trotter, (Trotter) and thought he would take part in the (Hunt),
but the horrid rocks (Horrocks) were such a (Sadd) difficulty
that he changed his mind, and went in for sport with a gun,
A good-natured (Miller) who lived hard by gave him permission
on his ground, and welcomed him to his (Hall) ; but there was
little or no sport on the Miller’s ground. The only thing that
presented itself to our (Young) sportsman was a (Jay), a bird
akin (Birdikin) to a magpie, on a bush,(Busch) but to such luck
as this he could not (Cotton), so immediately returned home.
The next thing this would-be sportsman tried his hand
to was fishing, at which he was more successful, hooking a
(Salmon) or two before long at the river side. While by the
river he met a lady and her son (Thomas), who was playing
with a (Barrow) which Jack’s son (Jackson) had left in the
field, consequently he was getting very warm, and his mamma
remarked “Y ou will surely die, son, (Dyson) if you get in such
a feverish heat, but he said “ Dont harass (Harris) me, mother
dear, lam enjoying myself.” Just at this moment an old and
feeble woman passed, and complained to the lady that her
house was sadly out of repair, when the good-natured soul
immediately said that she would mend her house and (Men-
derhausen) see all right before the coming winter ; and as to
the little road to the front, I will buy some clay den (Clayden)
pave it (Pavitt). Then the good feeble old woman said to
herself : “ How cunning I am ; (Cunningham) the mere tone
(Merton) of her soft voice quite cheered me up.” But now I
must bring this nursery story to a finish, for I am sure you are
all saying “ do close (Deuclos) this nonsense.”
On Sunday, 23rd inst., the Holy Communion was adminis-
tered at 7.30 a.m. Divine service held in the morning and
evening.
[Owing to the want of space and general objection of the
editorial staff to toil, we are unable to publish many contribu-
tions we have received, but in our next issue shall be better
enabled to give particulars of the “ Arawa ” and other matters
which we have not yet dealt with, Ed.]
THE ARAWA GAZETTE.
No. 2.
In submitting our second issue to the public we have
one paramount duty to perform, that is, most cordially to
acknowledge the generous and indulgent reception accorded
to our first venture. The absolute avidity with which our
necessary scanty edition was bought up, and the general
comments which have reached our ears, afforded a welcome
sign of the approval of a project in which we may assure our
readers that “ our true intent is all for their delight.”
Ours is not the pen of a ready writer, so we invite all
« to be to our virtues very kind, and to our faults a little blind.”
Our voyage is progressing pleasantly and quickly;
weather exceptionally fine continues to favour us ; the spirit
of fun is amongst us daily, making time pass almost too
quickly.
We passed the land of St. Helena on Sunday last,
historically famous as the scene of Napoleon’s captivity and
death. Whale ships have been seen, and it seems that the
voyage will be at an end ere we can realise it.
We think it advisable to state that the “ Arawa Gazette ”
will be published in pamphlet form on arrival in New
Zealand, and those who wish to retain such a suitable
memento of the trip will be enabled to obtain copies on
board, or, if previously leaving the ship, may have them
forwarded to any address.
On the first appearance of the paper there were no doubt
several who read its varied contents with very mingled
feelings. We suppose the feelings culminated in an ex-
cusable desire to either punch the editor’s head or box his
ears, according to the sex of the person aggrieved. We
should on the whole prefer the latter punishment, as it would
be an opportunity of exacting the counter penalty.
As avowed by our master printer in a moment of excite-
ment “ the paper is utterly without principles of any kind.”
As an important member of the editioral staff was almost
destroyed on account of having expressed his political
opinions, we have decided to refrain from stating ours.
I’ve heard New Zealand maidens sing—
And thrilled at every tone,
But sweeter is an English song
From voices of our own.
I’ve gazed in Eastern ladies’ eyes,
And brilliant though they be,
I’ve looked in brighter and exclaimed,
“An English girl for me.”
And when I seek a heart and hand,
Amongst the fair and free,
Still constant to my faith 111 say,
“ An English girl for me.”
We have omitted, through want of space in our first issue,
a description of the noble ship that is carrying us to the Land
of Promise. We will now give the history of the “ Arawa,”
which we are sure will be read with interest:—The “ Arawa ”
was launched in the Autumn of 1884, being built by Messrs.
W. Denny and Bros., of Dumbarton, for direct steam service
to New Zealand, at the order of the Shaw, Savill, and Albion
Company, Limited. The “Arawa” is built of steel, and
measures 420 feet in length, 46 feet in breadth, and 32 feet
in depth, her gross tonnage being over 5000 tons. She is
provided with water-ballast tanks, by means of which proper
trim may be maintained throughout a voyage, as coal is con-
sumed. The hulk is divided into nine water-tight compart-
ments. The vessel was designed for this enterprising Com-
pany with a view especially of enabling passengers to make
the voyage to the Antipodes with ease and comfort, combined
with speed, and in this object we may state that she has
proved a decided success. Her saloon and state-rooms are
fitted with luxury and every modern convenience, the latter
being of a size seldom seen in passenger vessels. The second
saloon accommodation is superior to the first of many estab-
lished “liners.” The “Arawa” left London on her maiden
voyage on 7th November, 1884, under the command of Cap-
tain J. Stuart, and arrived in New Zealand, 22nd December.
A most important and special feature of this fine steamer is
the machinery. Her engines are on the triple expansion
principle, having four cylinders, working tandem. The
engines are designed to work with steam at a pressure of
160 lbs. per square inch, the highest pressure yet reached in
ocean-going steamers. Under the skilful management of Mr.
Young, Chief Engineer, and his staff, these engines work with
an ease most remarkable in such ponderous yet intricate
machinery. On her last voyage the “ Arawa ” accomplished
an unparalleled feat, by steaming round the globe in 73 days
5 hours. This marvellous passage has been the theme of
admiration even to those versed in ocean-voyaging. This is
her third voyage to the Colony, and promises to be as suc-
cessful as the previous two. Another specialty of the
“ Arawa ”is her refrigerating machine, whereby it is unneces-
sary to carry any live stock —everything in the shape of fresh
provisions being kept in a frozen state—and it is a most
3
THE “ARAWA” GAZETTE.


convenient and excellent method. This machine, though on
the outward passage used only for freezing the ship’s provisions,
is capable of maintaining a temperature sufficiently low to
land about 20,000 carcases of sheep in excellent condition.
We have been compelled to condense this article considerably,
but will give further particulars in our next issue.
On Saturday last, the 29th inst., the second series of
Athletic Sports was held on the grounds, and, under the
experienced direction of Mr. Cunningham, most ably assisted
by Mr. Miller, proved as before interesting and successful.
The principal event causing much amusement by the activity
displayed by the competitors was the obstacle race, cleverly
won by Mr. Horrocks. The ladies egg and spoon race brought
forth great energy on the pair of fair runners, and resulted
in a win for Miss Bews.
1. Shoe Race.—W. Hunt. 6 runners.
2. Boys’ Race.—lst., Dundas ; 2nd, A. Sorby ; 3rd, H. Sorby.
3. Crossing the Line. —Ist, Bews. 4 competitors.
4. Chalking the Line (Rope).—lst, Moffatt. 4 competitors.
6. „ under Leg.—lst, Steele. 4 competitors.
6. All-fours Hurdle Race.—lst, Jay. 3 runners.
7. Trial of Strength.—lst, Birdekin. 8 competitors.
8. Obstacle Race.—lst, Horrocks ; 2nd Busch.
9. Tug of War. —Winners, Ist Saloon.
10. Egg and Spoon Race (Ladies). —Ist, Miss Bews; 2nd, Mrs.
McAllister.
Judge, Mr. Sorby; Starter, Dr. Eccles; Clerk of the
Course, Mr. Miller.
Who says that the medical profession is gradually deter-
iorating. When the advice of a worthy medical man to one
who complained “ that he was so weak he could not stand on
his pins,” was, “ Then try sitting on needles my friend.”
Holy Communion and Divine Service (morning and evening)
was held on Sunday, 30th inst. Sermon preached by Rev. G.
McMurray.
An enjoyable concert was given in the Social Hall and
Saloon on Monday evening by the second saloon passengers,
Mr. M. Woodgate ably occupying the chair. A large audience
was present and enjoyed the programme rendered by the
various performers. Where all did their parts well one can
hardly mention individually; the song, “ Rocked in the Cradle
of the Deep,” deserves special mention, being sung with fine
effect by Mr. Taylor. Refreshments were provided during
the interval by the second saloon committee, and a very
pleasant evening brought to a close with a vote of thanks to
the Chairman.
A cricket match was played on Monday, 31st inst.,
between third class and saloon, and resulted in an easy victory
for the former. The batting of Mr. Motley was very effective.
Third Class—lst innings, 6 ; Saloon, Ist innings, 6
Score. — „ 2nd ~ 43 ~ 2nd ~ 9
The same day the winning team played against the officers of
the ship, and again won, Mr. Motley distinguishing himself
as before.
Third Class.—lst innings, 20; Officers, Ist innings, 11.
Score,— ~ 2nd „ 18 „ 2nd „ 11.
ACROSTIC.
S wift as an arrow she proudly braves the main,
T hough the tempest howl and the billows roar ;
E ver may she tide through the fierce hurricane
A s she traverses the ocean from shore to shore,
M ajestically sailing, her wings unfurled.
S he made the fastest voyage ere known before—
H er first trip was taken around the world
I n one day less than seventy-four,
P lacing her record for speed above others to soar.
A gain this noble ship doth plough the wave,
R eceding daily from old England’s shore ;
A gain her manly crew and captain brave,
With God’s help, will guide her as heretofore,
A nd safely bring her to New Zealand’s shore.
—Edith O’G. Auffrat.
Why does Captain Stuart remind us of the entrance to
the Black Sea ?—Because he’s the Boss for us. (Bosphorus.)
Why is the end of “ Zulu’s ” tail like the heart of a tree ?
—Because it’s farthest from the bark.
What did the s.s. “ Arawa” weigh when she left Teneriffe ?
Her anchor.
Someone wrote “ honour the Light Brigade, honour the
charge they made.” —Evidently he hadn’t the gas laid on.
She : “ I don’t think all these electric lights are an im-
provement at all, do you?” He : “ Decidedly not, dear.”—
(Overheard.)
When ere I take an evening strole
On the deck, I am sure to see
A gent who is, to say the least,
Rather close to she.
As you are passing you hear them remark
“ Oh, bother the old Gazette ;
Well both enjoy ourselves at the Cape,
And have a good time, * you bet.’
They talked about us at Teneriffe,
But we’ll try if we can’t be more
Cunning this time, and give them the slip—
Arn’t prudes an awful bore.
Some people pretend what they never believe,
And don’t practice what they preach,
And then they think that by looking agrieved
A moral they can teach.
But let me inform them, for weal or woe,
And open their narrow minds,
That wherever they travel, or wherever they go,
Backbiting is very unkind. ”
How are the bats progressing ? Every event that is likely
to take place of any moment, is kept most profoundedly dark.
Are they afraid of the Gazette ? surely not.
What is the difference between an accepted and rejected
lover 1 The one kisses his missus, and the other misses his
kisses.
TEA A LA RHSSE.
Since our departure from the dear old land, in the short
space of a fortnight, we find that our four o’clock tea has de-
veloped into quite a social pleasure, and is looked for daily by
most of us. Various ladies and gentlemen have arranged
their own little parties, and amuse themselves according to
their individual tastes. I know at my table, and I think at
most of the others, a tit-bit of scandal is so welcome, and serves
us with such a “ bonne bouche ” with which to regale our
guests. It is often said that such feminine tastes are not
present in the male species, but, perhaps, because his time is
not fully occupied, or his natural taste seems to endue him
with the same spirit, as he receives any villanous scandal
with great gusto.
CHARADES.
No. 1.
My first should be keen and sharp,
My second is tranquility.
My whole is put up the table.
No. 2.
My first secures civility,
My second’s to be fondled,
My whole is warm and comfortable.
4
THE “ARAWA” GAZETTE.


My first you take when you walk abroad,
My second accompanies you at home or abroad,
My whole is a despicable character. muc
—Anon.
TENERIFFE,
A splendid view and a fine opportunity of observing
high land when approaching it frcm the sea was afforded us
on the morning of the 20th inst., when nearing the Island of
Teneriffe. This is an important island in the Canary group,
a Spanish possession, and the scene of one of Nelson’s actions.
The famous peak is situated near the centre of the island, and
is 12,180 feet high. When the weather is clear this peak can
be seen at a distance of 100 miles. Most of the “ Arawa s ”
went ashore, landing at Santa Cruz, the chief town, though it
has but little to interest a stranger ; the houses present an
appearance of whiteness rather dazzling. We took a native’s
advice, also a buggy, and after a drive of three hours reached
Lugano, a pleasant suburb. The scenery and novelty, com-
bined with the delights of a charming companion, have
vividly empressed on my mind pleasant thoughts of Teneriffe.
After ruralizing for some short time we returned to Santa
Cruz, where the care of mine host of the English Hotel
ministered to our wants, and a comfortable luncheon, with a
bottle” thoroughly restored us. We returned to the Arawa
mutually delighted with ourselves, and filled with regret that
others seemed not to have made as much of their time as we
had done.
Last evening (2nd inst.) a conversazione was given by
the committee in the saloon, and it was unanimously declared
to be the most entertaining event that has occurred since our
departure. The varied amusements shown kept the attention
of the guests alive for the whole evening. The ladies were
invited to exhibit and take charge of show tables, the most
conspicuous and charming being the exhibition in charge of
Mrs. Merton, assisted by Messrs. Miller and Pembroke. Her
table was ornamented by various articles of vertu and curio-
sities from many parts of the world. Adorning the walls
adjacent was a fine collection of pictures lent by Mr. Miller,
attracting much attraction and admiration. A basket of
flowers, tastefully arranged and illuminated by the electric
light, proved very attractive, calling forth many admiring
remarks. Sweetmeats were sold by Mrs. Merton in the costume
of a soubrette, and resulted in an addition to the Seamen’s
Hospital Fund of 235. Miss Claridge, attired as a gipsy
maiden, held a large audience, attracted by her skill in sooth-
saying, and her learned remarks and prophecies provoked
great mirth, and evoking from time to time bursts of laughter
when a well-known individual had some prominent charac-
teristic brought out. Our commander crossed the palm of
the dusky maid, unable to resist the fascination of diving
into the future. Another conspicuous feature was Mr.
Mendershausen’s fine collection of photographs and objects of
interest, assisted by Messrs. Busch and Dendenyts. This
table was a centre of attraction. The plates showed great
good taste on the part of their owner. His cheerful visage
was noticed in a photograph—a reminiscence of his visit to
Naples. Mrs. Cotton’s beautiful collection of New Zealand
and other ferns was most interesting. A Maori club, made
from jade or greenstone, the property of Mr. Cunningham, was
a valuable addition to the many interesting articles displayed;
and as it has been the means of giving many a warrior his
quietus, proved especially attractive. After the guests had
inspected the stalls, &c., a variety of amusing card-tricks were
shown by Messrs. Mendershausen, Busch, and Dr. Eccles,
with skill and a full appreciation of the gullibility of
those present. Mr. Busch, as the wizard, conjured, and re-
stored a burnt handkerchief to its original state This
much fun.
A man cannot be too' careful in the selection of his
parents.
The “ Land o’ Cakes,” with lithotrite obligato by Dr.
Eccles. (Advt.)
No man can live piously or die righteously without a
wife.
THE ELECTRIC LIGHT.
An acquisition productive of so much comfort and so
conducive to everybody’s welfare as the electric light decidedly
deserves great encomiums. Under the skilled charge of Mr,
C. Hall, our electrician, the splendid light not only illuminates
our saloons, cabins, and every part of the ship, but the citadel
and poop decks have been temporally lighted since leaving
Plymouth, being of especial benefit on the night of the ball.
The system is that of Drummond with Ferranti’s dynamos
and Lowrie’s high speed engines and the Swan-Eddison in-
candescent lamps. To give sufficient light requires an elec-
trical pressure of 100 volts, yielding a 20-candle power light.
There are 320 lamps distributed throughout the vessel. To
obtain power for this the engines work up to 32 mechanical
horse power, at a speed of 450 revolutions per minute. We
may mention that the entire system is free from danger, and
each light under separate control. It is a scientific certainty
that electricity will work a marvellous change in the motive
power of the universe.
Mr Clayden’s lecture has already been productive of refor-
mation. Pat didn’t go to the lecture, but one of his friends
told him that in order to succeed in the Colonies it was neces-
sary to forswear smoking, drinking, and gambling. Pat heard
this with considerable concern and alarm, but met the occasion
with, “ Then, begorra, sir, won’t we get drunk at the Cape,”
WHIST, CHESS, &C.
The Whist Tournament, after many severe battles, was
brought to a close on Ist inst., by Messrs. Mendershausen and
Pembroke winning a tie against Messrs. Hunt and Eccles.
The chess and draughts are still in progress. The Back-
gammon Tournament was won by Mr. Moffat.
A Chess Match between first and second saloons has been
decided. Messrs. Bullivant, Burdikin, Merton, and Cotton
represented first saloon, and Messrs. M‘ Murray, M‘Andrew,
Steel, and Williams the second saloon.
Result : First saloon won by seven points against one
point.
LECTURE.
On Tuesday, Ist September, Mr. A. Claydengave a lecture,
to which everyone on board was invited to attend. Rev. J.
E. Kelly occupied the chair, and a crowded audience was
present. We regret that our limited space will not allow us
to dwell on the lecture as we should wish. He described in
glowing terms the advantages to be derived by the working
classes and others by emigrating to New Zealand. There is
not the slightest doubt that a working man is infinitely better
off in New Zealand than in the Old Country, and has a far
greater scope for improving his position. Mr Clayden gave
words of advice to those entering on the new life, and was
supported in his opinions by several old Colonists returning
to the Colony. Loud applause greeted Mr Clayden when
resuming his seat; and we have no doubt that many benefited
by his lecture.
5
THE “ARAWA” GAZETTE.


SOCIAL LOG OF THE WEEK.
Sunday—Divine service. Passed St. Helena Island.
Monday—Second saloon concert.
Tuesday—Cricket match. Lecture by Mr. Olayden.
Wednesday—Conversazione.
Thursday—Cricket match. Concert.
Friday—Second issue “ Arawa ” Gazette.
SPORTS.
Mr. J. O. Jay ran fifty times round the citadel deck over
all obstacles in 28£ minutes.
Starting price, 2 to 1 agst. (taken). Time allowed, 30
minutes.
The bi-weekly Calcutta Sweep will be sold to-day by the
champion auctioneer, Mr. Miller. Tips can be obtained as
per advertisement.
Mr. Mac Sneezer says “ It’s too cold to sleep in the saloon
now, and prefers his own ‘ downy.’ ” Quite right, too, Mac,
Now people won’t see the colour of your “ white-biled rag.”
A word of caution, —When you go ashore at the Cape
beware of the seductive influences of Cape “ wines.”
Ed. Note.—There are many contributions we have received
that we are unable to insert, but in due course they will
occupy a place in our columns. The many demands on the
press and the eccentricities of the editorial staff will we feel
be sufficient excuse for our correspondents.
S. S. “ Arawa,” High Seas, 4th Sept., 1885.
THE ARAWA GAZETTE.
No. 3.
14 th September, 1885
Since our last issue the arrival of the s.s. “ Arawa ” at
Cape Town on Saturday, sth instant, afforded us another
opportunity for a run on terra firma. The elements were de-
cidedly unfavourable to the general enjoyment, but in spite of
torrents of rain a large portion of the passengers, including
some ladies, were not to be deterred from spending a night on
Africa’s “ sunny shores.” The satisfaction of doing what one
likes is almost sufficient compensation for severe colds and
perspective rheumatism. The determination of the hardy
adventurers was but poorly rewarded. Landing late on
Saturday night, the stores, &c., were mostly closed, and the
following day showed that the colonists are rigid Sabbatarians.
The gentlemen devoted considerable time to a most praise-
worthy endeavour to ascertain the virtues of Cape wines, the
effects, however, were somewhat disastrous, especially on
their return to the ship ; the eccentricity of one individual
being noticeable as he endeavoured to reach his bunk below
by a short cut through a ventilator. Yocal efforts, strengthened
by potent fluids, however thrilling, may not be appreciated by
those unreasoning passengers who desire repose. So little
was there to be seen ashore, and so great the discomfort, that
we returned on board with an increased regard for the
“ Arawa.”
On Friday evening an amusing nigger entertainment was
given in the steerage saloon. Mr. Motley, as “ boss,” ad-
dressed a crowded and appreciative audience, mentioning that
the troupe has been hastily formed, and that he had not had
time to impart to these black diamonds the necessary lustre,
but on a future occasion intended licking the “ Motley ”
groupe into shape. The programme was of considerable
variety and received with applause. “My Golden Slippers ”
and the conundrums being very good indeed —the latter
apropos of the vessel’s voyage. We look forward with interest
to the next appearance of the minstrels.
On Thursday last, the 10th inst., the Rev. Kelly gave a
most interesting lecture in the steerage saloon to a crowded
audience. The reverend gentleman commenced by describing
his experiences on board an ocean steamer for the first time.
His vivid descriptions of leaving land recalls painfully to our
memories our own feelings. He spoke highly of the hospi-
tality shown him when he reached the trans-Atlantic shores,
A highly interesting part of the lecture was that descriptive
of the death of the world-famed swimmer Oapt. Webb. The
wondrous Falls of Niagara evidently had impressed Mr. Kelly
with their sublimity, as they have done to many thousands of
visitors. The lecture throughout was highly instructive, and
delivered in a clear and distinct voice. A hearty vote of
thanks closed the proceedings.
TO MY COUSIN.
Charming cousin, tell me where
Shall I find one half so fair ?
Let me as I taste thy lips
Swear how sweet is cousinship.
Like a sister ? Yes, no doubt,
Still not sister out and out.
Who that ever had a sister
Felt his heart beat when he kissed her ?
Who by looking ever knew
That his sister’s eyes were blue ?
Who in names of all the loves
Bets his sister pairs of gloves 1
May thee, my darling, fondly loved,
Have troubles light if any ;
Thy hours of gloom, may they be view,
And saucy moments many.
It is not the change of scene that cures so many invalids.
It is the absence of the doctor.
We didn’t have much fun at the Cape, but we’re •' Rich”-er
since we left anyhow.
Quartermasters should not be allowed lamps at night; it’s
really very awkward sometimes.
The prisoners felt very jubilant when they knew who was
the prosecuting counsel, and quite safe when they heard his
arguments against them.
Did he kiss her when he saw tears in her eyes ?
The Calcutta Sweep is still as popular as ever, though,
dreadful to relate, a “ pigeon ” dropped twelve notes in making
“a cert.” of the pool.
Topsy’s admirers are pretty well known now. Topsy
had black face and hands on Wednesday night.
“ Africanus,” the lengthy, is desirous of being amongst the
favoured few but is dubious of approaching, and gives myster-
ious indications of his collapse.
It did not need much disguise when the two prisoners
wished to appear as notorious ruffians ; the characters evidently
fitted, and were not novel.
Uncle Tom looked benevolent until the curtain was down,
but Mrs. Beecher Stowe never chronicled the expression used
by the hoary old sinner when released from “darling little
Eva.”
Perhaps the most successful of all the entertainments
given in the good ship “ Arawa” during the present trip was
the Wax-work Exhibition, held on last Wednesday. The
chair was taken by Mr. Jackson, who, with appropriate re-
marks, introduced the world-renowned showman, Professor
Richardson (Mr. Miller). The Professor, in briefly explaining
the programme of the evening, with his characteristic modesty
did not lay claim to the credit of being the originator of the
exhibition at present under his control ; that credit was
rightly due to Messrs. Darwin, Huxley, and Tyndall. The
ultimate outcome of all the researches of these eminent
scientists, though extended through space itself, reached its
6
THE “ARAWA” GAZETTE.


climax in—nay more, found expression only in the spectacular
exhibition now about to be placed before the wondering eyes
of a delighted audience. The Professor only humbly claimed
to have reaped the fruits of the life labours of these gentlemen,
emphasizing the fact that they had sold out at a great loss.
They had toiled, he would gather in the golden harvest ( Verb
cum sap.) The Professor then introduced his boy “ Sprightly ”
fMr. Busch), who reminded us of another great showman’s
Kangaroo, who was, to use Artemus Ward’s own words, “an
amusin’ little cuss.” The first scene was the “ Mahdi ” (Mr.
Merton) dressed in true Oriental costume. Remembering that
this was a wax-work exhibition, the palm of merit should be
awarded to the “Mahdi” for the most correct impersonation
of a wax automaton. Some of the figures seem to have for-
gotten that they were to represent wax figures only, and not
the original object itself. The stirring song with which false
prophets (of mirth) rouse the enthusiasm of their confreres was
sung by this False Prophet in a wonderfully mechanical way ;
and judging only from the sentiments contained therein, we
should think that the Professor has some grounds for his theory
that the Mahdi is an Hibernian Ishmaelite, Next followed
Cinderella (Mrs. Pavitt) and her fairy godmother (Miss Sadd).
Though true to fairy tradition, which admits of no change in the
fashion of fairy garments, yet we must congratulate the latter on
the way she has kept herself fully informed as to the latest ter-
restrial modes ; for when exercising the power of her magic
wand, she transformed the dowdy Cinderella into a fashionable
young lady of the period. Next followed a scene from “Uncle
Tom’s Cabin,” where Eva (Miss Schulte) is reading to Uncle
Tom (Mr. Dyson) and Topsy (Mrs. Pavitt). This was a very
successful tableau ; its effect for pathos was partly spoiled by
Sprightly’s awkwardness in winding up Uncle Tom the wrong
way, and thus causing the worthy Professor to be suddenly
knocked down. The contrast between the fair-haired Eva and
her pale sweet face, and the satanic-looking impish-faced
towsy-headed Topsy, was striking, while Uncle Tom looked
the grey-headed patriarch to perfection. The Persian Dwarf
(Mrs Crosthwaite and Miss Sorby) was well represented.
The next item was a pair of Maoris in the light and airy cos-
tume most fashionable in a native pah. We must congratulate
the artist of the “ Arawa ” upon the remarkably successful way
in which he tattoed these warriors. To appreciate his skill
it is necessary to have seen a Maori chief in his native haunts.
Then came what was beyond all doubt the most striking
tableau of the entertainment —“ Night and Morning”—(Mrs.
Merton and Miss Salmon).
“ Then to our wondering eyes sad Night was shown,
And grimly darkled o’er our faces pale,
In brooding melancholy seemed to moan
As ’neath Morn’s light she felt her life should fail.”
Sad silent Night appeared crouching shudderingly as if about to
disappear beneath the rising star of Morning.
“ Morn on the 1 Arawa’! lovely and bright
Is the face of the fair form bathed in the light;
O’er Nights dark shadows triumphant she stands,
Yet calm and serene she blesses all lands ;
See ! she looks up to the golden-edged clouds,
Which loftily float o’er the ‘ Arawa’s ’ shrouds,
Praying the light from the torch which she carries
May bring to each, blessings, tho’ briefly she tarries.— Byron.
The torches of both figures were arranged by that very highly-
talented gentleman, Mr. Hall, our electrician, and contributed
largely to the effectiveness of the tableau. The last scene was
“Britannia” (Mr. Hunt) holding aloft the Union Jack, sur-
rounded by smaller figures with the flags of all nations. A
verse of the “ Marseillaise ” was sung by a son of La Belle
France, then, “ Die Wacht am Rhein,” also “Rule Britannia”
by the image, the company joining in the refrain of each,
the entertainment being closed by “ God Save the Queen.”
We cannot say much for the time, tune, or harmony of the
music as rendered by the Professor’s wax automatons, but we
distinguished the guttural notes of “ Sprightly ” so terribly
erratic that we could not wonder that even the unimpression-
able wax-works were led astray. The usual votes of thanks
were passed, and refreshments dispensed by two charming
damsels (Messrs. Jay and Horrocks) to the thirsty audience.
Great credit is due to the conductors and performers, all
entered heartily into the spirit of the entertainment. Mr.
Cunningham, as stage manager, posed and draped the figures
in a most artistic manner : all present expressed themselves
highly pleased and amused with the evening’s fun.
The following will interest our readers : —To-morrow, at
noon, we shall be 3,600 miles from Hobart, where we expect
to arrive on 25 th inst.
“ There is a woman at the root of everyone’s grief
The wisdom of time avers ;
The woman at his, be he chiel or chief,
The other woman at hers.
TO A PASSENGER.
I have a skiff, a skimmer o’er the sea,
And I ask if you will its mistress be.
CHESS, DRAUGHTS, &c.
The Chess Tournament was won by Mr. Moffat, by his
winning five games out of a possible seven.
The Draughts Tournament was decided by a tie between
Messrs. Moffat and Bulivant.
A draughts match was played between first and second
saloons, and was won by the latter, their scoring six points
against four.
Tournaments were commenced as under :—Whist, 12
entries ; Euchre, 8 entries ; Cribbage, 10 entries.
From flower to flower a sparkling butterfly flits,
Each colour, species, even genus fits,
In numbers safety, so the saying goes,
But will the series stop short at Deuclos.
Young birds at first she catches in her net,
But then to Hunt for larger game she’s set;
A flaxen soldier follows to the snare,
But when for foreign sport she tries—beware.
On Tuesday the Bth inst. an Impromptu Concert was
given in the first saloon, under the excellent management of
Mr. Mendershausen and his staff. A good varied programme
was provided, and thoroughly enjoyed by the audience.
“All the fat’s in the fire,” at least it was on Saturday
morning, somebody suggested an auto-de-fe' for the cooks.
(Overheard.) —“Will you come on the Citadel Deck to-
night ?” “ It’s too cold.” “ But never mind. I know where
there’s a warm corner.”
The newly imported mammal, resuscitated from African
forests, shows that the lessons of activity suggested by his
fel.’ow creatures in the trees there are not entirely lost.
An enquiring passenger on seeing one of the officers taking
the time by the chronometer, asked what it was for, and being
informed it was a machine for testing the depth of the water,
quite simply replied, “ There it’s getting deeper all the
time.”
A severe cold will do once or twice as an excuse, but we
can’t stand it this time, old fellow. We didn’t see you on
Saturday night in church to be gulled like this. But don’t
do it again.
Maori tattooing is naturally slept in by the simple savage,,
but the other one should know a little better, but perhaps he
couldn’t help it.
Broken noses arise from many causes, —who knows ?
Solomon says, “All men are liars. ” (Solomon must have
been an editor.)
The Chairman of the “ Bats Club ” gave a very interesting
and select party on the evening of the 12th instant, on account
of his attaining his 17th birthday. We could see many well-
known faces among the assembled guests (we do not mean to
the police), but well known belonging to the “ Religious De-
bating Society,” but why they should amalgamate or fraternise
7
THE “ AEAWA” GAZETTE.


with such society as the Bats yet remains to be seen ; possibly
we may be able to say in our next edition. The evening was
spent as usual on such occasions on ty ical and intellectual
subjects, with classical songs at rare intervals by the thrilling
warblers. Everything went on swimmingly until one of the
Bats started a song, well, not quite high-toned enough, when
he was immediately ejecte'l on account of the friends visiting
the Bats, but after promising to be more select, was admitted
again, and the evening passed off with the greatest success.
The church shall guard the gates of heaven,
And he who tries to euter,
Will have to swear upon his soul
That he is no dissenter.
TO A PASSENGER.
I fain would call thee “ idiot,”
I long to dub thee “liar,”
I rage like some young middy, hot
With patriotic fire.
Gould I but stigmatise thee “ dolt,”
I’d do it very soon ;
And add to that tierce thunderbolt
The pretty term “ poltroon.”
I’d christen you, had I the power, -
Insensate, —stupid,—crass ;
I’d love to see you writhe and cower
When written down as “ ass.”
But I—alas 1 my rage must hide,
And cloak my tasteful wit,
For Mr. Captain doth decide
Such things he won t permit. -Eao.
The athletic sports were hel l as usual on Saturday, 12th,
and, in spite of the cold, a large and fashionable company
assembled. The ladies’ potato race finished by an exciting
contest between Mrs. Butler and Miss Claridge, resulting in a
victory for the former. The Double Sculls (Mac Murray and
Horrocks), the Albatross race (Backhouse), afforded a great
amount of laughter. The hurdle was cleverly won by
Vanderbyl, and in this race we regret to state that
Horrocks had a severe fall, which will disable him for some
time. A Tug-of-war finished the events of an amusing
afternoon.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
T. E. -No, you certainly cannot slaughter or poison the editor
or any of his staff. If you do so you are amenable to
the laws of your country, and we should, before long, be
reading of a piece of rope with a man at the end. Editors
and their staff come under the catagory of human beings,
not wild beasts, as you suppose.
N. P. Z.—“Arawa” is not the Scotch way of spelling “au
revoir,” nor was the ship intended to be so named on
account of her leaving everything.
Nettie. —The reason, we believe, why nature has given
woman a pretty foot is that when a man is choosing his
wife he can bear in mind the old proverb “ all’s well
that ends well.”
Kate, —The writing is passable, but the spelling is so
atrocious we can’t read it. Don’t be disheartened, Kate,
but try again.
Robin. —We believe there has been made chairs to accomo-
date two, but we are unable to say where you could
procure one. Surely, with a little trouble, you could
arrange two so as to answer just as well.
SOCIAL LOG FOR THE WEEK.
FRlDAY—Calcutta Sweep. Concert.
SATURDAY —Arrived in Cape Town.
SUNDAY—Left Cape Town, Divine Service.
MONDAY—General lassitude.
TUESDAY—SaIoon Concert.
WEDNESDAY—CaIcutta Sweep. Waxworks Exhibition,
THURSDAY—Lecture by Rev. Kelly. Arrest of two
ruffians.
FRIDAY—TriaI of Prisoners. Sweep. Concert.
SATURDAY—AthIetic Sports.
SUNDAY—Divine Service.
On Friday, 11th inst., J. Miller and C, K. Hall, both of
no occupation, surrendered to their bail, in answer to a charge
of having, on the evening of the Waxworks Exhibition,
supplied two native Maoris with spirituous liquors, in contra-
vention of the Act. Mr. Max Mendershausen prosecuted on
behalf of the Crown, and Mr. Merton appeared for the
defence. Tne prisoners were most violent when arrested, but
after a long struggle were overpowered by Sergeants Hor-
ro-ks and Birdekin. The evidence was not conclusive, and
after hearing speeches from both prosecution and defence, the
learned Judge (Mr. Dillworth) discharged the prisoners,
deciding that each party should pay their own costs. The
pitiful and despondent bearing of the prisoners drew the
sympathy of Jury—this being the first occasion of ladies
using their lately acquired privilege of serving on a jury.
THE AKAWA GAZETTE.
No. 4.
21 st September, 1885.
That to the truly brave all things are possible, was of a
surety borne out by the scene witnessed on our good ship on
Wednesday last, when the proposal for a Masked Reception
was mooted, the first feeling with probably all but its sug-
gest ors was its impractibility, and the second one of utter
hopelessness as to taking any partin it oneself. The universal
cry was, “ I have nothing I could wear,” but against all such
wailing the determination of the projectors proved adamantine,
and the result amply justified their firmness and showed that
such proverbs as ex nihil nihilfit are but an excuse for
inertness or timidity, as allowing the objections, had nothing
to wear, the products therefrom must be ascribed to a miracle.
So many and varied were the costumes displayed, that the
enjoyment of the spectacle was tinged with a regret that the
space available for the motley crowd should of necessity be
circumscribed. The host and hostess of the evening were Mr.
Cunningham and Mrs. Salmon, whom, habited in courtly
attire, received their guests with winning courtesy and
urbanity, well befitting their position and the occasion. As
guest succeeded guest, the amazement of the spectators became
more and more pronounced, for, as nearly all the characters to
be assumed had been kept secret, the surprise was all the more
perfect. After the guests had arrived and paid their respects
to the host and hostess, the bon-mots, proverbs, and verses
were recited by each guest as their names were called, and
provoked as much astonishment as mirth by their felicitious
adaption to the characters or the scenes. After supper, the
maskers, headed by the host and hostess, made a procession
round the saloon, and so ended a wonderfully successful
evening, if possible the most successful. A list of the characters
and proverbs will be found in our columns, and where all
all were good, “ comparisons would be odious,” and all the
more that to a reporter having reached that mature age so very
susceptible to the heaute du diable, feels that he cannot trust
himself to be impartial. Captain Stuart was present on the
gay scene, but with his officers donned not the fancy dress.
8
THE “AKAWA” GAZETTE.


BEES AND BEE CULTURE.
On Tuesday, the 15th inst., an interesting and instructive
address was given by the Rev. R. Williams to the passengers
on Bee Culture. Mr. Williams touched on the medicinal
value of honey and its increasing use as a remedy for con-
sumption . The lecturer commended bee-keeping as a most
interesting and profitable study. In confirmation of the
latter point, he had last year gathered 92 lbs. of honey from
one hive, realizing Is. 6d. per lb. The queen bee lays some
2000 eggs per day during the season ; the working bees exist
only from 4 to 9 months, the drones enjoying a summer’s
existence, and then, as idlers, ejected from the hive. The
method of selecting and rearing the queen bee, and the way to
produce swarming were fully described. Other most interest-
ing facts were minutely explained, and a very hearty vote of
thanks, proposed by the Rev. McMurray, concluded the
lecture, ably presided over by Mr. Sorby.
ATHLETIC SPORTS,
The wet weather which prevailed last Saturday prevented
our sports being held on that day. Not to be outdone, the
Committee took advantage of the comparative idleness of old
Jupiter Pluvius by utilising Monday for the “ bringing off ”
the many events set down on the “ kerect kard.” Many of
the names that have been so prominent as winners during the
voyage were conspicuous by their absence. This was doubt-
less due to the vagaries of the thermometer, coupled with the
general inertia that pervades at the end of all long voyages.
1. —Tilting at the Ring.—The winners turned up in
Messrs. Yanderbyl and Busch. Pace very slow.
2. —Ladies Potato Race.—The heats in this race were
splendidly contested. Mademoiselles Young and Clapham
were in the first heat. A good start and run ended in favour of
Miss Young by a yard. Mrs. Hume hadn’t pace enough for
Miss Claridge, who won as she liked. Miss Bew won her heat
in good style, and won the final against Miss Claridge by a
short potato.
3. —Obstacle Race.—Yanderbyl won all his heats, and
final by a long neck. Mr. Busch worked hard in trying to
(busch) push his way through the obstacles, but took too long
over the operations.
4. —Boys’ Flat Race.—Master A. Sorby won this race
very easily against his brother and Master Auffray. The latter
is a plucky little runner, and will make his mark some day.
5. —Flat Race (once round). —The heats between Jay and
Digby, Busch and Birdekin, M‘Murray and Yanderbyl were
well contested. Jay and Yanderbyl ran off in the final.
Jay’s training told its tale, and his opponent had to put up
with second place.
6. —Albatross Race.—Won by a beak. Yanderbyl again
being second to Busch. A well waddled contest.
7. —Potato Race.—Mr. McMurray won this event in
spite of his opponent taking advantage of a railing near the
bucket.
8. —Egg and Spoon Race.—This event caused great
excitement. The heats were close and the final resulted in a
dead heat three times. Miss Fforde eventually winning by a
spoon from Miss Bews,
9. —Tug of War. —Mr. Merton’s side won easily. Dr.
Eccles, and Mr. Sorley, in their respective posts of Starter
and J udge, gave the greatest satisfaction.
The “ Arawa Blacks ” gave another successful entertain-
ment in the Steerage Saloon, on Monday last. The room
was gaily decorated with flags &c. and looked very pretty.
A varied programme was gone through, including songs and
choruses ; a negro sketch or two were also given. This
performance was, in every way a great success, and redounded
to the credit of those who got it up, considering the very
scanty means at their disposal. The room was packed from
floor to ceiling, and the “hits’’were duly appreciated. The
performers were Messrs. Stride, W, Sc B. Macdona, Davis
MacMillan, Lloyd, Lever and Motley. Mr. Motley was the
“Boss,” and we congratulate him on having fulfilled his
promise made at the last entertainment, viz. : that the “ Arawa
Blacks ” would excel themselves the next time they donned
the burnt cork.
The “ Duck at Sea ” joke took well.
In the Court of Queen’s Bench, before Mr. Justice Barrow,
an action for breach of promise to marry was heard. The
plaintiff, Miss Mabel Green, was represented by Mr. Miller,
Q.C., M.H.R. and Mr. Henderson, Q.C. The defendant, fount
Whiskiekoff alias Horatio Fitzjones was represented by Mr.
Dyson, Q.C., M.H.R., and Mr. C. K. Hall, Q.C. Mr. Miller
in opening dwelt at some length on the heartless nature of the
conduct of defendant, and also upon the extent of the lacera-
tion to the feelings of his client. Never before in his
experience had his bosom been made the receptacle of such
heartless and cruel revelations. His case would shew that his
client had first met the Count in a midnight bus’. The Count
had protected Miss Green against the insults of some drunken
men, and this would prove to be the thin end of the wedge,
the withdrawal of which had caused sd much grief and trouble
to his injured client. The learned gentleman then dilated at
length on the subtle influence of love and its accessories, and
then went on to give a touching account of the actual engage-
ment and its fruits ; various places of amusement were visited
by the happy couple ; race meetings were graced by their
presence, and all was peace and concord for a time. Their
loves blended and their “ soft nothings ” were as balm to love-
stricken doves ; then, Mr. Miller said, without rhyme or reason,
his client’s bliss was rudely damped and nipped by the news
that defendant had married another lady. These are the main
points of his case, and he was prepared to bring evidence of a
most damning nature to the prejudice of his learned friend’s
case and to the interest of his fair client.
Mr. Dyson, Q.C., replied at some length, and strongly
denied many of the assertions of his learned friend. His
client had protected Miss Green in the bus’ in the interest of
that chivalry for which his country is so famous. The learned
gentleman then proceeded to show that what his friend
called love was what his client considered his duty to
a lady insulted by a man in a drunken state. For his
friend to assert that any profession of love had been made,
was untrue. Such a thing was very remote from such a high
minded man as his client to a woman who kept a boarding-
house. That the Count had taken the complainant to the
Cremorne Gardens, and various places of amusement, he
would not deny ; but in what way could his client show such
a woman the interest he took in her welfare but by taking
her to places congenial to her sphere of life ? Of this he need
say no more. As for any promise to marry, he entirely re-
pudiated any such action on the part of his client. Mr. Dyson
expressed a hope that his evidence would, at all points, meet
and overthrow all the points at issue, and so establish his
client’s world-wide fame as a man of honor and chivalry, and
not the ruffian his friend would insinuate him to be.
Mr. Miller then called witnesses in support of his case,
his first witness being Miss Mable Green, the plaintiff.
Miss Green’s evidence was clear, and effectively showed
that Mr. Fitzjones had trifled with her affections to a very
large extent. The letters she had received from the defendant
clearly conveyed to her very susceptable mind his intentions
towards her. She imagined herself, nay her soul, wrapped up
in his, and trustingly allowed herself to be escorted by him to
the various places he wanted her to visit.
The plaintiff broke down several times during her evi-
dence, and had to be comforted by her counsel. Miss Ara-
bella Green, plaintiff’s sister, gave corroborative evidence,
and caused great amusement by feigned coyness. Dr. Eccles
and Mr. Courtney Beaumont (Mr. Merton) evidence was sever-
ally and severely handled by Mr. Dyson. Ah Sings (Mr. A.
9
THE “ARAWA” GAZETTE,


Motley) evidence somewhat implicated the Doctor. This
Sentleman’s conduct with the plaintiff being, according to
ohnny Story, anything but purely professional. This
finished the case for the complainant.
Mr. Dyson’s witnesses were then called, but none of them
succeeded in establishing the statements made in the learned
counsel’s opening speech. The defendant’s case was very
shadowy, and proved beyond doubt the status of the destroyer
of bliss. Messrs. Duclos and Digby were both unreliable ;
the defendant himself by his own assertion clearly showed
that his villainy had been unmasked. Mr. Justice Barrow in
addressing the Jury, laid stress on the more important points
in the evidence, and the Jury, after a short absence, found for
the plaintiff. His Lordship then gave judgment according to
the finding of the Jury, that the defendant had broken his
promise to marry the plaintiff. Judgment would be entered
for plaintiff to the sum of BJd, being the amount of the
Doctor’s running account with Miss Green unpaid.
“ The best of friends must part,” as the man said to the
last five pound note he paid away.
CHARACTERS.
Mrs, Auflfray and Son.—“ A lady from France.”
“ My son and I came from sunny France,
Where the men are brave and gay,
The women laugh and dance,
And peace and plenty rules the day.”
Mr. Busch.—“ Spanish Brigand.”
‘ A free life for us,
A life full of fun ;
The wood is our home,
When maurauding is done ;
The sun is our moon,
And the moon is our sun.”
Mr. Bullivant.—“A gentlemen.”
“ Be always what you seem to be.”
Mr. A. Barrow.—“ A gentleman of the period.”
Mr, Burdekin.—“ Simmond’s Footman.”
Mr, Backhouse. —“ Pontifex Footman,”
Mr. Crosthwaite.—“ Pat O’ Brien.”
“ Poor Pat is often painted with a ragged coat and hat,
But his heart and hospitality
Hath much to do with that.” ,
Mrs. Crosswaithe.—“A Spanish lady.”
Behold what a motley crowd I see.”
Mrs. Cotton. —“ Amy Eobsart.”
“ Bird of the wilderness. ”
Mr. Cotton. —“ Maori Pakeha (Remima Kanara).”
“ To Maoriland we go,
From Maoriland we come,
Where the Maori and the Pakeha
We hope will soon be one,”
Miss Claridge.—“ Flora Mclvor.”
“ My heart’s in the Highlands,
My heart is not here ;
I am Flora Mclvor,
And love chasing the deer,
With clansmen a thousand,
To obey at my call,
For Flora Mclvor is the
Pride of them all.”
Mr. Dyson.—“An irregular Indian cavalry man.”
“ If a sorrow’s crown of sorrows,
Be remembering happier days ;
What sadness will be ours
When scattered far,
In recollecting all the bright and pleasant hours,
With the ladies on the Arawa.”
Mr. Duclos.—“ A French gentleman.”
“ S ouvent femme varie bien,
Fol qui I’y fie. ”
Mr. Henderson. —“A French gentleman.”
“ Sola virtus nobilitat.”
Mr. C. K. Hall.—“ Nap.”
“ I am ace, I’m deuce, I’m tray, I’m five,
And yet you see I’m quite alive,
I’m six, I’m seven, I’m eight, I’m nine,
And dearly love a glass of wine ;
I’m a ten, I’m knave, I’m queen, I’m king,
And people do my praises sing;
To ale some people may take exception,
But if properly used I see no objection.”
Mr. Horrocks. —“ General Breakembones, K.C.8.”
“ I’m a poor distinguished soldier,
Worn out with fatigue and quite lame,
On the pilgrimage of life I’m wandering,
Disappointed with the phantom called fame.
So kind friends I ask you to give me
At least your heart and your hands,
I have fought and I’ve bled for my country,
And I am one that has guarded your land.
Mr. T. Hunt.—“ Bungaree Bill (stockrider.)”
“ O’er hill, o’er dale, I ride with a dash,
My stockwhip extended with good silken lash,.
Through bramble and stake my horses feet crash,
Till head-over-heels we come with a smash, ”
Mr. J. 0. Jay,—“ Chirgwin (White-eyed Kaffir.)”
“ Fresh from Kaflfrarian Tstand,
The jolliest Kaffir in the laud.”
Mr. Merton.—“ Fia Diavolo.”
“ I’m a famous brigand chief,
Where I reign misery and grief.
1 was never known men to spare,
But always polite to ladies fair.”
Mrs. Merton. —“ Carmen.”
“ My name recalls to your memorie
A beautiful woman’s tragic historic,
A once famed beauty of sunny Spain,
Erom comparison odious please refrain.”
Mr. McAlister. —“ Bedoiun Chief.”
“ A wandering Bedoiun, 1 greet thee, my hostess, fair,
From dearest wild, I dm not uncouth you will find.
My host, I thee salute, low bow my tusbaned head ;
Accept my warmest praise, for all this pleasure shed. ”
Mrs. McAlister. —“Italian Peasant.”
Sleeves to the dimpled elbow,
Fire in the sweet dark eyes,
To the masked reception,
The little Italian hies.
Mr. Menderhausen. —“Butler,”
Mrs, E. Pavitt. —“ School Girl.”
“ I’m a simple and heartless little school girl,
Which you’ll all discover very soon.
Come boys all, my skipping rope to twirl ;
I’ll teach you how to flirt and how to spoon.”
Miss Clapham.—“ Nun”
“ Religion is a good armour,
But a bad cloak. ”
Miss Friend. —“ Captain of the Mermaids,”
“ The sea I the sea ? the open sea !
The blue ; the fresh 1 the ever free I
I never was on the dull lame shore
But I loved the great sea more and more.”
Mr. Woodgate.—“ Aide-de-Camp.” (A Toast.)
Mr. Power. —“A Stockman.”
“ Good luck to the hoof and the horn,
Good luck to the growers of corn,
Good luck to the flock and the fleece
With God’s blessing of plenty and peace.”
Mr. Digby.—“The Girl of the period.”
“ When the heart of man is depressed with cares,
The mist is dispersed when woman appears.”
Miss Isaacs.—“ Galatea.”
10
THE “ARAWA” GAZETTE.


the donors amongst the Arawa public for the following sub-
scriptions : —
23rd August.
Collected by Mrs. Merton ...
£1 3
0
„ at church services
9 0
„ from T. T. M.
1 1
0
„ „ D. and D.
1 10
0
„ „ F. T
0 10
0
„ „ 0. B
1 0
0
„ „ Trot
0 10
0
„ p. o
„ by Arawa Minstrel (through
1 10
0
Mr. Motley) ...
,, from second saloon (through
0 10
0
Rev. M'Murray)
1 0
0
Mr. Salmon. —“ Master Mason.
“ Handsome is that handsome does.”
Miss Salmon, —“An Alsatian Peasant.”
“Where singleness is bliss ; ’tis folly to be wives.”
Mrs. Sorby.—“Lady of 18th Century.”
“ Hear first and speak afterwards.”
Miss Sorby.—“ Flower Girl,”
“March winds and April showers bring forth May flowers.”
Miss Young.“ Shepherdess.”
“ A live sheep is better than a dead lion.”
Miss Mac Murray.—“.—“ A pack of cards.”
“ i hang my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at.’
Mrs. Hume. —“ Queen of the Gipsies.”
“ When fortune means to men most good,
She looks upon them with a threatening eye.”
Mr. Bews.—“ A Gipsy Boy.”
“ I swear ’tis better to be lowly born,
And range with humble livers in content,
Than to be pecked up in a gust’ring grief,
And wear a golden sorrow.”
Mrs. Butler.—“ The Laplander.”
“ With blue cold nose and wrinkled brow,
Traveller whence comest thou ?
From Lapland’s hills and fields of frost,
By the rapid reindeer crossed.”
Miss Schulte. —“ Miss Gamp.”
Mr, Fisher.—Macbeth.”
“ Hang out our banners on the outward wall,
The cry is still they come ;
Our castle’s strength will laugh a siege to scorn.”
Miss Bews.—“ Nurse (with baby).”
“ Behold the child I By Nature’s kindly law,
Pleased with the rattle, tickled with a straw.
’Tis strange the likeness ’twixt all and this child ;
By sports like his are all our cares beguiled.”
Rev. MacMurray.—“Baby.”
“ But what am 1?
An infant crying in the night;
An infant crying for the light;
And with no language but a cry.”
Miss K. Bews. —“ Hungarian Girl.”
“ All that glitters is not gold.”
J. F. Jackson.—“ Joker,”
“ I’m the joke of the good ship ‘ Arawa,’
And a very good joker you see ;
Were I not the joker of this good ship,
No joker on board would be.”
Miss J. Sadd.—“ Caller Herrin’ ”
“ Many come to buy my fishes,
And gaze on me with eyes quite bold ;
But I am not like ‘ Caller Herrin’,
Easily caught or easily sold.”
Mr. J, Miller.—“ Sairey Gamp.”
“ I’m Sairey Gamp you all must know,
I ain’t come here to make a show.
To see you all I’m delighted,
I am come cos I was invited.
Should you require me my little dears,
To interduce to this wall of tears,
The little tokens of marriage bliss,
This opportunity you should not miss,
But at once engage, ‘ and don’t be nervis,’
Old Sairey Gamp she’s at your sends.”
144, Th’ O’born.
Knock three times ;
Ring the top bell twice.
8. G., her mark.
SEAMAN’S HOSPITAL FUND.
(Late Dreadnought.)
The following are the amounts received in aid of the
above admirable society. Many sick and disabled seamen of
all nations have been benefited and restored to health through
the medium of this invaluable institution. We have to thank
£l7 13 0£
In addition to above money has been put in the box from
time to time by sweeps, &c., amounts of which we are unable
to specify.
ORIGINAL.
It is not necessary for a ship’s carpenter to understand
“ plane ” sailing.
The bight of a rope is not dangerous.
The mariners’ compass has done some of the most impor-
tant needlework in the world.
“ Business before pleasure, ” as the man said when he gave
his wife a kiss and then went to see his sweetheart.
TO THE PIANO.
Tinkle, tinkle, all day long,
First a piece and then a song;
Seldom anything that’s new,
Seldom time or touch is true.
Tinkle, tinkle, night and day,
How I wish some folks that play
Would try and learn the proper way
Or silent let the piano stay.
JOTTINGS,
The biggest swell in the world is the swell of the ocean.
The sailor’s favourite wine—Port.
The line is not used by mermaids to dry their clothes on.
The captain’s gig is not a four-wheeler.
Rolls of the ocean and chops of the Channel make a very
fair breakfast for a sailor.
It is not necessary for a ship’s carpenter to understand
plane sailing.
The bight of a rope is dangerous.
When is a ship said to be ambitiously in love ?
When is she said to be judiciously in love?
When is she said to be foolishly in love ?
What ship is that which has two mates and no captain ?
Will the person who borrowed my books on Australia and
New Zealand kindly return them to me? Initials on cover.—
H.R.0.E., Second Saloon.
“ Veritas.”—Too personal. Try again.
Will the possessor kindly return my two copies of
“Arawa Gazette.”—Backhouse.
On Saturday night last one of Mendershausen’s concerts
again charmed us ; the pleasure with which we listened being
somewhat alloyed by the chairman (Mr. Bullivant) stating
that it would be the last one this voyage. Amongst the
items was the first appearance of Master Percy Dundas, who
recited the “ Wreck of the Hesperus.” The programme was
an unusually lengthy one, consisting of twenty performers,
and was carried out with eclat. The lovely “ Fairy Voices”
vocal and instrumental waltz was most cleverly rendered by
11
THE “AKAWA” GAZETTE.


the carefully tutored waltzers. Exceedingly good time and
tune were kept throughout, the performance being highly
creditable, and showed great talent, especially as but two
practices were held, and the waltz being quite new to many.
A hearty vote of thanks was accorded by applause to the
company, coupled with the names of Messrs. Hunt and Men-
dershausen, who replied in appreciative terms, the former
gentleman with his characteristic modesty. Really, the
thanks of all on board are due to the musical committee who
have been so energetic in their tasks of providing us with
amusement.
Divine Service was held on Sunday, 20th inst. At morn-
ing prayer a collection was made on behalf ef the “ Seaman’s
Hospital Fund,’ and during the day nearly £l4 was collected.
This is the last service that will be held by the Revds. Dun-
das and Mac Murray, both gentlemen leaving us at Hobart.
We feel assured that our readers will join us in regret at their
departure, and in hearty appreciation of the efforts for our
bodily and spiritual welfare.
Old McSneezer is once again to the front with his natural
bad taste and want of manliness. When unoffending ladies
get disturbed and annoyed by narrow minded married men,
it is just about time a committee of inquiry was formed (even
for chivalry’s sake), and find out the reason why, and inflict
the penalty every white man deems due and requisite to un-
provoked insult on unprotected ladies. After this little
episode it is surely time Mr. McSneezer was brought up with
a round turn one way or the other. Where is England’s
chivalry ?
It is said that a spy has been prying about
In the futile attempt to discover
The likings the ladies so rarely let out,
And the name of each favourite lover.
The sneak had decided to publish a list
Of the matches he oddly supposed to exist;
But the Editor said “ If you do I’ll be kissed,”
And threw the mean vagabond over.
The moral is short,
It is “ never spoil sport; ”
And if you can’t find out a mate of your own,
Continue to let other folks’ business alone.
Respectfully dedicated to the purser:—
Monday—Mutton Curry
Tuesday—Russian „
Wednesday—Curry d la Francais
Thursday—Venetian Curry
Friday—Ceylon Curry
Saturday—lndian Curry
Sunday—Recapitulation Curry
Monday—De Move Curry
Keep it up old man !
LIFE ON BOARD THE ARAWA.
As our voyage draws near its end it may be well to sum
up its incidents and characteristics. I take it, that whatever
differences are found amongst us there will be absolute
unanimity on a few points.
Firstly : We must all feel proud of our noble vessel. I
have now nearly completed my fifth voyage to or from New
Zealand, and, I must say, the good wine has been kept to the
last. I never had a pleasanter voyage—never travelled by a
better ship. Secondly : Our company has been exceptionally
pleasant and well-assorted. There has hardly been a social
jar. Thirdly : We have certainly not lacked for amusements,
if anything, the “ bill of fare ” has been too bountiful. Some
of us, no longer alas, young, have been reminded occasionally
of Sir G. C. Lewis’s smart saying—“ life would be tolerable
but for its amusements.” Fourthly : We have not starved—l
will not go so far as to say that nothing could have been
better than our cuisine ; occasionally we are reminded that M.
Soyer is not in office, but there has not been much to complain
of. There has been more trouble with our sluggish livers
after dinner, than disappointment of palate at dinner. Fifthly;
We have not wanted for intellectual stimulus, thanks to the
really useful library of the Arawa, and private supplies of
current literature. We have been able to travel with Lord
Dufiferin to the “Higher Latitudes,” fly off with novelists to
the realms of fiction, feast on the eloquent periods of Lord
Macaulay, or yield ourselves to the resistless witchery of
Charles Dickens. Sixthly ; Our spiritual necessities have not
been overlooked. With two Clergymen of the Church of
England and two Nonconformists ministers on board, it was
tolerably clear that the voyage would not be destitute of that
modem necessity, a good sermon or two once a week. We
have fared very well here, and I venture to say, that I think
the Australian Colonies may be congratulated on the accession
to their ministerial strength which the Arawa brings them.
Seventhly : We have enjoyed an unusual immunity from that
dread of the sea, “mal de mer,” I never voyaged with so
small a sense of that terrible scourge. If there have been
sufferers they have been wonderously considerate of their
fellow-passengers’ stomachs, and, like the wounded deer, have
retiled to suffer in the shade. For myself, I have not lost a
meal or felt a qualm. Eighthly : Everyone on board must
have had brought home to him the immense value to the
Colonies of this direct steam service—not only does it shorten
the distance, but it practically annihilates sea annoyances and
sea dangers. Who does not feel, as day by day we glide
along at race-horse speed—occasionally so quietly that we
have to ask ourselves if the engines have not stopped—that
the Antipodes is no longer at a distance from the old home ;
it is hardly too much to say that the intervening space is
bridged over, and what must this mean to the “ England of
the Pacific ? ” Clearly if this Colony, and its sister Colony of
Tasmania, have the power of rising to the occasion, it must
mean an infusion of new blood into them, which will one day
make them rivals of the older civilizations. Thousands of en-
terprising British farmers and manufacturers might be
attracted to their shores, who would gradually consolidate the
young communities into powerful states. I wind up my
desertation then with a sentiment which, I am sure, will
meet with a response in every fellow-passenger’s breast: —
Success to Shaw Savill and Albion Company’s (Limited)
magnificent fleet of steamers, and special good luck to the
noble Arawa, and her captain, officers, and crew.
A. C.
On board the Arawa, Sept. 24th, 1885.
Sir, —As I am about to leave the good ship Arawa, I
feel it incumbent on me to publicly state that never before
have I had so pleasant and happy a voyage, never have I met
a better lot of passengers, or a more harmonious one, and I
know that the feeling on board is unanimous that the captain
and his officers have done everything in their power to make
our passage a safe and prosperous one. Wishing them and
the New Zealand contingent every success,
I am,
A Corn Stalk.
We noticed that there was a very large gathering be-
hind the scenes at the play last night. We hope that the
manager kept a smart look-out on the giddy mashers there
assembled.
Divine Service has been held on board every Sunday.
Boat drill and fire stations have been practised each
Saturday when at sea.
The weather throughout the voyage has not been favour-
able to making a quick passage, head winds having predomi-
nated, or when the wind was favourable it was not of suffi-
cient strength to be of ary use to the ship. Several vessels
12
THE “ARAWA” GAZETTE.


have been signalled, the last being the barque “ Lorraine,’’
from Algoa Bay to Asoria, U.S.A. The general health has
been good, and there have been no births, deaths, or marriages.
We shall probably be at Hobart on Friday night or early
on Wednesday morning. It will, therefore, be advisable for
such of our passengers as leave us at that port, and who wish
to obtain printed copies of the “ Gazette ” to signify the same
to the Editor at their earliest convenience. Such copies will
be forwarded to the vaiious addresses immediately on their
receipt from the printers,— Ed.
THEATRICALS.
Wednesday evening bore testimony once again to the
truth that obstacles are but incentives to brave men.
Inspired, doubtless, by so many and varied efforts for
our amusement, a few determined spirits banded together as a
theatrical troupe, and favoured us with their first, and, we
regret to say, last performance, as our voyage is now little
more than a question of hours.
The piece wisely suggested was the lively farce of the
“ Area Belle.” There is no plot to speak of, merely a succes-
sion of laughter-moving incidents, dependant entirely upon
the actors in taking with the audience, and right well did our
Thespians prove equal to the occasion.
The characters are—Penelope (“ The Area Belle ”), her
mistress (Mrs Croker), Tosser (a soldier), Pitcher (a police-
man), and Chalks (the milkman).
The Belle is an arrant flirt, and open to having any num-
ber of strings to her bow, and her only care appears to be to
hide the suits of her various lovers not only from her mistress
but from each of them as well. Of course it ends in everyone
finding everyone else out, and in the summary dismissal of
Penelope, who, after flinging herself in turn upon Tosser and
Pitcher, only to discover they are but cupboard lovers, flies to
the arms of the homely but honest Chalks, owning to the truth
of the proverb, “ That all is not gold that glitters.” Penelope
was the character to the very life, like most of her class,
bright, flippant, and an inveterate flirt, but smart enough, and,
let us add, charming enough to fool any number of men, and
in the end secure herself a good match. Tosser, as the devil-
may-care, rollicking soldier ; Pitcher, as the hungry “bobby,”
with an eye to cold mutton and pickles ; and Chalks, as the
simple-minded milkman, were, in their several characters,
really good, considering the amount of make-believe from the
confined stage.
The part of Mrs. Croker could not by the very best
actress be made anything of, and to take it demands no little
self-denial. Mrs. Croker did all that was required by the
character, and that is much in a comparatively unthankful
part.
Pitcher.—“ Tis surely thy vocation, Hal.”
The curtain fell ’midst hearty applause.
The farce was immediately followed by the distribution
of prizes to the successful competitors in the athletic sports.
The name of each recipient was called out, with the achieve-
ment for which the prize was giren, and the prizes were then
handed to the lucky winners by Mrs. Sorbj, who kindly pre-
sided.
The evening was brought to a close by the presentation of
an address to our esteemed fellow-passenger, Mr. Peter
Cunningham.
The address will be found below, and speaks for itself,
and it needs only to remark here that if more could be re-
quired in the way of testimony to its sincerity, surely the
enthusiastic reception which attended its reading would be
ample to one and all, but especially, we trust, to Mr. Cunning-
ham.
Mr. Cunningham, in acknowledging the honour paid to
him, said that he had only done what he considered was his
duty, and it behoved every man on board a ship to put
himself out of the way to promote the enjoyment of his fellow
passengers. He was glad that his slight efforts had so far
pleased his fellow travellers, and thanked them heartily for
their eulogistic address.
On the evening of Thursday, the 24th instant, a fancy
dress ball was held by courtesy of Captain Stuart, in the
saloon. Dancing commenced soon after eight o’clock. Both
first and second saloon passengers joined heartily in the fun.
Captain Stuart opened the ball with Mrs. Merton, the hostess
of the evening. Conspicuous amongst the fancy dresses were
Mrs Merton, as a lady of the last century, bending under-
neath her weight of years. Our friend Harlequin (Mr.
Busch). The St. John’s Ambulance Corps, well represented
by Mrs. Rich and Mrs. Crosthwaite ; Mrs. Hume, as a Hew
Haven fishwife ; Miss Kate Bews, in the picturesque costume
of a Greek girl ; Miss Claridge hiding beneath the simple
dress of an English housemaid ; Miss Salmon, prettily attired
as a tennis player ; Mr. Backhouse, in the appropriate cos-
tume of Jack Ashore; Mr. Jay in Her Majesty’s uniform ;
Red Riding Hood (Miss Sorby), flitted here and there through
the ever-changing scene. Our ever-welcome, but irrepressible
friends, Messrs. Miller, Horrocks, and Hunt, appeared as
Police, Don Quixote, and Stockman, Other ladies and gentle-
men shared in the enjoyment of the dance, appearing in the
usual evening dress. The musical .part was given by Mrs.
Warden, Miss Sadd, and other ladies, accompanied by r the
violin. The fine old dance Sir “ Roger de Coverly,” and a
verse from the National Anthem brought a most enjoyable
evening to a close. Before eleven the guests dispersed to
their various homes.
PROGRAMME.
1. —Quadrille 8. —Waltz
2. —Waltz 9.—Quadrille
3. —Polka 10. —Waltz
4.—Waltz 11. —Polka
5. —Lancers 12.—Lancers
6. —Waltz 13. —Sir Roger de Coverley
7. —Highland Schottische
We felt it a duty, imposed doubtless on our own shoulders
consequent on our short-comings, to render some explanation
to our numerous readers for the delay that has taken place in
the issue of this number. To begin in mediasses. Our staff
complain that they are too poorly paid, and as all promises to
them of a rise in wages when things get better were of no
avail, we have been compelled to work short-handed. The
little that we could afford to pay our subs and devils, we regret
to say, was wasted on them. These men, with nothing of a
serious nature to occupy their minds, found solace in the
“ flowing bowl,” and made our lives hideous by nightly
serenadings. Your obedient Editor, however, by dint of hard
work, has managed to get this issue out, and trusts that the
increased prices which he hopes will be the result of his
labours will induce his staff to return to their various posts.
Fostering, as he is, anticipations of this nature, he cannot
close without expressing his thanks for the help he has hereto-
fore received from his erring staff. Dr. Bccles, Mr. C. K.
Hall, Mr. Saw, and all contributors, and other devils —“ I
thank you.”
GOOD-BYE.
“ Good-bye, old fellow; I wish you luck !” is now becoming
the common saying on board our good ship “ Arawa.” Glad
as we all were when beautiful Hobart appeared in sight,
many or us felt that the time for “ good-bye ” had arrived.
This was to be the first place where friends must part.
Amongst the first batch to leave us were Mr. and Mrs. Dundas
and family from the saloon, and Mr. Musgrave Woodgate.
These friends have been greatly missed in the respective
circles in which they moved.
The Very Rev. C. Dundas is the newly appointed Dean of
Hobart, in which high t and responsible position we feel sure
13
THE “AEAWA” GAZETTE.


his urbanity and kindness, together with his eloquence, will
at once endear him to the good people of Hobart. All on
board the “ Arawa ” we feel sure wish Mr. Dundas and his
family every success.
To-morrow will see our number further reduced, Port
Chalmers being our next port. Many prominent ladies and
gentlemen will leave us. All parts of the ship will be greatly
thinned of its passengers, and we will now take the opportunity,
this being our last issue, of saying “Good-bye” to all our
passengers.
Our good wishes accompany them for the sake of the Old
Country, and their own personal success in the new country,
which is fast rising into the very foremost position among the
countries of the world.
On their part we are certain the passengers cannot leave
the grand ship that has brought them safe and sound without
here expressing their very high appreciation of the “ Arawa ”
and its officers, and in fact all connected with her.
Owners of steamships may indeed be congratulated when
they can obtain gentlemen like these to take charge of their
ships. From our respected captain down to the crew, every
man seems even more than competent for the post held by
him. Captain Stewart’s great experience in large ocean going
steamers, and his genial manner, makes him a man at once
respected both as commander and companion. We refer our
readers to our Bill of Health to testify to the ability of Dr
Eccles. All will join with us in thanking him sincerely for
his great attention to us. Mr. Pembroke, our esteemed purser,
has a good word from everybody. To Mr. Moffat the serious
work of the ship has been entrusted, and we think that it
could not have been placed in better hands. Mr. Saw, our
second, has made himself a general favourite. Suffice it to
say that all in the ship have done everything in their power
to make the passengers feel that a journey to New Zealand in
the “ Arawa ” is a thing to be desired rather than endured.
Good-bye, all! God bless you 1
Maori.
As many of our fellow travellers are leaving us at Hobart,
the voyage of the “ Arawa ” will be to them then brought to a
close, and a few remarks as to the passage may be of interest
to them.
The daily latitudes, longitudes, &c., are detailed in another
part of our issue, and in this and previous numbers full
accounts have been given of the various entertainments that
have been organised by our energetic amusement committee.
Though not favoured by fair winds, the weather ex-
perienced has been good, and on only two occasions have the
elements interfered with any of the amusements.
On long voyages such as as our present one, a very pleasant
break to the monotony occurs when a stoppage is made at a
port, and two such opportunities have occurred during the
present trip.
Friday, the 25th inst., saw a most becoming termination
to the gaieties of the voyage in the shape of a special dinner
given to the saloon passengers, to which also a few guests
from the second-class saloon were invited, amongst others
the Hev. Mr. M‘Murray and Mrs. M‘Murray. The dinner
was given by the ship, and was in every way worthy of the
occasion, the tables having been arranged with much taste.
Illuminated jellies, that is, jellies sparkling with electric
light, were to most, if not all, a startling novelty. The
dinner was given by Captain Stuart. No sooner was the
dessert on the table than the real business of the evening was
commenced by Mr. Cunningham, who, acting as toast-master,
proposed the Queen and Royal Family. The following
toasts were then drunk :
Captain Stuart and the Officers of the Ship, The Revs.
Dundas and M‘Murray.
Mr. Jackson proposed The Ladies, to which Mr. Hunt
replied.
Mr. Rich The Press, with special allusion to the “ Arawa
Gazette ” and its capable and energetic editor Mr. Pembroke,
to which the latter feelingly responded. The evening closed
with the National Anthem.
The toast of the Captain and Officers of the Ship was, so
far as we remember, proposed in these words : “ Ladies and
gentlemen, the Committee of Amusements have entrusted to
me the duty of proposing a toast which will, I am assured,
meet with your heartiest acceptance. To me personally the
discharge of this duty is a very gratifying event, and if any,
as I doubt not is the case, are inclined to envy my good fortune
let them be consoled with the thought that the Committee’s
choice was most probably determined by the circumstance of
my possessing a loud voice, I think in submitting to you the
grounds upon which I propose this toast, L would be well to
speak of it in two aspects, viz.: the professional and social.
I daresay that there are many here who have travelled oftener
and farther than myself, bnt I hope it will not be out of place
to meiition the fact that I first went to see 28 years ago, and
that when I compare the circumstances of the voyage with
that now drawing to a close, it is impossible not to wonder at
the strides made in all directions towards insuring speed,
safety, and comfort. So much in fact has been achieved and
so fairly comfortable and easy have the passengers been made,
that 1 sometimes think we are prone to overlook the difficulties
that have been surmounted, and to accept our good fortune as
a matter cf course, and finding cause for grumbling about mere
trifles, in absolute forgetfulness that we are not on shore ; yet
it would be as well to remember that we are at sea, and that
granting all that science and ingenuity have done in the way
of fine ship and mighty engines, the perils of the sea still
remain. The dangers from hurricanes, cyclones, lee shores,
sunken rocks, and the like remain even as of old. To guard
us against all such perils is the duty of the Officers of a
ship, and it would be only fitting we should occasionally
reflect on the heavy responsibility involved in the care of
this great ship and its living freight of between 400 and
500 souls, as well as the rough and hard times which
they have to endure, I am sure many of you, like myself,
when lying snugly in your berths but unable to sleep, have
given a thought to the officers watching over our safety
in the biting cold and dark of recent nights. Now,
our seamen are as modest as they are manly, and are the very
last people to mention such matters, indeed, I feel assured
were any compliment offered to them for what they regard as
their simple duty, they would greatly resent it.
It is, however, I submit, fitting that we should take this
occasion of showing that we are not unmindful of how faith-
fnlly they have discharged their duty, and of tendering our
acknowledgments for having been brought safe to our journey’s
end. I now turn to the social side of the question. I had an
opportunity the other night of offering some remarks upon the
series of amusements got up for the purpose of lessening the
tedium of the voyage, and I have been desired by Mr. Cun-
ningham to state that every proposal to that end submitted by
himself to the Captain, was met with no half-hearted responses,
but if such a thing could be more than a whole response. In
like manner all the officers of the ship have joined in our
amusements, and have heartily aided by every means in their
power to make them a success. Evidences of this have been
so continually afforded that it would be a waste of time to
adduce instances. No trouble has been thought too great, and
all questions and suggestions have been met with an unfailing
courtesy and good humour, which, when we remember the
duties they have to discharge and the many calls upon their
time, could hardly fail to command our admiration.
Ladies and gentlemen, I do not think I need say anything
more, so will ask you to join me in drinking the health of
Captain Stuart and all the officers of the good ship “ Arawa,”
with the very heartiest good wishes that all possible success
and happiness may attend them.”
Mr. J. J. Miller accomplished a very remarkable feat by
running round our citadel deck fifty times in 40 minutes.
14
THE “ARAWA” GAZETTE.


Aug. 20.
By cash. General subscriptions
£7
5
0
22
Entrance fees, sports ...
3
7
6
29.
Do.
2
17
0
31.
Proceeds sale “ Arawa ” Gazette
4
2
0
Sept. 4.
Do.
2
12
6
10.
Entrance fees, sports ...
2
8
6
14.
Proceeds sale “ Arawa” Gazette
2
17
6
25.
Do.
2
7
0
29.
Subscnptious, “ Arawa ” Gazette
11
10
6
29.
Contributed by Shaw Savill and Albion
Co.
5
0
0
99
29.
Subscribed for Steward
4
4
0
£48
11
6
Aug. 20.
To Cash
Cards
£0
5
0
25.
99
Subscription returned
0
5
0
29.
Musicians at ball
1
1
0
u
29.
Wine accounts, ball and concert
6
5
6
Sep.
17.
Wine account, concert
1
5
0
17.
Musician, concert
0
5
0
25.
Wine account, theatricals
0
19
0
29.
Do.
0
13
0
29-
99
Boatswain, carpenters, &c.
3
3
0
29.
Prizes for Athletic sports
10
10
6
29.
Musician
0
5
6
29.
Servants and room steward
4
4
0
Balance in hand
19
10
0
PASSENGER LIST.
This is a smart performance for a youngster, and it is all the
more creditable to our energetic friend that at sixty he can
back himself to make such a run, and, what is more, win his
bet.
BLUFF.
PORT CHALMERS.
Saloon.
Third Class.
Miss Dunlop ...
„ Crawford
Miss C. Young ... ,1
Want of space last week prevented us giving a detailed
report of the performances of the actors in the “ Area Belle.”
Mrs. Pavitt played the title role, and right well did she act
the part of the flighty housemaid. Nelly Farren herself could
hardly excel our talented Penelope in some of her situations.
Mr. Miller as Pitcher, Mr. Hunt as Tosser, and Mr. Horrocks
as Walker Chalks were perfect in the delineations of their
several parts, while Miss Ciaridge was loudly applauded for
the excellent manner she spoke her lines.
Mr. Barrow ... 1
„ Barrow, Jr. ... 1
„ Mendershausen ... 1
~ T. Hunt ... 1
AUCKLAND.
Saloon.
„ T. Dyson ... 1
Mr. and Mrs. Clayden ... 2
Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Auffray
and child ... 2,
Mr. and Mrs. Crosthwaite 2
Total 6
2nd Saloon.
Mr. H. J, Murray ... 1
„ E. Banister ... 1
r„ and Mrs. Mac Whi-
„ J. Holland ... 1
„ and Mrs. Dillworih... 2
„ and Mrs. Trotter and
WHIST, CHESS, &c.
2 children ... 3
J. O. Jay 1
P. Henderson ... 1
ter 2
The Whist Tournament has been decided as under, after
many keenly-contested games, the winners being Messrs.
Crosthwaite and Cotton.
Cribbage Tournament won by Messrs. Backhouse and
Rich.
Total 4
From Cape Town.
Mr. and Mrs. Rich ... 2
Third Class,
Miss Sclater ... ... 1
Euchre Tournament, Messrs. Mendershausen and Birdekin.
An auction took place on the after-deck of a choice variety
of articles, sold on behalf of the respective owners. The prices
realised were good, and Mr. Clapham, ably assisted by Messrs.
Fisher and Digby, conducted the sale in a thoroughly profes-
sional style.
Mrs. J. Findlay ... 1
Total ... ...16*
F. Hayes ... 1
Second Saloon.
Mr W. C. Alder
„ R. H. Hayes ... 1
„ Chas. Davis ... 1
Rev. A. and Mrs. Wil-
liams, child (infant) 2*
Misses Bews (2) ... 2
„ W. McDougall ... 1
Mr. and Mrs. J. Frazer... 2
Mr. D. Bews ... ... 1
J. Watt 1
” j! McMillan 1
~ G. R. Heath .. 1
At the last committee meeting, held in the smoking-room,
on Tuesday evening, 29th instant; Mr. Cunningham in the
chair. The balance-sheet was read by the secretary, and was
unanimously adopted. The committee then dissolved them-
selves, and solemnly parted after taking a farewell libation.
„ H. McMillan ... 1
Mr. and Mrs. Fielding 2
Mr. H. L. Fox ... 1
J. Turtle ... ... 1
~ U. iUIUC ... ... A
„ E. P. Thomson ... 1
„ H. L. Stewart ... 1
Mr. and Mrs. Scott ... 2
Mrs. Hume ... ... 1
Mr. and Mrs. M‘Kenzie
and child ... 2*
„ W. Symons ... 1
BALANCE-SHEET,
„ L. Whittaker ... x
„ and Mrs. Slager ... 2
„ J. Arthur... ... 1
Mr. S. Plunley ... 1
~ J. P. Power ... 1
From Cape Town.
Mr. A. Muir ... ... 1
Mrs. McGee & 2 children 2
Mr. and Mrs. Creber ... 2
~ J. Hamilton ... 1
Miss Rabbidge ... 1
Ed. „ (11) ... *
John „ (10) ... *
Parnell,, (8) ... *
T. Dyson ... ... 1
Third Class.
Mr. Geo. Thomas ... 1
Mr. and Mrs. Campbell
and child ... 2*
Rev. J. E. Kelly, Mrs.
Kelly, and 3 chil-
dren ... 3*
Mr. Wm. J. Kelly 1
~ Harry Busch ... 1
~ A. W. Taylor ... 1
H. P. Pickup ... ... 1
R. Philp ... ... 1
Jas. Wilson ... ... 1
From Capetown.
Mr. and Mrs. Roberts ... 2
Misses Roqerts (3) ... 3
Mr. and Mrs. Hall ... 2
~ D. Stevenson ... 1
„ Thos. „ -• 1
~ Thos. Wright ... 1
„ Hugh „ ... J
Mr. Green ... ... 1
„ E. Ulph ... ... 1
„ J. Hynes ... ... 1
„ P. J. Bryne ... 1
~ John Moriarty ... 1
~ Paul Bate and wife 2
~ T. B. Howard ... 1
~ A . U . XJ I > IXO ... X
„ W. H. Troon ... 1
and Mrs. Ray ... 2
dllU "Alb, XXiOiJ ... XJ
„ H. McGregor ... 1
Mrs. C. Hill .. |
Miss Cornack.. ... |
Mrs. J. Watson ... 1
„ xx. iu.u\jrxcgux ... a
„ J. Smith ... ... 1
99 u. Uli-llull ... ... A
„ E. Scott ... ... 1
~ JG. Thomas ... 1
Miss Forbes .. ... 1
T. Burn ... ... 1
” p! Hart ... 1
’, 1’! Collins’ " !!! 1
Mr. J. Jackson ••• 1
~ Wm. Craig ... 1
„ Thos. M‘Neil ... 1
~ Robt. Counsell ... 1
~ H. Ollis 1
~ and Mrs. Siddall ... 2
~ and Mrs. J. Siddall
and infant ... 2
” J. P. Kelly !!! 1
~ U.JL . ... X
„ Jas. Murphy ... 1
„ E. O. Farrell ... 1
„ J. Lloydd ... 1
„ J. Boyd ... ... 1
Total ... ... 54£
£4B 11 6
P. CUNNINGHAM, Chairman.
F. PEMBROKE. Sec. and Treas.
15
THE “ ARAWA” GAZETTE.


Misses Siddall (2) ... 2
Mr. Thos. Blackball ... 1
J. Burns .. ... 1
~ R. Smith ... ... 1
~ W. G. Atkins ... 1
~ and Mrs. Thorne .. 2
~ Saul Thorne .. 1
~ John Hewett ... 1
~ Jos. Robin ... 1
„ T. Foley... ... 1
~ J. Macpherson ... 1
~ Miss Downing ... 1
Miss Downing ... 1
Mr. A. Hatton ... 1
~ F. Haynes ... 1
~ C. L. Ragohn ... 1
~ P. Kean ... ... 1
„ T. V. Roach .. 1
~ J. Speary ... 1
„ A. Smith ... 1
Total Adults ... 53
NAPIER.
Saloon.
Mr.&Mrs. Sorby (2chldn.) 3
Miss Sorby ... ... 1
Miss A. Claridge ... 1
Mr. E. Birdekin ... 1
3rd Class.
Mr. & Mrs. Jepson & child 2
Mr. Thos. Jepson ... 1
Miss Heathcote ... 1
GISBORNE.
Saloon.
Mrs. Davitt ... ... 1
NEW PLTMOURH.
'Third Class.
Mr. W. C. Reynolds . 1
NELSON.
Saloon.*
Miss Sadd ... ... 1
Third Saloon.
Miss Ramsay ... ... 1
Saloon .. ... 1
Third Saloon ... 1
CANTERBURY.
Saloon,
Mr. and Mrs. Cotton ... 2
~ P. Cunningham ... 1
2nd Saloon.
Miss Fforde ... ••• 1
Mrs. Butler, 2 children
and infant ... ... 2
Mrs. Hatrick and infant 1
Mr. and Mrs. J. Steel .. 1
Mr. E. T. Jarvis ... 1
Mrs. Stewart ... ... 1
Mr. and Miss Avison ... 2
Mr. A. E. Digby ... 1
~ J. Ross 1
Total
Port Chalmers
Bluff
Auckland
3rd Class.
Mr. J. Cock, wife, 3
chldren and infant 34
~ J. Davies ... ... 1
Mrs. Davies and infant... 1
Miss Roundtree 1
Josh Hawke 1
Dan Hawke 1
Mr. T. Roundtree ... 1
„ J. B. Wilby 1
Mrs. J. B. Wiby ... 1
Mr. M. Robinson ... 1
~ Thos. Trudgeon ... 1
„ T. McClintock ... 1
E. A. Newell , ... 1
W. Ballantyne ... 1
J. Ballantyne ... 1
B. Eendall ... 1
W. Crossley ... 1
and Mrs. Wroot and
2 children ... 3
Miss Wroot ... ... 1
W. G. Wroot .. .. 1
Mr. A, Motley ... 1
... 25
WELLINGTON.
Saloon.
Mr. E. G. J. Thomas ... 1
„ B. M. Horrocks ... 1
Mrs. Warden ... ... 1
Mr. and Mrs. Merton ... 2
Total
2nd Saloon.
Mr. and Mrs. S. Chulte,
and 3 children ... 34
Miss E. Isaacs ... 1
„ Friend ... ... - 1
Mr. H. Fisher... ... 1
„ A. Turner ... 1
J. Warden ... 1
Total
3rd Class
Mr. aud Mrs. Miller and
infant ... ... 2
Mr. H, E. McDonna ... 1
and Mrs. Blake, 3
child., and infant 34
„ and Mrs. Bevis ... 2
Mrs. R. Lever... ... 1
Mr. C. Sharinan ... 1
R. McMillan ... 1
O. Peat ... ... 1
„ Taylor ... ... 1
Miss Taylor ... ... 1
Mr. H. W. Taylor ... 1
Total
Saloon ... ... 5
2nd Saloon ... ... 84
13 3rd Saloon ... ... 15|
SUMMARY.
Saloon. 2nd Saloon. 3rd Class.
6 4 544
164 20 53
Napier
Gisborne
New Plymouth
Nelson
Canterbury...
Wellington ...
1
3
5
OFFICERS.
Deck Dept.—Captain J. Stuart, Commander.
Mr. T. Moffatt, Chief Officer.
Mr. J. Saw, Second „
Mr. R. Gardner, Jun. Second Officer.
Mr. T. Prosser, Third Officer.
Mr. W. G. Innes, Fourth Officer.
Mr. J. Stuart, Sup.
Engine Dept.—Mr. C. T. Young, Chief Engineer.
Mr, J. Munro, Second „
Mr. D. Wilkie, Third „
Mr. H. C. Hutchison, Fourth „
Mr. G. Arthur, Fifth „
Mr. J. Shaw, Sixth „
Mr. J. Spiers, Seventh „
Mr. T. Finnic, Chief Refrigerating Engineer.
Mr. McGilvray, Boilermaker.
Mr. C. J. Hall, Electrician.
Purser’s Dept.—Mr. A. L. A. Eccles, Surgeon.
Mr. F. Pembroke, Purser.
Mr. W. Johnson, Chief Steward.
Mr. G. Cooper, Second Steward.
Mrs. Macfarland, Chief Stewardess.
“ARAWA GAZETTE.”
EDITORIAL STAFF :
Editor ... ... Mr. Frank Pembroke
Sub-Editor... ... ... Mr. C. K. Hall
Sporting Correspondent ... Mr. J. J. Miller
Law Reporter ... ... Mr. A. Motely
Art Critic ... ... ... Mr. T. Dyson
Shipping Reporter Mr. J. Saw
Marine Artist )
Musical and Theatrical Critic Mr. M. Mendershausen
Medical Correspondent ... Dr. Leslie A. Eccles
Publisher ... ... ... Mr. A. Busch
Agents .. ... ••• Messrs. Miller & Busch,
Citadel Square.
SHAW, SAVILL AND ALBION COMPANY, LIMITED,
34, Leadenhall Street, London, E.C.
S.S. “ARAWA.”
Exceptional in regard to speed as was the outward
passage to New Zealand of the Shaw, Savill and Albion
Company’s Arawa, the voyage out and Home, when viewed
as a whole, appears to be still more remarkable. The esti-
mate arrived at from telegraphic advices that the outward
passage “scarcely exceeded in steaming time thirty-nine
days,” did not do justice to the Steamer, for the gross time
was ’only 39 days, 19 hours, 50 mins., while she only
consumed in nett steaming time the wonderfully short space
of 38 days and 30 mins., a feat then quite unparalleled in
the records of shipping. On the homeward voyage, however,
still more remarkable work was done, the passage from New
Zealand to Plymouth being effected in 36 days 6 hours gross,
or 35 days, 3 hours, 40 mins, actual steaming time.
It is scarcely necessary to add that these passages,
separately and together, are by far the best yet accomplished,
16
THE “ARAWA” GAZETTE.


August
August
15,
16
17
5h. 4m., Eddystone abeam. Depth taken, draft forward 23ft. 11m.
1 30.30 R 68 70 N.E. 1.2 B. C. S 29° W
2 30.12 S 68 73 Varble. 2.4 B. C. P. S 27 W
,, aft 25ft 4in.
46.34 N 7.20 W
42.18 10.22
259
287
13.3
11.9
Smooth sea
Half-speed 2 W.
18
3
30.04 R 73 72 S.E. 0.3 F. B. C.
S 24
W
37.52
12.59
292
12.1
do.
19
4
20.30 R 84 80 N.E. 4.3 B. C.
S 16
W
32.47
14.44
319
13.2
Smooth sea
22
23
7
8
30. 8 S
30.12 R
79
84
76
82
Varble. 0.1
Halm 0
B. C.
B. C.
S 6
S 1
W
E
19.54
15.19
17.51
17.45
306
276
12.7
12.3
do.
Stop Ih. 37m. for machinery
24
g
30.12 S
84
82
S.W.
4.5
B. C.
S 2
E
10.22
17.37
297
12.4
2.30 p.m. Cape Verdi Lt. H. ah,
25
10
30.11 S
79
80
S.W.
4.5
B. C.
S 25
E
5.47
15.26
308
17.7
Smooth sea
26
11
35.14 R
78
80
S.E.
5.6
B. C.
S 56
E
2.54
11.10
304
13.0
Mod;
27
12
80.18 S
77
77
S.E.
4
B. C.
S 21
E
1.21 S
9.29
273
11.5
do.
28
10
30.17 S
76
76
S.E.
4
B. C.
S 22
E
5.43
7.43
283
11.8
Head sea
29
30
14
15
30.19 R
30.27 S
72
70
72
70
S.E.
S.E.
6
6.4
B. C.
B. C.
S 9
S 15
E
E
10.20
14.59
6.58
5.38
280
290
11.7
12.1
do.
4.30 p.m. St. Helena ahead
Head sea
31
16
30.37 R
69
69
S.E.
5.6
B. C.
S 15
E
19.41
4.17
293
12.3
September 1
17
18
30.40 S
30.40 S
69
65
68
64
S.E.
S.E.
5
4.1
B. C.
Cloudy
S 26
S 31
E
E
24 0
28.20
1.56
0.55 E
299
293
12.5
12.3
do.
Smooth sea
3
19
30.32 S
62
64
Varble
i 0.1
B. C.
S 66
E
30.23
6.08
300
12.7
do.
4
20
30.13 F
63
62
S.E.
2.5
B. C.
S 67
E
32.18
11.24
293
12.4
Head sea
5
21
29 90 S
62
62
S.E.
6.3
C. G. L. O. P.
S 74
E
33.35
16.42
278
11.7
Very high head sea
7.5 p m. arrival.
Draft-
—Forward 23ft. 3in., aft 23ft. 9in.
' 86
12.4
High head sea
Passage—Teneriffe to Cape Town, 15d. 19h. 59m.
Total
4677
12.3
Stop in Cape Town 22h. 25m.
6
5.33
n.m.. full snd.
Denth taken, draft 23.21 frwd, 24.00 aft.
241
13.2
Poll. L. sea, heavy rain
7
22
29 03 R
61
60
West
2.4
G. O. P. R.
Vars.
36.19
21.21
8
23
30.30 R
54
52
South
6
D. G. O. Q. W.
see
E
38.10
26.40
277
11.7
Very high sea
9
24
30.41 S
52
58
S E.
5.1
B. C.
S 71
E
39.39
32.06
269
11.4
High swell
10
25
30.30 R
50
56
S.E.
1.2
C. G. O. P.
S 72
E
41.12
38.18
300
12.7
Smooth sea
11
26
30.41 R
45
44
S.E.
1.7
C. O. Q.
S 76
E
42.23
44.50
300
12.7
High head sea
12
13
27
28
30.37 F
29.55 F
40
40
40
42
S.E.
S.E.
6
7.8
C. B.
G. O. P. Q.R.W.
S 71
S 73
E
E
23.57
45.19
51.04
57.21
288
281
12.2
11.9
do.
Very high head head sea
14
29
29.70 R
38
42
S.E.
9.7
Q. R. G. B. C.
83
E
45.41
61.29
175
7.4
Mountainous head sea
16
30
30.35 R
37
40
S.W.
6.2
C. G. O.
S 82
E
46.25
68.55
313
13.3
Confused sea, No. No.
16
31
30.50 R
42
49
N.W.
1.3
B. C.
N 86
E
46.00
76.38
321
13.7
Mod. foil. G. sea
17
32
30.25 F
43
42
N.W.
3.6
G. O.
S 86
E
46.24
84.28
327
13.9
do. Noots
18
33
30-2 R
46
44
N.S.&W. 7.5
O. N. P. B. G.
E
46.23
82.39
335
14.3
High beam sea
19
34
29.29 F
42
41
North
1.2
B. C. G. O.
E
46.24
99.43
293
12.4
Smooth sea
20
36
29.90 R
41
43
South
1.7
O. P. R. B. C.
N 88
E
46.16
107.14
313
13.3
High beam sea
21
36
30.26 F
41
44
South
6.1
C. Q. O. G.
E
46.16
114.13
303
12.9
Mod. beam Noots
22
37
30.30 S
42
46
North
1.3
B. C.
S 88
E
46.29
112.04
316
13.5
do. do.
23
38
30.18 S
45
46
N.E.
3.5
B. C.
S 88
E
46.38
129.12
296
12.6
High beam sea
24
39
30.8 F
46
44
N.E.
6.1
B. C.
E
46.39
136.07
285
12.1
Smooth sea
25
40
29.62 R
47
50
South
4
B. C. G. O. R.
N 70
E
45.07
142.00
263
11.2
Mod. foil. G. sea
26
41
9.30 a.m,
,, arrival.
Draft frwd. 21.4, aft 24.05.
Total
292
Smooth
Passage—Cape Town to Hobart, 19d. 7h. 26m.
5788
Stop in Hobart 11.
27
42
29.60 F 51 62 S,E.
4.3 B. C.
S 67 E
44.12
151.37
201
13.3 Smooth sea
28
43
29.67 R 51 50 S.W.
4.6 B. C.
S 81 E
44.58
158.45
308
13.1 Mod. foil. G.
Sp
44
29.86 R 53 51 S.W.
5.3 B. C.
S 77 E
49.16
166.34
337
14.5 do.
30
45
2 a.m. arrival. Dodging outside until 6.30 a.m.
191
and the fact that this wonderful achievement is the complete
record of one voyage, shows that it is not the outcome of
a mere chance of exceptional luck. Such an average could
only have been attained by real excellence of construction
and handling.
The “ Tainui,” the sister ship of the “ Arawa,” now on
her way to New Zealand, reached the Cape on the 9th inst.
in 18 days and a few hours from Plymouth, thus show ing
that she comes in no degree behind the “Arawa” in the
matter of speed.
The performances of these magnificent vessels thoroughly
establishes the merits of the new triple expansion system of
engines with which they are fitted, as in both cases the work
was done on a consumption of coal, which, with the old style
of engines, was quite impossible. The easy motion of the
engines also, free from jar or jerk of any kind, makes them
specially suitable for passenger vessels, where vibration is
very objectionable and unpleasant.
Owing to the Refrigerators, with which all the Steamers
of this Line are fitted, the Board of Trade has given special
permission to the Shaw, Savill and Albion Company to
replace, to a large extent, the customery salt and preserved
meats by fresh provisions : the latter are thus, available
throughout the whole voyage, and are largely made use of,
to the great advantage of all classes of passengers.
The “Arawa” sails again for New Zealand on 13th
August, and regarding her accommodation the Otago Daily
Times of May 15th, 1885, says: —“The cabins of the
‘ Arawa ’ are most comfortable, and without doubt the
largest we have seen on any of the ocean steamers. ”
The Shaw, Savill and Albion Company’s Steam Service
to New Zealand is carried on by these Steamere, and the
well-known “ Coptic,” “Doric,” and “ lonic ” of the White
Star Line.
The route taken is via the Cape of Good Hope, and
passengers consequently escape the intense heat experienced
in the Red Sea, which is so very objectionable and trying to
many persons.
13 th July, 1885,
ABSTRACT OF LOG OF SHAW, SAVILL,
AND
ALBION COMPANY, LIMITED. LONDON,
J. STUART, COMMANDER,
SCREW STEAM SHIP
ARAWA,
From Plymouth via Teneriffe and Cape Good Hope toward s New Zealand. Voyage No. 3.
Ther- . §
■g g mometer Winds, ~ , a c „ , .
Date 1885 °° Barometer go Weather. Courses. Latitude. Longitude. | a Remarks, &c.
’ j|g> Dry Wet Direction. f* £ g
fi ..... ... .. «...
20 6 840 a.m. arrival. Draft forward 23ft. 6in., aft 25ft. Sin. 270 73.0 , do.
Passage—Plymouth to Teneriffe, 4d. 16h. 41m. # Total 1427 12.7 Stop in Teneriffe lOh. 30m.
20 7.10 1.M., full spd. Depth taken, draft forward 23ft. 9in., aft 25ft. Sin. ——
21 6 30.10 SB2 74 N.E 5.2 B. C. Sl5 W 24.58 17.18 217 12.8 Mod. fol. sea
99. 7 30. 8 S 79 76 Varble. 0.1 B. C. S 6 W 19.54 17.51 306 12.7 _ do.
Passage—Hobart to Port Chalmers, 3d. 3h. 54m. Total 1047
Total Passage - Plymouth to Port Chalmers, 44d. 21h. 32m.
Total Stoppages in part and at sea, .. Id. Oh. Om.
Total Steaming Time .. .. 43d. Oh. om.
Total Distance 12929 Avg., 12,5.
17
THE “ARAWA” GAZETTE.


Steamer.
Tons
Register.
Horse-Power.
Commander.
Date of Departure.
Arawa
5200
3500
— Stuart
24th Oct.
Ionic
4753
3000
J. Cameron
21st Nov.
Tainui
5200
3500
— Jdarlow
As arranged
Doric
4744
3000
J. W. Jennings
n
Coptic
4367
3000
W. H. Kidley
>
\rawa and Tainui are new steamers of the latest designs, and fitted with the electric light
First-class Passenge
r Accommodation is in
a citadel saloon on the main deck amidshi
SHAW. SAVILL L ALBION COMPANY
(LIMITED).
MONTHLY LINE
OF —
FAST PASSENGER STEAMERS
BETWEEN
ALL PORTS OF NEW ZEALAND AND LONDON.
The following powerful new steel-built Steamers are ap-
pointed to Leave for t London Direct as follows :
(FINAL PORT AS ARRANGED.)
The Arawa and Tainui are new steamers of the latest designs, and fitted with the electric light throughout.
The First-class Passenger Accommodation is in a citadel saloon on the main deck amidships, and the
sleeping berths are of extra large size.
The Second-class Accommodation is very superior, and is situated under the poop deck.
Steerage Passengers will have most excellent and roomy accommodation in the between-decks.
The White Star steamers lonic, Doric, and Coptic will be conducted by the Managers of that line, who have
made their service the most comfortable and popular afloat.
An Experienced Surgeon will accompany each Steamer.
Passage Money. —Saloon, from 60 guineas upwards ; Second Cabin, 40 guineas ; Steerage from 18 to
20 guineas.
The undersigned are empowered to grant passages from London to New Zealand, payment for which has
been guaranteed in the Colony.
The above will be supplemented by First-class Sailing Vessels, which will be advertised from time to time.
For further particulars apply to the Agents,
National Mortgage & Agencjr Company of Nov Zealand, Limited Ualgely and Co., Christchurch,
Salgety and Company, Limited. Levin and Co., Wellington.
The British & New Zealand Mortgage & Agency Company, Limited G, Cruikshank, Auckland.
