

wlv WV¥WW
k /sf% dK i|®|[ / a . / 1}
fmrnft 6r
7 tQ& V 1 ■V wVt *rj|r




THE
STRAIGHT AND DEVIOUS PATHS
OF STUDENTSHIP.




THE
STRAIGHT AND DEVIOUS
PATHS
OF STUDENTSHIP.
A Lecture delivered at the School of Design,
Adelaide, on Friday, qth February, 1894.
HARRY P. GILL,
Director for Technical Art, Adelaide,
South Australia.
Published by the School of Design Art Club,
Adelaide, South Australia.


Printed by A. H. Roberts,
131, King William St.,
Adelaide.


DEDICATED
To THOSE I HOPED TO HELP, WHO, HEARING, ASKED
THAT THEY MIGHT READ.




The Straight and Devious
Paths of Studentship.
All artistic representation is founded upon Nature.
Man, in whom was the imitative capacity, found him-
self surrounded by Nature, and his artistic works
show his endeavors to reproduce her aspects. The
bushman draws upon the walls of his cave the
animals with which he struggles for existence. The
cave-man scratched animals upon flat bones and cut
them upon the handles of daggers. Native Andam-
anese used first to eat from shells, and later, from
wooden vessels somewhat similarly shaped, and
scratched upon their hollowed surface representations
of the markings of the original shells. Natives of
British Guinea weave rush baskets, in which they


introduce representations of the snake and monkey;
these afford as accurate a representation of Nature as
does the cross-stitch in needlework which has at times
been revived among civilised people-—the civilised
woman who works in cross-stitch and does not pro-
duce her own designs is an artistic retrogression com-
pared with the savage weaver. Woven baskets,
daubed inside with clay, are used as water vessels.
The clay shrinks and falls away, showing a pattei’n
created by the impress of the Avoven work. This
pattern is copied in scratchings upon primitive
pottery. Gourds bound about with string, whereby
the savage carried them, have also been models
for early pottery in regard to shape, while decora-
tions were scratched upon the vessel in imitation
of the lines of string. Nature is the source from
which all is derived. She must be your constant
companion, and you must be constant in your study
of her.


Your understanding is fenced by your knowledge.
Any natural aspect or effect outside your knowledge
should create a yearning to overcome it. Your per-
ception is bounded by your capacity to see, and to see
aright you must go to Nature. In doing so, you will
be following in the steps of all who have helped in
human and artistic progress. Your artistic ignor-
ance is as great as the square of the width and depth
of all that is without your mental vision, and only by
constant intercourse with Nature will your capacity
develop. Any ten of you can prove this by each
taking a number from 1 to 10. No. 1 makes a
drawing from Nature which No. 2 copies without
visual reference to, or aural knowledge of the
original. No. 3 copies 2 without seeing the original
or the drawing by No. 1, and so on ; 4 copies 3, 5
copies 4, 6 copies 5, each succeeding number seeing
its immediate predecessor’s work only, and the final
result will possess not the faintest representation of


the original ; when the ten drawings are arranged
numerically there will be observed a sequence of
decadence. Therefore, you must study Nature, and I
urge you to study her daily.
The repeated acts of our days become, with passing
years, our habits, and these together build up and
mould the character of our lives. This is true in
every respect. The portrait of Lorenz Alma Tadema,
R.A., by the Hon. Jno. Collier, exhibited at the
recent exhibition of the Royal Anglo-Colonial Society
of Artists, showed this painter before his easel, upon
which was an unfinished picture, “ A Roman Pottery
in Britain.” Mr. Collier’s picture represented only a
portion of Tadema’s canvas, and this showed a work-
man clothed only in a loin cloth and waistbelt, and
with a metal bracelet upon his arm, who is engaged
carrying a box of pots up a flight of steps. The potter
is completely painted, while the box of pots which
Tadema is about to paint is drawn in with white


chalk upon the toned canvas. This is the task for
the day, and when the master ceases to work he will
have completed his box of pots, and so he passes from
one portion to another, finishing each as he works.
Only those who have worked at art can realise the
repeated daily efforts which have developed this habit
of work which is this painter’s characteristic—
complete finish, and apparently complete ease in
attaining finish.
E. J. Poynter, R.A., works in a somewhat similar
manner. His “ Nausicaa and her Maidens Playing
at Ball ” was first painted thinly in terra verte and
white, and thus was fixed upon the canvas, in a quiet
green monochrome or grisaille, the drawing and
chiaroscuro of the subject. Over this he worked in
color, painting the various groups of the composition,
each group was finished in color and tone, though the
surrounding canvas was only covered with the green
underpainting. The capacity to paint a portion


understanding and representing exactly the proper
relation it would bear to the whole when complete, is
an achievement only to be gained by continuous
daily effort to produce complete and truthful work.
These repeated acts have become with years of
practice the habit of their artistic expression and
have formed the character of their work.
Good work is usually misunderstood. The ignor-
ant chatter and comprehend it not. They look at a
careful representation of tones, the truthful realisation
of elementary truths, it passeth their understanding,
and they yearn for the oleograph.
Ruskin said in his “ Two Paths,” p. 58, to the
Manchester students :—“ If you paint as you ought,
and study as you ought, depend upon it the public
will take no notice of you for a long while. If you
study wrongly, and try to draw the attention of the
public upon you—supposing you are clever students—
you will get swift reward; but the reward does not


come fast when it is sought wisely ; it is always held
aloof for a little while ; the right roads of early life
are very quiet ones, hedged in from nearly all help or
praise. But the wrong roads are noisy, vociferous
everywhere with all kinds of demands upon you for
art which is not properly art at all.” No greater
tribute to the truth of this can be found than in the
fact that Frith’s pictures have had more often than
any other artist’s at the Royal Academy, a rail
placed before them and a policeman to make the
public “ move on ” so as to obviate the crowding of
the hundreds who appreciate vulgarity. What Gotch
has done in “ Destiny ” with some nobility, Frith, in
his “ Road to Ruin,” has done with vulgarity.
What Gotch has spoken in one picture, which is
valuable because it makes us enquire and think, has
taken Frith six pictures which require no thought,
but they leave us with a sad mind, a bitter contempt
for the time we live in. But mark you this, in the


times and years unborn, this work of (Notch’s will
still appeal and still make those who see it ponder;
while the pictures of Frith will appear as sad
evidences of a distorted taste, productions which
never left the world one whit the better or the purer;
their author, a reveller in depraved, badly painted,
caricatures of our times.
To those of you who have done elementary work
and are about to engage in more advanced, I say it
matters not in what media you, who have advanced
in black and white, proceed, whether in tempera the
eldest, or in oil, or in water color, the youngest; it
matters not which. All kinds of color are legitimate
and “ all kinds of color are illegitimate, if you think
they will allow you to alter at your pleasure or
blunder at your ease.” Put on one side all thought
of respite from labor. You could alter your black
and white, you cannot alter your color, unless the
serpent’s trail showeth through the resulting labor.


Your trials in the past were whips, now they are
scorpions, but you are the stronger and should knit
yourself for effort. Like Bernard Evans, the water
colorist, you cannot achieve unless you “ set your
teeth.” Who-so commences color and choosetli oil,
“ because he can cover up as often as he likes ” had
better never thumb the palette ; his sheaf of brushes
will yield no grain of wheat, and each time he slides
back from purity he has to climb again before he can
advance. Love your labor. “ Love further’s know-
ledge.” Love must be the spur to effort; without it
you labor in vain, you beat the air, you will never put
Nature’s “ infinite riches in a little room.” If I do
not speak further of our elementary work, it is
because, I think, it is safe and true ; and if I only
speak more shortly of our advanced work you will
pardon me, for I feel I must spend to-night, not in
utterances of ourselves but of greater ones. Yet a
few words upon the advanced work which is executed


away from the school. The students are alone, with-
out guidance, thrown upon their own resources, made
to commune with their love, laboring to attain their
desire, producing works that are marked by
individualism, without which their labor would be
vanity. The result shows that your works have this
general aim, the desire for truth. They say to me:—
“ Thus far have we striven to follow truth,” and I am
satisfied that high achievement must follow and
reward your future efforts. Further, I see that these
works lack any uniform conventional characterisation,
so often noticeable in students’ works, mere imitation
of a master. This lack of uniformity is as important
a product as is the attainment of truth. It is a proof
of truth. Truth cannot be obtained by students
where the master has the strength of Raffaelle whose
pupils were copyists, and their works but imitations
of their master and marked by degeneracy.
Followers are always behind their leader. Copyists


are always behind their selection. Neither can truth
be obtained if the student has not been trained to
observe, educated to labor, and, while laboi'ing, to
exercise a cultivated judgment. Failing this exercise
of judgment, students pick up tricks; their best
works may be mistaken for the bad works of a
master, their worst are contemptible. I, therefore,
feel doubly grateful that you strive for a truthful
realisation of Nature, and I urge you to rise from
your present point of vantage to the highest that an
incentive love and a purifying labor can carry you ;
and in your future efforts “ you will find that to
make quick studies is a safeguard against any too
servile or slow habits which minute copying may
induce in you ; for although the endeavor to obtain
velocity for velocity’s sake, and dash for display’s
sake, is as baneful as it is despicable, there are a
velocity and a dash which not only are compatible
with perfect drawing, but obtain certain results


which cannot be obtained otherwise. And it is per-
fectly safe for you to study occasionally for speed and
decision, while your continual coui’se of practice is
such as to ensure your attaining an accurate judgment
and a tender touch. Speed, under such circum-
stances, is rather fatiguing than tempting, and you
will find yourself always beguiled rather into
elaboration than negligence.” Your elaboration in
art is that constant service rendered to a sweet mis-
tress, whom negligent and careless handling tend
only to dishonor. Let force, for force’s sake, be the
last thing you aim at. An exquisite refinement is a
higher and more cultivated effort than the brutal
display of the boxer. If you can play in many tones
in a refined key you are greater than if you played
the same number of tones using a higher and wider
key ; but you won’t catch the ear of the public, and
you must not want to do so. It is more difficult to
obtain a variety of effect when playing piano than


when you indulge in forte or fortissimo. Many
artists sit upon the piano and the public applaud.
Music is not produced by thumping, and art is not
evolved by blackness.
Art only exists truly when it affords the proper
relationship of its parts ; strain one of these to obtain
an effect and the unity of the whole is ruptured to
admit your tour de force. The vain striving after
effect is cheap claptrap. It makes the ignorant to
gape, but the art-educated to sorrow.
Still you must remember that “ the character of
everything is best manifested by contrast. Rest can
but be enjoyed after labor; sound to be heard
clearly, must rise out of silence ; light is exhibited by
darkness, darkness by light, and so on in all things.
These contrasts are to be observed in Nature ; the
rugged mountain and soft mist; the green of the
plain and the dark masses of foliage; and “ one of
the most curious facts, which will impress itself upon


you, when you have drawn sometimes carefully from
Nature in light and shade is the appearance of
intentional artifice with which contrasts are pro-
duced by her; the artistry with which she will
darken a tree trunk as long as it comes against a
light sky, and throw sunlight on it precisely at the
spot where it comes against a dark hill, and similarly
treat all her masses of shade and color, is so great
that if you only follow her closely, everyone who looks
at your drawing with attention will think that you
have been inventing the most artificial and delightful
interchanges of shadow that could possibly be devised
by human wit.”
For the works of the past you must feel a reverence.
They are the expression of man’s mind upon the
phenomena of Nature and will repay your most
careful study.
In counselling students and in allusion to the works
of the past, Sir Fred. Leighton, P.R.A., recently


said : “ Struck as all must be deeply with the vehe-
ment and almost feverish strife of conflicting theories
and opinions which is rife about us, it is impossible
not to feel sti*ongly how perplexing such a condition
of things must be to the very young, who, on the
outer threshold of their career, eager and still malle-
able, seek a sure path in such a labyrinth of contra-
dictions. Extreme youth when it is healthy is bold
and fearless, and not a little inclined to rebel against
tradition, however rooted in the long assent of
men. . . . Steeped as I am to my inmost
marrow in reverence for the mighty men of the past
to whom art owes whatever of true sublimity it
boasts, convinced unshakeably of the vital validity
of the great principles on which their achievements
rest, lam yet not of those who would refuse to art
all power of evolution, or who believe that, though
assuredly it will never reach more lofty summits, it
may not send forth lateral shoots fresh and delightful


as only they are, when nourished from the strong sap
of the parent stem. In brief, I do not believe —to
change the metaphor—that they who, in our time,
have wedded their lives to art have clasped to their
breast a lovely but a lifeless corpse. To the very
young then I would fain offer one or two matters for
thought, if, perchance, they will hearken to one who
lias grown old in unwavering sympathy with their
struggles and their doubts. I would beg them to
keep ever before their eyes the vital truth that
sincerity is the well-spring of all lasting achievement,
and that no good thing ever took root in untruth or
in self-deception. I would urge them to remember
that if every excellent work is stamped with the
personality of its author, no work can be enduring
that is stamped with a borrowed stamp, and that,
therefore, their first duty is to see that the thoughts,
the emotions, the impressions they fix on the canvas
are in very truth their own thoughts, their own


emotions, their own spontaneous impressions, and not
those of others ; for work that does not spring from
the heart has no roots, and will of a certainty wither
and perish. This other maxim I would urge on
them—that true genius knows no hurry, that patience
is of its essence and thoroughness its constant mark,
and, lastly, I would ask them to believe that the
gathered experience of past ages is a precious heritage
and not an irksome load, and that nothing will better
fortify them for future and free development than the
reverent and the loving study of the past.” I cannot
better complete my first part than by a short resume.
I have shown you that all art is produced by a study
of Nature, that your productions are limited by your
knowledge, and biassed by your affection, which
should be noble, to enoble and not debase your work.
I have shown the elementary that they are on the
slope of the hill, and that the advanced have pursued
the same way before them, and have now reached a


more extended vision of Nature’s beauties, and a
higher capacity to reproduce them. The advanced I
have shown that they must climb much and jump but
occasionally, while 1 have added to my persuasion the
voices of authority.
I might here leave you to your studies and your
courage, but I think this is perhaps a time when I
may indicate shortly to you some points in the art of
painting and its various parts that may be of advan-
tage to the students, and, at the same time, by
reference to works by Masters in Art, it will be
possible for me not utterly to weary those who
are not students. There are branches of art in
which you are engaged: Still-life, Landscape and
♦
Portrait painting, and there are other branches
of higher importance upon which I hope you will
engage, and towards which I would direct your atten-
tion : Genre, Historical and Allegorical Painting.
Still-life is the artist’s drill ground. Its name is a


contradiction, for life is never still. This section
includes very elementary and highly advanced work,
from a dower pot before a simple background to an
embossed copper pot with a draped background. Here
the student practices drawing, light and shade and
color. If he renders these, then the texture of the
object, and the relationship of each part of the whole
is truthfully rendered, and he passes to more difficult
work. Fruit and dowers belong to this section and
are indnitely more difficult. Many who badly paint
these would be better engaged, and with more surety,
if they grappled with less deeting models, and their
advance would be more rapid and assured.
Landscape.—Can you tell how tl»e sky is built up,
how the trees radiate in their growth, how the moun-
tains have been thrown together, how the hills have
been denuded that they slope towards the level plain?
All these things have a plan. What do you know of
the laws of Nature ? “ Your common painter or


sketcher puts his leaves on the trees as if they were
moss tied to the sticks, he cannot see the lines of
growth or action ; he scatters the shapeless clouds
over his sky, not perceiving the sweep of associated
curves which the real clouds are following as they fly;
he breaks his mountain side into rugged fragments
wholly unconscious of the lines of force with which
the real rocks have x’isen, or of the lines of couch in
which they repose. On the contrary, it is the main
delight of the great draughtsman to trace these laws
of government; and his tendency to error is always
in the exaggeration of their authority rather than in
its denial.” Thus the beginners of landscape must
apply their accurate observation to learn afresh from
Nature of sea and sky, of trees and rocks, of land and
rivers, and of these last Kuskin has inimitably
written—“ All rivers, small or large, agree in one
character, they like to lean a little on one side; they
cannot bear to have their channels deepest in the


middle, but will always, if they can, have one bank to
sun themselves upon and another to get cool under ;
one shingly shore to play over, where they may be
shallow, and foolish and child-like, and another steep
shore, under which they can pause, and purify them-
selves, and get their strength of waves together for
due occasion. Rivers in this way are just like wise
men, who keep one side of their life for play, and
another for work ; can be brilliant, and chattering
and transparent, when they are at ease, and yet take
deep counsel on the other side when they set them-
selves to their main purposes. And rivers are just in
this divided, also, like wicked and good men ; the
good rivers have serviceable deep places all along
their banks, that ships can sail into, but the wicked
rivers go scooping irregularly under their banks until
they get full of strangling eddies, which no boat can
row over without being twisted against the rocks;
and pools like wells, which no one can get out of but


the water-kelpie that lives at the bottom ; but, wicked
or good, the rivers all agree in having two kinds of
sides.” And see how he who illustrated page 620 in
the English Illustrated Magazine for May, 1890, felt
the life of the river and put it into black and white
so that all can see, but only those can read whose
heart has been touched by the truths and aspect of
Nature. The illustrator has given us a sun-clouded
sky over swelling downs, whose feet are wooded and
spread in level pasture, broken in the foreground by
the river’s curve. Yet, the river’s life is fully shown,
though only once its curve appears, and this is how he
shows it: Between the clouds the sun breaks through
in parts, cloud shadows rest upon the far hill. Sun-
lighted is the vale that lies between where the river’s
“first sweet gurgle is heard within the grass,” and so
through lesser vales it flows, receiving tribute, and
passes ’tween the wooded lands wherein the slender
poplar shows its path and the woods lie, part


shimmering in sun-light, in part cloud-covered,
symbol of the showers that full feed the flowing river,
and in the foreground is the ford; the earth cut
through by passing carts and trodden ’neath the feet
of cattle has left its residue of gravel and those
larger stones which choke the river, too heavy for its
gentle currents. These make it garrulous and it runs
in rapid lines, fretful at the hindrance, and passing
sweeps in widening and more gentle curves “to
where, far away, salt and sullied, it rocks on turbid
tides the carriers of the country’s commerce.” These
are some of the larger aspects of Nature towards
which you will move ; continents that you will sub-
ject, and you will more readily subject them province
by province. What then shall you study 1 lam
convinced that you can do nothing better than an
old boat pulled up among the reeds with the water
beyond and the bank in front; or a variegated gum
tree stem with bracken, ferns, or shrubs about it; not


a large one, a small one, not more than a foot thick,
and draw it largely, keeping the brilliancy of its
silvery light, the rich cream orange of its fresh peeled
surface turning green grey in the shadows, and the
whole patched with its old bark in pink and pm'ple
greys, and the deep rich browns and purple madder
stains that ring the tree about its foot. Seek the
hillside that has been cut by the quarry man where
the cutting affords you sweet and diverse color. Co
into gardens. Paint a row or rows of cabbages,
drawing each its portrait ; note the quiet blue greys
in the lights, the cool green greys of shade, and the
rich swimming transparent color of transmitted lights
that are purer than the colors of gems, for they are
unsullied by flicker, unblemished by spot. Great is
the beauty when light shines through leaves and the
whole is emphasised by the purple shadows of rich
brown earth. Draw great marrow and melon plants,
winding recumbent upon the ground with yellow


spheres of fruit. All of these and old fig trees with
stems sucker-clustered, broken fences, heaps of stones,
and the purple and grey green harmonies of thistle
and artichoke are more valuable to us as students
than all the long spread views from distant hill tops.
Avoid the Waterfall Gully or anything that in the
least resembles it, wherein the distance is elaborate,
and the middle distance monotonous with interwoven
hills, and spottily monotonous with isolated trees, and
the foreground mass shattered, shimmering with a
multitude of pendant gleaming leaves. Neither
should you paint simply because of an affection for a
place, but paint that which is a joy, and which it
were a sadness to let pass by.
When at Port Victor or Port Elliot, resolve to
draw a piece of rounded granite —at Port Elliot for
preference—with its variegated stains and lichens,
and do it rightly, getting its complete roundings and
all the carpeting of its varied patterns in true local


color. Never mind the view from the Bluff, though
the sea may be sapphire merging in malachite or
emerald and melting in opal reaches upon yellow
sands, and though West Island shall glint in the sun,
mesembryanthemum covered, as a bunch of gems set
in jewels, and though the distant sea churn in milky
folds against rocky reefs and wall of cliff that rise
purple-shadowed against the pale orange toning up to
mauve that hangs throbbing under the descending
god of day. Leave these for some years. Go to the
green-washed piles of the jetty, study the subtile con-
tours of boats that lie upon the beach, the crab
baskets, and red-rusted anchors, and the tan of drying
nets.
Do the little and do it well, with patient lingering
do it well, and each thing done for itself, and done in
truth, will be annexed unto yourself—a conquest of
the mind—a province added to your possessions—the
victory over which has rendered you fit for higher


efforts, rendered you capable of larger conquests.
And mark you this : In Landscape each will indi-
vidualise ; selection commences, one will select one
tiling, another will emphasise another. Here are the
ever-altering sunlight and the fleeting evanescent
effects of atmospheric changes. The mental bent of
each will be revealed, landscape painting must show
a charm of individuality, which the still-life study can
only show when untruthful.
Portrait Painting. —All the difficulties of the first
sections are present. Instead of sunshine and cloud
we have the mind and spirit of the sitter to present.
Tennyson well suggested the difficulties in these
lines :
As when a painter poring on a face,
Divinely through all hindrance finds the man
Behind it, and so paints him that his face,
The shape and color of a mind and life.
Lives for his children, ever at his best and fullest.
And Ruskin speaks of the greatest portrait painter


“ when Titian or Tintoret look at a human being they
see at a glance the whole of its nature, outside and
in; all that it has of form, of color, of passion, or of
thought; saintliness and loveliness ; fleshly body and
spiritual power; grace of strength, or softness, or
whatsoever other quality, those men will see to the
full, and so paint that when narrower people come to
look at what they have done, everyone may, if he
choose, find his own special pleasure in the work.
The sensualist will find sensuality in Titian, the
thinker will find thought; the saint, sanctity; the
colorist, color; the anatomist, form ; and yet the
picture will not be a popular one in the full sense,
for none of these narrower people will find their
special taste so alone consulted as that the qualities
which would ensure their gratification shall be sifted
or separated from others ; they are checked by the
presence of the other qualities w r hich ensure the
gratification of other men Nobody


cares much at heart about Titian ; only there is a
strange undercurrent of everlasting murmur about
his name, which means the deep consent of all great
men that he is greater than they.”
And now, for those branches of art upon which
we are at present not much engaged, and upon which
I can direct you by the example of others : Genre,
History and Allegory.
Genre is a work in which the predominant note is
a figure or figures engaged in ordinary occupation.
These may be allied with Still-life, as in “ Rest after
the Bath,” by L. Blanc, “ The Mother’s Return
Home,” by W. Roegge; “ A Birthday Present,” by
R. Warth Muller; “ Sketching a Bust, time of
Louis XV.,” by J. Ceriez; or the figures may be
allied with landscape, as in “ Worse Things Happen
at Sea,” by J. C. Dollman, R.I; or with architecture,
as in “ Avant la Procession,” by V. Chevilliard ; or
“ Prayer,” by L. Nono. The difference between


Historical and Genre merely consists in the import-
ance of the event. The “ Favorites of Honorius,” by
J. W. Waterhouse, A.R.A., R. 1., and “ Shakespeare
Reading to Queen Elizabeth,” by H. O’Neil, A.R.A.,
are profane history. The “ Descent from the Cross,”
by J. V. Kramer, is religious history. In the pro-
duction of Genre there should be unity of idea
between the figure and its surroundings, and Nono’s
“ Prayer,” in the Gallery, is an excellent example of
this unity, perfectly conceived and executed.
It shows the hour of falling day, a day of storms
and fears, full of fears of wreck and drowning,
crowded with the worst fears, lonesome fears, not
encountered in the turmoil of the peril and the
excitement of the danger, but encountered in the
silent house, solitary, accentuated by the great mis-
givings of an acute fancy ; helpless to help the loved
one who is wave-tossed by the rushing winds that
have roughly torn and scattered the hardy hanging


leaves of autumn. She, the girl wife, has left the
lonely house and come out into the wind-swept streets,
and has reached the fishers’ landing place, closed by a
balustrade, crowned by Saints and the figure of the
Blessed Virgin, before whom hangs a little lighted
lamp and the floral decorations of the pious. She has
cast herself upon the pavement, a human leaf among
the scattered leaves of storm-tossed Nature. Thus
she knelt, and backward slipped the shawl and
forward fell the head as she crouched, borne lower by
the sad dull heart within. Her head downcast with
trouble, her heart heavy with fears, speechless she
begs, but cannot look. The wind still plays about
her, still the leaves are driven, but from out the veil
of that last shower passing southward there comes,
unseen by her, a light along the western sky, a tear-
stained radiance, light of sunshine after rain, against
which the patched and ruddy sail is being lowered as
the boat, returning, glides ’long side the quay, and


prayer unspoken is answered to the uttermost. Thus
it is possible in Genre painting to strike a chord
sweet and pure that throbing through all the picture’s
varying harmonies doth stamp as genius the work of
man.
And lastly, Allegory, in which a picture parable is
expressed by means of symbols—a class of work
usually uncared for.
In early days the savage viewed with superstitious
awe all things he did not comprehend and wisely left
them alone. In these days most of us assume a high
position, and look contemptuously at all things that
are beyond our range ; others, who have some faith
in human kind, and not doubting but that an artist
produces what he understands, enquire, hoping to
find the truth.
What is a symbol 1 It is an object to which is
affixed some arbitrary meaning other than its common
one. The lion is a symbol of courage. The crane is


a symbol of longevity in Japan. It is also the crest
of a family whose divisions have necessitated certain
alterations whereby its separate branches might be
recognised as cranes, yet easily distinguished one from
another. Thus a symbol may be simple or it may be
involved. The New Zealand Chief’s staff is topped
with an enormous protruding tongue covered with
elaborate carved scroll-work. Whence comes this
device? The Maori warriors, as well as our small
boys, protrude their tongue to indicate contempt,
defiance. The cultivation of this accomplishment is
an important part of the warriors’ training. The
mere pointing of the upper end of such a staff would
be sufficiently expressive. The chief, as the all
powerful, could be the most defiant and contemptuous
and the carved protruding tongue was his symbol of
authority. The crossed lines in blue pencil upon a
registered letter are the symbol of security; the
letter was originally secured by colored string before


the days of adhesive envelopes. Special red and
white string tied in a special manner and having a
small folded paper containing a little piece of fish
skin inserted under the string is, in Japan, a symbol
that the parcel so secured and labelled contains a
gift. The fish skin is a survival from early times
when presents consisted usually of gifts of food. In
later times it has been found convenient to have
wrappers or envelopes on which the symbolic string
binding and the fish skin in its paper fold are repre-
sented painted in color. The painted ornament is a
symbol or token that the contents of the envelope are
a gift. The realisation of a symbol will assist us in
the explanation of an allegory, the most difficult of
all subjects to paint. The mental condition has to be
represented by human forms and symbols. It is
quite possible for a man of much learning and noble
thought to paint allegory that a lesser intelligence
would fail to grasp. Thus the highest art generally


appeals to a small and intelligent audience, and is
cried down by the crowd.
Of such is “ Destiny.”
There are three figures in the picture. Two lovers
flower-crowned, and a third in human form who is
the symbol of that inner power which, when aroused,
either stirs the one awakened to action and reprieve
or sinks him in deeper sleep, more closely coiled
within the habit of his failing. The lovers are not
really sitting in a lonesome landscape before a vacant
sea; these are used as symbols to express the earth’s
decadence caused by continuous neglect.
With this premise I see in the picture: Two
humans fraught with naught of ill, have fallen aside
from doing well. Two humans spending youthful
hours given wherein to found habits of work and a
higher life, that they, their kin and people, struggling
to advance and walk through deeds of strenuous
thought or toil, might raise a province and make the


country of their labor the richer for their lives, and
uncondemn to barren nakedness born of unproductive
rest. Time spent in pleasure’s dalliance achieveth
nought, makes none the richer, wiser, or the better.
Thus lived these two within their earth and thus the
garden of their lives produced no flowers, but weeds
of long neglected growth, and thus the bay of yonder
sea bears neither ships to carry from nor bring to
them the wealth of nations. Thus lived they, flower-
crowned, and passed the time in gentle wastefulness,
harmonious with the strings of lyre, soothed by the
voice of song. Their “ moments melt in gentle
wantonness, and toil, ambition, duty are forgot,” and
the country poorer grows, for he who nought createth
destroyeth much and weakeneth ever. But there
“ comes the inevitable, sternly beneficent, urging us
on,” and the inward power lifts man’s soul free of
the error of inaction. This is the crux of the artist’s
representation : The awakening of two minds from


slothful ease —and this awakening could only be
represented by showing the awakener—the resultant
mental strain, the realisation of past follies, the start-
ing up of man to recover lost ground, the sheltering
of the woman ; all these are used to portray an
altered mental condition. Burst upon them has the
surprising knowledge that the past has produced
nothing. The quick energy of the man has found the
answer in spontaneous action of feet and hands. To
err is past; to nobly act at once determined. That
barren plain shall bend with corn and yield the scent
of roses, that sea shall break and bear the produce of
the toilers. That shrouded face of Destiny shall not
saddened be when the great heart of the dutiful
people can look upon her face without surprise.
/ARDOH A PRITCHARD, PRINTERS, GRESHAM RAREST


