

THE AIR MAILS
OF THE BRITISH ISLES
H. STANLEY REDGROVE


“The Air Mails of the British Isles."
By H. S. Redgrove.
Corrigenda
In spite of efforts made to avoid this, a few misprints were
overlooked in checking- the proofs of my book, “ The Air Mails
of the British Isles,” and, in a few instances, fresh information
has come to hand since the book was published. Readers are
asked kindly to make the following corrections :
•J Page 4, line 17 from bottom: for ” R. L. Cheney ” read
“ R. F. Cheney.”
J ~ 18, ~ 7 from bottom: for-” Ist ” September read ” Ist
and 3rd September.”
~ 68, Note: R.A.S. probably would have accepted railway
letters on 20th August, 1934, but none
accepted earlier than 23rd August bearing
the ” 3D PAID ” cachet are known.
Y ~ 88, line 10 from bottom: for “H. C. Harman ” read
” M. C. Harman.”
■Y ~ 95, ~ 12 from top: after “ black ” add “or more rarely
in blue.”
y/ 16 from top: for ” 19th July ” read ” 7th or Bth
July.”
/ 7 from bottom: for “ Cn Ist December ” read
“ In November.”
~ 96, ~ 13 from bottom: for “ 5,000 ” read ” about
5,000.”
v ~ 98, ~ 2 from bottom: for ” 1939 ” read “ 1935.”
J ~ 137, ~ 8 from top: for “ 23rd May ” read “ 22nd May.”
Y ~ 142, ~ 20 from top: for “ 19th July ” read “ 7th or Bth
July.”
y 20 and 23 from top: for ” Services ” read
“ Lines.”
y ~ 143, ~ 10 from bottom: for “ 11th November” read
” Ist November.”
/ 7 from bottom: for “Ist December ” read
“ November.”


National Library of Australia
from the collection of
E. A. CROME






THE AIR MAILS
OF THE
BRITISH ISLES


PLATE 1
Frontispiece.
Cover flown by Great Western Railway on 15 May, 1933, from Cardiff
to Plymouth, signed by the Pilot, F. Dismore.
R.A.S. cover flown by the Company on 21 August, 1934, from Glasgow to
Croydon, bearing postmark of this date.


THE AIR MAILS OF THE
BRITISH ISLES
THE STORY OF THEIR DEVELOPMENT FROM THE
VENTURE OF THE GREAT WESTERN RAILWAY
IN 1933 TO THE OUTBREAK OF THE WAR WITH
GERMANY
By
H. STANLEY REDGROVE, B.Sc., F.I.C.
Member of the Aero-Philatelic Club and of the Air Mail Society
194°
PRIVATELY PRINTED
{Sole Distributors: Messrs. Francis J. Field, Ltd., Sutton Coldfield)


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, ABERDEEN


FOREWORD
BY
SIR WILLIAM LINDSAY EVERARD, M.P.
It is particularly appropriate that Mr. H. Stanley Redgrove
should have chosen 1940 as the date of publication of this
book upon British Inland Air Mails, for it is the centenary
of the introduction by Rowland Hill of the penny stamp in
the British Isles.
The years 1933 to 1940 will go down to all time as the
period during which Inland Air Mail was introduced into
Great Britain. Prior to 1933 there had been no official
authorisation of internal Air Mail, but during these few
years a very serious development has taken place in linking
up not only our larger cities but outlying islands, such as
the Orkneys, Shetlands and the Outer Hebrides, with the
general Mainland services.
When such services were first introduced there were
special Air Mail charges, but by 1939 this rapid acceleration
of postal facilities was carried out at the normal three-
halfpenny charge. Surely a great step to have taken place
in such a short while! It is certain that in the future this
period will be looked upon as being a very important one in
the postal history of our country, and Mr. Redgrove’s patient
and careful investigations on this subject will go down as
an important contribution, interesting not only to those who
may collect Air Mail, but to those who could wish to know
more about the rapid development that during this period
took place in the carrying of mail.
Ratcliffe Hall,
Leicestershire,
21 st January, 1940.




CONTENTS
CHAP. PAGE
I Introduction i
II Great Western Railway .... 7
111 International Airlines, Ltd. (Western
Air Express) 18
IV East Yorkshire Motor Services, Ltd. . 21
V Provincial Airways, Ltd. (Westcountry
Air Services) 24
VI Portsmouth, Southsea and Isle of Wight
Aviation, Ltd 29
VII Midland and Scottish Air Ferries, Ltd. . 33
VIII “Apex” 36
IX London, Scottish and Provincial Airways,
Ltd 39
X Highland Airways, Ltd. (Normal Air Mail
Services) 40
XI K.L.M. (Royal Dutch Air Lines) . . 53
XII Railway Air Services, Ltd. 55
XIII Hillman's Airways, Ltd.—Glasgow Air
Mail Cachets 78
XIV Isle of Man Air Mails —Blackpool and
West Coast Air Services, Ltd., and
United Airways, Ltd 82
XV Lundy Air Mail 88
XVI R.A.F. Royal Review Emergency Air Mail 97


CHAP. PAG*
XVII Channel Islands Air Mails—Jersey Air-
ways, Ltd., and Guernsey Airways,
Ltd. ....... 99
XVIII Emergency Mail-Carrying Flights of
Highland Airways, Ltd. . . .105
XIX Western Isles Emergency Mail-Carrying
Flights (Northern and Scottish Air-
ways, Ltd.) 109
XX The Shetland Air Mail—Allied Airways
(Gandar Dower), Ltd 112
XXI Eire-Manx Air Mail (Aer Lingus, Teo-
ranta) 117
XXII North Eastern Airways, Ltd. . . .121
XXIII Scottish Airways, Ltd 130
XXIV The Chronology 137
Index 146


ILLUSTRATIONS
Full Page Plates
Plate i. Cover flown by Great Western Railway on
15 May, 1933, from Cardiff to Plymouth.
R.A.S. cover flown by the Company on
21 August, 1934, from Glasgow to Croydon
frontispiece
Plate 2. Private Air stamp issued by International
Airlines, Ltd.
First and second vignettes issued by Highland
Airways, Ltd.
Cover flown by Provincial Airways, Ltd., on
26 November, 1933, from Plymouth to
Southampton ... to face p. 26
Plate 3. Back of cover flown from Lundy by Atlantic
Coast Air Services on 31 March, 1936.
Cover flown by Highland Airways, Ltd., from
Stronsay to Kirkwall, on the emergency
flight of 27 January, 1937. . to face p. 90
Plate 4. Cover flown by North Eastern Airways on
3 October, 1938, from Yeadon to Croydon.
Cover flown by Aer Lingus, Tedranta, on
5 June, 1939, from Dublin to the Isle of
Man .... to face p. 124
Illustrations in the Text
PAGE
Fig. 1. Map showing routes of Great Western Rail-
way’s mail-carrying flights of 1933 . . 15
Fig. 2. Cancellation (first type) used by Provincial
Airways, Ltd. ..... 28
Fig. 3. “By Air ” cachet used on copies of (Ports-
mouth) Evening News flown to the Isle of
Wight ....... 32


PAGE
Fig. 4. Cachet applied by Midland and Scottish
Air Ferries, Ltd., at Heston Air Park . 34
Fig. 5. Special Exhibition postmark found on some
covers flown by Midland and Scottish Air
Ferries, Ltd. ...... 35
Fig. 6. Special Postmark used at “ Apex ” Exhibition
Post Office ...... 36
Fig. 7. Cachet applied by the Exhibition Authorities
at the “ Apex ” Exhibition ... 36
Fig. 8. Map showing routes over which mail was
carried by Railway Air Services, Ltd., on
20-21 August, 1934 ..... 62
Fig. 9. Air mail postmark (Type 1) used at London
on mail intended for conveyance by Rail-
way Air Services, Ltd. .... 66
Fig. 10. Air mail postmark (Type 2) used at London
on mail intended for conveyance by Rail-
way Air Services, Ltd. .... 66
Fig. 11. Air mail cachet (Type 2) used at Glasgow
during operation of air mail services by
Hillman’s Airways, Ltd. . . . .81
Fig. 12. Air mail cachet (Type 3) used at Glasgow
during operation of air mail services by
Hillman’s Airways, Ltd. . . . .81
Fig. 13. Lundy Island cancellation (reduced in size)
introduced 1 December, 1938 ... 94
Figs. 14 and 15. Cachets applied by the Company to
first flight covers carried by Guernsey
Airways, Ltd. . . . . .102
Fig. 16. Map showing routes of various Scottish emer-
gency mail-carrying flights . . .107


CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
The developments in aerial transport for mails which have
taken place in recent years all over the world have, very
naturally, excited great interest on the part of numerous folk,
included among whom are stamp collectors, or to give them
their high-brow name, “ philatelists.” Many have left the
field of general stamp collecting to specialise in the collect-
ing of stamps issued for use on air mails, while others have
found it more interesting to collect flown covers —especially
those carried on first flights—and other souvenirs, such as
newspaper cuttings relating to mail-carrying flights, time
tables and propaganda labels issued by air transport com-
panies which carry mail, photographs of machines and pilots,
air mail labels (or “ etiquettes,” as they are called by
collectors), special stationery issued for use on specific
mail-carrying flights—indeed, everything which might be
used to illustrate the development of aerial transport for
mails.
Moreover, this hobby has attracted many persons who
find little to interest them in a mere postage stamp. The
flown cover, it is said, tells a far more interesting and
romantic story, and provides more scope for useful study.
Making a collection of flown covers illustrating the
complete history of the world’s air posts is, however, too
vast an undertaking for any but millionaires. Hence
specialisation has inevitably taken place, and there has come
into existence a body of collectors whose chief interest
centres in air posts which operate or have operated within
the confines of the British Isles.


Prior to 1933, when the Great Western Railway exer-
cised its privilege as a railway company to carry letters not
exceeding 2 oz. in weight for an additional fee of 3d. on its
air service operating in the West of England, there had
been no regular internal air mail service in the British Isles.
There had been experimental services and emergency
services, but the venture of the Great Western Railway
opened a new epoch in the history of the air mails of the
British Isles.
Followed further ventures on the part of other air
transport companies which were suppressed, because they
infringed the monopoly of the Postmaster-General, but
which, perhaps, played their part in spurring on the Postal
Authorities to utilise aerial transport for internal mails.
At the outbreak of the war with Germany in 1939, the
Post Office was using the six following services for the
transport of internal mails, either in place of, or as supple-
mentary to, surface transport:
Railway Air Services, Ltd.: Between Croydon (for
London), Liverpool, Belfast and Glasgow.
North Eastern Airways, Ltd.: Between Perth, New-
castle and Croydon (for London), in the southerly
direction only.
Isle of Man Air Services, Ltd.: Between Liverpool and
the Isle of Man.
Scottish Airways, Ltd.: Between Inverness, Wick
(Caithness), Kirkwall (Orkney), and North Ronald-
shay (Orkney).
Allied Airways (Gandar Dower), Ltd.: Between Aber-
deen and Shetland.
Jersey Airways, Ltd., and Guernsey Airways, Ltd.:
Between Southampton, Guernsey, and Jersey.
Moreover, the Irish Postal Authorities were utilising
the services of Aer Lingus, Teoranta, for a seasonal air mail
service from Eire to the Isle of Man ; and there was in
operation a private air post, not infringing the Postmaster-
General’s monopoly, operating to and from Lundy Island
and the mainland.


Actually, Great Britain is so small a country that, in
general, little saving in time can be effected by aerial trans-
port so far as concerns places which are connected by rail.
The case is otherwise when a journey by sea is involved, and,
as will be seen from the above list, it is mainly in the direction
of linking the smaller islands to the main British Isles that
developments in internal air posts have yielded satisfactory
results.
The full history of these developments has never been
written. This statement is true also of the earlier experi-
mental period, but so far as this period is concerned some
excellent monographs have appeared dealing with specific
mail-carrying flights. Special mention may be made of the
following as particularly useful to students of the subject:
W. E. Hughes: Chronicles of Icarus. Edgware. N.D.
John Pringle, M.D.: Early British Balloon Posts.
Privately printed. N.D.
A. E. Hopkins: A Pioneer British Air Mail, Bath-
London, 1912. Bath. 1929.
Francis J. Field and N. C. Baldwin: The Coronation
Aerial Posts, 1911. Sutton Coldfield. 1934.
Francis J. Field’s British Air Mails: A Chronology of
the Air Posts of Great Britain and Ireland (Sutton Coldfield,
may also be mentioned as a useful work of reference
covering the period 1784 to May, 1935* including
external as well as internal mail-carrying flights.
So far as the period covering the important years 1933
to J 939 — a period of special interest to collectors, since first-
flight covers are more numerous and easier to obtain than
those relating to the earlier period —numerous articles have
appeared in various philatelic and aero-philatelic journals,
and some pamphlets have also been published. With
relatively few exceptions, some of which are specifically
mentioned in the text where acknowledgment has seemed
desirable, these have been written by dealers in flown covers,
and one cannot escape the feeling that, in certain cases at
any rate, they were written as advertisements.
Indeed, in some cases the information given in these


publications is definitely inaccurate and misleading, but it is
only just to state that there are many honourable exceptions.
It is rare, however, for the information given to be as
full and complete as one of a scientific turn of mind would
desire, and a few years ago, having become interested in the
hobby, I determined to make as full and complete a study of
the subject as was humanly possible. As the reseach pro-
ceeded I published accounts of various internal air posts,
both official and unofficial, in several journals, namely,
Stamp Review, The West-End. Philatelist, Stamp Magazine,
and (short notes only) Stamp Collecting, and I was encour-
aged to continue the research by the many congratulatory
letters I received from fellow-collectors who had found my
notes and articles of use and value.
Collecting the information proved a more difficult task
than was at first anticipated. Collectors having specialised
knowledge or specialised collections of internal British air
mail covers have been most helpful, and I must acknowledge
my indebtedness to Mr. Ernest B. Lye (who, indeed, is
responsible for this book having been written), Mr. G. Leigh
Walker, Dr. F. J. Whitelaw, Dr. H. Lawrence Patrick, Rev.
R. L. Cheney, Mr. D. S. Glover, Mr. W. Laird, and others to
whom I apologise for not having mentioned their names.
I believe I made a perfect nuisance of myself to the
officials of various air transport companies in my quest for
full and accurate information which they alone could give.
Many have been most helpful. A few, I regret to say,
oblivious of the important part their companies have played
in making postal history, have apparently adopted the
policy of not answering letters, but of retaining the stamps
affixed to envelopes sent for this purpose.
Postal officials have been extremely helpful and, indeed,
but for their aid several of the chapters of this book could
not have been written, or if written, would have been
worthless.
The war with Germany came before my investigations
were quite complete. However, my good friend, Mr. Lye,
thought that the data I had accumulated should be presented


in the form of a consecutive story, more especially as much
of the information had not been published even in the form
of contributions to the philatelic press. For example, the
full and accurate story of the mail-carrying activities of
Railway Air Services, Ltd., is here told for the first time.
Articles which I have published in the philatelic press
are here republished, but with numerous alterations in form,
and additions and corrections where these appeared to be
necessary. Accounts of the mail-carrying activities of all
other companies which have operated within the British
Isles during the period covered by the book have been
added. These have been made as full and as complete as
possible, but I am only too conscious of the fact that lacunae
occur, lacunae which the outbreak of war renders it now
impossible to fill.
Perhaps a second edition of the book will be called for,
and, perhaps, in the meantime collectors and others who
have the necessary information will help to fill these lacunae.
The needs of collectors of first-flight covers and other
souvenirs have been kept well in mind, and information
necessary for the identification of these covers, and details
suitable for use in “ writing-up ” collections, have always
been given.
A word concerning pilot-signed covers is not out of
season. A first-flight cover signed by the pilot who carries
it is certainly an interesting and attractive souvenir of the
event. But so far as the period covered by this book is
concerned, at any rate in the case of mail carried under Post
Office contract, it seems necessary to emphasise the fact that
this mail is carried in sealed bags. The pilot cannot obtain
access to it until it has actually been delivered by the Post
Office to the address written thereon. It is obvious that in
the case of mail so carried a pilot’s signature in itself pro-
vides no proof whatever that the cover bearing it was actually
flown. Pilots are honourable men and I should be the last
of accusing them of signing covers indiscriminately. But
they are only human and human beings are liable to error.
In certain instances it requires quite considerable knowledge


of postal regulations and, indeed, profound study, to deter-
mine whether a particular cover has been flown or conveyed
by surface transport, and the existence of unflown covers
signed in good faith by pilots, and of covers flown by one
pilot but inadvertently signed by another, should warn
collectors against paying high prices for signed covers on
the grounds that a pilot’s signature provides proof positive
that the particular cover was flown.


CHAPTER II
GREAT WESTERN RAILWAY
In order to understand the history and development of
the internal air mail system of the British Isles during the
period to which this book relates (i 93 11 impera-
tive to bear certain facts of primary importance in mind,
facts which appear frequently to have been overlooked.
First then, it needs to be emphasised that in Great
Britain the conveyance of mail is a monopoly of the Post-
master-General. In the words of the Post Office Guide :
“ Subject to certain exceptions, the Postmaster
General possesses, by virtue of the Post Office Acts,
the exclusive privilege of carrying letters from place
to place, and of performing all incidental services
such as those of collecting and delivering them.”
The principal exceptions are:
“Letters sent by a private friend, on his journey, to
be delivered to the person to whom they are directed;
“ Letters sent by the servant of the sender or by a
special messenger employed by him;
“ Letters concerning goods sent by carrier, such
letters being carried gratuitously and delivered with the
goods to which they relate ; and
“ Packets containing news intelligence, that is, matter
or pictures for publication in a newspaper.”
However, a special concession is made to railway com-
panies. By agreement with the Post Office certain railway
companies are permitted, in order to expedite delivery, to
convey letters not exceeding 2 oz. in weight for an additional
fee of 3d. (4d. in the case of certain places in Northern
Ireland). These letters must be franked with postage
B


stamps in the ordinary way. They are posted by a servant
of the railway company at the town of destination, or
nearest place served by the railway, and are then handled in
the ordinary way by the Post Office. These letters are
known as “ railway letters.”
One other matter of considerable importance in con-
nection with the collection and study of flown covers also
calls for notice. A letter has passed through the post in the
ordinary way, or has been handled by a railway company as
a “ railway letter.” What indications will the envelope (or
cover as it is called by collectors) bear of the journey it
has taken ?
Consider, for example, a letter which has been sent from
Plymouth to Birmingham. If it has been posted in the
ordinary way, the postage stamp or stamps it bears will be
cancelled with the Plymouth postmark of the day it was
handled in the Plymouth Sorting Office, that is, the cover
will bear the postmark of the town of departure. The only
indication the cover will bear of the town of arrival will be
the address inscribed on the envelope; and, although I have
not met with this type of swindle in connection with air mail
covers, it seems desirable to point out that it is not a difficult
matter to remove by chemical means an address written in
ink and to replace it by another.
If, however, the letter has been addressed “Poste
Restante,” it will bear on the back the Birmingham post-
mark of the day of arrival, that is, it will be backstamped.
Postmark plus backstamp provides the best evidence of the
journey a cover has undertaken.
The case will be different if the latter has been sent as
a “ railway letter.” In this event, the stamp or stamps will
be cancelled with the Birmingham postmark of the day of
arrival, that is, the cover will bear the postmark of the town
of arrival. The railway company may or may not place a
mark on the envelope indicating that the letter was handed
in at Plymouth, but in any case, the letter will not bear any
indication of the town of departure applied by the Post
Office.


Now, these remarks apply not only to letters carried in
Great Britain by surface transport, but also to internally
flown mail. On the one hand, there are covers handled
entirely by the Post Office, utilising the services of air trans-
port companies, bearing departure town postmarks, and on
the other hand, covers accepted as “ railway letters ” for
aerial transport, or in the earlier days of the period under
consideration, by various air transport companies which
(illegally) carried mail in a manner perfectly analogous to
that in which “ railway letters ” are carried, bearing arrival
town postmarks.
In the case of the first group, the arrival town may or
may not be indicated by an official backstamp, or a private
mark applied to the cover by the operating company, while
in the case of the second group, the departure town may be
(and in most cases is) indicated by a private mark applied by
the operating company.
G.W.R. Unofficial Air Mail
In 1933 the Great Western Railway instituted a pas-
senger plane service between the City Airport, Cardiff (for
Cardiff and Newport), and Roborough Aerodrome, Ply-
mouth, calling at Haldon Aerodrome, connected by a motor
bus service with Teignmouth and Torquay.
The “ Westland Wessex ” six-seater, three-engined
aeroplane, G-AAGW, and pilot were supplied by Imperial
Airways, Ltd., and there was a service twice daily, Sundays
included, scheduled to operate according to the following
time table:
Cardiff Airport ... dep. 9.15 a.m. 1.45 p.m.
Haldon Aerodrome ... arr. 10.05 » 2.35 »
. dep. 10.10 „ 2.40 „
Roborough Aerodrome arr. 10.35 » 3-°5 »
dep. 11.25 » 3-55 »
Haldon Aerodrome ... arr. 11.50 „ 4.20 „
dep. noon 4.30 „
Cardiff Airport ... arr. 12.50 p.m. 5.20 „


Mr. A. Phillips, a well-known dealer in flown covers,
conceived the idea—which, as events proved, had most
important consequences —of persuading the Company,
which was (and still is) privileged to carry “ railway letters,”
to accept similar letters for conveyance by the air service.
It appears that officials of the Company were not clear
as to the standing of the Company in the matter, but it was
arranged that Mr. Phillips should, as a passenger, carry the
letters on the first flights of 12 April, 1933, the Company
accepting the 3d. fee on each and applying suitable franking.
In the case of covers accepted at Newport and Cardiff,
the franking was effected by affixing to each cover one of the
Company’s large black on green 3d. “ prepaid newspaper
parcel ” labels, which was cancelled by a handstamp. At
Plymouth, copies of this label were not available, and the
covers were handstamped in purple with a doubly-lined oval
cachet reading “ PARCELS DEPARTMENT*/ G.W.R.
PLYMOUTH (NORTH RD.)” around with the date
“ 12 APR 1933 ” inside.
The following covers exist:
Ai. Cardiff to Plymouth. G.W.R. cancellation:
“CARDIFF (General)/ APR 12 1933/ G.W.R.”
enclosed in doubly-lined rectangle, applied in
purple. Postmark: “PLYMOUTH DEVON/
APR 12/ 1230 PM/ 1933”.
A 2. Cardiff to Teignmouth. G.W.R. cancellation as
Ai. Postmark: “TEIGNMOUTH/ 1030 AM/
1933/ DEVON”.
A 3. Cardiff to Torquay. G.W.R. cancellation as Ai.
Postmark: “TORQUAY/ 10 30 AM/ 1933/
DEVON,” with slogan “SHOP/ BY/ TELE-
PHONE ”.
A 4. Newport to Plymouth. G.W.R. cancellation:
large doubly-lined oval, reading “ *PARCELS
DEPT.”/ NEWPORT HIGH STREET, G.W.
14” around, with the date “12 APR 1933”
within, applied in black. Postmark as Ai.


A 5. Newport to Teignmouth. G.W.R. cancellation
as A 4. Postmark as A 2.
A 6. Newport to Torquay. G.W.R. cancellation as
A 4. Postmark as A 3.
A 7. Plymouth to Cardiff. G.W.R. cachet as de-
scribed. Postmark: “CARDIFF/ 1.15 PM/ 12
APR/ 1933”, with slogan “THE TELEPHONE/
SAVES/ TIME AND MONEY”.
AB. Plymouth to Newport. These covers, of which
it is said only twelve exist, I have not seen.
There also exists one cover carried on the round trip.
It should be noted that so far as the journey by air is con-
cerned, A 1 and A 4 are identical, A 2, A 3, A 5, and A 6 are
identical, and A 7 and A 8 are identical. No covers appear
to have been accepted at Torquay or Teignmouth.
Examples of covers signed by the pilot, Capt. Gordon
P. Olley, are known.
The First British Air Stamp
The question was raised of the legality of the Great
Western Railway accepting letters as “ railway letters ” for
conveyance by the Company’s air service as distinct from
passenger train service.
Finally, the Postmaster-General conceded the right to
the Company, and with his permission, the Great Western
Railway issued a special air stamp for franking mail flown
by the Company, in addition to the necessary postage
stamps.
This was the first (and the last) air stamp possessing
semi-official status issued for use in Great Britain.
The stamp, which is of very large oblong format, is pale
blue in colour, printed by a lithographic process on white
wove paper, in sheets of 20, with margins around. They
are perforated 10. The design, by G. Sawyer, shows an
aeroplane, with the value “3D” in blue. Below appears
the inscription in white on blue, “ G.W.R. AIR MAIL.”


In the top left-hand corner each stamp bears a serial
number printed in red.
The printers were Messrs. Waterlow and Sons, Ltd., of
London, and it is believed that about 500 sheets were printed
but exact figures have not been made public. Mr. Leigh
Walker, who has made a special study of these stamps and
has examined a very large number, states that he has not
seen an example bearing a serial number above 9,000.
The statement that has been made that officially the
stamp does not exist mint is incorrect. The Great Western
Railway placed no obstacles in the way of folk desirous of
purchasing mint examples, and these are not very un-
common. The first sheet, commencing with the serial
number “ 0000,” was retained by the Company.
A variety of the stamp exists in which the “ M ” and
“ A ” of “ MAIL ” are joined at the bottom by a serif.
This variety, caused by wearing in the printing process,
occurs only in stamps coming from the fourth row down in
the sheets, that is, stamps whose serial numbers end in “ 3 ”
or “ 8.” The variety begins to make its appearance in the
sheet commencing with the serial number 4,500, but is better
developed in sheets bearing higher serial numbers. After
aerial number 8,000, however, the variety vanishes. This
may suggest that two printings were made, or at any rate,
printings from two transfers. It seems more likely that a
number of sheets were printed and numbered afterwards as
required, the numbering not being effected in exactly the
same order as that in which the sheets were printed.
Good examples of the variety, that is, examples showing
the two letters clearly joined, are not common.
First Official Air Mail
The first official air mail of the Great Western Railway
took place over the route already described on 15 May, 1933,
when the air stamp first came into use.
The pilot on this historic occasion was Capt. F. Dismore,
and flown covers signed by him exist.
Flown covers, on account of their great historic interest,


are much prized by collectors and fetch good prices, though
an attempt appears to have been made to over-estimate their
cash value on the grounds of rarity.
Figures published for numbers carried on the various
stages should be received with caution. These figures do
not, apparently, include those relating to covers sent by
various collectors, as for example, Mr. D. S. Glover.
The following different covers are known to exist:
Bi. Cardiff to Plymouth. G.W.R. cancellation as Ai,
but date reading “ MAY 15 1933 ’V Postmark:
“PLYMOUTH DEVON/ 10.45 AM/ 15 MY/
33 ” .
82. Cardiff to Teignmouth. G.W.R. cancellation as
81. Postmark: “ TEIGNMOUTH/10.15AM/
15 MY/ 33/ DEVON”.
83. Cardiff to Torquay. G.W.R. cancellation as Bi.
Postmark: “TORQUAY/ n 30 AM/ 12 MAY/
1933/ DEVON”, with slogan “SHOP/ BY/
TELEPHONE ”.
84. Plymouth to Cardiff. G.W.R. cancellation :
“PLYMOUTH/ (NORTH ROAD)/ 15 MAY
1933/ G.W.R.”, enclosed in doubly-lined rect-
angle, applied in black. 2 Postmark: “CAR-
DIFF/ 1 15 PM/ 15 MAY/ 1933”, with slogan
“THE TELEPHONE/ SAVES/ TIME AND
MONEY ”.
85. Plymouth to Newport. G.W.R. cancellation as
84. Postmark: “NEWPORT/ 2. 4c PM/ ic
MAY/ 1933”.
86. Torquay to Cardiff. G.W.R. cancellation:
“TORQUAY, R. 0./ 15 MAY/ 1933/ G.W.R.”,
I The Company appear to have used two slightly different
handstamps at Cardiff, one with a period after the word “ MAY ”,
the other without.
2 A different type of cancellation is found on some covers,
namely, a trebly-lined oval containing the wording “PLYMOUTH
NORTH ROAD/ *PASSENGER DEPT.*” around, and the
date “ 15 MAY 1933 ” within, applied in green.


enclosed in doubly-lined rectangle, applied in
purple. Postmark as 84.
A limited number (stated to be twenty-five) of round-
flight covers also exist.
It should be noted that so far as the journey by air is
concerned, B 2 and B 3 are identical, and B 4 and B 5 are
identical.
Extension to Birmingham
On 22 May, 1933, the Great Western Railway’s plane
service was extended to Birmingham. The service operated
once daily, Sundays included, according to the following
time table:
Castle Bromwich Aero- a.m. p.m.
drome (Birmingham) ... dep. 9.30 arr. 6.50
Cardiff Airport ... ... arr. 10.40 dep. 5.40
dep. 11.00 arr. 5.20
Haldon Aerodrome ... arr. 11.50 dep. 4.30
dep. 11.55 arr. 4.25
Roborough Aerodrome p.m.
(Plymouth) arr. 12.20 dep. 4.00
The pilot responsible for the first flight of this
extended service was again Capt. F. Dismore, and mail was
carried, flown covers being far more plentiful than are those
carried on the flights of 15 May.
The following different covers, representing stages not
previously effected, exist:
Ci. Birmingham to Cardiff. G.W.R. cancellation:
“ G.W.R./ 22 MAY 33/ BIRMINGHAM/
(G.W.31)”, in doubly-lined rectangle, applied in
purple. Postmark: “ CARDIFF/ 1 PM/ 22
MAY/ 1933”, with the slogan “THE TELE-
PHONE/ SAVES/ TIME AND MONEY”.
C 2. Birmingham to Torquay. G.W.R. cancellation
asCi. Postmark : “TORQUAY/ 1 15PM/ 22
MAY/ 1933/ DEVON”, with slogan “SHOP/
BY/ TELEPHONE ”.


C 3. Birmingham to Plymouth. G.W.R. cancellation
as Ci. Postmark: “PLYMOUTH DEVON/
MAY 22/ 1.30 PM/ 1933”.
C 4. Plymouth to Birmingham. G.W.R. cancellation
as 84, but with date altered to “MAY 22 1933”,
applied in purple. Postmark: “ BIRMING-
HAM/ 8- PM (or 9.15 PM)/ 22 MAY/ 1933”.
Fig. 1
Map showing routes of Great
Western Railway’s mail-carrying
flights of 1933.
(With acknowledgment to “ British Air Mailt.")
✓ t
C 5. Torquay to Birmingham. G.W.R. cancellation
as 86, but with date altered to “ MAY 22 1933
Postmark as C 4.
C 6. Cardiff to Birmingham. G.W.R. cancellation as
A l, but with date altered to “MAY 22 1933”.
. Postmark as C 4.
First Acceptance for and at Newton Abbot
Commencing 17 July, 1933, the motor bus service con-
necting Haldon with Teignmouth and Torquay was diverted


so as to connect also with Newton Abbot, and mail was
accepted for aerial transport by the Great Western Railway
at Newton Abbot and for posting at Newton Abbot.
Souvenir covers were despatched on the day of the first
acceptance at Newton Abbot for flight to Cardiff and Bir-
mingham, and at Cardiff for posting at Newton Abbot. The
covers accepted at Newton Abbot have the G.W.R.air stamp
cancelled with a doubly-lined oval handstamp in purple
reading OFFICE*/ NEWTON ABBOT,
G.W.io around, with the date “JUL 17 1933- within.
The handstamp used for cancelling the air stamp at
Cardiff is of a new and specially interesting type, though I
am uncertain whether it was introduced on this date or at an
earlier date. The cancellation is a special one for air mail
and takes the form of a lozenge containing the wording
‘AIR MAIL/ CARDIFF/ 17 JUL 1933/ GREAT WEST-
ERN RAILWAY ”, and is applied in purple.
At some time during the service a new cancellation was
also introduced for use at Birmingham. This takes the
form of a single-lined circle, reading “—BIRMINGHAM—/
GREAT WESTERN RAILWAY ” around, with the date
within.
Examples of the latter cancellation are to be met with
on covers flown from Birmingham on 27 July, 1933, posted
at Newton Abbot.
The existence on the market of covers either accepted
at or posted at Newton Abbot on the two dates specified,
namely, 17 July and 27 July, 1933, has given rise to the
quite erroneous opinion that Newton Abbot was served only
on these two dates. And the status of Newton Abbot covers
has been further confused by the presence on some covers
flown on 17 July, 1933, of a one-line cachet applied in purple,
reading SPECIAL TRIP I have no definite informa-
tion regarding the status of this cachet, but believe it to be
of private origin. Both these covers and those flown on 27
July also bear, in the same colour, two two-line cachets, one
giving the stage and the other reading “GW RLY/ AIR
SERVICE , of the status of which I have no information.


Last Mail-Carrying Flight
The last Great Western Railway air mail was flown on
30 September, 1933. The plane was fogbound, and only
covers from Birmingham addressed to Cardiff were posted
on the day of despatch.
Thus ended the first regular air mail service operating
with official sanction within the British Isles.
From the financial point of view the plane service was
not a success, but it ushered in a new period in the history of
the development of the postal services of Great Britain, and
represented the first stage in a series of definitely important
developments.


CHAPTER III
INTERNATIONAL AIRLINES, LTD.
(Western Air Express)
It was only natural, perhaps, that after the air mail service
of the Great Western Railway had received official sanction,
other air transport companies, not being railway companies,
and not realising the unique position railway companies
occupy in this country in relation to the Postmaster-
General’s monopoly of mail-carrying, imagined that they
could follow the Great Western Railway’s example and carry
mail on their air services for an additional fee of 3d., posting
the mail on arrival at the plane’s destination to be then
handled by the Post Office in the ordinary way.
The first Company to enter the field was International
Airlines, Ltd., who instituted a service known as the
“ Western Air Express ” between Croydon, Portsmouth and
Southampton, and Plymouth.
The service was poorly advertised and short-lived.
Relatively few covers were carried and none are common.
It has been stated that the service operated for one day
only—a statement typical of much misleading nonsense that
has been written about the air mails of the British Isles.
Covers exist carried on 24, 25 and 26 August, and
1 September, 1933. Covers carried on other dates may exist,
but I have not seen any. The Post Office seems to have
taken no action in banning the mail-carrying activities of
the Company, possibly because they received so little
publicity. The service appears to have collapsed through
lack of support and, unfortunately, it is not possible to give
as full details of it as might be desired.


The Stamps
As a receipt for the air fee and for franking mail, the
Company issued a special stamp.
The stamp measures approximately 1/2" x 2", and is
type set, the inscription, which is surrounded by a frame of
dots, reading “ 1.A.L./ Western Air/ Express/ 3d./ Prepaid
Package It is printed in black on yellow paper, in sheets
of 20, perforated 11 except on margins.
Covers intended to be posted on arrival at the plane’s
destination had, of course, to be franked with ordinary
postage stamps as well.
The First Flight
It was intended that the first flight should take place
from Plymouth on 20 August, 1933, and the Company’s
stamps on covers prepared for this flight were accordingly
cancelled in black with a trebly-lined oval handstamp,
reading “INTERNATIONAL AIRLINES LTD./ PLY-
MOUTH ” around, and “20 AUG. 1933 ” within. It was
then decided to postpone the first flight to 25 August, and
the date on the covers was altered by stamping a “ 5 ” on the
“o” in “20”. Actually, on 24 August, certain of the
directors of the Company decided to fly from Plymouth to
Croydon, and they carried a number of these covers with
them. They were posted on arrival, and bear the Croydon
postmark of 11.0 p.m. of 24 August. On arrival at Croydon,
and prior to posting, an oval receiving cachet was applied,
in the case of some covers, in black to the Company’s stamps.
The oval is much smaller than that of the Plymouth
cancellation and is doubly-lined. The inscription reads,
“INTERNATIONAL AIRLINES LTD/ *AIR PORT
OF LONDON*” around, and “CROYDON/ SURREY”
within. The flight was effected by Capt. W. G. Pudney,
piloting the twin-engined Monospar, G-ACVN.
Other Flights and Cachets
The service was announced to take place thrice daily,
but it is doubtful how far it operated to schedule.


The first flight from Croydon took place on 25 August,
but bad visibility prevented the plane, the twin-engined
Monospar, G-ACJF, piloted by W. V. Creates, from landing
at Plymouth, and it returned with Plymouth mail to South-
ampton, from where the mail was returned to Croydon and
flown to Plymouth the next day. The Company’s stamps
on covers carried on this flight were cancelled with a three-
lined cachet in purple, reading “First Flight/ Fri. 25-8-33./
Croydon.” The same cancellation was used on covers flown
to Croydon on the same date, in some cases accompanied by
the oval receiving cachet used at Croydon on covers flown on
24 August, but applied in purple. These covers bear no
indication applied by the Company of the town from which
they were flown.
The Company appears to have had a predilection for
stamping covers with “first flight” cachets, although a cachet
of this type was not applied to covers flown on 24 August.
A number of covers exist bearing the Company’s stamp
cancelled in black or purple, with the oval Croydon cachet
used as a receiving cachet on 24 August, and also bearing,
in purple, a three-lined cachet, reading “First/ Flight/
26-8-33.” addressed to the Company’s offices at Plymouth
and signed by the pilot, S. W. A. Scott. These covers are
not franked with ordinary postage stamps and did not go
through the post. The lack of a postmark renders it im-
possible to determine the exact date on which they were
flown, unless the Company’s cachet is to be trusted.
Later, two new cachets were used for the first time, so
far as is known, on covers flown on 1 September from Croy-
don to Plymouth. Both cachets were applied in purple.
One, used for cancelling the Company’s stamp, also can-
celled with the oval Croydon cachet in purple, reads “ 17-00
Hours/ 1.9.33.”, while the other is a four-line cachet, reading
“Travel By/ THE/ WESTERN AIR/ EXPRESS.” An
error of the latter cachet exists with the letter “I” in “AIR”
missing.


CHAPTER IV
EAST YORKSHIRE MOTOR SERVICES, LTD.
On i July, 1933, the East Yorkshire Motor Services, Ltd.,
instituted an air ferry across the Humber, operating between
Hedon Aerodrome, Hull, and W altham Aerodrome, Grimsby.
To advertise the service gummed labels were issued,
imperforate, measuring 1 13 1 1 6 " x 2". They were printed in
blue, with a blue frame on a silver background. They bear
the inscription, reading, diagonally upwards, “ HULL-
GRIMSBY/ (PARAGON SQUARE)/ (OLD MARKET
PLACE) ”. Above appears the inscription, “BEUP TO
DATE!/ TRAVEL BY/ AIR FERRY/ 3 TIMES/
DAILY.” and below, “7/- S/ 12/- RET./ IN 35 MINS./
SEAT RESERVATIONS/ SINGLE OR RETURN./
HULL TEL GRIMSBY
36994. 2606.”
In Stamp Collecting for 1 February, 1936, the following
account of the service and the labels appeared by an
anonymous writer:
“ A well-known air mail dealer has shown us a letter
from one of his Yorkshire clients on this very subject
and we take the liberty of publishing the information
contained therein. ‘ Similar to the Sinclair vignette
these blue and silver labels were affixed to all parcels
* and freight carried by this Charter Service. They
served both the purpose of propaganda and a check on
the payment of the rates specified. . . . Therefore
the labels have a status as Semi-Official labels although
not actually used as'a surcharge fee. It will be per-
ceived, however, that their application was a definite


check on payments received. So far as the carrying of
letters was concerned, this was purely experimental and
so far as I know only operated for two or three days
. . . There is no doubt . . . that these labels
have a definite status, although hardly in the same cate-
gory as the 1.A.L., G.W.R., and Provincial Airways,
Ltd. They are, nevertheless, distinctly scarce and will
prove in time, I think, to be the best of the lot.’ ”
As a result of the publication of this story the labels
began to assume an interest in the eyes of collectors which
they certainly never possessed, and high prices were asked
for them, one dealer asking so much as io/- each, in spite of
the fact that the Company supplied them free.
The absurdity of supposing that they were ever used as
a check on freight charges should have been evident from a
mere inspection of them, since they are unnumbered and
bear no figure of value. In fact, they were propaganda
labels purely and simply.
In reply to a question I directed to the Company as a
result of the story published in the journal quoted, I was
informed by the Traffic Manager, Mr. J. B. Wells, “ that
the labels mentioned were issued purely as an advertising
medium, because letters and parcels were not carried on this
service.”
Actually, however, it appears that on 2 November, 1933,
five covers were flown by favour for Mr. D. S. Glover from
Hull to Grimsby, and posted on arrival. They bear the
Grimsby postmark of 12.5 p.m. of the date mentioned. To
decorate the covers, one of the blue and silver labels was
stuck on the back of each. On the back also they bear two
cachets in purple, one reading “ 2-Nov 1933 ”, the other, a
boxed cachet, “East Yorkshire/ Motor Services Ltd.” as
well as the signature of the pilot, Capt. Pierce, in pencil.
On the front, each cover bears a small label printed in brown
on lemon, reading “ HUMBER/ AIR FERRY AND/
CHARTER SERVICES ”, which was possibly cut from a
time table or leaflet issued by the Company.
The machine used on the flight in question was a


De Havilland “ Fox Moth.” A Blackburn Segrave plane
was also used on the service.
The service terminated on 4 November, 1933, and
although the covers mentioned possess a certain interest as
curiosities, it cannot be said that this service played any
significant part in the evolution of the air mail services of
the British Isles.
c


CHAPTER V
PROVINCIAL AIRWAYS, LTD.
(Westcountry Air Services )
The venture of International Airlines, Ltd., dealt with in
Chapter 111, was soon followed by a similar one by Provincial
Airways, Ltd., who operated a plane service between Croy-
don, Southampton and Plymouth. The Company also
undertook to carry mail on the same terms as the previous
Company, and had stamps printed for franking it, and as a
receipt for the additional air fee of 3d.
The Flights
Two mail-carrying flights took place. On 25 Novem-
ber, 1933, S. W. A. Scott piloting the De Havilland “ Moth,”
G-EBZB, flew with mail from Croydon to Plymouth,
stopping at Southampton.
The next day, piloting the same machine, he flew back
with mail, but owing to inclement weather, Croydon was
not reached and Scott descended at Heston.
Collectors who desire to have covers representative of
each stage in their collections have an easy task. Six covers
suffice, namely, Croydon-Southampton, Croydon-Plymouth,
and Southampton-Plymouth, flown on 25 November, 1933,
and Plymouth-Southampton, Plymouth-Heston, and South-
ampton-Heston, flown on 26 November, 1933. But actually
16 varieties of the Company’s stamp exist in flown state, and
to acquire covers franked with all these varieties, and at the
same time showing all varieties of cachets, is much more
difficult.
However, in the opinion of some collectors, the special-


isation thereby made possible renders the covers carried by
this Company among the most interesting of modern British
inland flown covers.
It is true that the mail carrying was of an unofficial,
indeed, illegal, character. After the two flights mentioned
above had taken place the Postmaster-General demanded an
apology from the Company and forbade the further carrying
of mail. On the other hand, there was nothing of a hole-
and-corner character about the venture —it was no secret
“ experiment ” eventuating in the creation of artificial
“ rarities.” The service was adequately advertised, and
collectors and dealers alike had every opportunity to get
what covers they required as souvenirs flown for the fee of
3d. each in addition to postage.
Several availed themselves of the opportunity. The
following figures have been published as the numbers
flown: London to Plymouth, 714; London to Southampton,
343; Southampton to Plymouth, 319; Plymouth to London,
750; Plymouth to Southampton, 553; Southampton to
London, 257.
The Stamps
As already mentioned, to defray the extra charge of
3d. special stamps were used. These were printed by
Messrs. Clarke, Doble & Co., Ltd., of Plymouth, in various
shades of orange and blue, in sheets of four, perforated 11,
and bound up in booklets of five sheets each. The printers
have refused to state the numbers printed.
The stamps show in the upper part a biplane in flight
and the words “PROVINCIAL AIRWAYS Ltd./ WEST-
COUNTRY AIR SERVICE ” in blue, with corner tablets
bearing the value “3D ” in white on orange. The centre
shows, in orange, designs of the Houses of Parliament, a
liner leaving Southampton Harbour, and Plymouth Hoe,
while at the bottom is the inscription in blue, “ LONDON
PLYMOUTH ”.
Five printings of the stamps were made, which may
be conveniently designated printings A, B, C, D and E


respectively. Printing C was supplementary to printing B.
Printing E was made after the carrying of mail by the Com-
pany had been banned, and hence stamps of this printing
have the character of reprints.
The sheets were printed from four stereos clamped
together. Each stereo exhibits certain defects and the
colours of each printing are distinct. It is thus possible to
distinguish between 20 different varieties of the stamp, 16 of
which exist in flown state.
Stamps of printing A are clearly printed in reddish-
orange and light blue. In printing B the orange is less
reddish. In printing C the blue is darker and the wings of
the plane are in more or less solid colour instead of being
clearly lined. The orange varies a little in shade. Stamps
of printing D are still more smudgy in appearance and the
wearing of the stereos is very marked. The orange is dark
and the letter “ d ” in tablets of value is almost obsolete.
After printing A had been made, the stereos were
clamped together in a different order, namely, reading from
the top, 4,1, 3, 2. Hence, sheets of the first printing can be
at once detected by the position of the stamps in which
constant flaws occur. They also differ from sheets of later
printings in two other respects; the marginal edge at the
bottom is much deeper, and in the second stamp from the
top, an orange fleck appears near the wings of the aeroplane
in the top left-hand corner. This fleck of colour, which is
very distinct, was caused by a badly placed screw, and is a
flaw which occurs in no other printing and in no other stamp.
The stamp in question shows another flaw. The tug
on the River Thames lacks a funnel. This flaw is repeated
in printings B, C and D, but in the case of these printings
appears on the bottom stamp.
Another very noticeable flaw takes the form of a white
line in the left-hand tablet of value. This appears in the
bottom stamp of the first printing and in the top stamp in
printings B and C. It is practically obsolete in the case of
printing D owing to the smudgy character of this printing.
Examination through a lens will reveal constant flaws


To face p. 26.
PLATE 2
A
B
c
A. Private air stamp issued by International Airlines. Ltd.
B. First vignette issued by Highland Airways, Ltd.
C. Second vignette issued by Highland Airways, Ltd.
(With acknowledgment to “British Air Mails.")
Cover flown by Provincial Airways, Ltd., on 26 November, 1933, from Plymouth
to Southampton, franked with Co.’s private air stamp —printing C, top stamp
of sheet —showing both types of cancellation used at Plymouth.


in the remaining stamps, which enable any mint or flown
specimen to be completely identified as to printing and
position on the sheet.
The last printing (E) was made from new stereos and
the flaws mentioned were all corrected, although other minor
flaws occur. The colour of this printing is red rather than
orange.
Cachets
The majority of flown covers bear a boxed cachet in
black, reading “ FIRST FLIGHT” in wide sans-serif
capitals, and this cachet is “ official ” in the sense that it was
applied by the Company. In the case of some covers flown
from Plymouth, however, a cachet reading “ WEST OF
ENGLAND AIR SERVICE ” in narrow sans-serif capitals
is met with in place of, or in addition to, the cachet already
mentioned. I feel dubious as to its status.
Cancellations
The air stamp was cancelled by the Company at the
place of departure. Two types of cancellation were used,
both oval in form. The first and commoner type is doubly-
lined and has the words “ PROVINCIAL AIRWAYS/
*LIMITED* ” in the outer oval, and the name of the town,
together with the date, in the centre. This was applied in
black, or more rarely, at Southampton and Plymouth, in
purple. I have not met with the Croydon cancellation in
this colour.
The second cancellation, used at Plymouth only, is
trebly-lined and has the words “PROVINCIAL AIRWAYS
LTD./ PLYMOUTH” in the outer oval, and the date
only inside. This appears to have been an emergency
cancellation, as covers from Plymouth exist bearing both
cancellations, the first one very faint, the second boldly
applied in black, obviously because the first cancellation had
not proved effective.
Covers are also normally franked with a i l / 2 d. postage
stamp, cancelled by the Post Office in the usual manner with


the postmark of the town where posted, that is, the town of
arrival of the plane. A few covers addressed to offices of
the Company do not bear a postage stamp and were not
handled by the Post Office. I have seen a cover which
appears to have gone through the post without a postage
stamp and (accidentally) to have escaped surcharge.
Covers addressed to Plymouth normally bear the
Plymouth postmark of ii.o p.m. of 25 November, 1933.
Covers flown from Croydon to Southampton normally bear
the Southampton postmark of 10.15 P-tn- of the same date,
while those flown from Plymouth to Southampton normally
bear the Southampton postmark of 11.45 p.m. of 26
November.
Fig. 2
Cancellation (first type) used by Provincial Airways, Ltd.
(With acknowledgment to “ British Air Mails.”)
So far as mail from Plymouth and Southampton to
London is concerned, the unforeseen landing at Heston
appears to have created some confusion. As a result, these
covers were not immediately posted. They normally bear
the London S.W. i postmark of 11.45 a.m. of 28 November.
Other postmarks may occur. For example, there exist
a few “ round flight ” covers bearing both the Company’s
Croydon cancellation of 25 November and the Company’s
Plymouth cancellation (first type) of 26 November. The
stamp is cancelled with the Croydon postmark of 12.45 p.m.
of 30 November. This postmark suggests that the return
journey of the covers from Plymouth may have been made
after the conveyance of mail had been banned. On the
other hand, the covers may have been brought to Croydon
and forgotten until the date in question.


CHAPTER VI
PORTSMOUTH, SOUTHSEA AND ISLE OF WIGHT
AVIATION, LTD.
The venture of Provincial Airways, Ltd., dealt with in the
last chapter, was followed by a similar one on the part of
the Portsmouth, Southsea and Isle of Wight Aviation, Ltd.
This Company had instituted an air service for the convey-
ance of passengers and freight between Portsmouth and
Ryde (Isle of Wight), a service which, as its continuance
showed, appears to have met a real need. The journey from
Portsmouth City Airport to Ryde Airport takes only ten
minutes, and represents a valuable saving in time as
compared with the journey by steamer.
The Company planned to carry mail on the same terms
as previous private ventures and issued special stamps (3d.
in value) for franking such mail in addition to ordinary
postage. It has been stated that this was done in ignorance
of the prohibition in force against the private conveyance
of mail, and forty covers, described in detail below, were
flown (twenty in each direction) on the afternoon of 3 Feb-
ruary, 1934, by F/O A. W. Whitta (afterwards appointed
Instructor at the Flying School opened by the British
Government at Hyderabad, India), piloting the three-seater
Fox “ Moth,” G-ACCA. The double journey took twenty
minutes only.
These covers, owing to the fact that so few exist, are
highly prized by collectors, and the Company’s expressed
ignorance of the illegality of their conveyance gives the
covers a status which otherwise they would not possess.
However, flown examples of the second printing of the


stamps and of labels printed for the Company in August,
1934, under the belief, it is said, that with the granting of
a Post Office contract to Railway Air Services, Ltd., their use
would be sanctioned, should be expunged from collections
as purely speculative and devoid of any real interest.
The Stamps
The stamps of the first issue, which are square in format
and of large size, were printed in sheets of four and bound
up in booklets containing five sheets by Messrs. Charpentier,
Ltd., of Portsmouth, in January, 1934.
The stamps are printed in blue and each bears a serial
number in red.
Examples of trial printings in various colours exist and
may have been made for sale to collectors. A second print-
ing was made about the middle of February, 1934.
The design shows Portsmouth City Hall with a plane
in flight, and above appears the inscription “PORTS-
MOUTH - SOUTHSEA/ AND ISLE OF WIGHT
AVIATION Ltd/ AIR FERRY SERVICE ”. There
is no indication of value but, as already indicated, the
stamps were sold at 3d. each.
The stamps of the first printing are numbered 1 to 4,000,
those of the second printing, 4,001 to 8,000. Stamps of the
two printings also differ in perforation. In both printings
the perforation is nj4, but, whereas the stamps of the
second printing are perforated all round, the marginal edges
of the sheets of the first printing are imperforate, except in
the case of the left-hand edge, hence single stamps are
perforated on two or three sides only.
The stamps, or “ essays ” as they should be called, of
the second issue were printed by the same firm, again in
sheets of four bound in booklets each containing five sheets.
The format is oblong rectangular and the design shows
part of the Isle of Wight, with the Needles Lighthouse, and
a plane in flight. The inscription reads “ THE ISLAND
AIR EXPRESS ” above, “ LONDON ” on the left side,
“ISLE OF WIGHT” on the right, and “PORTSMOUTH,


SOUTHSEA & ISLE OF WIGHT AVIATION Ltd”
below the design.
The labels were issued in two different colours, sepia
and pale blue, and are perforated 11/2 all round. “ Rare ”
imperforate varieties have been offered at high prices to the
unwitting.
Flown Covers
The forty covers flown on 2 February, 1934, bear
stamps of the first printing of the first issue, numbered 21
to 60. The stamp is neatly cancelled by the Company’s
cachet, applied in blue at Portsmouth and in purple at
Ryde. The cachet, which is a doubly-lined circle, bears
the name of the Company around, and inside, the wording,
“CITY AIRPORT/ —3 FEB. 1934/ PORTSMOUTH”,
or “ISLE OF WIGHT/ AIRPORT/ —3 FEB. 1934/
RYDE ”.
Covers flown to Ryde bear the Ryde postmark of 8.30
p.m. of 3 February, 1934, those flown to Portsmouth, the
Portsmouth and Southsea postmark of 7.00 p.m. of the same
date.
All covers I have seen are signed by the pilot.
The Portsmouth “ Evening News ”
The private conveyance of newspapers does not infringe
the Postmaster-General’s monopoly, since newspapers are
classed as freight, not as mail.
There have been several, possibly very many, occasions
on which parcels of newspapers have been conveyed by air
in the British Isles during the period covered by this book.
Unfortunately, it has been found impossible to obtain
details of all these flights or, indeed, of any save a very few,
and I cannot, therefore, attempt any systematic account of
them, in spite of their very real interest in connection with
the development of civil aviation.
However, mention may be made of the Portsmouth
Evening News which has on numerous occasions, more


especially during August Bank Holiday week each year and
on Saturdays during August, been flown by Portsmouth,
Southsea and Isle of Wight Aviation, Ltd., to the Isle of
Wight to expedite delivery in the island. The plan is
understood first to have been adopted in 1935, but enquiries
have failed to elicit the exact date of the first occasion when
the paper was flown.
Fi g. 3
“By Air” cachet used on copies of (Portsmouth)
Evening News flown to Isle of Wight.
(With acknowledgment to "Stamp Magazine")
Copies of the paper intended for transit to the island
by air bear a special cachet, applied in bright green. This
shows an outline aeroplane bearing the words “ BY AIR ”
in white. Copies are not scarce, and one of them makes an
interesting addition to a collection of flown covers of the
British Isles.
As a matter of interest, it may be added that the first
occasion on which the proprietors of the paper—Portsmouth
and Sunderland Newspapers, Ltd.—appear to have utilised
air transport for one of their publications, and to have used
the special “ BY AIR ” cachet, was on 27 April, 1934, when
copies of the Football Mail were flown from Portsmouth to
Heston (for London).


CHAPTER VII
MIDLAND AND SCOTTISH AIR FERRIES, LTD.
The action of the Postmaster-General in suppressing the
mail-carrying activities of air transport companies, other
than the Great Western Railway, did not deter Midland
and Scottish Air Ferries, Ltd., from entering the field.
This Company ran an air service in connection with
the British Industries Fair of 1934 between Castle Brom-
wich, Birmingham, and Heston Air Park, London, and
between Castle Bromwich, Birmingham, and Hooton for
Liverpool. Mail-carrying flights from Castle Bromwich
took place on 19 February, 1934, and to Castle Bromwich
the next day. Sqd.-Leader H. G. Malet was responsible
for the flights between Castle Bromwich and Heston, and
C. E. N. Pelly for those between Castle Bromwich and
Hooton.
The Company appears to have been under the false
impression that no infringement of the Postmaster-General's
rights would be committed, providing special stamps were
not issued or used. Mail was carried on each of the four
flights of 19-20 February, 1934, an air fee of 3d. per letter or
card, in addition to ordinary postage, being charged; and
this mail was posted in the ordinary way on the plane’s
arrival at its destination.
The mail-carrying service was then suppressed by the
Postal Authorities.
In place of air stamps cachets were applied to the mail,
a number of different ones being used. lam acquainted
with the following:
(a) On covers flown from Castle Bromwich to Heston,


two cachets appear on the fronts in blue. One is a one-line
cachet, reading “ 8.1. F., B’HAM TO LONDON.” The
other is a trebly-lined oval cachet. Inside appears the date
“19 FEB 1934 Around is the inscription “ MIDLAND
& SCOTTISH AIR FERRIES LTD./ *8.1.F. BIRMING-
HAM.* ”
A reception cachet is met with on the back, applied in
purple. This is a trebly-lined oval cachet of larger size than
the Birmingham cachet. Inside appears the date “19
FEB 1934.” Around is the inscription “MIDLAND &
SCOTTISH AIR FERRIES LTD./ *HESTON AIR
PARK.* ”
Fig. 4
Cachet applied by Midland and Scottish Air Ferries, Ltd.,
at Heston Air Park.
(With acknowledgment to “ British Air Mails.”)
( b ) On covers flown from Heston to Castle Bromwich
appear oval cachets similar to those described above (a) and
applied in the same colours, but with the date altered to “ 20
FEB 1934.” The Heston Air Park cachet appears on the
front, and the Birmingham cachet on the back.
(c) On covers flown from Castle Bromwich to Hooton,
two cachets, both applied in red, are met with. One is a
three-lined cachet, reading “FIRST DESPATCH/ Febru-
ary 19 1934/ BIF TO HOOTON.” The other is a two-line
cachet giving the name of the Company. Some covers also
bear, in blue, the same oval cachet as was applied at Bir-
mingham to Birmingham-London mail, and a similar
cachet, applied in purple, reading “ MIDLAND & SCOT-
TISH AIR FERRIES LTD/ (HOOTON
PARK).* ”


(cL) On covers flown from Hooton to Castle Bromwich
appear cachets similar to those applied to Birmingham-
Liverpool mail (c); but the three-lined cachet reads “FIRST
DESPATCH/ February 20 1934/ SPEKE TO BIF ”, and
both cachets are in purple.
It has been stated that, on the Birmingham-Liverpool
service, 412 covers were flown to Castle Bromwich and 278
to Hooton.
Specially attractive and interesting are flown examples
of special postcards issued at the 8.1. F., Birmingham,
Fig. 5
Special Exhibition postmark (reduced in
size) found on some covers flown by
Midland & Scottish Air Ferries, Ltd.
(With acknowledgment to “ The Aero Field")
bearing the design of a plane and the inscription USE
THE/ AIR MAIL/ THE FASTEST MAIL”. They
were, of course, issued to advertise the official overseas air
mail services, and there is a certain irony in their use on a
private air mail which the Post Office promply suppressed.
Also particularly esteemed by collectors are covers
flown from Heston to Castle Bromwich, posted at the Post
Office inside the Fair and bearing the special Birmingham
8.1. F. postmark of 20 February, 1934.


CHAPTER VIII
“APEX”
During the week commencing 7 May, 1934, the London
International Air Post Exhibition, familiarly known as
“ Apex,” was held at the Horticultural Hall, London.
A post office was opened in the Exhibition and a special
postmark was used for cancelling the stamps on mail posted
at it. This postmark takes the form of a doubly-lined
circle with a pair of wings at the base, and is noteworthy as
representing a departure from the conventional circular
design. The inscription around reads “ AIR POST
EXHIBITION/ LONDON ”, while within, appears a star,
the date, and the London postal district “ S.W.i ”.
Fig. 6 Fig. 7
Special postmark used at the Exhibition Post Office, and cachet applied
to mail by the Exhibition Authorities at the London International Air
Post Exhibition, 1934.
(With acknowledgment to “ British Air Mails.”)
The Exhibition authorities issued propaganda labels
suitably inscribed, showing the Tower Bridge (London) with
an aeroplane in flight over it, and a balloon and a pigeon on
the left. These labels were printed in six different colours,


brown, green, red, orange, blue and purple, and were freely
attached to mail posted at the Exhibition. Special com-
memorative postcards were also issued, and a special
“Apex ” cachet was applied, by request, by the Exhibition
authorities to mail. This cachet shows an enormous aero-
plane in flight over London, with the inscription “ APEX
1934” above, and “LONDON 7-12 MAY” below. A
different colour was used each day, that employed on the
opening day of the Exhibition being yellow.
“ Apex ” Souvenir Pigeon Post
One of the features of the Exhibition was an experi-
mental Souvenir Pigeon Post. “ Pigeongrams ” were
printed for the occasion in blue on very thin “ wing mail ”
paper. They were suitably inscribed, part of the design
being another type of “Apex” cachet of upright rectangular
format. The post operated throughout the duration of the
Exhibition and the pigeons used were supplied by the
proprietors of The Racing Pigeon.
“ Apex ” Autogiro Flight
On the second day of the Exhibition, 8 May, 1934, a
well-known dealer in stamps and flown covers (Mr. John S.
Davis) had flown by autogiro, by permission of the Post-
master-General, a number of specially printed souvenir
postcards, from Hanworth over the route of the Coronation
flights of 19 11, this type of machine being selected because
it had not hitherto been employed in this country for the
conveyance of mail.
The autogiro (G-ACIN) was piloted by R. Brie.
The cards were brought back to the Exhibition after
the flight and there posted, hence they bear the special
Exhibition postmark of the date in question.
The fronts of unflown cards are plain, but flown
examples received a cachet in red showing an autogiro and
bearing the inscription “BY AUTOGIRO/ OVER THE
ROUTE/ OF THE FIRST U.K./ AERIAL POST 1911./
WINDSOR-LONDON.” They are numbered in black


and bear the signature of the initiator. A few were also
signed by the pilot.
On the backs of the cards is printed a picture of an
autogiro and a reproduction of the “ Apex ” label in black.
Attached to the backs of flown examples is a small oblong
rectangular label printed in black on blue and reading,
“By AUTOGIRO G.ACIN/ HANWORTH-WINDSOR-
HENDON-HANWORTH/ May Bth 1934/ Pilot: R. Brie
Passenger: John S. DAVIS/ This card was flown over the
route of the first/ U.K. Aerial Post, with permission of the
P.M.G.”


CHAPTER IX
LONDON, SCOTTISH AND PROVINCIAL
AIRWAYS, LTD.
On 23 May, 1934, the London, Scottish and Provincial
Airways, Ltd., conveyed a special mail at the request of the
Post Office from Nottingham to London. The mail was
despatched from the Post Office Exhibition then being held
in Nottingham, and among the letters carried was one from
the Lord Mayor of Nottingham addressed to the Lord
Mayor of London, while another was addressed to the
Postmaster-General (Sir Kingsley Wood).
The mail was conveyed by a Post Office motor van
from Nottingham to Tollerton Aerodrome miles
distant), loaded into Air Speed Courier, G-ACSZ (which
machine, by the way, crashed at a later date on its way to
Paris), and the plane was flown by Pilot F. Jaques to Rad-
lett, Herts, from where the mail was conveyed to London
by motor. The journey by air occupied 42 minutes.
A flat rate of 4d. per letter was charged, and all covers
I have seen are franked with a 4d. stamp cancelled with the
Nottingham postmark of 2.15 p.m. of 23 May, 1934.
Covers exist signed by the pilot, and certified on the
back as having been flown by the Postmaster of
Nottingham.
These covers are rare.
D


CHAPTER X
HIGHLAND AIRWAYS, LTD.
An extremely important event in the history of the
development of the internal air mail system of the British
Isles took place in 1934, and in this chapter we enter upon a
new phase in that history.
Highland Airways, Ltd., received a contract from the
Post Office for the regular conveyance of first-class mail by
air, no extra fee being charged to the public for letters not
exceeding 2 oz. in weight. This was the first Company to
receive such a contract. For although on certain occasions,
such as during the General Strike of 1926, the Post Office
had had mail flown without making any special charge to
the public, the air mail carried by Highland Airways, Ltd.,
was the first regular service of the type to be instituted in the
British Isles.
The plan was first put into operation experimentally on
29 May, 1934, and commencing on this date, first-class mail
was regularly flown for the Post Office by the Company’s
plane service operating between Inverness and Kirkwall in
the Orkney Islands. The planes also called at Wick
(Caithness), but during the experimental period this stop
was not utilised by the Post Office.
On 1 December the air mail service was put on a per-
manent basis, and commencing on this date all first-class
mail was flown, not only over the whole route, but also to
and from Wick in either direction.
The Post Office’s New Policy
On the latter date the Postmaster-General made an
important announcement to the effect that, in future, all


internal mails would be conveyed by air without extra
charge to the public where a saving in time over surface
transport could be effected and satisfactory contracts
entered into; futhermore, that the use of air mail labels
(or “ etiquettes ”) on inland mails was no longer necessary
or desirable.
In short, the Postal Authorities adopted the policy
that they would transmit internal mails by the method
which, in any particular instance, appeared to be the most
rapid, irrespective of the wishes of the sender. Aerial
transport so far as internal mails was concerned ceased to be
a special method of transport. It was simply an alternative
to transport by road, rail or sea, and no guarantee could be
given that a particular piece of mail would be sent by one
method or another.
This change in the policy of the British Postal
Authorities must be recognised as being in the line of
progress, but for collectors of flown covers it has created
difficulties in differentiating these from unflown ones.
Generally speaking, it is only possible to make the differen-
tiation after careful study of operating companies time
tables and postal regulations relating to the mail in
question. These remarks, of course, do not apply merely
or especially to mail conveyed between the towns served by
Highland Airways, Ltd. They apply to practically all air
services operated by various companies within the British
Isles holding Post Office contracts for tfie conveyance of
mail.
Unfortunately, many collectors of flown covers have
failed to take due notice of the Post Office’s policy and its
consequences, with the result that many collections contain
coyers accepted as flown because of private markings they
bear, but which have never been inside an aeroplane.
The Flights of 29 May and i December
To return from these general considerations to the
story of the mail-carrying activities of Highland Airways,
Ltd.:


On 29 May, 1934, the weather was fine and clear. The
north-bound plane piloted by Capt. E. E. Fresson left Inver-
ness at 10.55 a - m - an d arrived at Kirkwall at 12.25 P- m *
The south-bound plane piloted by F/O E. H. Coleman left
Kirkwall at 2.20 p.m. and reached Inverness at 3.45 p.m.
The north-bound plane called at Wick at 11.50 a.m., and
left at noon, and the south-bound plane called at Wick at
2.50 p.m. and left at 2.52 p.m. But as stated above, no
mail was unloaded or taken on at Wick.
1 December, 1934, was a less propitious day, as the sky
was overcast and there was rain and snow. The north-
bound plane piloted by Capt. E. E. Fresson left Inverness
at 10.18 a.m., reached Wick at 11.03 a.m., left Wick at 11.08
a.m., and arrived at Kirkwall at 11.28 a.m.
The south-bound plane piloted by J. Gordon Hay
(accompanied, I believe, by Capt. Fresson) left Kirkwall at
1.00 p.m., reached Wick at 1.33 p.m., left Wick at 1.38 p.m.,
and arrived at Inverness at 2.35 p.m. 1
The events created great interest in Scotland. The
Company obtained additional profits by the sale of specially
designed souvenir envelopes and of special vignettes which
latter could, if senders desired, be attached to first-flight
covers. The publishers of two Scottish newspapers seized
the opportunity to advertise their journals by distributing
gratis, for use on first and later flights, pleasantly designed
and suitably inscribed envelopes carrying advertising
matter. These may be compared with the advertising
cards used in connection with the Coronation aerial mail
of 1911, which are now highly prized by collectors. Some
privately printed souvenir envelopes were also flown.
The Vignettes
The first vignette is of oblong rectangular format,
measuring i7/g" x 1". It is printed in red, green and
black, shows an outline map of the route with a plane in
flight and bears the inscription, “FIRST AIR MAIL/
1 1 am indebted to the Company for above particulars of
times, weather conditions, and pilots.


HIGHLAND AIRWAYS Ltd./ INVERNESS-ORKNEY
ISLES/ AT ORDINARY/ LETTER RATE 29 MAY
1934 ”•
It was issued imperforate and sold at 2/- for optional
use on covers to be flown by the first flight of 29 May, 1934.
The total printing was 1,250 copies.
First-flight covers without the vignette are fairly
common. Those bearing the vignette are considerably
scarcer. In mint state the vignette is definitely rare.
The second vignette was issued in sheets of six with
margins and is perforated 11. It is of upright rectangular
format, printed in red, ultramarine and black. It shows a
map of the route and bears the inscription, “ FIRST/ AIR
MAIL/ HIGHLAND/ AIRWAYS Ltd/ INVERNESS-/
WICK-KIRKWALL/ AT/ ORDINARY/ LETTER/
RATE/ ist DEC./ 1934”. The names of the towns
served also appear on the map in red.
This vignette was sold at 1 /- for optional use on covers
to be flown by the flights of 1 December, 1934. The total
printing was about 1,000.
Flown covers of 1 December, 1934, bearing the vignette
are considerably less common than plain covers. Mint
sheets of the vignette are extremely rare.
At a later date, I believe in 1936, the Company issued
an imperforate propaganda label of upright rectangular
format, printed in blue and red. Flown covers decorated
by the addition of this label exist. The status of the label,
however, is totally different from that of the vignettes
described above, and its value, whether flown or mint, quite
trifling.
Cancellations
The following list gives the normal times of postmarks
occurring on first-flight covers posted at Inverness, Wick or
Kirkwall, but as mail was accepted at other places for
conveyance on the flights a great diversity of postmarks
exists:


29 May, 1934:
Inverness: 9.10 a.m.
Kirkwall: 1.30 p.m., or earlier.
1 December, 1934:
Inverness: 9.30 a.m.
Wick, for Kirkwall: 10.45 a.m.; for Inverness:
1.00 p.m.
Kirkwall: 12.45 P m -> or earlier.
Many covers were addressed “ Poste Restante.” These
usually bear timed backstamps and are especially attractive,
as the backstamp, if of correct time, provides clear evidence
of flight.
The timing of backstamps on flown covers addressed to
the three towns directly served by the flights is as under:
29 May, 1934:
Inverness: 4.45 p.m.
Kirkwall: 1.30 p.m.
1 December, 1934:
Inverness: 3.45p.m.
Wick, from Inverness: 11.15 a.m.; from Kirk-
wall : 3.00 p.m.
Kirkwall: 12.45 P- m *
The first vignette was not cancelled, though examples
exist on cover with the pilot’s signature written across.
In the case of the second vignette, examples are com-
monly met with in which the vignette is cancelled in purple
or black with a rubber stamp, the cancellation giving the
date and arrival time of the plane, with the word “ Arrival ”
above and the name of the town below. This cancellation
was, I believe, applied by officials of the Company, but they
could have done this only after the mail, which was carried
in sealed bags, had been delivered by the Post Office to the
various addresses written thereon. The arrival times as
given by these cancellations are those already noted in the
section dealing with the flights, except in the case of the
Wick cancellation on covers flown from Kirkwall, which
gives the arrival time as 1.38 p.m.


In the case of the Inverness cancellation, an error
occurs reading “ INERNESS.”
Souvenir Envelopes
The study of the souvenir envelopes issued for use in
connection with the first and later flights of Highland
Airways, Ltd., is rather complex, and for purposes of
simplification the envelopes may be classified into three
groups, namely, (i) Company’s envelopes; (ii) advertising
envelopes; and (iii) other specially printed souvenir
envelopes.
I consider group (ii) to be the most interesting, and
most deserving of the attention of collectors.
The collecting of specially printed souvenir covers is
not free from danger to the pockets of collectors, for there
is nothing to prevent anyone having a few envelopes
specially printed and flown, and thus creating artificial
“ rarities.” Envelopes issued far and wide for advertising
purposes are in quite a different category, and some justi-
fication may be admitted for operating companies issuing
special envelopes to celebrate first mail-carrying flights.
Other specially printed envelopes may be admitted into
collections on the grounds of artistic appeal, but envelopes
of groups (i) and (iii) must not be considered valuable for
the sole reason that they are rare. The larger the number
issued of such an envelope the better its status.
With these preliminary remarks, I pass to a consider-
ation of the envelopes issued for use in connection with the
flights of Highland Airways, Ltd.
Company’s Envelopes
There were two issues of special envelopes by the
Company.
500 envelopes were specially printed for use on the
flights of 29 May, 1934, of which 400 were flown, 200 in
each direction, half the number with, and half without, the
special vignette.


The envelope measures x 5", and is made of white
laid paper. The envelopes were printed after having been
made, so that the flap on the back produced two white lines
running diagonally across the design. This is crudely
printed in black in the bottom left-hand corner and shows
an aeroplane in flight. Above appears the inscription, also
in black, “ First Air Mail to the Orkney Islands.”, and
below, “ Highland Airways Limited, Inverness.”
For the flights of 1 December, 1934, 750 envelopes were
specially printed, of which about 650 were flown. Of these,
about 20 only were flown from Inverness to Kirkwall, and
the rest, in about equal quantities, over the four stages to
and from Wick. None is believed to have been flown from
Kirkwall to Inverness.
The envelope is of the same size as the previous enve-
lope, and made of similar paper. The design, however, is
much more elaborate, and the printing is of much better
quality. The design shows, in red, an outline map of the
North of Scotland and the Orkney Islands, with the route
of the service marked in blue. Across the map, also in blue,
is the inscription, “ TO/ INVERNESS-/ WICK-/ KIRK-
WALL ”. At the top and bottom are blue bands lettered in
white, “FIRST * AIR * MAIL **/ HIGHLAND
** AIRWAYS ** LTD ”.
Advertising Envelopes
Three specially designed advertising envelopes were
issued by the Orcadian and two by the John o y Groat
Journal.
The Orcadian envelopes are made of buff wove
(manilla) paper, and are of ordinary commercial size (5 15 /i 6 "
x 3 9 /i«"). They bear on the left a design of a plane in
flight with appropriate wording. In the case of Nos. (i)
and (ii) below, the advertising matter appears at the bottom
on the right.
(i) Aeroplane in grey and dull green. Inscription
above, “ First Air Mail from/ the Orkney Islands ”in grey.
Inscription below, “ Tuesday, 29th May,/ 1934


”in red. Advertising matter: “ READ THE
ORCADIAN/ The Best and Most Popular Weekly News-
paper/ in the North/ PUBLISHED AT KIRKWALL,
ORKNEY, SCOTLAND ” in grey.
2,000 copies of this envelope were issued and distributed
gratis for use on the first air mail from the Orkney Islands.
Accompanying the envelope was a folded sheet of note-
paper giving details of the service, printed in blue on one
side only.
(ii) As (i), except that the wording above the plane
reads, “First Air Mail to/ the Orkney Islands”, and the
inscription below in red does not appear. There was no
enclosure.
This envelope was distributed gratis to the paper s
subscribers in Inverness and district for use on the first air
mail to the Orkney Islands on 29 May, 1934. Flown
examples are much scarcer than are those of the former
envelope.
(iii) Aeroplane in grey and bright yellow-green. In-
scription above, “Per / Orkney-Inverness/ Air Mail ”, in
bright yellow-green. Inscription below, “ The Orcadian,
BEST FOR NEWS prym tott-c't') AT
EST FOR ADVERTISEMENTS 1 PUBLIS
KIRKWALL, ORKNEY, SCOTLAND ”, in bright yellow-
green.
This envelope was issued for general use in connection
with the Orkney air mail after the first flight had taken
place, and in spite of the numbers used appears to be scarce.
There was no enclosure.
The John o * Groat envelopes are made of white laid
paper and measure 5 16 /i/' x The general layout and
design follows those of the Orcadian envelopes already
described, but the inscription and design are printed in pale
red and green, yellowish-green in the case of No. (i), bluish-
green in that of No. (ii).
The first envelope was intended for use on the first
Wick air mail of 1 December, 1934, the second for general
air mail use.


(i) Aeroplane in green and pale red. Inscription
above, “FIRST AIR MAIL/ FROM WICK”, in green.
Inscription below, “Saturday, ist Dec.,/ 1934
”, in pale red. Advertising matter, “ READ
THE JOHN O’ GROAT JOURNAL./ ‘ One of the Best
Papers in the United Kingdom.’—/ Lord Alness./ ORDER
YOUR CHRISTMAS NUMBER NOW./ Peter Reid &
Co., Ltd., Union Street, Wick, Caithness.”
A considerable number of these envelopes were printed
and distributed gratis. Accompanying each envelope was
a folded sheet of notepaper with details of the service
printed on one side in green.
(ii) Similar to (i), but the type has been re-set and the
reference to the Christmas number of the journal omitted.
Inscription above plane, “INVERNESS WICK/ AIR
MAIL ”, in green. Inscription below, “ Arrives Wick
. . . . 11.5 a.m./ Departs for South, 1.30 p.m.”
In all examples I have seen, the time “ 1.30 p.m.” is
barred out in red and replaced by “ 2 p.m.” also in red.
The publishers think it possible that a few of the envelopes
without the alteration may have been used, but I have
failed to locate an example. There was no enclosure with
this envelope.
Two varieties of the envelope may be distinguished
according to the paper, one being creamy white, the other
dead white.
Other Souvenir Envelopes
I am acquainted with three other types of souvenir
envelopes issued in connection with the mail-carrying
activities of Highland Airways, Ltd. Details follow:
(i) The “ Leonards ” envelope. This is an envelope
made of azure wove paper, measuring 6" x At th e
top, on the left, it bears, printed in dark blue, the inscrip-
tion, “First Orkney-Inverness/ Air Mail/ MAY 29, 1934”.
This envelope was printed by the Orkney Herald
Printing Press for “ The Leonards ’ ” Stores, Kirkwall, and
considerable numbers were sold at y 2 d. each for use on 29


May, 1934. Nevertheless, flown examples do not appear
to be particularly common.
(ii) The “ Cross ” envelopes. These were printed for
use on 1 December, 1934, for sale afterwards to collectors.
The envelopes, which are made of cream laid paper, measure
6" x 3 9 1 1 6 ". The design, placed about centrally on the left-
hand side, shows in black an aeroplane in flight. Above is
a space for an air mail label, and a label is attached to all
examples I have seen, although actually rendered unneces-
sary by the pronouncement of the Postmaster-General
already mentioned. Above this is printed the stage, for
example, “ WICK KIRKWALL ”, also in black.
Below appears in red the inscription, “OPENING OF THE
REGULAR/ AIR MAIL SERVICE BY/ HIGHLAND
AIRWAYS, LTD.,/ BETWEEN INVERNESS,/ WICK
AND KIRKWALL./ Ist DECEMBER,/ 1934”. There
are two bars of black above and below the date.
The appearance of these covers is very neat, but their
chief interest resides in the fact that as they are all addressed
“ Poste Restante ” —the address being printed on the
covers —they are invariably backstamped.
(iii) The Orcadian Caithness envelope. This envelope,
printed by the Orcadian, resembles the previously described
Orcadian envelope, but is devoid of advertising matter.
The aeroplane is printed in grey and brick-red. There is
no inscription above. Below, in pale blue, appears the
wording “Orkney-Inverness/ Air-Mail Service / Exten-
sion to Caithness ”, and below this, in brick-red, the date
“Saturday, December 1, 1934”-
Examples of this envelope, flown on 1 December, i934>
are scarce, but lack the intrinsic interest of the Orcadian
advertising envelopes.
First Acceptance for and at Thurso
Commencing 10 December, 1934, the Postal Authori-
ties utilised the Inverness-Wick-Kirkwall air service of
Highland Airways, Ltd., to accelerate the delivery of mail
posted at or addressed to Thurso (Caithness).


A great deal of mystery surrounded, in the mind of
collectors, what was called the “ Thurso Air Mail,” until in
1937 I took the trouble—which apparently no one had
previously thought of doing—to write to the Company and
to the Postmaster at Thurso, and was thereby easily able to
clear the whole “ mystery ” up. The results of my enquiries
appeared in Stamp Review for November, 1937, under the
title, “ The Thurso Air-Mail Mystery.”
The plan of the Post Office was very simple. The
acceleration was effected by having mail conveyed between
Thurso and Wick by train or omnibus, the mail being trans-
ferred to or from the mail-carrying planes of Highland
Airways, Ltd., at the latter place.
Covers carried to or from Thurso by the accelerated
service are of definite historical interest. They are, of
course, not first-flight covers, but first-acceptance covers.
Unfortunately, the plan did not work quite to schedule
on the day of its introduction.
On 10 December, 1934, the service from Inverness
operated normally. Capt. E. E. Fresson piloting the
S.T. 4-Monospar monoplane, G-ACEW, left Inverness at
10.39 a.m. and reached Wick at 11.19 a.m. Mail for Thurso
was transferred from the plane to the train due to arrive at
Thurso at 12.55 p.m.
Flown covers are not common. An example in my
collection bears the Inverness postmark of 9.30 a.m. of 10
December, 1934, is addressed “ Poste Restante,” and bears
the Thurso backstamp of 1.30 p.m. of the same date.
On the same day two planes left Kirkwall for Wick and
Inverness. Thurso mail was carried by the De Havilland
“Dragon,” G-ACIT, which left at 1.25 p.m., piloted by
J. Gordon Hay. Owing to unfavourable weather conditions
no landing could be effected at Wick. Wick and Thurso
mail was accordingly flown on to Inverness, where the plane
arrived at 3.15 p.m. But owing to the mishandling of a
mail bag the Thurso mail was not sent back until 12
December, 1934.
Flown covers are scarce. An example in my collection


bears the Kirkwall postmark of 12.45 P m - 10 December,
1934, is addressed “ Poste Restante,” and bears the Thurso
backstamp of 2 p.m. of 12 December.
Owing to the fact that very short notice was given of
the accelerated service, no philatelic mail appears to have
been despatched at Thurso in time for the first acceptance.
However, some covers exist, of which I have an example,
bearing the Thurso postmark of 3.15 p.m. of 10 December,
1934, and flown from Wick to Kirkwall the next day.
These covers are scarce.
A Crash
On 8 January, 1935, the north-bound plane, the De
Havilland “ Dragon,” G-ACGK, piloted by F/O E. H.
Coleman, crashed into five feet of water in Moray Firth.
In addition to mail the plane was carrying two passengers,
Mr. and Mrs. Wm. D. Firth, of Harray, a honeymoon couple
who were returning home to Orkney by air. The pilot,
passengers, and mail—the last entirely submerged—were
rescued. The mail was returned to Inverness Head Post
Office, partially dried, and forwarded to destination by next
day’s mail-carrying plane.
This appears to have been the first occasion since the
unfortunate accident to Charles L. A. Hubert in i9 Il[ > i**
connection with the Coronation aerial post, on which a
plane carrying inland mail has crashed, and one of the
rescued covers makes an interesting addition to a collection
of British flown covers.
A number have come on to the market signed, as evid-
ence of their authenticity as “ crash ” covers, by one or more
of the following: (i) the pilot, (ii) the honeymoon couple,
and (iii) the postmaster of the town to which the cover is
addressed, the last signature being the most valuable and
important.
Accelerated Service from Shetland
On Monday, 25 March, i935> an accelerated mail
service between Lerwick (Shetland Isles) and Glasgow and


the South came into operation, in which further use was
made by the Post Office of the plane service from Kirkwall
of Highland Airways, Ltd.
The service operated on Mondays and Wednesdays,
the latest time of posting at Lerwick being 4.15 p.m. On
the Monday service, mail left Lerwick at 5.00 p.m. by
steamer due to arrive at Kirkwall at 6.00 a.m. the next day.
The mail was then flown to Inverness in time to be trans-
ferred to the 3.45 p.m. train to Glasgow, reaching this city
at 9-45 P- m - for delivery next morning. On the Wednesday
service, the mail was despatched by the steamer leaving
Scalloway at 6.00 p.m., due to arrive at Kirkwall at 8.45 a.m.
the next morning, when it was further handled as above.
This service constituted the first official mail service in
the British Isles in which use was made of steamer, rail
and air.
First-acceptance covers bearing the Lerwick (Shetland)
postmark of 4.15 p.m. of 25 March, 1935, addressed to Glas-
gow, have come on to the market, and represent a desirable
addition to a collection because of the mail’s unique char-
acter just mentioned. Unfortunately, not being addressed
“Poste Restante,” they are not backstamped, which fact
detracts from their interest and value.
I have also in my collection a last-acceptance cover
addressed to me personally in South London, and bearing
the Lerwick postmark of 17 November, 1937, the date of
the last operation of the service prior to the inauguration
of the Aberdeen-Shetland air mail service dealt with in
Chapter XX.
# # # #
On four separate occasions, during the years 1936-1938,
Highland Airways, Ltd., have effected special emergency
mail-carrying flights for the Post Office. Details concerning
these will be found in Chapter XVIII.


CHAPTER XI
K.L.M. (ROYAL DUTCH AIR LINES)
On i June, 1934, mail was first carried under Post Office
contract by Koninklijke Luchvaart Maatschappij (Royal
Dutch Air Lines) between England and Holland. The
plane service operated between Liverpool, Hull, Amsterdam
and Rotterdam, but mail was carried only between Hull and
Holland. Commencing 13 August of the same year, mail
was flown by the Company between Liverpool and Holland
as well.
At no time has mail been carried by this Company
from Liverpool for delivery in Hull, or from Hull for
delivery in Liverpool. The Company has played no part
whatever in the development of the internal air mail ser-
vices of the British Isles. Its service, so far as mail carrying
is concerned, has been a purely Continental one, and
mention of the service is made in this book purely because
of the mistaken notion that internal mails have been flown
by the Company.
In reply to a question directed to the General Post
Office, London, the following letter was received by me,
dated 19 March, 1937 :
“ With reference to your letter of the 15th of March,
* lam directed by the Postmaster-General to say that the
air mail service between Liverpool, Hull and Amster-
dam has at no time since its inauguration been used for
the conveyance of inland mails between Liverpool and
Hull.”
This, of course, leaves open the possibility that letters
might have been carried unofficially and posted on the


plane’s arrival at either Hull or Liverpool. In this event,
the covers so carried would bear postmarks of the town of
arrival This is not, however, the case with covers I have
seen described as carried unofficially between Liverpool and
Hull. The covers in question appear to have been posted
in the ordinary way, and thus to have been despatched by
surface transport. The Company’s cachet met with on such
covers appears to be merely an arrival cachet applied to mail
received through the post at the Company s offices to which
the covers were addressed.


CHAPTER XII
RAILWAY AIR SERVICES, LTD.
On 20 August, 1934, an event of great historical importance
in connection with the British internal postal system took
place. Commencing on this date, the Postal Authorities
utilised Railway Air Services, Ltd., for the transport of
internal first-class mails by air.
As already stated in Chapter X, a contract (of an
experimental character) had already been granted by the
Post Office to Highland Airways, Ltd., but whereas the
Inverness-Kirkwall service of this Company had rather a
local character, the mail-carrying activities of Railway Air
Services, Ltd., were fully national, not only London being
served, but also important towns in Scotland, Northern
Ireland, the Isle of Man, the Midlands, the West Country
and the Isle of Wight.
Stationery
Special envelopes were prepared for the parent Com-
pany, Imperial Airways, Ltd., to celebrate the event, and
were sold to the public in immense numbers prior to the
flights. These envelopes, made of thin tough paper,
measure $/% x 334", and bear a design and inscription
priijted in black and blue. The main design is a symbolic
representation of an aeroplane and a railway engine, with
the words “ RAILWAY/ AIR SERVICES ” underneath.
Above this appears a reproduction of the wing type of air
mail label. Below is the inscription in blue, “ FIRST
UNITED KINGDOM/ AIR MAIL BY/ RAILWAY
AIR SERVICES LTD.”
E


Two types of envelopes, differing in the thickness of the
paper, may be distinguished, the thicker paper being less
transparent than the thin.
The envelopes were printed in two operations, and it
would seem that in printing different batches sometimes
the black part was printed first and sometimes the blue,
since errors occur in which either (i) the blue part of the
design and inscription is missing, or (ii) the black part is
missing.
These errors should, perhaps, be classed as “ printer’s
waste.” Nevertheless, they are sought after by collectors,
and some were flown. Both types are rare, especially (i),
and both mint and flown examples are rarer than those
which, intended to be flown, actually went by surface
transport.
Of privately printed stationery, mention may be made
of (i) envelopes bearing a design showing an outline map
of the British Isles with the R.A.S. routes marked, used by
the firm of Francis J. Field, Ltd., and (ii) small gummed
labels printed in black on pink for Mr. L. Pitman. These
labels bear the wording “BY/ FIRST AIR MAIL./ (AT
ORDINARY LETTER RATE) ” followed by the stage for
which they were intended to be used, ioo each of these
labels were printed before it was known that special enve-
lopes would be available, and only about 20 or 30 of each
were used.
The British Climate Causes Chaos
Aero-philatelists looked forward to adding pages of
interesting souvenir covers to their collections. But the
British climate intervened and several of the flights
scheduled to take place on 20 August were curtailed or
abandoned.
What, every interested collector asked, had happened
to the souvenir covers? Had they been held up and flown
next day, when the climate was more kind, or had they been
sent by surface transport?
Some covers were certainly held up. One dealer, on


the strength of arrival postage-due postmarks applied to
unfranked covers he had posted, maintained that all his
covers for stages not served on 20 August had received pre-
ferential treatment, and were flown next day. But, seeing
that unfranked correspondence is usually handled in a
special manner by the Postal Authorities, this argument,
to my mind, is very unconvincing.
Undoubtedly, the British climate had given dealers,
who had spent considerable sums in despatching mail, a
very rough deal. Some, to the annoyance of collectors, put
up the prices of covers they considered to have been flown
to recompense themselves for losses on unflown covers.
All, indeed, was confusion, and the situation was
worsened when debate arose as to over what combinations
of stages mail was actually flown when the service did
operate to schedule on 21 August, 1934.
Indeed, some folk were so exasperated that they
destroyed the whole of their R.A.S. covers in disgust. The
hobby suffered a set-back, and R.A.S. covers have never
regained popularity. Nevertheless, to the serious student
of postal history the study of the various R.A.S. mail-
carrying flights and of covers flown by the Company
constitutes one of very great interest, and much of the
confusion could have been obviated by making, at the time,
enquiry at official sources for information. 1
Before, however, proceeding to a consideration of the
events of 20 August, attention must be directed to the mail-
carrying activities of R.A.S. prior to this date, activities
with which few aero-philatelists appear to be acquainted.
1 My own conclusions, as given in this chapter, are based on
(i) a study of the covers in my own collection ; (ii) information
kiftdly supplied by officials at the G.P.O. and other Post Offices,
and by officials of R.A.S. ; (iii) information supplied by Mr. G.
Leigh Walker, who has a specialised collection of R.A.S. and other
British flown covers and has made a close study of them, and
(iv) official correspondence published in The Aero Field for
November, 1938. lam also indebted to Francis J. Field’s pamph-
let on British Inland Air Posts, 1934, though unable to accept
completely his list of flown stages.


R.A.S. Mail Prior to 20 August, 1934
Commencing 7 May, 1934, R.A.S. carried “ single post
letters ” under the special provisions allowing railway
companies to do this on the Liverpool-Plymouth route, the
scene of the Great Western Railway’s venture of the
previous year.
Existing covers appear to be few in number and I have
not seen one. lam indebted to Mr. Leigh Walker for a
description of a cover in his collection, flown from Birming-
ham to Cardiff on 23 July, 1934. On the back it bears an
official buff label, inscribed “ Combined Rail and Air ”,
while on the front it bears a 3d. prepaid railway parcel
stamp.
What Should have Happened on 20 August, 1934
The mail-carrying services planned to operate on 20
August, 1934, were as follows:
(a) A service between Glasgow and Croydon (for
London), via Belfast, Manchester and Birmingham, with a
connecting shuttle service operating between Belfast,
Douglas (1.0. M.) and Manchester.
( b ) A service operating between Liverpool and
Plymouth, via Birmingham, Cardiff and Haldon (for
Teignmouth).
(c) A service operating between Birmingham and
Cowes (1.0. W.), via Bristol and Southampton.
(d) A service, operated for R.A.S. by Norman Edgar,
from Cardiff to Bristol. (Actually, this service comprised,
for passengers, four flights in each direction per day, but,
contrary to a long-standing opinion, arrangements for mail
carrying were restricted to the direction Cardiff to Bristol by
the two flights scheduled to take place as per the time table
below.)
A study of all the time tables is extremely important.
Very few covers bear backstamps, hence a comparison
between the time of posting and that of the plane’s
departure becomes imperative in order to prove status.


The time tables are as follows:
(a) GLASGOW-LONDON a.m. p.m.
Glasgow (Renfrew) ... dep. 9.15 arr. 7.30
Belfast (Aldergrove) ... arr. 10.05 dep. 6.40
dep. 10.25 arr. d. 20
Manchester (Barton) ... arr. 11.55 dep. 4.50
P.M.
dep. 12.10 arr. 4.35
Birmingham (Castle
Bromwich) arr. 12.40 dep. 4.05
dep. 12.45 arr. 4.00
London (Croydon) ... arr. 1.35 dep. 3.10
ISLE OF MAN SHUTTLE SERVICE
A.M. P.M.
Belfast (Aldergrove) ... dep. 10.07 arr. 6.30
1.0. M. (Ronaldsway) ... arr. 10.57 dep. 5.37
Manchester (Barton) ... arr. noon dep. 4.37
(b) LIVERPOOL-PLYMOUTH
A.M. P.M.
Liverpool Airport dep. 8.45 arr. 7.45
Birmingham (Castle
Bromwich) ... ... arr. 9.30 dep. 7.00
dep. 9.45 arr. 6.55
Cardiff Airport arr. 10.45 dep. 5.55
dep. 10.50 arr. 5.40
Haldon (for Teignmouth) ... arr. 11.30 dep. 5.00
dep. 11.35 arr. 4.55
Plymouth (Roborough) ... arr. 11.55 dep. 4.35
(c) BIRMINGHAM-COWES
Birmingham (Castle a.m. p.m. p.m. p.m.
Bromwich) ... d. 9.35 2.15 a. 2.00 6.55
Bristol Airport ... a. 10.30 3.10 d. 1.05 6.00
d- 10.35 3-i5 a. 1.00 5.55


Southampton a.m. p.m. p.m. p.m.
Airport ... a. 11.15 3.55 d. 12.20 5.15
d. 11.20 4.00 a. 12.15 5.10
Cowes (Somerton) a. 11.30 4.10 d. 12.05 5.00
(d) CARDIFF TO BRISTOL (mail-carrying
service only) a.m. p.m.
Cardiff Airport dep. 10.05 12.35
Bristol Airport arr. 10.20 12.50
What did Happen on 20 August, 1934
On 20 August two planes left Glasgow for the South,
the four-engined Diana liner “Mercury,” G-ACVY,
carrying passengers and mails, piloted by Capt. J. H. Lock,
and the Diana liner “ Delphinus,” G-ACPL, carrying
freight only, piloted by E. C. Poole. A call was duly made
at Belfast, but when Manchester was reached, the journey
further south was abandoned and mail for points south w T as
sent on by rail.
At Croydon, the old G.W.R. “Westland Wessex” plane,
G-AAGW, was called into service, and flown by Capt. W.
Armstrong as far as Birmingham. Mail for points north
of Birmingham was sent on by surface transport, except
mail for Liverpool, which was duly transferred to the
machine from Plymouth and flown to destination.
In the evening the “Delphinus” was flown back to
Glasgow and the “ Mercury ” was flown on to Croydon, but
no mail was carried by either plane.
The Isle of Man shuttle service was operated by
Gordon Store, who successfully flew a two-engined De
Havilland liner from Belfast to Manchester, calling at
Ronaldsway Aerodrome, but the return mail-carrying
flight was abandoned.
Hence, so far as the services mentioned were concerned,
the only stages over which mail was flown were:
Glasgow to Belfast, Douglas and Manchester;
Belfast to Douglas and Manchester;
Douglas to Manchester; and
London to Birmingham and Liverpool.


Actually, however, covers flown from Glasgow to the
Isle of Man on 20 August do not exist, as inadvertently all
mail from Glasgow to Douglas was overflown to Manchester
and returned to the Isle of Man by sea.
At Belfast, mail addressed to Liverpool was accepted
for aerial transport. This mail was flown to Manchester
and then railed to destination, and this practice was con-
tinued until R.A.S. instituted a direct plane service between
Belfast and Liverpool on 1 November, 1934.
First-flight covers carried over the above-mentioned
stages are all plentiful, with the exception of covers from
Douglas to Manchester, which are very rare. This rarity is
the result of an error made by R.A.S. officials to whom was
entrusted the job of posting the bulk of the souvenir mail at
Douglas. It was all posted in the afternoon after the plane
for Manchester had left, and bears the 4.30 p.m. postmark.
This mail was held up and flown next day. In conse-
quence, first-flight covers from the Isle of Man to all places
for which air mail letters were accepted, other than Man-
chester, bearing the 4.30 p.m. postmark of 20 August and
flown next day are plentiful. First-flight Douglas to
Manchester covers bear postmarks of 20 August, not later
than 10.00 a.m.
The Liverpool-Plymouth service was successfully
operated in both directions by the late Capt. Rodney
Beresford, flying a De Havilland “ Dragon,” although there
was some delay. It should be carefully noted, however,
that no mail was unloaded at Haldon on the south-bound
journey. Mail addressed to Teignmouth coming from
places other than Plymouth was flown to Plymouth and
returned by rail, hence, from the aero-philatelic point of
view, this mail does not differ from mail addressed to Ply-
mouth. As after 20 August Teignmouth was cut out of
the mail-carrying programme entirely, the only covers
actually flown to and unloaded at Haldon are Plymouth to
Teignmouth covers of 20 August.
On the Birmingham-Cowes route, F/L J. H. Sender
piloting a De Havilland “ Dragon,” left Castle Bromwich


at 10.20 a.m., but in consequence of a gale warning issued
by the Air Ministry he did not proceed beyond Bristol.
Mail for Southampton and Cowes was unloaded at Bristol
and sent on by surface transport. The pilot then flew his
Fig. 8
Map showing routes over which mail was carried by Railway
Air Services, Ltd., on 20-21 August, 1934.
(With acknowledgment to “British Air Mails.")
machine back to Birmingham, carrying Birmingham mail
only. The afternoon service was cancelled.
The connecting service from Cardiff to Bristol was
operated by David Cubitt. Mail was carried in this
direction by the morning plane, but the second (afternoon)
mail-carrying service was, I understand, cancelled.


The following, therefore, is a complete list of the stages
over which mail was flown by Railway Air Services, Ltd.,
on the inaugural day, 20 August, 1934:
Glasgow to Belfast and Manchester;
Belfast to Douglas and Manchester;
Douglas to Manchester;
Birmingham to Liverpool, Cardiff, Bristol and
Plymouth;
London to Birmingham and Liverpool (via Birming-
ham);
Liverpool to Birmingham, Cardiff, Plymouth and
Bristol;
Cardiff to Liverpool, Birmingham, Bristol and Ply-
mouth;
Teignmouth to Liverpool, Birmingham, Cardiff and
Plymouth;
Plymouth to Liverpool, Birmingham, Cardiff and
Teignmouth;
Bristol to Birmingham.
What Happened on 21 August, 1934
On 21 August, 1934, the weather was more propitious,
and the mail-carrying activities of Railway Air Services,
Ltd., operated to schedule. Various lists have been com-
piled of the stages (including combinations of stages) over
which mail was flown. Some of these lists appear to have
been drawn up without reference to the express statement of
the Postal Authorities that air transport would be used only
where an appreciable saving in time over surface transport
could be gained. For example, to have carried mail from
Glasgow to Liverpool by air would have entailed a delay of
over six hours at Birmingham, and the possibility of mail
having been thus conveyed ought never to have been
contemplated.
The following list of stages (including combinations of


stages) is official, and was kindly supplied me by the G.P.O.
Stages flown on 20 August, given above, are omitted:
Glasgow to Douglas, Birmingham, London and Biistol,
Belfast to Glasgow, Birmingham, London, Bristol,
Southampton and Cowes;
Douglas to Belfast, Glasgow, Birmingham, London,
Bristol, Southampton and Cowes;
Manchester to Glasgow, Belfast, Douglas, Birmingham,
London, Bristol, Southampton and Cowes;
Birmingham to Glasgow, Belfast, Manchester, Doug-
las, London, Southampton and Cowes;
London to Glasgow, Belfast, Manchester and Douglas;
Bristol to Glasgow, Belfast, Manchester, Douglas,
Liverpool, Southampton and Cowes;
Liverpool to Southampton and Cowes;
Cardiff to Glasgow, Belfast, Manchester, Douglas,
Southampton and Cowes; 1
Southampton to Glasgow, Belfast, Manchester, Doug-
las, Liverpool, Birmingham, Bristol and Cowes,
Cowes to Glasgow, Belfast, Manchester, Douglas,
Liverpool, Birmingham, Bristol and Southampton.
As already mentioned, Teignmouth was cut out of the
programme after 20 August, and so far as Plymouth was
concerned all stages for which there were acceptances were
flown on 20 August.
It will be noted that, in all, mail was flown over 95
single and combined stages, 28 of which were effected by
Railway Air Services, Ltd., on 20 August, and the remainder
on 21 August. Souvenir covers carried on 20 August,
except Douglas to Manchester, are plentiful. It has,
however, been stated that only 3 lb. of mail was flown on
that date from Birmingham to Bristol, but I have been
unable to verify this statement.
So far as covers flown over routes or combinations of
routes for the first time on 21 August are concerned, these
1 Specialists may like to add “ Cardiff to Birmingham via
Bristol,” as distinct from “ Cardiff to Birmingham direct. Only
the latter was used on 20 August.


included covers posted the previous day at Cowes, South-
ampton and Douglas (4.30 p.m. postmark), which were
postmarked 20 August, but held over and flown the next
day. These covers are plentiful.
It is, of course, possible, in spite of official statements
to the contrary, that some souvenir covers may have been
held over at other places. But I emphatically consider that
no cover should be accepted as flown on 21 August if
bearing a postmark of the previous day, other than a post-
mark of Cowes, Southampton or Douglas (afternoon
postmark), unless the fact is certified by a backstamp, and
backstamps on covers carried by R.A.S. are rare.
Flown covers bearing postmarks of 21 August, 1934, are
difficult to come by, and it may be queried whether a com-
plete set is in existence. The special R.A.S. envelopes
carried on first flights of 21 August and bearing postmarks
of this date are especially rare, as the majority were used up
the previous day. The only stage I have seen is Glasgow to
London, of which an example is in my collection.
The 1 y 2 d. King George Photogravure Stamp
The 1 l / 2 d. King George photogravure stamp was issued
the same day as the R.A.S. scheme came into operation.
However, as the vast majority of covers were stamped in
advance, flown covers of 20 August franked with this stamp
are relatively uncommon. One dealer was sufficiently
enterprising to have a number of envelopes franked with
this stamp flown from Cardiff to Liverpool. The special
R.A.S. envelopes so franked are scarcer. Among interesting
examples which exist are covers flown from Croydon
bearing air mail postmarks, Types 2 and 3 respectively,
referred to below.
Postmarks
As already mentioned, study of the postmarks on
R.A.S. covers is essential in order to determine status.
Special attention should be paid to postmarks on covers
posted at Douglas and at Cardiff. At Liverpool, the bulk


of the souvenir mail was posted late at night on the pre-
ceding day. It was postmarked “ 12. — AM/ 20 AUG/
1934 This ambiguous postmark, which might have given
rise to the question being raised whether the covers were
flown or not, was an error, as I pointed out, on the basis of
official correspondence, in Stamp Review for June, 1938.
The time should have read “ 12.5 AM ”, and covers bearing
Fig. 9 Type 1
Fig. 10 Type 2
Types of air mail postmarks used at London on mail
intended for conveyance by Railway Air Services, Ltd.
(With acknowledgment to “ British Air Mails.”)
the postmark in question were flown if correctly addressed
to places served by the air service from Liverpool on 20
August.
Only at London were special air mail postmarks
employed. Of these, four distinct types are known. By
far the commonest is a small single-lined circle containing
the inscription “ LONDON F.S.” in the upper part, “ AIR
MAIL ” in the lower part, and the time and date in the
centre.
This may be referred to as Type 1.
Types 2, 3 and 4 show double circles, the space between
the circles containing the same wording as in Type 1. The


time and date appear inside the inner circle. “ LONDON
F.S. ” and “ AIR MAIL ” are separated by curved solid
bars. In Type 2, the lettering is of medium size. This
type is uncommon. In Type 3, which is still less common,
the lettering is much smaller, and there is a considerable
gap between the words “ AIR ” and “ MAIL.” In Type 4
the letters are very large, and in consequence the bars
between the words referred to are reduced in size equivalent
to that of a single letter.
The only covers bearing the last postmark which I
have seen are business reply envelopes addressed to Liver-
pool and postmarked 17 August. I think it just possible
that these envelopes may have been held over and flown on
20 August. They bear Liverpool re-direction postmarks of
21 August.
Pilots
The names of the pilots responsible for the first flights
of 20 August have already been given. Those of pilots
responsible for the flights of 21 August are, so far as is
known, as follows:
Glasgow to London: Capt. J. H. Lock (piloting
“ Delphinus ”);
London to Glasgow: Capt. W. Armstrong (piloting
“ Mercury ”);
1.0. M. Shuttle Service: Gordon Store;
Birmingham-Cowes Service: F/L J. H. Sender.
Pilot-signed covers flown by R.A.S. exist and possess
a certain interest. It must, however, be again emphasised
that the pilot’s signature on an R.A.S. cover provides no
evidence that the cover was actually flown, as, since the mail
was carried in sealed bags, no pilot had access to them or
means of identifying covers he flew other than that
provided by their aero-philatelic study. 1
x This may not apply to railway and “railex” letters referred
to below.


Railway and “ Railex ” Letters
The Post Office announced that, commencing 20
August, 1934, the “Railex” system would be in operation
in connection with the R.A.S. air mail. Under this system,
operating on week-days when messengers are on duty, and
still in operation so far as railways are concerned, any Post
Office which is an express delivery office will accept an
unregistered packet, convey it to the appropriate railway
station, and despatch it by the next available train. On
arrival, providing this is during hours when messengers are
on duty, it will be met by a messenger and delivered to the
addressee. The charge for a letter not exceeding 2 oz. in
weight is 2/6. In the case of the R.A.S. air mail service the
plane took the place of a train.
For some totally inexplicable reason, neither dealers
nor collectors, with very few exceptions, appear to have
taken advantage of this service in connection with R.A.S.
first flights. Eight “ railex ” letters were despatched on 20
August by a dealer from Birmingham, addressed to Cowes,
and, according to his own statement, flown to Bristol only.
A few others probably went on other routes.
On 23 August, 1934, Railway Air Services, Ltd., com-
menced again to accept railway letters under the special
provisions applying to railway companies only. As already
noted, a special fee of 3d., in addition to postage, is charged
on a railway letter not exceeding 2 oz. in weight. On
20 August, 1934, the Company introduced the use of a
special boxed cachet containing the letters “ R.A.S.” in a
circle, and reading “3D PAID ” underneath. This was
applied to both railway and “ railex ” letters, and took the
place of the pre-paid parcel labels used on railway and
“ railex ” letters carried by rail.
Railway letters of 23 August, 1934, are extremely
scarce. Again, both dealers and collectors missed a big
opportunity. As things are, one is hampered in the study
of the covers by the lack of available material.
However, I believe that railway letters for conveyance


by R.A.S. were, during the operation of the system,
accepted only at Glasgow, Belfast, Manchester, Liverpool,
and Birmingham.
The special “ R.A.S. 3d. paid ” cachet was applied to
“ railex ” letters accepted at London, but railway letters
were not accepted there. This acceptance was rendered
unnecessary by the fact that it was possible to hand over
letters at the Head Office of Imperial Airways, Ltd.,
London, 30 minutes after the mail had closed at the G.P.O.
This special supplementary mail was postmarked “ WIL-
TON ROAD/ HUDSON’S PLACE/ S.W.i” or “WILTON
RD/ HUDSONS PCE SWi ”, the two types of postmark
differing in size. Both types show the date but, unfortu-
nately, no time. No extra charge was made.
Judging from a study of “ railex ” letters posted at
various dates, considerable confusion appears to have existed
concerning correct franking. According to Post Office
regulations, the covers should bear a stamp only, but
covers franked with stamps to the value of either 2/6 or 2/3,
the balance in the latter case being accounted for by the
R.A.S. cachet, were accepted. Some “ railex ” covers bear
an express label, others do not.
“ Railex ” covers bear the postmark of the town of
departure. Railway letter covers, on the other hand, nor-
mally bear the postmark of the town of the plane’s arrival,
where they were posted. However, railway letters accepted
at Belfast on certain dates (31 October and 1 November,
1934) are postmarked “ BELFAST.” In other cases, one
has to accept as valid the indication of town of departure
written or typed by the sender on the cover. The only
exceptions I have met with are certain railway letters which,
in addition to the R.A.S. 3d. paid cachet, bear the cachet
“LIVERPOOL, LIME STREET” or “BIRMINGHAM
SNOW HILL/ G.W.31 ” in violet.
Regarding the colours in which the R.A.S. 3d. paid
cachet was applied I hesitate to generalise, but apparently
Glasgow and London applied the cachet in black ink,
often so pale as to appear grey, Belfast used bright green or


greenish-grey, Manchester and Liverpool used violet, and
Birmingham black or violet.
Last Flights of 29 September, 1934
On 29 September, 1934, the last mail-carrying flights by
the Isle of Man shuttle service, the service from Cardiff to
Bristol, and the services between Liverpool and Plymouth,
and between Birmingham and Cowes, took place. Some
souvenir flight covers were despatched. A complete set
would include all stages involving one or more of these
routes already given as having been flown on 20-21 August,
stages to and from Teignmouth excluded. But it is doubt-
ful whether all are to be found on the market, and in any
case, last-flight covers have never attained the same
popularity with collectors as have first-flight covers.
It should be noted that, on this day, there was no
afternoon flight from Cowes.
The only R.A.S. mail-carrying service remaining in
operation after this date was that between Glasgow and
Croydon (for London), via Belfast, Manchester and Bir-
mingham, and commencing 1 October, 1934, a new time
table came into operation, the north-bound plane leaving
Croydon in the morning instead of the afternoon. The
new time table was as under :
A.M. P.M.
Glasgow (Renfrew) ... dep. 9.00 arr. 2.45
Belfast (Aldergrove) ... arr. 9.55 dep. 1.50
dep. 10.15 arr -
A.M.
Manchester (Barton) ... arr. 11.55 dep. 11.50
P.M.
dep. 12.15 arr. 11.30
Birmingham (Castle
Bromwich) arr. 12.55 dep. 10.50
dep. 1.05 arr. 10.40
London (Croydon) ... arr. 2.00 dep. 9.45
Covers carried on this date on the north-bound service
are of interest, but to specialists only.


Liverpool Supplants Manchester and Birmingham
On i November, 1934, an entirely new time table came
into operation with important consequences. For the first
time Liverpool was put into regular aerial communication
with Scotland and Ireland, and for the first time also, mail
was flown from Liverpool to Croydon (for London). On
the other hand, the planes ceased to call for mail-carrying
purposes at Birmingham and Manchester.
The main service operated between Belfast and Croy-
don via Liverpool, and there was a connecting service
between Belfast and Glasgow, according to the time table
given below:
Connecting Plane a.m. p.m.
Glasgow (Renfrew) ... dep. 8.20 arr. 2.55
Belfast (Aldergrove) ... arr. 9.35 dep. 1.40
Main Service
Belfast (Aldergrove) ... dep. 9.45 arr. 1.30
Liverpool (Speke) arr. 11.10 dep. 12.05
dep. 11.30 a.m.
p.m. arr. 11.45
London (Croydon) ... arr. 1.00 dep. 10.15
Covers were carried by this service over twelve stages,
namely, Glasgow to Belfast, Liverpool and London;
Belfast to Glasgow, Liverpool and London; Liverpool to
Glasgow, Belfast and London; and London to Liverpool,
Belfast and Glasgow. Relatively little interest attaches to
the stages Glasgow to Belfast and Belfast to Glasgow, but
the stages to and from Liverpool (except London to Liver-
pool) are especially important, as mail was carried on the
date in question for the first time by Railway Air Services,
Ltd., between the cities in question.
Moreover, interest is heightened in covers of 1 Novem-
ber, 1934, and also of the preceding day (when mail was
carried for the last time by air to and from Manchester and
Birmingham), by the fact that dealers and collectors had by
this date awakened to the importance of railway and
“ railex ” covers, and a number were despatched.
F


A Mishap on 31 October, 1934
It is surprising how accidents have happened to Railway
Air Services, Ltd., on aero-philatelically important dates.
On 31 October, 1934, the last day for mail to be transmitted
by air to and from Manchester and Birmingham, the north-
bound plane “ Delphinus ” piloted by Capt. E. C. Poole was
forced to land at Stokemere Aerodrome, Stoke, and mail for
Birmingham was taken out and forwarded to that city by
motor. Souvenir covers of the mishap exist, but are not
common. Mail from London to Manchester, Belfast and
Glasgow was left in the plane and flown later. Mail from
Belfast to Glasgow was flown by the auxiliary service.
No mail was flown north from Birmingham. Railway
letters accepted at Birmingham for Manchester, and
stamped with the R.A.S. 3d. paid cachet, were returned to
sender with the postage stamps uncancelled, and with the
cachets overstamped in violet with the word “ CANCEL-
LED ” in a rectangular frame.
This was the only occasion, so far as I am aware, that
the R.A.S. cachet was so cancelled, and unflown covers
bearing the cancelled cachet are of definite interest to
students of postal history.
The south-bound plane (“ Mercury ”) was delayed at
Manchester. Nevertheless, it eventually completed the
journey, and according to Mr. Leigh Walker, who has
investigated the matter, mail was flown over all scheduled
south-bound stages.
The R.A.S. Contract Ends
On 30 November, 1934, the contract with the Post Office
held by the Company came to an end, and commencing
1 December, 1934, the conveyance of first-class mail between
Glasgow, Belfast, Liverpool and London was entrusted to
Hillman’s Airways, Ltd., whose mail-carrying activities are
dealt with in the next chapter.
Collectors desirous of adding covers carried by the last
R.A.S. flights to their collections should carefully note


that, again, disaster prevented the operation of the service
fully to schedule.
On 30 November, 1934, the north-bound plane was
compelled to land at Birmingham, where mail for the north
was unloaded and sent on by train. Mail from Liverpool
for the north was held at Liverpool pending the arrival of
the plane. However, on landing the undercarriage broke
and the mail had to be sent on by surface transport. No
mail was flown from Liverpool, except that for London.
Belfast to Glasgow mail, however, was successfully flown by
the auxiliary service.
There had been communication between the G.P.O.
and the various post offices concerned regarding railway
letters, and it was decided to discontinue the use of the
R.A.S. 3d. paid cachet on these. However, for some
reason Belfast was overlooked, and railway letters of 30
November, 1934, despatched from Belfast and bearing the
cachet, exist.
Special receiving cachets were applied to certain covers
received by Railway Air Services, Ltd., at London, and by
the London, Midland and Scottish Railway at Glasgow, by
the Companies concerned. It should, of course, be noted
that London to Glasgow covers of this date were, as pointed
out, flown to Birmingham only.
A few very interesting “ railex ” letters exist carried by
the last R.A.S. mail-carrying flight of 36 November, 1934,
from Croydon to Birmingham, railed to Inverness, and
flown to Wick on 1 December, 1934, by the first mail-
carrying flight of Highland Airways, Ltd., to the latter
town.
The New Contract
On 2 December, 1935, Railway Air Services, Ltd., again
commenced to carry mail between London and the north
under Post Office contract, a new contract having been
granted to the Company on the expiry of the contract with
Hillman’s Airways, Ltd.


The time table in operation is given below:
A.M. P.M.
Glasgow (Renfrew) ... dep. 7.50 arr. 1.40
Belfast (Aldergrove) ... arr. 8.45 dep. 12.45
dep. 8.55 arr. 12.35
A.M.
Liverpool (Speke) ... ... arr. 10.15 dep. 11.15
dep. 10.30 arr. 11.00
London (Croydon) ... arr. noon dep. 9.30
The first south-bound flight was effected by Capt. E. F.
Finnegan piloting “ The City of Birmingham ” (G-ACPR),
and the first north-bound flight by Capt. Allen piloting the
“ Mercury.”
Among souvenir covers of these important flights
which exist are covers addressed to the Company’s offices at
the four cities served bearing the Company’s official
receiving cachets. These cachets add to the attractiveness
of the covers but do not constitute evidence that the covers
were flown. This must be judged from the postmark.
Covers were carried on the opening day of the new
mail-carrying contract over nine stages only, namely,
Glasgow to Belfast, Liverpool and London; Belfast to
Liverpool and London; Liverpool to Belfast and London;
and London to Liverpool and Belfast.
The British climate once more interfered with the plans
of the Company and the north-bound flight had to terminate
at Belfast, mail for Scotland being sent on by sea, with the
exception of six “ railex ” covers from London only, which
were held over and flown next day.
The End of the R.A.S. 3D. Paid Cachet
Mail despatched from London for conveyance by
R.A.S. on 2 December, 1935, did not receive special air mail
postmarks. The use of these postmarks on inland air mails
was discontinued with the passing of the contract to Hill-
man’s Airways, Ltd., and was not revived. At the same
time, the “ railex ” system had also come to an end in


respect of air-borne mail, and Hillman’s Airways, Ltd., not
being a railway company, could not accept railway letters.
It was not the intention of the Postal Authorities to re-
introduce the system with the transference of the contract
back to Railway Air Services, Ltd., but no definite
instructions appear to have been issued to postmasters, with
the result that “railex” letters were accepted on 2 December,
1935, at any rate at London (Wilton Road) and at Glasgow.
At London (Wilton Road) six “ railex ” letters for
Glasgow were accepted. The old handstamp for applying
the R.A.S. 3d. paid cachet had been mislaid. Another
handstamp was found, the original use of which I have been
unable to discover, and this was pressed into service. The
cachet, applied in bluish-green, shows a large figure of value
“ 3d ”, with the word “ PAID ” underneath in small, thin
san-serif capitals.
These covers are of quite exceptional interest, not only
because they bear this unusual cachet, but also because they
appear to be the sole remaining souvenirs of the first flight
of the new mail-carrying contract to Glasgow. As already
mentioned, they were held up at Belfast on 2 December and
flown the next day. This was confirmed by a letter of 11
January, 1936, from the Postmaster-Surveyor at Belfast to
the sender, Mr. G. Leigh Walker.
At Glasgow the old R.A.S. 3d. paid cachet was used,
and this cachet was, as a matter of fact,,applied to mail at
Glasgow on later dates. I have an example on a cover dated
3 February, 1936, and believe the last time it was used was
5 February, 1936. On both occasions the cachet was
applied in error. The error was discovered, the cash paid
by the sender refunded, and the letters sent by ordinary air
mail. The cachet, however, was not cancelled.
The Glasgow Exhibition
The holding of the Empire Exhibition at Glasgow in
1938 focussed all eyes on Scotland, and to facilitate the
transport of both passenger and mail Railway Air Services,
Ltd., introduced an accelerated service, operating on and


from 2 May, 1938, until 3 September of the same year. The
acceleration was effected by means of a direct plane service
between Glasgow and Liverpool, whereby the detour to
Ireland was obviated. This service connected with the
main London-Belfast service at Liverpool. An auxiliary
service connected Glasgow with Belfast, where the port of
call was transferred to Belfast Harbour Airport.
The time table of the accelerated service was as under:
A.M. P.M.
Glasgow (Renfrew) ... dep. 8.45 arr. 12.50
A.M.
Liverpool (Speke) arr. 10.20 dep. 11.15
dep. 10.30 arr. 11.05
London (Croydon) ... arr. noon dep. 9.30
On 2 May the pilots and machines were as under:
Croydon to Belfast: Capt. Soundy, piloting “Mercury”
(G-ACVY);
Belfast to Croydon: Capt. Jefferson, piloting G-AEFH;
Glasgow to Liverpool and return: Capt. Glasheen,
piloting G-AEWR;
Glasgow to Belfast and return: Capt. Scadding,
piloting G-AEBX.
As some doubts have been expressed as to whether mail
was carried by the accelerated service, I made express
enquiry of the G.P.0., and was officially informed that all
the services were utilised for mail-carrying purposes.
Unfortunately, however, very few souvenir covers
appear to have been despatched on the opening day of the
accelerated service. To the best of my knowledge, souvenir
covers are limited to about 20 covers despatched on behalf
of a well-known dealer from Glasgow to London. The
covers bear the 6 a.m. Glasgow postmark of 2 May, 1938,
and are decorated with one of the red on white stickers used
to advertise the Empire Exhibition, across which is printed
in black, presumably for the sender, the inscription “ First
Direct Glasgow-London Air Mail.” These covers are now
rare.


Similar covers were prepared and despatched from
London to Glasgow, but by some oversight were posted after
the plane had left Croydon. I “ spotted ” this error as soon
as one of these covers was submitted to me and informed
the dealer that they were not flown. To his credit, the fact
should be recorded that they were immediately withdrawn
from sale.
# # * *
On the declaration of war, the conveyance of mail by air
by Railway Air Services, Ltd., ceased.


CHAPTER XIII
HILLMAN’S AIRWAYS, LTD.—THE GLASGOW
AIR MAIL CACHETS
On i December, 1934, the Post Office contract for the con-
veyance of first-class mail between London, Liverpool,
Belfast and Glasgow passed from Railway Air Services, Ltd.,
to Hillman’s Airways, Ltd., and on this date the first mail-
carrying flights by the latter Company took place. Essex
Airport for London was utilised in place of the Airport at
Croydon.
The north-bound plane used on the first mail-carrying
flight was the De Havilland “ Dragon,” G-ACPN, piloted
by Capt. W. Anderson, D. 5.0., and the south-bound plane
was the De Havilland “ Dragon,” G-ACEU, “ Brentwood,”
piloted by Capt. C. E. N. Pelly.
No special cachets were used and the only method of
identifying first-flight covers is by postmark, which must
be compared with the time table to which the Company
worked, and the address. The time table in force on
1 December, 1934, was as follows:
A.M. p.m.
Glasgow (Renfrew Airport) dep. 8.30 arr. 1.35
Belfast (Newtownards
Airport) dep. 9.30 dep. 12.35
A.M.
Liverpool (Speke Airport) dep. 10.45 dep. 11.20
London (Essex Airport) ... arr. 12.05 dep. 10.00
This time table was in operation until 5 October, 1935,
after which a slightly modified time table came into force,
the south-bound mail-carrying plane leaving Renfrew


Airport at 7.50 a.m., reaching Essex Airport at noon; the
north-bound plane leaving Essex Airport at 9.30 a.m., and
reaching Renfrew at 1.40 p.m.
The covers have never excited great interest on the part
of collectors, largely owing to the facts that the Company
issued no special envelopes and applied no special cachets
to covers carried on first flights.
Pilot-signed covers are fairly numerous. These include
covers flown by one pilot but signed by another, the exist-
ence of which emphasises the worthlessness of a pilot’s
signature as proof that mail, which was carried in sealed
bags, was actually flown.
The Davis Covers
Specially designed covers do exist, but they were
printed for a well-known Liverpool dealer, Mr. John S. Davis,
although it should be noted that the design was approved
by the operating Company.
The envelopes are made of white wove paper and
measure 6 9 /i 8 " x 4". On the right, the envelope bears an
outline map of Great Britain superimposed on which is a
gigantic aeroplane. Underneath appears the inscription
“BY HILLMAN’S AIRWAYS LTD.,/ FIRST AIR-
MAIL,/ LONDON - LIVERPOOL - BELFAST - GLAS-
GOW,/ DECEMBER 1, 1934.” Both the design and
inscription are printed in dark blue. 961 of these special
envelopes were flown.
Reception Cachets
A reception cachet applied in purple is to be met with
on covers addressed to Speke Airport, Liverpool. But this
is devoid of any special significance, as before receiving it
the covers first passed through the Liverpool Post Office, the
bags not being opened at the airport.
Similar remarks apply to other reception cachets to be
met with on mail carried by Hillman’s Airways, Ltd.
Examples I have seen are (i) a boxed cachet, reading


“ ARDS AIRPORT,” with the date “30 NOV 1935” below,
applied in green, on last-flight covers addressed to the Com-
pany s Belfast offices, and (ii) a four-line cachet in very large
type applied in blue, and reading “ Hillman’s Airways,
LTD./ ESSEX AIRPORT,/ Stapleford, near Abridge,/
Essex.” applied to a cover addressed to the Company’s offices
at the airport, flown on 1 February, 1935, by Blackpool and
West Coast Airways, Ltd. (see Chapter XIV), from the Isle of
Man to Liverpool, and by Hillman’s Airways, Ltd., from
Liverpool to Essex.
# # # #
The contract, as indicated in the preceding chapter,
expired on 30 November, 1935, and a new contract was
granted to Railway Air Services, Ltd.
The Glasgow Air Mail Cachets
On 2 February, 1935, during the operation of the mail-
carrying services of Hillman’s Airways, Ltd., to and from
Glasgow, the Postmaster-Surveyor at Glasgow (Lt.-Col. F. N.
Westbury) introduced the plan of applying a special cachet
to incoming air mail in order to popularise the internal air
mail service.
The scheme was short-lived, but during its operation
four distinct types of cachets were employed. A full
account of these, to which I acknowledge my indebtedness,
appeared in Stamp Collecting for 4 January, 1936, by Dr.
H. Lawrence Patrick, who has made a full study of them.
The design of the cachets was adapted from the design
of the current air mail label, wing type.
The cachet of Type 1 shows a pair of solid wings
between the words “ AIR MAIL ”, the whole being enclosed
in a rectangular frame. The stamp applying the cachet was
fitted into the postmarking machine, so as to apply the
cachet at the bottom left-hand corners of envelopes and
postcards arriving by the inland air mail service.
As registered letters are handled separately the cachet


was not applied to them, but a little later (exact date un-
known) a handstamp was brought into use for applying a
similar cachet to registered packets. This cachet (Type 2)
shows a pair of hollow wings between the words “ AIR
MAIL ”, the whole being enclosed in a rectangular frame.
The wording not being considered sufficiently explicit,
a new cachet (Type 3) was introduced on 1 March, 1935, for
Fig. 11 Type 2
Fig. 12 Type 3
Types of air mail cachets used at Glasgow during operation of air
mail service by Hillman’s Airways, Ltd.
(With acknowledgment to “ British Air Mails.”)
use in place of Type 1. This was applied in the same
manner as the type it replaced and differs from it in showing
a pair of solid wings above the words “ BY AIR MAIL ”,
the whole being enclosed in a rectangular frame.
Still later (exact date unknown) a handstamp was
introduced for applying a similar cachet to bulky packages
which would not go through the stamping machine. The
cachet (Type 4) resembles Type 3, but the wings are hollow.
Examples are also occasionally to be met with on registered
letters.
All these cachets were applied in black and examples
of none of the types are very easy to come by, except Type 3.
Owing to the early despatch of the air mail from London,
examples on air mail from Belfast are commoner than
examples on air mail from other places. Examples of
Type 1 are especially scarce.


CHAPTER XIV
ISLE OF MAN AIR MAILS
[Blackpool and West Coast Air Services, Ltd., and
United Airways, Ltd.)
Mail appears to have been flown to the Isle of Man,
unofficially, on a date prior to the commencement of the
period dealt with specifically in this book.
At any rate, registered covers exist bearing the Douglas
(1.0. M.) postmark of 8.30 a.m., 25 March, 1932, Douglas
registration label, and a typed statement on the front reading
“ Carried by Air to Douglas,/ 1.0. M. from Blackpool./ First
Regular flight of/ Amphibious Air Lines Ltd./ Date:
March 25th, 1932./ Pilot’s signature R. M. Monk.” The
date and signature are in MS.
The example in my collection is addressed to the
eminent aero-philatelist, the late Dr. G. W. N. Joseph, but
concerning both the Company and the flight no informa-
tion appears to be available. The covers are undoubtedly
rare, but they have not been boosted by any dealer, nor are
they mentioned in any price list or catalogue so far as I
am aware.
The first official air mail to and from the Isle of Man
was that operated by Railway Air Services, Ltd., between
20-21 August, 1934, and 29 September of the same year.
After the latter date, there was no air mail service to or from
the island until 1 February, 1935.
Blackpool and West Coast Air Services, Ltd.—First
Contract
Commencing 1 February, 1935, first-class mail was
flown under Post Office contract by Blackpool and West


Coast Air Services, Ltd., between Liverpool and the Isle
of Man.
The first mail-carrying flight to the island was effected
by Capt. J. C. Higgins, the Company’s Chief Pilot, piloting
the De Havilland 84 “ Dragon,” G-ACPY. A heavy gale
was blowing, in consequence of which the flight took 95
minutes. Capt. Higgins left Liverpool Airport (Speke) at
8.00 a.m. and did not reach Ronaldsway Aerodrome
(1.0. M.) until 9.35 a.m.
The first mail-carrying flight from the island was
effected by Capt. O. E. Armstrong piloting the De Havil-
land 84 “ Dragon,” G-ACGU. He left Ronaldsway
Aerodrome at 8.00 a.m. and reached Liverpool Airport at
8.55 a.m.
Owing to the early departure of the planes, flown covers
normally bear postmarks of the previous evening.
Crest Covers
Souvenir covers were prepared for an interested person,
who borrowed the die of the Company’s crest for the pur-
pose and, with permission, had the crest printed in black on
the bottom left-hand corner of envelopes of commercial
size, which were afterwards flown.
Of more interest, and considerably scarcer, are flown
examples of the Company’s official envelope (not specially
printed for the occasion), which bears the crest on the flap
in apple-green.
Examples of the latter in my collection are signed, in
the case of the cover flown to the Isle of Man, by Mr. J. W.
Mason, the Company’s Station Superintendent, and in the
case of the cover flown from the island, by the pilot, Capt.
Armstrong, and Mr. Harold P. L. Smith, the Company’s
Traffic Manager.
Cachets
Two cachets are to be found on first-flight covers.
One, a date-stamp reading “ 1 FEB 1935”, applied in
purple, is met with more frequently on covers flown to the


island than on those flown in the opposite direction. This
was the Company’s own cachet, and in that sense “ official.”
It was applied to covers handled individually by the Com-
pany, that is to say, posted by the Company’s servants or
addressed to the Company’s offices.
The other is a six-lined cachet reading, “BLACKPOOL
& WEST COAST/ AIR SERVICES LTD./ First Air Mail/
Liverpool to Isle of Man/ & Isle of Man to Liverpool/ ist
February, 1935.”
This cachet was, I understand, made up by another
interested person and loaned to the Company, who applied
it in purple to covers handled individually as above. lam
doubtful of the status of the same cachet applied in black
or red. Some flown covers bear two examples of the cachet,
in different colours, one in front, the other on the back.
The reception cachet of the Liverpool Airport, men-
tioned in the last chapter, is to be met with on some flown
covers addressed to the Airport, but is devoid of any special
significance, although adding to the attractiveness of covers
which bear it.
United Airways, Ltd.
On 1 November, 1935, the contract was transferred to
United Airways, Ltd., a component of British Airways,
Ltd., and the first mail-carrying flights of the Company to
and from the Isle of Man were effected on this day. The
port of call in the island used was Hall Caine Airport,
Ramsey, and the first mail-carrying flight thereto was
effected by L. T. C. Barber, piloting a Spartan cruiser. I
believe the return flight was made by the same pilot.
Unfortunately, further information about the flights
has proved unobtainable, and the only flown covers which
have come on the market are those which were flown for a
well-known dealer, who, having secured a monopoly,
maintained the price at a high level.
These covers, flown to the island, bear the Liverpool
postmark of 2 a.m., 1 November, 1935, and on the back, the
Douglas re-direction postmark of 2.45 p.m. of the same date.


In front they bear a doubly-lined circular cachet in red
reading, “UNITED AIRWAYS LTD./ ISLE OF MAN”
around, with the date “—i NOV 1935 ” within. I think it
possible that this cachet is “ official ” in the sense defined
above.
Examples exist bearing the pilot’s signature.
The last mail-carrying flights of this Company took
place on 31 October, 1936. Flown covers emanating from
the same source bear a three-lined cachet. This cachet, on
covers flown from the Isle of Man, reads, “ BRITISH AIR-
WAYS LTD./ 1.0. M./ LAST AIRMAIL FLIGHT OCT.
3 1 st 1938 ”, applied in red. A similar cachet appears on
covers flown in the opposite direction.
Examples exist bearing the pilot’s signature.
West Coast Air Services, Ltd.—Second Contract
Commencing 2 November, 1936, the former Company,
which had shortened its name to “West Coast Air Services”,
again undertook the conveyance by air of first-class mail
between Liverpool and the Isle of Man, having received a
new Post Office contract for the purpose.
The first mail-carrying flights of the new contract took
place on the above date. Capt. G. T. Greenhalgh piloting
the De Havilland 84 “ Dragon,” G-ADCP, left Liverpool
Airport at 8.00 a.m., carrying 410 lb. of mail, and reached
Ronaldsway Aerodrome at 8.55 a.m.
Capt. Higgins, piloting the De Havilland 86a,G-ADVK,
effected the flight in the opposite direction, carrying 205 lb.
of mail. The flight was a very good one and took only
half-an-hour. Capt. Higgins left Ronaldsway Aerodrome
at 8.00 a.m. and reached Liverpool Airport at 8.30 a.m.
Cachets
Two different types of cachets were applied by the
Company to first-flight covers handled individually by
them.
One is a doubly-lined circular cachet, reading around,
“WEST COAST/ AIR SERVICES LTD.” Within is a


design of a plane, with the word “ LIVERPOOL ” or “ ISLE
OF MAN ” underneath. This was applied in the case of
the Liverpool cachet in black, and in the case of the Isle
of Man cachet in red. Covers exist with the Liverpool
cachet on front and the Isle of Man cachet on the back.
The other cachet is three-lined, and reads, “ WEST
COAST AIR SERVICES LTD./ ist FLIGHT OF NEW
CONTRACT/ ISLE OF MAN/ AIRMAIL NOV. 2nd
1936.” This was applied in black or red to the fronts of
covers only.
Pilot-signed covers exist.
The Company also used a third type of cachet, three-
lined, and reading, “LIVERPOOL AIRPORT/ SPEKE/
’PHONE GARSTON 64 (DAY AND NIGHT).” but I
have not met with examples on first-flight covers and do not
think it was applied to them.
The Fake Coronation Covers
Some time after the Coronation of His Majesty King
George VI specially designed covers came on the market,
stated to have been flown on Coronation Day, 12 May, 1937,
by a special service from the Isle of Man to Blackpool and
bearing, as authentication of this claim, a signature alleged
to be that of Capt. J. C. Higgins.
The facts are as follows:
(i) At no time has mail been flown direct from the Isle
of Man to Blackpool. 1.0. M.-Blackpool flown mail is flown
to Liverpool only, and railed from there.
(ii) On the date in question, the air mail service from
the Isle of Man was entirely suspended.
(iii) Capt. Higgins did not sign the covers. The
signatures on them are forgeries.
I exposed this fraud in Stamp Review for June, 1938,
and understand that all the faked covers, except some which
may have found their way into the collections of unsus-
picious purchasers prior to my exposure, have been
destroyed.


Isle of Man Air Services, Ltd.
On 26 September, 1937, the contract for conveying
first-class mail by air between Liverpool and the Isle of Man
passed to Isle of Man Air Services, Ltd., a new Company
formed by the amalgamation of the section of West Coast
Air Services, Ltd., operating the service between Liverpool
and the Isle of Man, and Manx Airways, a subsidiary of
Railway Air Services, Ltd., and the Isle of Man Steam
Packet Company.
No souvenir covers were flown to mark the occasion.
The air mail service ceased on the declaration of war,
but was resumed as from 1 January, 1940.
# # # #
For details of the official seasonal air mail service from
Eire to the Isle of Man, see Chapter XXI.
G


CHAPTER XV
THE LUNDY AIR MAIL
Lundy, a small island lying in the Bristol Channel off the
coast of North Devon, enjoys the privilege, if privilege it is,
of being the only place in the British Isles where a private
post, not conflicting with the monopoly of the Postmaster-
General, is in operation.
The explanation is that there is no Government Post
Office in the island.
The Lundy local post has tended to be ignored by
British philatelists and aero-philatelists, which seems a pity
in view of its unique character. On the other hand, it has
excited the interest of philatelists in the United States of
America, and Mr. John D. Stanard, whose name is well
known in American philatelic circles, has written a very
informative and beautifully illustrated brochure on the
subject, under the title Lundy Island and the Lundy Locals
(Chattanooga, Tenn., U.S.A., 1938), to which I acknowledge
my considerable indebtedness, though Mr. Stanard has
slipped up on one or two minor points.
The Lundy Local Stamps
On 1 November, 1929, Mr. H. C. Harman, the owner
of Lundy Island, issued a couple of local postage stamps, of
value l / 2 puffin and 1 puffin respectively. The “ puffin ”
(equivalent to a penny) was the unit of a local currency he
also introduced, but whose use was banned by the
Government.
The stamps were printed by Messrs. Bradbury, Wilkin-
son and Co., Ltd., of New Malden, Surrey, on white
unwatermarked paper. They are perforated 12, bear the
inscription “ Lundy ” and the value, and show a puffin’s


head in the case of the *4 puffin value, which is printed in
red, and a whole puffin in the case of the i puffin value,
which is printed in blue.
The next year, three further values were added, namely,
6 puffin violet (also said to exist in blue), 9 puffin brown and
12 puffin green. The designs are similar to those of the
former values, but each design shows the number of puffins
corresponding to the value.
These stamps were used to defray the local charge for
conveying mail to and from the Post Office on the
mainland.
The Air Mail
In April, 1935, Mr. R. T. Boyd, pilot, operating as the
Atlantic Coast Air Services, instituted a regular plane
service for passengers between North Devon Aerodrome
(near Barnstaple) and Lundy Island, a Short Scion machine
being used for the purpose.
By arrangement with Mr. Harman, this service under-
took the conveyance of letters and parcels between the
island and the mainland. The date of the first mail-carrying
flight is not known, but was probably prior to the institution
of the regular service and may have been as early as June,
1 934-
Letters were carried for a fee of id., one half of which
represented the air fee, and the other half the fee charged
by Mr. Harman for handling mail in the island.
The latter fee was acknowledged by means of one of the
Lundy local stamps already described. The former was
acknowledged by special labels issued by Atlantic Coast Air
Services.
No official objection could be (or has been) raised to the
use of these labels, since, as mentioned, there is no Govern-
ment Post Office in the island. But to avoid any possible
conflict with the Postal Authorities, both the Lundy locals
and the air labels are normally affixed to the backs of covers
flown from Lundy.


Air Stamps : First Issue
The first (provisional) issue of air labels, or air stamps
as they may be called, though they are very unlike stamps
in format, appeared in April, 1935. The stamps resemble
cinema tickets. They are printed in black on colour, in
rolls of 500 each, roughly perforated between each stamp
and gummed on the backs. Each stamp bears a serial
number on the left, reading upwards, and the figure of value
on the right. The inscription reads, “BY/ ATLANTIC
COAST/ AIR SERVICES ”, underneath which appears
the value in words, not followed by a period.
The printers were Messrs. Willson’s Ltd., of Leicester,
and the first printing, made on 2 April, 1935, consisted of
eight rolls of / 2 d. stamps (Nos. 00001 to 04000), black on
red, and four rolls of 3d. stamps (Nos. 00001 to 02000), black
on blue. The latter were intended for use on parcels
(carried for l / 2 d. per lb.), but flown envelopes franked with
them “ philatelically ” also exist.
In what may be described as the normal / 2 d. stamp, the
figure “ 1 ” of “ y 2 ” is separated by a space from the bar.
Stamps of rolls 1 to 4 and 6 to 8 (Nos. 00001 to 02000 and
02501 to 04000) are of this type. In stamps of roll 5 (Nos.
02001 to 02500) the figure “ 1 ” and the bar are joined so as
to form an inverted “T ”. This variety is decidedly rare,
either mint or flown.
Two types of the 3d. value also occur in the first
printing. In stamps of the first roll (Nos. 00001 to 00500)
the “ T ” of “ THERE ” comes immediately under the “ R ”
of “ AIR ” In stamps of rolls 2 and 4 (Nos. 00501 to 01000
and 0150 1 to 02000) the “T” of “THREE” comes
immediately below the “A” of “ AIR ”. It is not known
to which type stamps coming from roll 3 belong.
The Second Printing
A second printing of these stamps was made by the
same printers on 3 December, 1935, a new value being
added, namely, id. black on yellow, which is excessively
rare in flown state.


To face p. go.
PLATE 3
Back of cover flown from Lundy by Atlantic Coast Air Services on 3 1 March,
1936, franked with Lundy ½p. local stamp and A.C.A.S. air stamps, first issue,
½d. Type 2, and 3d. Type 2, showing Co.’s cancellation first used on this date.
Cover flown by Highland Airways, Ltd., from Stronsay to Kirkwall, on the
emergency flight of 27 January, 1937, signed by the pilot, Adam Smith,
and by A. Cameron, Head Postmaster, Kirkwall.


The printing consisted of four rolls of / 2 d. stamps
(Nos. 04001 to 06000), four rolls of id. stamps (Nos. 00001
to 02000), and four rolls of 3d. stamps (Nos. 02001 to 04000).
I have not seen examples of l / 2 d. stamps from roll 12,
id. stamps from roll 4, or 3d. stamps from rolls 6 or 8, nor
have I been able to locate collectors having specimens. The
following remarks, therefore, may not apply to these.
Stamps of the second printing differ from those of the
first in the word “ BY ”, which is set in smaller type than
before. In the case of the id. and 3d. values, there is a
period after the words of value.
Futhermore, in the case of the / 2 d. value the figure of
value is much larger but less thick, and the “ 1 ” of “ / 2 ” is
joined to the bar to form an inverted “T ”. This stamp is
scarce, either mint or flown.
No varieties of the id. value are known.
In the case of the 3d. value, the figure “ 3 ” is normal on
stamps of roll 7 (Nos. 03001 to 03500), but on those of roll 5
(Nos. 02001 to 02500), the upward loop at the bottom shows
a nick at the top.
Hence, to sum up, so far as is known there exist three
varieties of the l / 2 d. value and four of the 3d. value. A
minor difference which may be noted in stamps coming
from different rolls lies in the position of the serial numbers.
Air Stamps : Second Issue
On 1 April, 1936, a second issue of air stamps made its
appearance, comprising six values, printed in colour on
white unwatermarked paper. The design, by Mr. Boyd,
shows a map of the route, with Bideford, Barnstaple, the
Aerodrome, and Lundy marked. Above appears the
inscription, “ATLANTIC COAST AIR SERVICES”,
and below the value in words.
The values and colours in which the stamps are
printed are: y 2 d. black, id. red, 2d. green, 3d. blue, 6d.
orange, and 1/- dull purple. The stamps were printed on
28 March, 1936, by Messrs. H. Pincombe and Son, of Barn-
staple, in sheets of twelve, rouletted between stamps,


imperforate on outer margins. The total printing of the
/4d. value was 1,000 sheets, bound in ten books.
Collectors prefer these stamps on covers flown on the
day of issue. “ Last-day ” covers flown on 31 March, 1936,
franked with air stamps of the first (provisional) issue have
come on to the market at fancy prices. It should be noted
that covers franked with stamps of the first (provisional)
issue were accepted by Atlantic Coast Air Services and flown
after the appearance of the second issue. I have examples
in my collection flown on 9 May, 1936.
Flown covers of 31 March, 1936, are, however, of
interest as being first-day covers of the A.C.A.S. cancellation
dealt with below.
Air Stamps: Later Issues
In March, 1937, the concern was registered as a limited
liability Company under the title, “ Lundy and Atlantic
Coasts Air Lines, Ltd/’
On 20 July, 1937, the stocks of the old / 2 d. stamp being
exhausted, the new Company issued a new l / 2 d. stamp.
Actually, prior to this date, there appears to have been
a temporary shortage of this value, and I have in my col-
lection a cover of 1 April, 1937, franked with half a penny
air stamp which had been bisected diagonally. The
Company, on enquiry, was unable to inform me how many
bisected id. air stamps had been used, but the flown
bisected air stamp appears to be very rare indeed, and Ido
not, personally, incline to the opinion expressed to me by an
American correspondent, that the bisection was a “philatelic
stunt.”
The new / 2 d. air stamp referred to above is of small
rectangular format, and bears a design, by Mr. Boyd,
showing the island with a plane in flight, the figure of value
“ y 2 D” and the word “ LUNDY ”
The stamp was printed in purple in sheets of 48 stamps,
rouletted between, but imperforate on margins, by Messrs.
Willson’s Ltd., of Leicester.
Two printings of this stamp were made, both of 500


sheets. In the case of the first printing the stamps bore no
inscription other than that mentioned above.
The use of these air stamps was objected to by Mr.
Harman. A second printing was, therefore, made in which
the name of the operating Company was added in the
margin around the central design. Stamps of the first
printing were not issued.
Mr. Stanard gives n June, 1937, as the date of both
printings, but it seems unlikely that they could have both
been made on the same day. His date for the issue of air
stamps of the second printing (22 July, 1937) is an error.
They were first used on 20 July, 1937* as already indicated.
Stamps of the first printing are scarce in mint state.
A few are said to exist in flown state, having been used for
the sake of economy on parcels flown by the Company to
Mr. F. W. Gade, Mr. Harman’s agent in Lundy, who acts
as Lundy Postmaster, and to whom I am indebted for a mint
specimen.
On 1 November, 1938, a shortage of J4d. air stamps
having again occurred, 111 sheets of the rejected *4d. air
stamp were overprinted in black by Messrs. H. Pincombe
and Son, of Barnstaple, with the name of the Company, in
five lines, on each stamp, and these overprinted air stamps
were issued. They are not common, either in mint or flown
state. The bulk of the rejected l / 2 d. stamps is said to have
been destroyed.
On 31 March, 1939, a new issue of the air stamp
was made in the approved design of the issue of 20 July,
1937- The stamps were printed, as before, by Messrs.
Willson’s Ltd., of Leicester, in sheets of 48 stamps, rouletted
between stamps, imperforate on margins as before, but in
bronze instead of purple. 2,000 sheets were printed.
* This issue was shortly followed on 25 April, 1939, by
the appearance of a new rouletted id. air stamp printed in
black by the same firm, in sheets of 48 with margins.
The design of this id. air stamp is a new one, again
featuring Lundy, with an enormous lighthouse, a plane in
flight, and the figure of value “id ”. In the margin around


appears the name of the Company. Both design and
execution are crude in comparison with the l / 2 d. value.
1,000 sheets were printed.
Cancellations
Mail intended for flight to Lundy is normally posted
in the ordinary way, addressed c/o the North Devon Aero-
drome. Hence, postage stamps on this mail bear postmarks
of the towns where posted.
Mail flown from Lundy is posted at Braunton or Barn-
staple, and bears the postmark of one or other of these
towns.
Fig. 13
Lundy Island cancellation (reduced in size)
introduced 1 December, 1938.
(With acknowledgment to “ The Aero Field.")
Lundy Cancellations
The study of the cancellations applied to the air stamps
and Lundy local stamps presents points of interest, and the
making of a collection of the different cancellations, each
used on the date of its introduction, is not easy.
Prior to 1 December, 1938, Lundy local stamps were
cancelled with a rectangular handstamp in black. The
rectangle is divided into two. The left-hand and smaller
section shows a puffin, the right-hand one contains the date,
with the word “ LUNDY ” in sans-serif capitals above and
below it.
On 1 December, 1938, a new handstamp came into use.
This cancellation is also rectangular and divided into two.
The left-hand and larger section contains the inscription,
“LUNDY/ LIGHTS/ AND/ LEADS ”, in sans-serif
capitals, a large “ L ” serving as initial to all three words
commencing with this letter. The smaller right-hand
section shows a puffin.


At the same time an additional circular handstamp
came into use resembling an official postmark, and bearing
the word “ LUNDY ” and the date.
These handstamps were (and still are) applied in green,
only the first being used to cancel the Lundy local stamp.
Air Stamp Cancellations
At first A.C.A.S. air stamps were not specially can-
celled, but examples on flown covers may be met with
cancelled with the Lundy cancellation.
Later, on 31 March, 1936, a special handstamp was
brought into use for cancelling the air stamps and applied
in black. The cancellation shows a diagrammatic plane at
the top, the date in the middle, and the words “ BARN-
STAPLE,/ LUNDY ISLAND.” below in sans-serif
capitals, and is boxed, that is, enclosed in a frame.
Still later, on 19 July, 1937, a similar cancellation came
into use, differing from the above in the removal of the
frame. It was applied in blue. Varieties exist (i) without
the plane, and (ii) without the date. I have an example of
the first dated 20 July, 1937, and one of the second on a
cover probably flown on 5 May, 1938.
Sometime in October, 1938, an entirely new cancellation
came into use. This took the form of a circle containing
the initials of the Company, “ L.A.C.A.L.”, with the words
“ AIR ” above and “ POST ” below. In an example I have
of this rare cancellation, it is applied in, blue. According
to the Company, the cancellation was introduced about 15
October, 1938, but Mr. Chas. Thornley, in a letter to me,
gives, on the basis of notes he made at the time, the date as
1 October, 1938.
On 1 December, 1938, a cancellation similar to the
above came into use, but the words “AIR POST” are
omitted. It was applied in blue.
The Stanard Envelope
Only one type of special envelope has been printed for
use on the Lundy air mail, and this envelope, made of white
wove paper and measuring 6 V 1 8" x hails from America.


4,000 copies were printed for Mr. John D. Stanard by E. A.
Andrews, North Georgia Publishing Co., Rossville, Georgia,
U.S.A. The design, printed in red on the left, shows a map
of the island, with the points of the compass above on the
left, and a puffin, in a doubly-lined circle at the bottom, on
the right. The main inscription reads, “JANUARY i
1939 ” above, and “ LUNDY ISLAND ” below.
On the back appears Mr. Stanard’s name and address,
also printed in red.
Mr. Stanard had about 3,500 of the envelopes addressed
to philatelists throughout the world, and flown from Lundy
on 1 January, 1939. Inside was a card containing parti-
culars of his brochure and details relating to the Lundy local
post. Examples I have seen are franked with two Lundy
local stamps (/4p. and ip.) and the scarce overprinted
L.A.C.A.L. *4d. provisional air stamp.
The receipt of these covers must have given pleasure to
numerous philatelists; and, in spite of the large number
despatched the cover appears to be definitely rare, at any
rate in Great Britain. All the envelopes not used were
destroyed, with the exception of two examples only, one of
which, through Mr. Stanard’s kindness, is in my own
collection.
War-Time Addendum
On 1 November, 1939, 5,000 copies each of the five
Lundy local stamps were issued with the overprint “ 1929-
1939 ” in red to commemorate the tenth anniversary of their
original issue. At the same time, three new values were
added to the series, namely, 2 puffin grey, 3 puffin dark
brown, and 4 puffin red-brown, in a new design showing a
single puffin. These stamps are perforated 12, and 100,000
of each value were printed by Messrs. Bradbury, Wilkinson
and Co., Ltd., on white, unwatermarked paper.
At the time of writing, none of these Lundy local stamps
exist on flown covers, the last occasions on which mail was
flown to and from Lundy being 9 September and 4 Septem-
ber, 1939, respectively.


CHAPTER XVI
R.A.F. ROYAL REVIEW EMERGENCY AIR MAIL
On 6 July, 1935, the R.A.F. Royal Review was held as part
of the Jubilee celebrations of King George V’s reign of
twenty-five years. A Royal Review camp was erected at the
R.A.F. Station, Mildenhall, for officers and airmen who
would take part in the Parade of Squadrons at Mildenhall
and the Fly-Past at Duxford. Air Vice-Marshall P. H. L.
Playfair, C. 8., M.C., was in charge of flying, and his staff
consisted of the officers of his Headquarters Staff, Western
Area, and three supernumerary officers, namely, a Wing
Commander and two Flight Lieutenants.
It being necessary to open the camp for rehearsal pur-
poses prior to 6 July, and at the same time to carry on normal
duties of the Area from Headquarters at Andover, it was
decided to run a daily air mail service for official corres-
pondence between Andover and Feltwell (for Mildenhall)
from Ito 5 July. In addition, private mail for personnel at
Andover engaged at Mildenhall camp was also flown to
Feltwell if handed in for despatch.
No official cachets were used, but a few covers exist,
certified by Wing-Commander E. J. D. Townesend, R.A.F.,
as having been flown by the emergency service, and these,
naturally, are among the rarities of the internal air mails of
the British Isles. Wing-Commander Townesend contri-
buted a full account of the service to The Aero Field for
November, 1937, to which I acknowledge my indebtedness.
An Atlas plane was used for all the flights, except those
effected on 3 July, on which date a Moth was used.


Refuelling was effected on each return journey at Henlow.
The following table gives a complete list of the flights:
Date Dep. Andover Arr. Feltwell Dep. Feltwell
1 July 10.55 a.m. 12.25 p.m. 4.00 p.m.
2 July 10.20 a.m. 11.20 a.m. 4.20 p.m.
3 July 10.45 a.m. 12.10 p.m. 4.10 p.m.
4 July 11.00 a.m. noon 4.00 p.m.
5 July 10.50 a.m. 11.45 a.m. 3.20 p.m.
An example of a cover carried by this emergency
service which is in my collection was posted in London,
S.W.i, on 26 June, 1935, addressed to Sqd.-Leader E. J. D.
Townesend at the R.A.F. Club, Piccadilly, London, re-
directed from there to the Air Ministry, Kingsway, London,
re-directed again to the R.A.F. at Andover, and certified by
Wing-Commander E. J. D. Townesend as having been
received by him at Mildenhall on 1 July, 1939, and flown
from Andover by the R.A.F. emergency air mail service.


CHAPTERr XVII
CHANNEL ISLANDS AIR MAILS
(Jersey Airways, Ltd., and Guernsey Airways, Ltd)
On Friday, 28 June, 1935, the first flight of a new service of
passenger planes between Plymouth and Jersey took place.
The service was organised by Whoopee Sports, Ltd., who
chartered machines from Jersey Airways, Ltd. The first
plane, piloted by W. B. Caldwell, Chief Pilot of Jersey
Airways, Ltd., left Roborough Aerodrome, Plymouth, at
noon and arrived at Jersey at 1.15 p.m.
To demonstrate the saving in time that could be
effected by using this service for mail carrying, less than 100
covers were posted early in the morning at Plymouth (5 a.m.
postmark) addressed to the Aerodrome. These were flown
to Jersey, re-stamped and re-posted, the old address being
covered by a grey label bearing a Jersey address. The
second stamp bears the Jersey postmark of 4.15 p.m. of the
same day.
Examples signed by the pilot exist. ,
Owing, however, to the lack of an aerodrome in Jersey,
planes had to use the beach. This necessitated their
running to a time table which varied from day to day
according to the tides, and a service of this character is
unsuitable for official mail-carrying purposes.
The Official Air Mail
In 1937 an aerodrome was erected in Jersey, and the
Postal Authorities granted a contract to Jersey Airways,
Ltd., for the transport of first-class mail by air between
Southampton and Jersey.
First mail-carrying flights took place on 1 June. The


De Havilland Rapide ” 8-seater, piloted by
B. Walker, left Jersey at 6.25 a.m. and arrived at Southamp-
ton at 7.37 a.m., carrying 335 lb. of mail. The De Havil-
land “ Express ” four-engined, 14-seater, G-ACYF, piloted
by W. B. Caldwell accompanied by First Officer J. Marten,
left Southampton at 7.50 a.m. and reached Jersey at 8.50
a.m., carrying 229 lb. of mail.
Owing to the early departure of the planes, first-flight
covers normally bear postmarks of the late hours of the
previous day.
Cachets
First-flight covers handled individually by the Com-
pany at the Company’s offices at Jersey, Southampton, or
London were stamped with an angular cachet, reading
“JERSEY AIRWAYS LTD./ FIRST/ AIR/ MAIL/
FLIGHT/ Ist JUNE/ 1937 The cachet, I believe,
originated from a well-known dealer in flown covers, but
the handstamp was used at the Company’s offices, and
appears to have been applied in specific colours at different
offices, namely, blue at Jersey, violet at Southampton, and
green at London. The status of a similar cachet in red,
apparently printed on certain covers, is more dubious. In
the case of covers posted by the Company to the Company
at a different office, the cachet usually appears twice, once
in front and once on the back, the front cachet being in the
colour used at the departure office, the back cachet in that
used at the reception office.
In addition, outward bound covers were stamped
“FROM JERSEY.” in blue, or “FROM SOUTHAMP-
TON.” in violet. I believe that these cachets were officially
applied by the Company to covers they despatched.
Furthermore, some covers addressed to the Company’s
offices in Jersey bear a reception cachet in blue, which was
applied, by courtesy, by the Company. The cachet reads
“Jersey Airways Limited./ 1 JUN 1937 10.45 a.m.” The
time is in MS.
A doubly-lined circular reception cachet applied in


black is also met with on covers addressed to the Company’s
offices in London. This reads “LONDON/ i JUN 1937/
3.00 P.M./ OFFICE ”, the time being in MS. These covers,
of course, were flown to Southampton and railed to London.
Pilot-signed covers exist.
Among covers having specially attractive characters
may be mentioned examples flown from Jersey and franked,
not with stamps, but with the Company’s meter franking
in red. Another interesting souvenir is provided by
covers from Jersey addressed to Kirkwall, which were flown
from Jersey to Southampton on 1 June, 1935, and from
Inverness to Kirkwall the next day, thus travelling from the
most southerly to the most northerly points in the British
Isles then enjoying official air mail services.
The Guernsey Air Mail
In 1939, the airport at Guernsey having been completed,
Guernsey Airways, Ltd., a Company affiliated with Jersey
Airways, Ltd., instituted a plane service between Southamp-
ton and Guernsey, the 8.00 a.m. service from Southampton
and the 6.00 a.m. service from Jersey serving both islands.
The service came into operation on 5 May, 1939, and
was progressively utilised by the Postal Authorities for the
transmission of first-class mail.
On Monday, 8 May, 1939, first-class mail was flown,
under Post Office contract, for the first time from Southamp-
ton to Guernsey, but not in the reverse direction. The
plane, a De Havilland 86 “ Express ” (G-ACZP) piloted by
Capt. B. Walker, left Southampton Airport at 8.00 a.m. and
reached Guernsey Airport at 8.59 a.m., one minute before
scheduled time. Mail for Guernsey was unloaded and the
plane proceeded to Jersey, carrying mail for Jersey from the
mainland. No mail from Guernsey was carried.
Only mail addressed “ Poste Restante ” received a
backstamp. The backstamp, although untimed, is very
important in determining status, as, at the time of the year
in question, no mail from the mainland is received in
Guernsey on Mondays except that coming by air.


Among flown covers in existence may be mentioned
those bearing the Southampton postmark of 11.45 p.m. of
7 May, 1939, and (more interesting) those bearing the
London (Head Office) postmark of 12.45 a.m. °f the day of
flight (8 May, 1939).
Covers handled individually by the Company at their
offices received a single-lined circular cachet on the back in
black, reading ‘ GUERNSEY/ AIRWAYS” around, and
“ —8 MAY 1939/ GZ ” within. Some of these covers also
received, by courtesy, a rectangular boxed cachet in purple
on the front. This reads “GUERNSEY/ 8 MAY 1939/
SX/ AIRWAYS ”.
Fig. 14 Fig. 15
Cachets applied by the Company to first-flight covers
carried by Guernsey Airways, Ltd.
(With acknowledgment to “ The Aero Field.”)
The Return Service
The return service was utilised by the Postal Authori-
ties for the conveyance of first-class mail, commencing
Monday, 22 May, 1939, when mail was first flown from
Guernsey to Southampton.
The plane, a De Havilland 868 (G-ADVK) piloted by
Capt. Pugh, left Guernsey Airport (after travelling from
Jersey) at 6.28 a.m. and reached Southampton Airport at
7.25 a.m.
It has been stated that 4,000 letters and postcards were
flown from Guernsey, but I cannot vouch for the accuracy
of this figure.
Flown covers posted at St. Helier, Guernsey, normally
bear the 5 a.m. postmark of that town.
Cachets similar to those met with on covers flown from


Southampton to Guernsey on 8 May, but with the date
altered, are to be met with on some covers flown from
Guernsey to Southampton on 22 May, 1939, but they appear
to have been applied by the Company only to covers which
they handled for certain dealers, and not generally to all
covers handled at their offices. In examples I have seen
both cachets appear on the face of the covers, the circular
cachet being in a black so faint as to appear grey.
The Martin Cover
It has been stated in a well-known philatelic journal
that special souvenir envelopes were issued by the operating
Company. This is not correct. The covers in question
were the result of purely private enterprise.
700 were printed by the Guernsey Press Co., Ltd., for
Messrs. Martin Bros., Ltd., of Guernsey, and all were flown
for sale afterwards to collectors.
The envelope is made of cream wove paper, and is of
large size x 5"). The design and inscription, printed
in black, red and yellow, appears on the left. The design
shows the Arms of The States of Guernsey at the top with
a map below. This features a much enlarged Guernsey,
with parts of the English and French coasts, and an
enormous plane in flight from Guernsey to England.
Underneath is the inscription “ Guernsey to England/ First
Air Mail May 22nd, 1939 ”. Below the address appear the
words “ by Guernsey Airways Ltd.”
The Inter-Island Air Mail
On the same date (22 May, 1939) first-class mail was also
flown for the first time, under Post Office contract, from
Jersey to Guernsey, but not in the reverse direction.
The mail was carried by the same plane (G-ADVK)
which carried the first mail from Guernsey to England.
This left Jersey Airport at 6.00 a.m. and reached Guernsey
Airport at 6.15 a.m.
Examples of flown mail are definitely rare, as much of
the mail intended to be flown for souvenir purposes failed to
H


be posted in time. Flown covers normally bear the Jersey
postmark of 5 a.m., 22 May, 1939, if addressed Poste
Restante,” the Guernsey (untimed) backstamp of the same
day. No special envelopes were flown, nor do the Company
appear to have applied cachets to covers they handled at
their offices.
On Monday, 10 July, 1939, first-class mail was flown for
the first time, under Post Office contract, from Guernsey to
Jersey. This service, according to Post Office announce-
ment, was to operate on Mondays only. The reason is that
there is, for the greater part of the year at any rate, no
regular service of mail boats from Guernsey to Jersey on
Mondays, whereas, on other days of the week, the regular
mail boat service suffices for the conveyance of mail early
in the morning.
Several applications to the Company for details of the
first mail-carrying flight from Guernsey to Jersey have not
been answered.
Very short notice was given of the institution of this
air mail service, with the result that souvenir covers intended
for transmission were either posted too late or not at all.
The only cover I have seen stated to have been flown bears
a postmark indistinct as to time and was not backstamped.
Hence, its status is doubtful.
Prior to the outbreak of war, an air mail to and from
Alderney, utilising the planes of the same Company, was
projected by the Post Office.
# * * *
The air mail services to and from the Channel Isles
ceased on the declaration of war. On Wednesday, 8 Novem-
ber, 1939? a thrice-weekly (Monday, Wednesday and Friday)
service to Jersey and Guernsey came into operation, and the
next day, a service operating on Tuesdays, Thursdays,
Saturdays and Sundays from the islands, Southampton being
replaced by another port of call. After 11 December, 1939,
the services operated daily.


CHAPTER XVIII
EMERGENCY FLIGHTS OF HIGHLAND
AIRWAYS, LTD.
In addition to the regular mail-carrying flights, of which full
particulars have been given in Chapter X, Highland
Airways, Ltd., have on four occasions made special mail-
carrying flights for the Post Office when climatic conditions
have rendered normal methods of transport impracticable.
Covers carried on these and other emergency flights are
usually not very attractive in appearance. They bear no
special cachet, and, except in a few instances, can be identi-
fied by postmark only. To the uninitiated they look just
like old used envelopes, possibly rescued from the waste-
paper basket.
Actually, they are documents of great historic interest,
and in many cases have changed hands at several pounds
apiece.
Sanday Emergency Flight
The first of the emergency mail-carrying flights effected
by Highland Airways, Ltd., took place on 23 December,
1936. On this date parcels and letters from North Ronald-
shay lay stormbound in the Island of Sanday, where the
mail had been conveyed by motor-boat the previous day.
The Post Office arranged for the Company to collect
this mail. It was flown from Sanday to Kirkwall by Pilot
Adam Smith. Letters were sent on south by the regular
air mail service from Kirkwall. Parcels were conveyed from
Kirkwall by motor-boat.


This was the first occasion on which parcels were
conveyed for the Post Office by air.
Further details of this historic flight are not available,
and I have not seen any covers carried on it.
Stronsay Emergency Flight
On 27 January, 1937, owing to inclement weather, the
Post Office chartered Highland Airways, Ltd., for a second
emergency flight. Pilot Adam Smith flying the De Havil-
land “ Rapide,” G-ADAJ, in a 75 m.p.h. blizzard, conveyed
mail from Kirkwall to Stronsay and from Stronsay to
Kirkwall. After landing at Stronsay the plane was flown to
North Ronaldshay with foodstuffs for the half-starving
inhabitants of this island, but no mail was carried to or from
North Ronaldshay. The plane also carried mail from Kirk-
wall for Sanday, but no landing could be effected, and this
mail was therefore returned.
A limited number of covers carried in either direction
on this flight have come on to the market, including some
signed by the pilot. They can, in general, be identified by
postmark and address only. Among those in my own col-
lection may be mentioned, (i) a cover addressed to Stronsay
bearing the Great Yarmouth postmark of 25 January, 1937,
and (ii) a cover addressed to Kirkwall bearing the Stronsay
postmark of 25 January, 1937. Of special interest is (iii) a
cover, of which possibly a few other examples exist, bearing
the Stronsay postmark of the above date and addressed to the
offices of the Orcadian at Kirkwall. Printed on the face of
the cover, presumably after delivery, by the proprietors of
the paper (who have always been alive to the interest attach-
ing to first air mail covers) is an inscription reading “ First
Air Mail from the Island of/ Stronsay, Orkney, carried by
De/ Haviland Rapide G-ADAJ.”, signed by the pilot,
Adam Smith, and by Mr. A. Cameron, Head Postmaster at
Kirkwall.
So far as covers flown from Stronsay are concerned,
these may bear postmarks of 22 to 27 January, 1937, both
dates inclusive.


Second Sanday Emergency Flight
The next day, 28 January, 1937, a third emergency
flight was effected for the Post Office by the Company.
Capt. E. E. Fresson flew a De Havilland “ Dragon ”
from Kirkwall to Sanday and back, calling at Rousay and
Westray. Letters and parcels were flown to and from
Rousay, and letters only to and from Sanday and Westray.
Fig. 16
Map showing routes of emergency mail-carrying flights of
Highland Airways, Ltd., to Stronsay, Sanday, Rousay, and
Westray, also route of emergency mail-carrying flight of Aberdeen
Airways, Ltd., to Shetland (see Chapter XX).
(With acknowledgment to “ The Aero Field")
Mail collected from Sanday included letters from North
Ronaldshay, while that collected from Rousay included a
few letters from Egilshay, previously sent there by boat.
I have seen few examples of covers flown on the
outward journey. So far as those flown to Kirkwall are
concerned, as they are not, in general, backstamped, identi-
fication rests on the postmark and address only. A list of


known postmarks on flown covers is appended, as a useful
guide to identification:
From Dates of Postmarks (both included
where two are given)
Sanday ... ... ... 25-28 January, 1937
Westray 25-28 do.
Rousay 23-28 do.
North Ronaldshay ... 16-28 do.
Egilshay 23 do.
Special interest attaches to an official cover which is in
my collection, and of which I believe another example is in
existence. It is addressed to the Postmaster at Kirkwall,
bears the Sanday postmark of 25 January, 1937, and the
Kirkwall arrival postmark of 5.30 p.m. of 28 January, 1937,
which provides clear evidence of flight.
Stornoway Emergency Flight
The fourth and last emergency mail-carrying flight of
Highland Airways, Ltd., took place on 4 March, 1938.
On this date mail for the Isle of Lewis was held up by
heavy seas at Kyle (Ross and Cromarty). It was, therefore,
recalled to Inverness, and was flown to Stornoway on behalf
of the Post Office by the Company. Capt. E. E. Fresson,
who effected the flight, carried forty bags of mail on the
outward service, and there was a return mail.
Unfortunately, no further details of this flight are
available, and flown covers are very rare. I believe there to
be at least two in existence, one of which is said to have
changed hands at a fantastic price.
### • #
On 2 May, 1938, the Company was amalgamated with
Northern and Scottish Airways, Ltd. (see next chapter), to
form Scottish Airways, Ltd., which Company have con-
tinued the normal mail-carrying activities of the former
Company, and were at later dates given further contracts by
the Post Office, for particulars of which see Chapter XXIII.


CHAPTER XIX
WESTERN ISLES EMERGENCY FLIGHTS
(Northern and Scottish Airways, Ltd)
On 4 September, 1936, the mail for Jura missed the mail
boat, and the Post Office, in the emergency, arranged for
Northern and Scottish Airways, Ltd., to fly the mail to
Islay.
No further information concerning this emergency
flight appears to be available and, so far as I am aware, no
covers carried by the emergency service have been
preserved.
The Second Emergency Flight
In 1937 the same Company effected a second emergency
flight for the Post Office. The mail boat “ Pioneer ” had
been disabled and driven to a dangerous anchorage off-shore
in the Sound of Islay. In consequence, the Post Office
chartered the Company to convey mail' between Renfrew
(Airport for Glasgow), Islay and Campbeltown.
The flight was effected on 12 March, 1937, by Capt.
David Barclay, the Company’s Chief Pilot, piloting the
triple-engined Spartan cruiser G-ACSM, and accompanied
by Wireless Officer F. R. Hughes. The plane left Renfrew
at 9.0 a.m. and performed the round trip Renfrew-Islay-
Campbeltown-Islay-Renfrew in 3 hours 25 minutes, re-
turning at 12.25 p.m.
In all, 43 bags containing 943 lb. of mail were carried.
The full time table and details of mail quantities taken on at
each point are given below:


Bags of Mail Weight
Arrive Depart taken on of Mail
A.M. A.M. lb.
Renfrew ... 9 .oo 26 571
, 930 9 . 45 , , 3
Campbeltown ... 10.10 10.15 12 293
Isla ? 10.30 11.15 4 66
P.M.
Renfrew ... 12 .25
The bags from Campbeltown contained mail which
had accumulated three days at Tarbert, and which had been
conveyed to Campbeltown for aerial transport. It is
believed that no mail from Campbeltown itself was flown.
Souvenir Covers
On this occasion officials of the Company had posted,
for conveyance on the emergency service, a number of
souvenir covers, totalling, it is said, 206, but of which some
were damaged. These were at first offered at fantastic prices
but more recently have come on the market at a reasonable
figure. The souvenir covers were carried over the four
following stages—Renfrew to Islay, Renfrew to Campbel-
town, Islay to Campbeltown, and Islay to Renfrew.
They were all signed by the pilot and the wireless
officer.
Plain envelopes were used at Glasgow. At Islay the
Company’s official envelopes were employed. These bear
the inscription, in black, in the top left-hand corner,
“NORTHERN AND SCOTTISH AIRWAYS LTD./
CAMPBELTOWN, ISLAY, ISLE OF MAN/ AND/
THE WESTERN ISLES On the back, at the bottom,
appears the inscription, in blue imitation handwriting,
“ Why not travel by Air to/ Isle of Man and The Western
Isles? ” The envelopes are made of cream laid paper and
measure 5 16 / le " x 3 9 /i«".
Covers flown from Renfrew bear diverse Glasgow post-
marks of the afternoon of n March, 1937, and an
(unnecessary) air mail label. Those flown from Islay bear


the (untimed) Bowmore postmark of 12 March, 1937.
Covers flown to Islay are backstamped, the backstamp
reading “PORT ELLEN/ n AM/ 12 MR/ 37/ Isle of
Islay The covers carried on the other stages are not
backstamped.
# # # #
On 2 May, 1938, the Company, as already noted, was
amalgamated with Highland Airways, Ltd., to form
Scottish Airways, Ltd.


CHAPTER XX
THE SHETLAND AIR MAIL
(Allied Airways [Gandar Dower], Ltd.)
It has already been recorded, in Chapter X, that commenc-
ing in March, 1935, the Post Office instituted an accelerated
service from the Shetlands, making use of the regular plane
service of Highland Airways, Ltd., between the Orkney
Islands and the mainland.
Although described as “ accelerated,” this service had
rather the character of a makeshift. For example, a cover
despatched to me by the Wednesday service was not
delivered in South London until the following Saturday
morning.
Moreover, in bad weather, transport by sea between the
Shetlands and the Orkneys is liable to become impracticable.
The Shetland Emergency Air Mail
This was the case in January, 1937. Mail having lain
stormbound for a fortnight, the Post Office chartered Aber-
deen Airways, Ltd., to undertake an emergency flight to
and from the Shetlands on 29 January, 1937.
989 lb. of mail were first flown from Aberdeen to Thurso
(Caithness) in the De Havilland “ Dragon ” liner, G-HDFI,
piloted by F/O James Gordon Hay. At Thurso the mail
was transferred to the De Havilland “ Dragon ” liner,
G-ACAN, and flown to Sumburgh (Shetland) by Pilot H.
Vallance. Arrival was effected at 4.30 p.m., after a flight
of 95 minutes.


After the mail had been taken off and the plane loaded
with a light consignment of mail from Shetland for points
south of Kirkwall, Pilot Vallance left immediately and flew
to Quanterness, near Kirkwall.
The mail was then transferred to the steamer “ St.
Magnus,” which was bound south from Kirkwall.
Accounts of this historic flight appeared in The
Orcadian for 4 February, 1937, and The Shetland Times for
6 February, 1937. The two accounts do not agree in all
details. The former, which consists in the main of an
interview with Pilot Vallance, is probably the more correct.
Covers are decidedly rare. Covers flown to Shet-
land can be identified by (i) the postmark, which must be
of a date not earlier than that on which the mail was first
held up, and (ii) the address. Pilot-signed covers exist. So
far as covers flown from Shetland are concerned, it is
doubtful if any have been preserved.
The Regular Air Mail Service
Later in the year the Post Office granted a contract to
the Company —which on 13 February, 1937, had changed
its name to Allied Airways (Gandar Dower), Ltd.—for the
regular conveyance of first-class mail between Aberdeen
Airport (Dyce) and Sumburgh Airport (Shetland).
The first mail-carrying flights took place on Tuesday,
23 November, 1937, and were effected by E. A. Starling
piloting the De Havilland “ Dragon ” named “ Sir
Rowland ” in memory of Sir Rowland Hill.
The flight was effected closely to schedule, the plane
leaving Dyce at 9.30 a.m. and reaching Sumburgh at 12.10
p.m., after calling at Thurso (Caithness) and at Howe
(Orkney) for Kirkwall and Stromness. At Howe the crew
and passengers were welcomed by Bailie J. M. Moar and
representatives of the Stromness Council. Major Neven-
Spence, M.P. for Orkney and Shetland, travelled on the
plane.
The plane left Sumburgh at 12.30 p.m. and finally


arrived back at Dyce at 2.50 p.m., after calling again at
Howe and Thurso. 1
488 lb. of mail were flown to Shetland and twenty-four
bags (625 lb.) from Shetland. The mail from Shetland
contained a congratulatory message from the Convener of
the Zetland (Shetland) County Council to the Lord Provost
of Aberdeen, of which photographs (postcard size) have
been made and are available for collectors. The mail also
contained a very large number, estimated at about 4,000,
of souvenir letters addressed by the islanders to all parts of
the world.
The Company responsible for this historic flight issued
no special envelopes to commemorate it, and applied no
cachets to flown mail. First-flight covers can be identified
by the postmark and address. Only those addressed “ Poste
Restante ” were backstamped. The Lerwick (Shetland)
backstamp is not timed. That used at Aberdeen is timed
4.45 p.m. Covers posted the previous day in London,
bearing the Head Office postmark of 3.45 p.m., reached
Aberdeen in time and were flown. Covers posted at
Aberdeen on the day of flight bearing postmarks up to
9 a.m. were flown.
As further evidence of the real saving in time effected
by the air mail may be mentioned the fact that letters
posted to me in Shetland, bearing the Lerwick postmark of
8.45 a.m. of 23 November, 1937, were delivered in South
London by the second morning delivery the next day.
Pilot-signed covers exist.
In 1936 the Company (Aberdeen Airways, Ltd.) had
issued some propaganda labels printed in green, mauve and
yellow, and first-flight covers of 23 November, 1937, exist
with these labels attached. The label adds a decorative
value to the cover, and is more especially interesting when
tied by the postmark to the stamp.
As already mentioned, the Aberdeen-Lerwick planes
1 The times given are those supplied by the G.P.O. as actual
times of the first mail-carrying flights. They differ by a few min-
utes from those published in the Company’s time table.


stop at both Thurso and Howe, but owing to the contract
with Highland Airways, Ltd., these stops were not, and have
not been, utilised by the Postal Authorities, in spite of the
time that might thereby be saved.
Test-letters addressed to Thurso, and posted in Lerwick
in time for the first mail-carrying flight, were not received
in Thurso until 1.30 p.m. the next day. As this is the
normal time of arrival for mail coming from Wick, con-
veyed there by plane from Inverness, details of which
service have been given in Chapter X, it may be safely
concluded that the covers were first flown to Aberdeen by
Allied Airways, Ltd., then sent by rail to Inverness, then
flown to Wick by Highland Airways, Ltd., and finally
conveyed by surface transport to Thurso, surely a very
round-about route.
Souvenir Stationery
The inauguration of the regular air mail service aroused
tremendous interest in the Shetland Islands, and although,
as mentioned, the Company issued no souvenir envelopes,
private enterprise stepped into the breach.
(i) A local printer issued large (5%" x 2-5/g") white
labels, printed in black, for sticking to the backs of souvenir
covers. The inscription reads “ SHETLAND AIR MAIL
SERVICE./ THIS Service was inaugurated on 23rd Novem-
ber, 1937./ Mails containing first-class matter will be carried
between/ Aberdeen and Shetland Isles, on TUESDAY,
THURSDAY and/ SATURDAY, during the Winter
months, and daily during the/ Summer./ To /
From ”.
(ii) The Shetland Times issued a limited number of
souvenir envelopes bearing an advertisement for the paper.
The envelope measures s 3 A" x tf/i" and is made of azure
wove paper. I understand that a rare variety exists made of
white paper but have not seen an example. On the right
appears, in blue, an aeroplane in flight, and beneath, in red,
the inscription, “SHETLAND’S FIRST/ AIR MAIL./
Tuesday, 23rd Nov.,/ 1937 ”• Below this,


in blue, appears the advertisement, “The Shetland Times/
The Popular Paper in/ the Islands.”
(iii) Mr. Robert Ollason, a Shetland stationer, had
printed by Messrs. Wm. Collins, Sons and Co., Ltd., of
Glasgow, 5,000 copies of a small souvenir envelope (sYs" x
3 l /Y) made of white laid paper, bearing on the left, at the
top, the words “ Shetland Air Mail/ Service.” Lower down
appears a plane, with the inscription below, “ Inaugurated
23rd November, 1937.” The whole is printed in black.
It is said that so great was the demand for this envelope
that the whole supply was sold out in one day.
# # # #
The air mail service ceased on the declaration of war,
but was resumed on 3 October, 1939, and, in spite of all
difficulties imposed by the war, was successfully operated by
Capt. Harry Reed thrice weekly in each direction until 18
November, 1939, after which it operated twice weekly
(Tuesday and Friday), being shortly afterwards supple-
mented by an air mail service operated by Scottish Airways,
Ltd. (see Chapter XXIII).


CHAPTER XXI
EIRE-MANX AIR MAIL
(Aer Lingus, Teóranta )
In view of the great interest displayed in covers carried by
air services operating within the British Isles, it may seem
incredible that an official service of this character should
have been inaugurated in 1937 and have entirely escaped
the notice of dealers and collectors alike.
Yet such is the case, the service in question being the
air mail instituted from Dublin to the Isle of Man in the
summer of that year, and of which the first full account to
appear in any philatelic or aero-philatelic publication was
the account I contributed to the issue of The West-End
Philatelist for February, 1939.
Many Irish folk spend their holidays in the Isle of Man,
and the service was instituted by the Irish Postal Authori-
ties, in the first season as an experiment, mainly for their
benefit, in order to facilitate and expedite the transmission
of mail from Dublin to the island.
The Company which received the contract was Aer
Lingus, Teoranta. This Company issued no special
envelopes to celebrate the occasion, nor have the Company
ever applied cachets to flown covers.
* The Irish Postal Authorities announced that no extra
fee would be charged on flown mail and that the use of air
mail labels in connection with it was unnecessary.
As covers, unless addressed “ Poste Restante,” are not
backstamped on arrival at the Isle of Man, and even when
backstamped do not bear arrival times, the only method for
distinguishing them from sea-borne covers is, in general,


by postmark and address. However, as noted below, certain
flown covers do exist on the fronts of which arrival times
have been very kindly noted by the Town Clerk of Douglas,
who has thereby materially assisted me in the study of this
air mail.
It may be added that all covers carried by the Company
are exceedingly rare, and so far as covers carried in 1937 are
concerned, efforts to locate any remaining in existence have
completely failed.
It should be further noted that, although the service
operates for passengers in both directions, the mail-carrying
contract relates to the conveyance of mail from Dublin only.
No mail has been flown by the Company from the Isle of
Man to Eire.
Moreover, the Irish postal regulations provide for the
carrying of mail by air only if addressed to the Isle of Man,
mail for the mainland of Great Britain not being accepted.
However, as will appear later, on one occasion mail addressed
to Bristol appears to have been flown.
The First Season
The first mail-carrying flight was effected by Capt. A. L.
Robinson piloting the De Havilland “Rapide,” G-ACYR,
on 1 July, 1937. Full accounts of the event, with illustra-
tions, appeared in both the Irish Times and the Irish
Independent the next day.
The service continued in operation until 31 August,
*937-
During this period mail was despatched from the
Dublin Sorting Office at 12.15 p.m. for Baldonnel Aero-
drome, whence the mail-carrying plane departed at 1.45
p.m., arriving at Ronaldsway Aerodrome at 2.45 p.m. Mail
was delivered in Douglas the same afternoon. Other services
of the Company were not utilised for mail carrying.
As already mentioned, no covers flown during 1937 are
known to exist.


The Second Season
The experiment apparently proved a success, as the air
mail service was put into operation again in 1938, and for a
longer period, namely, from 4 June to 19 September.
It operated under conditions similar to those in force
the previous year, except that the mail-carrying plane was
timed to leave Baldonnel Aerodrome and to arrive at
Ronaldsway Aerodrome fifteen minutes earlier in each case.
The first mail-carrying flight of 1938 (4 June) was
effected by Capt. Ivan Hammond piloting the De Havilland
“ Rapide,” EI-ABP. 3/2 lb. of mail was carried.
Among this mail appears to have been included, by
inadvertence, a few covers addressed to Bristol and bearing
a MS. inscription “ By Ist Flight/ Irish Free State/ to/ Isle
of Man ”, and an Irish air mail label. Stamps are cancelled
with the Bade Atha Cliath (Dublin) postmark of 12.15 p.m.,
4 June, 1938, and the covers bear also the Douglas postmark
of 8.30 p.m. of the same day.
These appear to be the only covers carried on this flight
which have come to light.
The last mail-carrying flight of 1938 (19 September) was
effected by Capt. J. Hesketh piloting the De Havilland
“Rapide,” G-AEBW. Only n oz. of mail were carried.
This included eight souvenir covers, four addressed “ Poste
Restante,” and four c/o the Office of the Town Clerk (Mr.
P. M. Shimmin) at Douglas. The covers bear the Baile
Atha Cliath postmark of 12.15 p.m., 19 September, 1939,
and the latter four a certification of receipt at 10.30 a.m. the
next day. The Controller of the Department of Posts and
Telegraphs, Dublin, who examined one of these covers,
certified it as having been flown, explaining the late delivery
as due to the fact that handling of mail at Douglas was
delayed by the late arrival of the plane. According to an
official of the Company, however, the plane arrived on time.
The Third Season
In 1939 the mail-carrying service was again put into
operation under the same conditions as formerly, but with
1


an altered time table, the mail-carrying plane being timed
to leave Baldonnel at 2.30 p.m. each day (Sundays excepted)
and to reach the Isle of Man Airport at Derbyhaven at
3.30 p.m.
The first mail-carrying flight of the season took place
on 5 June, 1939, and was effected by Capt. Ivan Hammond
piloting the De Havilland “ Rapide,” EI-ABP, the plane
used for the first mail-carrying flight of the previous year.
Three passengers were carried and only 3 1 oz. of mail.
The mail included eight souvenir covers addressed c/o
the Office of the Town Clerk at Douglas, and were certified
as having been received the same day at 4.30 p.m.
The service was scheduled to operate until 19
September, but actually terminated on 3 1 August.


CHAPTER XXII
NORTH EASTERN AIRWAYS, LTD.
Towards the end of 1938 North Eastern Airways, Ltd.,
received a Post Office contract for the conveyance of first-
class mail by their south-bound plane service from Perth, via
Newcastle, Yeadon (for Leeds and Bradford), and Don-
caster, to the London Airport at Croydon.
The new contract was granted primarily to speed up
the delivery in London of mail from Perth, Dundee and
towns in the north from which the afternoon mails do not
arrive in Perth in time for inclusion in the last mail for
London, but mail to and from other places was also conveyed
as noted below.
The First Mail-Carrying Flight
Mail-carrying under the contract was first effected on
3 October, 1938.
The time table according to which the service worked
was as follows:
Arrive Depart
A.M. A.M.
Perth ... ... ... ... 9.00
Newcastle ... ... ... 10.00 10.10
Yeadon ... ... ... 10.50 11.00
Doncaster ... ... ... 11.20 n .35
Croydon 12.50
The first mail-carrying flight was effected in two stages.
Capt. A. L. T. Naish, accompanied by Wireless Officer
B. Young, piloted the De Havilland “ Rapide,” G-AFEP,
from Perth to Newcastle, whence the journey was completed


by the Air-Speed Envoy, G-ADAZ, piloted by F/O D. Boitel
Gill, accompanied by Wireless Officer J. W. Williamson.
Being in Croydon at the time I visited the Airport and
had the pleasure of watching, from the roof, the plane
arrive and of seeing the mail bags unloaded into the mail
van which conveyed them to London.
In spite of a strong headwind, the plane was only a few
minutes late and touched the ground at i o’clock precisely.
The work of unloading the bags commenced at 1.03 p.m.
133 kilograms of mail were flown to Croydon, which included
a large number of souvenir covers.
The Company’s Labels
For optional attachment to covers intended to be
carried by the first flight the Company had special vignettes
printed by the Modern Press, Croydon. There were five
different sorts, identical in design but differing in wording,
according to the stage for which they were intended to be
used.
There were two separate printings of these vignettes.
The first printing, ordered 17 September, consisted of 500
copies of each sort, the second printing, ordered 24 Septem-
ber, of 1,500 copies of each sort.
The vignettes are imperforate and of oblong rectangular
format, measuring 2 16 /i a" x 1 They are printed in light
blue and dark blue, the main design, printed first, being in
the first colour, the wording in the second. The design
shows an aeroplane in white against a light blue background.
As already mentioned, the five sorts differ only in the stage,
which reads “ PERTH-LONDON ”, “NEWCASTLE-
LONDON”, “ LEEDS-LONDON ”, BRADFORD-LON-
DON ”, or “ DONCASTER-LONDON ”. Above appears
the inscription, “FIRST AIR MAIL”, and below, “OCTO-
BER 3rd. 1938/ FLOWN BY/ NORTH EASTERN
AIRWAYS ”. The lettering is in sans-serif type, the words
“ FLOWN BY ” being in italics.
The two printings can be distinguished by differences


to which I first called attention in The West-End Philatelist
for November, 1938.
In the case of the Perth, Newcastle and Leeds vignettes
the most noticeable difference between the two printings is
in the position of the first “O” in “ OCTOBER In the
first printing this is under the “ E ” of “ PERTH ”, the
“WC” of “ NEWCASTLE ” and the first “E” of
“ LEEDS ”. In the second printing this “O” is under the
“ ER ” of “ PERTH ”, the “ C ” of “ NEWCASTLE ” and
the “ EE ” of “ LEEDS ”.
The two printings of the Bradford vignettes can be
distinguished by the fact that, in the first printing, the “ B ”
of “ BRADFORD ” is much nearer the nose of the plane
than in the second printing. Measured horizontally, the
distances are 8 mm. and 9.5 mm. respectively, but the
difference is quite obvious without measuring.
In the case of the Doncaster vignettes, if a ruler is held
flush against the vertical stroke of the “ F ” in “ FIRST ”,
this will be found just to miss the “N” in “DONCASTER”
in the second printing. In the first printing the “F ” and
“ N ” slightly overlap.
The two printings of the Doncaster vignettes also differ
from each other in a manner similar to that in which the two
printings of the Bradford vignettes differ from each other.
In the first printing the “ D ” of “ DONCASTER ” is much
nearer the nose of the plane than in the case of the second
printing.
Mint sets of vignettes of the first printing are excessively
scarce.
So far as the first printing of the Bradford vignette is
concerned, I doubt if a flown example exists.
* In the case of some covers the vignettes were attached
after the covers had passed through the post. For this
reason, specimens tied to the postage stamp by the postmark
or cancelled with the Company’s clock cachet are preferred
by collectors, but in neither case does the presence of the
vignette constitute evidence of flight.


The Company's Cachets
The Company applied two cachets to mail addressed to
their Croydon office.
One cachet is a small doubly-lined circle, reading
“ NORTH EASTERN AIRWAYS/ LIMITED ” around,
and “AIRPORT OF/ LONDON/ CROYDON/ SUR-
REY ” within.
This cachet is absolutely without significance. It is
merely a reception cachet normally applied at the office to
incoming mail. Moreover, the cachet appears to have been
applied, by courtesy, to covers other than those addressed to
the Company, and it is said that the handstamp was loaned
to a certain interested individual who applied it indiscrim-
inately to numerous covers.
I believe that the cachet was normally applied by the
Company in black.
A variant of this cachet exists in which the central
inscription reads “AIRPORT OF/ LONDON/ CROY-
DON ENGLAND/ TEL./ CRO. 5153 This I have
met with in blue.
In addition, and of rather more interest, is a second
cachet which the Company applied, in purple, only to covers
which it was considered at the time had come by air. The
cachet takes the form of a clock face, with the hands set
between 12.50 and 12.55, bearing the inscription “ RCVD.
3 OCT 1938”.
This was (approximately) the time at which the plane
reached Croydon, not the time the mail was delivered at the
Company’s offices. It must be emphasised that the cachet
was not applied when the mail first reached Croydon, since
it was immediately taken by the Post Office to London for
sorting and delivery, but was applied after the mail
addressed to the Company’s office at Croydon had been
delivered there by the Post Office. Actually, along with
the flown mail, the Post Office also delivered mail from
Bradford which had come by surface transport. This
caused the officials of the Company to consider the mail


To face fi. 124.
PLATE 4
Cover flown by North Eastern Airways, Ltd., on 3 October, 1938, from
Yeadon to Croydon, bearing Co.’s “Leeds-London” vignette (2nd
printing) and Co.’s cachets.
With acknowledgment to “ The Aero-Field. ")
Cover flown by Aer Lingus, Teóranta, on 5 June, 1939 (first flight of 1939
season), from Dublin to the Isle of Man, with certificate of arrival on face.


from Bradford to have been flown, and the cachet was
accordingly applied to it. Indeed, believing that he had
carried them, the pilot, Mr. Boitel Gill, actually signed some
of the Bradford covers. Later it was realised by all con-
cerned that the Bradford covers had not been flown, but the
mistake could not be rectified, and much to the detriment of
the hobby a number of these unflown Bradford covers have
come on the market as first-flight covers from Bradford, as,
indeed, have other covers supposed to have been carried by
North Eastern Airways, Ltd., but which, in fact, have never
been inside an aeroplane.
Criteria for Determining First-Flight Covers
The only criteria which permit first-flight covers
carried by North Eastern Airways, Ltd., to be distinguished
from covers conveyed by surface transport are (i) the post-
mark and (ii) the address. Cachets are unreliable and so
are backstamps.
The postmark and address must be carefully studied in
connection with the regulations of the various post offices
concerned in the despatching of mail by this service,
regulations which, unfortunately, are extremely complex.
At each despatching office mail was included in the
bags to be flown only (i) if posted at the correct time and (ii)
if addressed to certain specified towns or postal districts, the
lists of which differed according to each town of despatch.
Mail was taken on at Perth, at Newcastle, at Yeadon,
and at Doncaster. Mail for places in the north of England,
including both Newcastle and Leeds, was unloaded at New-
castle and sent on by surface transport. 1 No mail was
unloaded after the plane had left Newcastle until its arrival,
at Croydon. At Perth, in addition to mail from Perth, mail
from Dundee and other places in the far north was taken on
1 No special vignettes were issued by the Company for attach-
ing to souvenir mail to be flown from Perth to Newcastle only,
for the reason, I understand, that the Company did not know in
time that the Post Office intended to handle mail in this way.


the plane. At Newcastle, in addition to mail from New-
castle, mail which had been railed from Edinburgh was also
taken on the plane.
Since the lists of towns and/or London postal districts
for which mail was accepted for transport by the service at
the chief towns of despatch are very long and involved, it
has seemed the best plan to give a simplified summary in
which it is believed specific mention has been made of all
places to which “ philatelic ” mail was despatched.
Town of Despatch Places to which Mail was accepted
for Aerial Transport
Perth Certain towns in Durham, Northum-
berland, and Yorkshire, including
Newcastle and Leeds, but not Brad-
ford or Doncaster.
All London postal districts.
Certain places in the Home Counties,
including Croydon.
Cambridge, Oxford, Brighton, and
Hove.
Dundee Certain places in Durham, Northum-
berland, and Yorkshire, including
Leeds, but not Newcastle, Bradford,
or Doncaster.
All London postal districts.
Certain places in the Home Counties,
including Croydon.
Oxford, Cambridge, Brighton, and
Hove.
Newcastle London W.C. and W.i, but not other
London postal districts.
Certain places in the Home Counties,
including Croydon.
Edinburgh All London postal districts.
Certain places in the Home Counties,
including Croydon.
Oxford, Cambridge, Brighton, and
Hove.


Leeds and
Bradford
Doncaster
London E.C., W.C., E.i, W.i, W. 2,
N.i, N.W.i, and S.E.i only.
London districts as for Leeds and
Bradford with addition of London
S.W.i.
Certain places in the Home Counties,
including Croydon.
Covers posted in a town in the first column addressed
to a town or postal district not in the second column were
not flown.
There was, however, one important exception.
A large proportion of the souvenir mail was addressed to
the Company’s office at the Airport for London, Croydon.
Mail addressed to Croydon was, according to the regulations,
not to be accepted for aerial transmission at either Leeds or
Bradford. However, at Leeds, as an act of courtesy, for
which collectors should be very grateful, covers addressed
to the Company’s office at Croydon and handed in by a
servant of the Company were included in the mail bags to be
carried by the plane.
At Bradford a similar courtesy was not extended, and
no Bradford mail addressed to the Company’s office at
Croydon was flown.
London W.C. and W.i postal districts were specially
favoured by the postal regulations, and all mail addressed to
one or other of these districts, if posted at the correct time,
was flown. Flown covers so addressed and despatched for a
well-known firm of London West-End stamp dealers came
on the market immediately after the flight at exceedingly
moderate prices. They were not looked upon with much
favour by many collectors because the covers bore no
cachets. Some of these collectors paid higher prices for
cacheted, but unflown, covers.
Postmarks
In order to secure inclusion in the air mail despatch,
mail had not only to be correctly addressed, it had also to
be posted at the right time, and the following information


concerning the timing of postmarks is given to enable
readers to distinguish between flown covers and those
conveyed by surface transport.
Perth. Covers posted in Perth up to 8.00 a.m. on 3
October, 1938, secured inclusion in the first air mail despatch.
Covers posted the previous day were railed. So far as mail
for Newcastle was concerned, after 3 October this was flown
only if posted between 8.15 a.m. and 8.25 a.m., but on 3
October mail for Newcastle was flown if posted earlier,
providing it was specially marked for aerial transmission.
Dundee. In general, first-class mail, if correctly
addressed, was included in the first air mail despatch if it
came to hand between 9.55 p.m. (in some instances 9.00 p.m.)
on 2 October, 1938, and 6.30 a.m. on 3 October, 1938, but in
the case of mail addressed to London sub-districts, this was
included only if coming to hand between 5.20 a.m. and 6.30
a.m. on 3 October, 1938.
Newcastle. Flown covers bear the 9.00 a.m. postmark
of 3 October.
Edinburgh. First-class mail posted in Edinburgh up
to 3.30 a.m. on 3 October secured inclusion in the first ah
mail despatch.
Leeds. Flown covers bear postmarks of 9.15 a.m. to
9.45 a.m.,except if addressed London W.C. or W.i,in which
case they may bear postmarks of from 7.00 a.m. to 9.45 a.m.
Bradford. Flown covers bear postmarks of 9.15 a.m.
to 9.45 a.m., the latter time appearing on flown covers only
if they were posted at the Valley Road Sorting Office.
Doncaster. Flown covers are postmarked 11.00 a.m.
Covers posted at Edinburgh bearing the 6.00 a.m. post-
mark of 3 October, 1938, exist, which, it is stated, were
received in London at a time on the same day too early for
them to have come by surface transport, and which must,
therefore, have been flown. The suggestion has been made
that the Post Office utilised an auxiliary plane service which
operated between Glasgow and Doncaster, via Edinburgh.
To this suggestion I give no credence. The explanation of
Controller of the G.P.0., Edinburgh, to whom one of these


covers was submitted by me, was that, if the cover had been
received in London at the time stated, it must have been
posted prior to 3.30 a.m. and inadvertently received a
postmark giving the time incorrectly.
It may be further noted, as a matter of general interest,
that no mail for the British Dominions or Colonies was
accepted for flight to Croydon except at Doncaster, where
such mail appears to have been accepted for Dominions and
Colonies not in America. It is understood, however, that a
few covers flown to Croydon from other towns of despatch
were sent to overseas parts of the Empire by the simple
device of re-addressing and re-posting them at Croydon.
The Modified Service
The last conveyance of mail by air from Bradford,
Leeds and Doncaster to London took place on 15 April,
1939, after which a modified time table came into operation,
the planes no longer calling at Yeadon or Doncaster.
Covers conveyed by the last flight of the old service or by
the first flight of the new one do not appear to have been
preserved.
# # * #
The air mail service ceased on the declaration of war.


CHAPTER XXIII
SCOTTISH AIRWAYS, LTD.
Until 1939 mail for North Ronaldshay (Orkney) was
normally conveyed to this island by boat from the Isle of
Sanday, but owing to climatic reasons this was impossible
for several days prior to 17 December, 1938, and there was
an accumulation of mail for North Ronaldshay both in
Sanday and at Kirkwall.
North Ronaldshay Emergency Air Mail
The Post Office, therefore, chartered Scottish Airways,
Ltd., to collect this mail and carry it to its destination by air.
On 17 December, 1938, Capt. J. Annesley Hankins
piloting the De Havilland “ Dragon ” “ Aberdeen ”
(G-ACIT) left Wideford Airport (Kirkwall) at 10.10 a.m.,
carrying 343 lb. of mail for North Ronaldshay. He reached
Sanday at 10.25 a.m., where a further 250 lb. of mail was
loaded into the plane. This included mail for North
Ronaldshay which had already been sent to Sanday by sea.
Leaving Sanday at 10.28 a.m. he reached North Ronald-
shay at 10.38 a.m., where the mail was unloaded. At 10.40
a.m. Capt. Hankins left North Ronaldshay carrying ten
bags (560 lb.) of mail, representing a week’s accumulation,
from the island, and flew back direct to Wideford Airport,
arriving at 11.20 a.m.
Covers addressed to North Ronaldshay received the
North Ronaldshay (untimed) backstamp of 17 December,
1938, so that identification is easy. A cachet met with on
some covers is said to have been applied by Capt. Hankins’
agent.


Covers flown by this emergency service are exceed-
ingly rare. This is accounted for, so far as covers flown to
North Ronaldshay are concerned, by the fact that the
inhabitants were collecting postage stamps for a charitable
purpose and, not realising the great interest (and value) of
the flown covers, in most cases tore the stamps off them.
The Plebiscite
On Saturday, 28 January, 1939, a plebiscite was held
for all inhabitants of North Ronaldshay between the ages
of 14 and 80 to determine whether they were satisfied with
the existing postal service or would prefer a regular air mail.
The result was an overwhelming majority (127 for, 24
against) for the air mail proposition, and it was confidently
hoped that the Post Office would accede to the islanders’
desire in this matter.
North Ronaldshay Regular Air Mail
The islanders were not disappointed, and commencing
on Monday, 31 July, 1939, a thrice-weekly air mail service
was instituted, to operate on Mondays, Wednesdays and
Saturdays between Wideford Airport, Kirkwall, and North
Ronaldshay, the Company receiving the contract being
Scottish Airways, Ltd.
The service is particularly interesting because, unlike
other official air mail services operating within the British
Isles, it provides for the conveyance of all mail, not first-
class matter only.
The first flight was effected by Capt. E. E. Fresson
piloting the De Havilland “ Dragon, ’ G-ACIT. The plane
left Wideford Airport at noon, carrying 57 lb. of mail, and
reached North Ronaldshay at 12.40 p.m.
In a full account which appeared in the Orcadian for
3 August, 1939, we read, “Almost the entire population of
the island greeted Captain Fresson when he landed at North
Ronaldshay on Monday. Rev. A. M. Gordon, the Church
of Scotland minister, on behalf of the islanders, gave wel-
come to Captain Fresson. Acknowledging the welcome,


Captain Fresson said he looked forward to the date when
he would be asked to fly to North Ronaldshay all the goods
required by the islanders—even their beer (laughter). On
the outgoing mail being loaded, Captain Fresson was carried
shoulder-high to the plane. The little crowd gave a rousing
cheer as the machine took off.”
The plane, carrying 8a lb. of mail, left North Ronald-
shay at 12.50 p.m. and reached Wideford Airport at
1.30 p.m.
Flown covers, owing to the small quantity of mail
carried, are not common. No special cachets were applied,
nor were special envelopes issued by the Company for public
use to celebrate the event. However, after the first flight
had been effected, specially printed covers, decorated with a
special “ sticker,” not available to the public prior to the
flight, were offered by the Company. Only one hundred
were printed, the quantity being kept low, I am informed by
the Company, “to enhance their value ” ! These are
described below.
Some first-flight covers bear as decoration the large
oblong-rectangular propaganda label, printed in black, grey
and yellow, issued by the Company some time previously.
These are specially attractive when the label is tied to the
stamp by the postmark.
Covers addressed “ Poste Restante ” flown to North
Ronaldshay bear the North Ronaldshay (untimed) back-
stamp of 31 July, 1939, while those addressed to Kirkwall
bear the (untimed) Kirkwall backstamp of the same date.
The Kirkwall backstamp is especially important as
providing proof of flight, as the North Ronaldshay postmark
is also untimed. The normal timing of the postmark on
covers flown from Kirkwall is 11.15 a.m. of the day of flight.
Special Envelopes and “ Stickers ”
The special envelope mentioned above is made of cream
wove paper, and measures x 5". The envelope bears
a highly decorative design, printed in deep green and orange,


showing a map of the route, the main wording reading
“FIRST AIR MAIL / 31st JULY 1939/ TO THE/
ORKNEY/ OUTER/ ISLES/ SCOTTISH AIRWAYS
LTD./ Incorporating Highland Airways The “ stickers ”
resemble in design and format the second vignette issued by
Highland Airways, Ltd. (see p. 43). They are printed in
pale blue, deep green and orange, show a map of the route,
bear the inscription “FIRST AIR MAIL/ TO THE/
ORKNEY/ OUTER/ ISLES/ 31st JULY/ 1939/ AT
ORDINARY/ LETTER RATE/ SCOTTISH AIRWAYS
LD/ INC HIGHLAND AIRWAYS”, and are perforated
11 except on outer margins of the sheets. Examples of
the flown covers I have seen are not backstamped, and lack
the interest and value attaching to backstamped covers.
The “ Orcadian ” Envelope
100 special souvenir envelopes were printed by the
Orcadian. These resemble the Orcadian envelopes printed
for use on the first flights of Highland Airways, Ltd., to
and from Wick.
The envelope is made of cream wove paper and
measures s ‘/>«"x3 9 />«" 0n the left a P pearS the design
of a plane in flight, printed in blue and grey-green. Above
the plane appears, in blue, the inscription, “ First Official
Air Mail ”. Below, also in blue, appears the inscription,
“To North Ronaldshay” (on 50 of the, envelopes) and
“ From North Ronaldshay ” (on the other 50). Below this,
in grey-green, is the date, Monday, 3 J u ty’ *939
Of these envelopes I understand that only 76 were
flown, 38 in each direction. The remaining envelopes were
not used and are available for collectors interested in mint
air mail stationery.
The “ Orkney Herald ” Envelopes
The Orkney Herald also decided to commemorate the
event by issuing specially designed envelopes and ordered
a block of a plane to be made for this purpose. The block
not arriving promptly, the proprietors borrowed from the


Orcadian the block used by the paper, and used it to print
ioo envelopes, which were sold at id. each. At the last
moment the specially ordered block arrived and a further
printing of 60 envelopes was made. These envelopes were
also sold at id. each. The two types of envelopes may be
distinguished as Types I and II respectively.
The envelopes used in both printings are made of cream
wove paper and measure 5 16 he"x 3° U ln each type the
envelope is decorated by a border in red, with a plane in
red and blue in Type I [Orcadian block), in red only in Type
11, appearing at the top on the left. Under the plane is an
inscription in blue, with advertising matter in the case of
Type 11. The inscriptions read as follows:
Type I. “ INAUGURATION OF/ THRICE WEEK-
LY/ AIR MAIL/ KIRKWALL to NORTH RONALD-
SHAY (or NORTH RONALDSHAY to KIRKWALL)/
31st July 1939
Type 11. “ INAUGURATION OF/ THRICE
WEEKLY/ AIR MAIL/ KIRKWALL/ TO/ NORTH
RONALDSHAY (or NORTH RONALDSHAY/ TO/
KIRKWALL) 31 July 1939/ */ AT THE TOP!/ “THE
ORKNEY HERALD ”/ A Progressive/ County’s Most/
Progressive Newspaper The “ O ” in “ TOP ”in all
examples I have seen is out of alignment.
Equal quantities in each case were printed for use on
the outward and inward flights.
The following varieties are reported to exist in the
numbers quoted in parenthesis. Of these I have seen
only [d) :
(a) Type I, with blue of plane and clouds missing (4).
( b ) Type I, with red of plane and frame doubly
printed (3).
(c) Type I, with inscription doubly printed (1 only).
(d) Type 11, red very pale (3).
War-Time Addendum
After the declaration of war, both the North Ronald-
shay air mail and the air mail service between Inverness,


Wick and Kirkwall ceased to operate. The latter service,
however, was resumed on Wednesday, 13 September, 1939,
operating daily, and the North Ronaldshay service on Mon-
day, 27 November, operating thrice weekly. A few
souvenir covers were despatched on the latter date. Those
I have seen are decorated with the Company’s propaganda
label mentioned above. Those flown from Kirkwall bear
the 11.15 a.m. postmark of 27 November, 1939, those flown
to Kirkwall the 2 p.m. backstamp of the same day. The
North Ronaldshay postmark and backstamp are untimed.
Commencing Thursday, 23 November, the Company
carried mail, under Post Office contract, twice weekly, on
Thursdays and Saturdays, between Inverness, Wick, Kirk-
wall and Shetland. I have seen no souvenir first-flight
covers, and do not know if any were despatched.
Campbeltown Regular Air Mail
Commencing Monday, 2 October, 1939, first-class mail
was regularly flown by the Company, under Post Office
contract, between Renfrew, Airport for Glasgow, and
Kintyre Airport, for Campbeltown.
This air mail service, therefore, came into operation
after declaration of war, but some particulars of it are
included in this book for the sake of completeness.
The first mail-carrying flight was effected by Capt.
David Barclay, the Company’s Chief Pilot, piloting the
Spartan Cruiser (triple-engine monoplane), G-ACYL.
He left Renfrew Airport at 9.45 a.m., carrying 52 lb. of
mail, and reached Kintyre Airport at 10.30 a.m. Among
the passengers carried was Mr. George Nicholson, Founder
Director of the Company, who was warmly greeted on
arrival by Mr. Robert Stewart, Acting Head Postmaster at
Campbeltown, Mr. A. D. McNair, Provost of Campbeltown,
and other representatives of the town and county.
Capt. Barclay left Kintyre Airport at noon, carrying
67J/2 lb. of mail, and arrived back at Renfrew Airport
at 12.45 P- m -
The Company states that it was not possible to give
K


advance notice of the date of the first flights in order that
dealers and collectors might despatch souvenir covers.
However, the Company prepared 157 special envelopes for
the purpose, of which only 96 are understood to bear
complete markings.
The covers bear the Company’s propaganda label
mentioned above, across which and adjacent parts of the
envelopes is printed details of the flight. On the back
appears the Company’s crest.
Covers (44) posted at Campbeltown bear the 11.15 a.m.
Campbeltown postmark of the day of flight and the 2.45
p.m. Renfrew backstamp. Those flown in the reverse
direction (40) bear the Glasgow postmark of 8 a.m. of the day
of flight and the Campbeltown backstamp of 11.15 a.m.
The latter covers were delivered to the Company by the Post
Office at Kintyre Airport before noon. Twelve round-flight
covers bearing both postmarks and backstamps also exist.


CHAPTER XXIV
THE CHRONOLOGY
1933
12 April Great Western Railway. Mail flown (unoffi-
cially) on Cardiff-Haldon-Plymouth route.
15 May Great Western Railway. Air stamp issued.
Mail flown officially as “ railway letters ” on
Cardiff-Haldon-Plymouth route.
23 May Great Western Railway. Air mail service
extended to Birmingham.
17 July Great Western Railway. First acceptance of
air mail at and for Newton Abbot.
24 August International Air Lines, Ltd. First (unofficial)
mail-carrying flight, Plymouth to Croydon.
25 August International Air Lines, Ltd. First (unofficial)
mail-carrying flight, Croydon to Southampton.
26 August International Air Lines, Ltd.' First (unofficial)
mail-carrying flight, Croydon to Plymouth.
1 Sept. International Air Lines, Ltd. First known use
of “ Travel by Western Air Express ” cachet.
30 Sept. Great Western Railway. Last mail-carrying
flights.
2 Nov. East Yorkshire Motor Services, Ltd. Mail
flown, unofficially and by favour, from Hull
to Grimsby.
25 Nov. Provincial Airways, Ltd. Mail flown (unoffi-
cially) westwards on Croydon-Southampton-
Plymouth route.


26 Nov. Provincial Airways, Ltd. Mail flown (unoffi-
cially) in reverse direction.
! 934
3 Feb. Portsmouth, Southsea and Isle of Wight
Aviation, Ltd. Mail flown (unofficially)
between Portsmouth and Ryde (1.0. W.).
19 Feb. Midland and Scottish Air Ferries, Ltd. Mail
flown (unofficially) from Birmingham to
Hooton (for Liverpool) and Heston (for
London).
20 Feb. Midland and Scottish Air Ferries, Ltd. Mail
flown (unofficially) over above routes in reverse
directions.
7 May Railway Air Services, Ltd. First acceptance
of “ railway letters ” for conveyance by Liver-
pool-Plymouth air service.
7-12 May “Apex.” Special postmark used at Exhibi-
tion Post Office. Experimental pigeon-post
each day.
8 May “Apex.” Officially sanctioned experimental
autogyro flight, carrying souvenir cards,
between London and Windsor.
23 May London, Scottish and Provincial Airways,
Ltd. Mail flown officially from Tollerton (for
Nottingham) to Radlett (for London)
29 May Highland Airways, Ltd. Institution by Post
Office of experimental air mail, at ordinary
letter rate, for first-class mail only, between
Inverness and Kirkwall (Orkney).
August Portsmouth, Southsea and Isle of Wight
Aviation, Ltd. Second issue of (illegal) air
stamps.
20 August Railway Air Services, Ltd. First (official)
mail-carrying flights for first-class mail at
ordinary letter rates. Introduction of “ R.A.S.
3d. Paid” cachet.


21 August Railway Air Services, Ltd. First operation
to schedule of all projected mail-carrying
services.
23 August Railway Air Services, Ltd. Acceptance of
“ railway letters.”
29 Sept. Railway Air Services, Ltd. Last mail-carrying
flights over Liverpool-Plymouth and Birming-
ham-Cowes routes, and to and from the Isle
of Man.
1 Oct. Railway Air Services, Ltd. New time table.
Earlier despatch of mail from London to the
north.
31 Oct. Railway Air Services, Ltd. Last mail-carry-
ing flights to and from Birmingham and
Manchester—no mail flown from Birmingham
north.
1 Nov. Railway Air Services, Ltd. First (official)
mail-carrying flights over Croydon-Liverpool-
Belfast-Glasgow route.
30 Nov. Railway Air Services, Ltd. Last mail-carrying
flights under first Post Office contract. Last
use of special London “ Air Mail ” postmarks
on internal air mails.
1 Dec. Adoption of new policy by Post Office in
relation to internal air mails. Abolition of
use of air mail labels on these.
1 Dec. Highland Airways, Ltd. Permanent official
air mail service instituted for first-class mail
between Inverness, Wick and Kirkwall
• (Orkney).
1 Dec. Hillman’s Airways, Ltd. First conveyance by
the Company of first-class mail, under Post
Office contract, between Glasgow, Belfast,
Liverpool and Essex Airport for London.
10 Dec. Highland Airways, Ltd. First acceptance by


Post Office of first-class mail at and for Thurso
for flight from and to Wick.
1935
8 Jan. Highland Airways, Ltd. North-bound mail-
carrying plane crashed into the Moray Firth.
Passengers and mail rescued.
1 Feb. Blackpool and West Coast Air Services, Ltd.
First conveyance of first-class mail, under Post
Office contract, between Liverpool and the
Isle of Man.
2 Feb. Introduction of first Glasgow “ Air Mail ”
cachet.
1 March Introduction of first Glasgow “By Air Mail ”
cachet.
25 March Highland Airways, Ltd. Institution by Post
Office of accelerated service for first-class mail
from Shetland utilising the Company’s Inver-
ness-Wick-Kirkwall service.
1 April Atlantic Coast Air Services. First (provi-
sional) issue of (private) air stamps for use on
Lundy air mail.
1-5 July R.A.F. Emergency air mail between
Andover and Feltwell for Mildenhall.
28 July Whoopee Sports, Ltd. Experimental (unoffi-
cial) mail-carrying flight from Plymouth to
Jersey.
August Portsmouth, Southsea and Isle of Wight
Aviation, Ltd. Copies of (Portsmouth)
Evening News, bearing “By Air ” cachet,
first flown to Isle of Wight.
1 Nov. United Airways, Ltd. First conveyance,
under Post Office contract, of first-class mail
by the Company between Liverpool and the
Isle of Man.
30 Nov. Hillman’s Airways, Ltd. Last conveyance of
mail under Post Office contract.


2 Dec. Railway Air Services, Ltd. First conveyance
of first-class mail, under new Post Office
contract, on Glasgow-Belfast-Liverpool-Croy-
don route. No mail flown to Glasgow.
3 Dec. Railway Air Services, Ltd. First conveyance
of first-class mail to Glasgow under New Post
Office contract.
3 Dec. Atlantic Coast Air Services. Second printing
of first (provisional) issue of (private) air
stamps.
1936
31 March Atlantic Coast Air Services. Introduction of
special cancellation for air stamps.
1 April Atlantic Coast Air Services. Second issue of
(private) air stamps.
4 Sept. Northern and Scottish Air Services, Ltd.
First official emergency mail-carrying flight to
Islay.
31 Oct. United Airways, Ltd. (British Airways, Ltd.).
Last conveyance of first-class mail under Post
Office contract.
1 Nov. West Coast Air Services, Ltd. First con-
veyance of first-class mail, under new Post
Office contract, between Liverpool and the
Isle of Man.
23 Dec. Highland Airways, Ltd. Official emergency
mail-carrying flight to Sanday (Orkney) to
fetch mail from North Ronaldshay for the
South.
1937
27 Jan. Highland Airways, Ltd. Official emergency
mail-carrying flight between Kirkwall and
Stronsay (Orkney).
28 Jan. Highland Airways, Ltd. Official emergency
mail-carrying flight between Kirkwall and the


islands of Rousay, Westray and Sanday
(Orkney).
29 Jan. Aberdeen Airways, Ltd. Official emergency
mail-carrying flight between Aberdeen and the
Shetland Isles.
13 Feb. Aberdeen Airways, Ltd., changes title to
Allied Airways (Gandar Dower), Ltd.
March Lundy and Atlantic Coasts Air Lines, Ltd.,
formed to take over activities of Atlantic Coast
Air Services.
12 March Northern and Scottish Airways, Ltd. Official
emergency mail-carrying flights between
Renfrew (Glasgow), Islay and Campbeltown.
1 June Jersey Airways, Ltd. First conveyance,
under Post Office contract, of first-class mail
between Southampton and Jersey.
1 July Aer Lingus, Teoranta. First conveyance of
mail, under Irish Post Office contract, from
Dublin to the Isle of Man.
19 July Lundy and Atlantic Coasts Air Services, Ltd.
Introduction of modified cancellation for air
stamps.
20 July Lundy and Atlantic Coasts Air Services, Ltd.
Issue of first (private) air stamp (ftd. purple)
bearing the name of the Company.
31 August Aer Lingus, Teoranta. Last mail-carrying
flight of the season.
26 Sept. Isle of Man Air Services, Ltd., formed and
granted Post Office contract for conveyance of
first-class mail between Liverpool and the
Isle of Man.
23 Nov. Allied Airways (Gandar Dower), Ltd. First
regular conveyance, under Post Office contract,
of first-class mail between Aberdeen and
Shetland.


1938
4 March Highland Airways, Ltd. Official emergency
mail-carrying flight between Inverness and
Stornoway (Outer Hebrides).
2 May Railway Air Services, Ltd. Accelerated
service between Croydon and Glasgow, carry-
ing first-class mail under Post Office contract.
2 May Scottish Airways, Ltd., formed by amalgama-
tion of Highland Airways, Ltd., and Northern
and Scottish Airways, Ltd. Official mail-
carrying activities of former Company con-
tinued.
4 June Aer Lingus, Teoranta. First official mail-
carrying flight of the season.
19 Sept. Aer Lingus, Teoranta. Last official mail-
carrying flight of the season.
Oct. Lundy and Atlantic Coasts Air Lines, Ltd.
Introduction of new cancellation for air stamps
bearing Company’s initials and words Air
Post.”
3 Oct. North Eastern Airways, Ltd. First convey-
ance, under Post Office contract, of first-class
mail by service from Perth to Croydon, via
Newcastle, Yeadon and Doncaster.
11 Nov. Lundy and Atlantic Coasts Air Lines, Ltd.
Issue of provisional, overprinted / 2 d. (private),
air stamp.
1 Dec. Lundy and Atlantic Coasts Air Lines, Ltd.
Deletion of words “Air Post” from Com-
pany’s cancellation. Introduction of new
Lundy cancellation and (private) postmark.
17 Dec. Scottish Airways, Ltd. Official emergency
mail-carrying flight to and from North
Ronaldshay (Orkney).


*939
i Jan. Lundy and Atlantic Coasts Air Lines, Ltd.
Stanard covers despatched from Lundy Island.
28 Jan. Plebiscite in North Ronaldshay gives big
majority in favour of regular air mail.
31 March Lundy and Atlantic Coasts Air Lines, Ltd.
Issue of y 2 d. bronze (private) air stamp.
15 April North Eastern Airways, Ltd. Last convey-
ance of mail, under Post Office contract, from
Yeadon (Leeds and Bradford) and Doncaster
to Croydon.
25 April Lundy and Atlantic Coasts Air Lines, Ltd.
Issue of id. black (private) air stamp.
8 May Guernsey Airways, Ltd. First conveyance,
under Post Office contract, of first-class mail
from Southampton to Guernsey.
22 May Guernsey Airways, Ltd. First conveyance,
under Post Office contract, of first-class mail
from Jersey to Guernsey, and from Guernsey
to Southampton.
5 June Aer Lingus, Teoranta. First mail-carrying
flight of the season.
10 July Guernsey Airways, Ltd. Institution, by Post
Office, of Monday air mail service for first-class
mail from Guernsey to Jersey.
31 July Scottish Airways, Ltd. First regular con-
veyance of mail (all types), under Post Office
contract, between Kirkwall and North Ronald-
shay (Orkney).
31 August Aer Lingus, Teoranta. Last mail-carrying
flight.
3 Sept. Declaration of War. All internal air mail
services cease.
13 Sept. Scottish Airways, Ltd. Resumption of
Inverness-Wick-Kirkwall air mail service.


2 Oct. Scottish Airways, Ltd. First regular con-
veyance, under Post Office contract, of first-
class mail between Renfrew (Glasgow) and
Kintyre (Campbeltown).
3 Oct. Allied Airways (Gandar Dower), Ltd. Re-
sumption of air mail service between Aberdeen
and Shetland.
8-9 Nov. Jersey Airways, Ltd. Resumption of air mail
service between Jersey, Guernsey and the
mainland.
23 Nov. Scottish Airways, Ltd. First conveyance of
mail, under Post Office contract, between
Inverness, Wick, Kirkwall and Shetland.
27 Nov. Scottish Airways, Ltd. Resumption of North
Ronaldshay air mail service.
1940
1 Jan. Isle of Man Air Services, Ltd. Resumption
of air mail service between Liverpool and the
Isle of Man.


INDEX
A.
Aberdeen, 2, 112, 113, 114, 115.
Aberdeen Airways, Ltd., 112-114.
propaganda labels, 114.
Aer Lingus, Teoranta, 2, 117-120.
Air mail labels, discontinuance of, on
internal mail, 41.
Alderney, 104.
Allen, 74.
Allied Airways (Gandar Dower), Ltd.,
2, 113-116.
Amphibious Air Lines, Ltd., 82.
Anderson, W., 78.
Andover, 97, qB.
“ Apex,” 36-38.
autogiro flights, 37, 38.
pigeon post, 37.
postmark, 36.
Armstrong, O. E., 83.
Armstrong, W., 60, 67.
Atlantic Coast Air Services, 89-92, 95.
air stamps, first issue, 90, 91
air stamps, second issue, 91, 92.
cancellations, 95.
B.
Back-stamping, 8, 9.
Baile Atha Cliath (see Dublin).
Baldwin, N. C., 3.
Barclay, David, 109, 135.
Barnstaple, 94.
Belfast, 2, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 69, 70,
7i> 7 2 , 73. 74. 75. 76, 78, 80, 81.
Beresford, Rodney, 61.
Birmingham, 14, 15, 16, 17, 33, 34, 35,
58, 59. 6 °. 61, 62, 63, 64, 67, 68, 69,
70. 7L 72, 73-
Blackpool, 82, 86.
Blackpool and West Coast Air Services,
Ltd., 80, 82-84.
cachets, 83, 84.
crest covers, 83.
Bowmore, 111.
Boyd, R. T., 89, 91, 92.
Bradford, 121, 122, 123, 127, 128, 129.
Braunton, 94.
Brie, R., 37, 38.
Brighton, 126.
Bristol, 58, 59,60, 62, 63, 64,68, 70, 119.
British Airways, Ltd., 84.
G.
Caldwell, W. 8., 99, 100.
Cambridge, 126.
Cameron, A., 106.
Campbeltown, 109-110, 135, 136.
Cardiff, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
58, 59. 6o > 62 > 6 3> 65, 70-
Channel Islands, 99-104.
Cheney, R. L., 4.
Coleman, E. H., 51.
Coronation covers, fake, 86.
Cowes, 58, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 67, 68, 70.
Creates, W. V., 20.
“ Cross ” air mail envelopes, 49.
Croydon, 2, 18, 19, 20, 24, 27, 28, 58,
59, 60, 70, 71, 74, 76, 77, 121, 122,
124, 125, 126, 127, 129.
Cubitt, David, 62.
D.
Davis, John S., 37-38, 79.
Dismore, F., 12.
Doncaster, 121, 122, 123, 125, 126,
127, 128, 129.
Douglas, 1.0. M., 60, 61, 63, 64, 65, 82,
84, 118-120.
Dublin, 117-120.
Dundee, 121, 125, 126, 128.
Dyce (see Aberdeen).
E.
East Yorkshire Motor Services, Ltd.,
21-23.
Edinburgh, 126, 128.
Egilshay, IQ7, 108.
Eire-Manx Air Mail, 117- 120.
first season, 118.
second season, 119.
third season, 119-120.
Emergency air mails :
Highland Airways, Ltd., 105-108.
Northern and Scottish Airways, 109-
iii.
North Ronaldshay, 130-131.
R.A.F., 97-98.
rarity of covers, 105.
Shetland, 112-113.
Essex Airport, 78, 79, 80.


F.
Feltwell, 97, 98.
Field, Francis J., 3, 56, 57.
Finnegan, E. F., 74.
Firth, Mr. and Mrs. Wm. D., 51.
Football Mail, flown copies of, 32.
Fresson, E. E., 42, 50, 107, 108, 131, 132.
G.
Gade, F. W., 93.
Gill, D. Boitel, 122, 125.
Glasgow, 2, 51, 52, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63,
64, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76,
77, 78, 79, 109-110, 128, 135, 136.
Glasgow air mail cachets, 80, 81.
Glasheen, 76.
Glover, D. S., 4, 13, 22.
Gordon, A. M., 131.
Great Western Railway, 2, 7-17.
acceptance of air mail for, and at
Newton Abbot, 15-16.
air stamp, 11-12.
Birmingham extension, 14-15.
last mail-carrying flight, 17.
official air mail, 12-17.
unofficial air mail, 9-1 1.
Greenhalgh, G. T., 85.
Grimsby, 21, 22.
Guernsey, 2, 101-104.
Guernsey Airways, Ltd. (see Jersey
Airways, Ltd., and Guernsey Airways,
Ltd.).
H.
Haldon, 9. 14, 15, 58, 59, 61.
Hammond, Ivan, 119, 120.
Hankins, J. Annesley, 130.
Hanworth, 37, 38.
Harman, H. C., 88, 89, 93.
Hay, J. Gordon, 42, 50, 112.
Hendon, 38.
Hesketh,J., 119.
Heston, 24, 32, 33, 34, 35.
Higgins, J. C., 83, 85, 86.
Highland Airways Ltd. :
emergency air mail services, 105-108.
normal air mail services, 40-52, 73,
115-
cancellations, 43-45.
crash covers, 51.
first flights, 41, 42.
Shetland accelerated service, 51, 52.
souvenir envelopes, 45-49.
Thurso air mail, 49-51.
vignettes, 42, 43.
Hill, Sir Rowland, 113.
Hillman’s Airways, Ltd., 72, 73, 74-75,
78-80.
Davis covers, 79.
reception cachets, 79, 80.
Hooton, 33, 34, 35.
Hopkins, A. E., 3.
Hove, 126.
Howe, 113, 114, 115.
Hubert, Chas. L. A., 51.
Hughes, F. R., 109.
Hughes, W. E., 3.
Hull, 21, 22, 53-54.
I.
Imperial Airways, Ltd., 55, 69.
International Air Lines, Ltd., 18-20.
air stamps, 19.
cachets, 19-20.
first flight, 19.
later flights, 20.
Inverness, 2, 40, 42-44, 45, 46, 47, 48,
49> 50, 5L 73> "5. 135-
Islay, 109- 110.
Isle of Man, 2, 59, 60, 61, 67, 70, 80,
82-87, 117-120 (see also Douglas).
Isle of Man Air Services, Ltd., 2, 87.
Isle of Man Steam Packet Co., 87.
Isle of Wight (see Cowes, and Ryde).
J.
Jaques, F., 39.
Jefferson, 76.
Jersey, 2, 99-101, 103-104.
Jersey Airways, Ltd., and Guernsey Air-
ways, Ltd., 2, 99-104.
air mail from Guernsey, 102-103.
air mail to Guernsey, 101-102.
inter-island air mail, 103-104.
Jersey air mail, 99-101.
Jersey cachets, 100-1 01.
Martin cover, 103.
war-time air mails, 104.
John o' Groat Journal air mail envelopes,
47-48.
Joseph, G. W. N., 82.
Jura, 109.
K.
Kintyre (see Campbeltown).
Kirkwall, 2, 40, 42-44, 46, 47, 49, 50,
51, 52, 101, 105, 106, 113, 130, 131,
132, 134» 135-
K.L.M., 53-54.


L.
Laird, W., 4.
Leeds, 121, 122, 123, 125, 126, 127,
128, 129.
“ Leonards ” air mail envelopes, 48, 49.
Lerwick, 51, 52, 114.
Lewis, 108.
Liverpool, 2, 33, 34, 35, 53-54, 58, 59, 60,
61, 63, 64, 65, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73,
74, 76, 78, 79, 80, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87.
Lock, J. H., 60, 67.
London, 2, 25, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 39, 58,
59, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 70, 71, 72, 73,
74. 75. 76, 77. 78, 79. 101, 102, 114,
121, 122, 124, 126, 127, 128, 129,
(see also Croydon, Essex Airport
and Heston).
London International Air Post Ex-
hibition (see “ Apex ”).
London, Scottish and Provincial Air-
ways, Ltd., 39.
Lundy and Atlantic Coasts Air Lines,
92-96.
air stamps, 92-94.
cancellations, 95.
Lundy Island, 2, 88-96.
cancellations, 94, 95.
local stamps, 88, 89, 96.
Standard envelope, 95-96.
Lye, Ernest 8., 4.
M.
McNair, A. D., 135.
Malet, H. G., 33.
Manchester, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 69,
70, 71, 72.
Manx Airways, 87.
Marten, J., 100.
Martin Bros., Ltd., 103.
Mason, J. W., 83.
Midland and Scottish Air Ferries, Ltd.,
33-35-
Mildenhall, 97, 98.
Moar, J. M.. 113.
Monk, R. M., 82.
N. '
Naish, A. L. T., 121.
Neven-Spence, B. H., 113.
Newcastle, 2, 121, 122, 123, 125, 126,
128.
Newport, 9, 10, 11, 13.
Newton Abbot, 15-16.
Nicholson, George, 135.
North Eastern Airways, Ltd., 2, 121-129.
cachets, 124-125.
North Eastern Airways, Ltd.— contd.
criteria for determining first flight
covers, 125-12 7.
first mail-carrying flight, 121-122.
modified service, 129.
postmarks on covers carried by,
127-129.
vignettes, 122-123.
North Ronaldshay, 2, 105, 106, 107,
108, 131-134.
air mail plebiscite, 131.
emergency air mail, 130-131.
regular air mail, 131-134.
souvenir envelopes, 132-134.
Northern and Scottish Airways, Ltd.,
109-111.
Nottingham, 39.
O.
Ollason, Robert, 116.
Olley, Gordon P., 11.
Orcadian air mail envelopes, 46-47, 49,
133-
Orkney Herald air mail envelopes, 133-134.
Orkney Islands (see Kirkwall, North
Ronaldshay, etc.).
Oxford, 126.
P.
Patrick, H. Lawrence, 4, 80.
Pelley, C. E. N., 33, 78.
Perth, 2, 121, 122, 123, 125, 126, 128.
Phillips, A., 10.
Pierce, 22.
Pigeon post, “ Apex,” 37.
Pilot-signed covers, 5-6.
Pitman, L., 56.
Playfair, P. H. L., 97.
Plymouth, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19,
20, 24, 25, 27, 28, 58, 59, 60, 61, 63,
64. 70, 99-
Poole, E. C., 60, 72.
Port Ellen, 111.
Portsmouth, 18, 29-32.
Portsmouth Evening News, flown copies
of, 31, 32.
Portsmouth, Southsea and Isle of Wight
Aviation, Ltd., 29-32.
conveyance of newspapers, 31, 32.
flown covers, 31.
stamps, 30, 31.
Postmarks :
air mail; on R.A.S. covers, 61, 66-67.
air post exhibition, 36.
British Industries Fair, Birmingham,
35-


Postmarks— contd.
Liverpool, error in, on R.A.S. covers,
66.
on covers carried by Highland Air-
ways, Ltd., 43, 44.
on covers carried by North Eastern
Airways, Ltd., 127-129.
on R.A.S. supplementary mail, 69.
on railway and “railex” letters carried
by R.A.S., 69.
significance of, 8-9.
Postmaster General’s monopoly, 7.
Pringle, John, 3.
Provincial Airways, Ltd., 24-28.
cancellations, 27-28.
cachets, 27.
flights, 24-25.
stamps, 25-27.
Pudney, W. G., 19.
Pugh, 102.
Q,
Quanterness, 113.
R.
Radlet, 39.
R.A.F. emergency air mail, 97-98.
Railway Air Services, Ltd., 2,5, 55-77,
80, 82, 87.
accelerated service, 75-77.
end of first contract, 72-73.
envelopes, 55, 56.
first flights, 20 August, 1934, 56-63.
first flights, 21 August, 1934, 63-65.
first flights of 1 November, 1934, 71.
last flights of 31 October, 1934, 72.
last flights of 29 September, 1934,
7°.
mail-carrying activities prior to 20
August, 1934, 58.
new contract, 73-74.
pilots, 21 August, 1934, 67.
postmarks on first flight covers, 65-67.
railway and “ railex ” letters carried
by, 68-70, 71-73, 74, 75-
revised service of 1 October, 1934, 70.
use of 1 £d. King George photogravure
stamps on first flight covers of, 65.
3d. paid cachets, 68-70, 72, 73, 74, 75.
Railway and “ railex ” letters, 7,8, 58,
68-70, 71-73, 74, 75-
Railway Companies, mail-carrying
privileges of, 2,7, 8.
Reed, Harry, 116.
Renfrew (see Glasgow).
Robinson, A. L., 118.
Rousay, 107, 108.
Royal Dutch Air Lines (see K.L.M.).
Ryde, 29, 31.
S.
Sanday, 105, 107, 108, 130.
Sawyer, G., 11.
Scadding, 76.
Scalloway, 52.
Scott, S. W. A., 20, 24.
Scottish Airways, Ltd., 2, 116, 130-136.
Campbeltown air mail, 135-136.
North Ronaldshay emergency air
mail, 130, 131-
North. Ronaldshay regular air mail,
131-134-
propaganda label, 132-136.
war-time air mail services, 134-136.
Sender, J. H., 61, 67.
Shetland, 2, 51-52, 112-116, 135.
accelerated service, 51, 52, 112.
emergency air mail, 112-113.
regular air mail, 113-116.
souvenir air mail stationery, 115-116.
war-time air mail, Ix 6, 135.
Shetland Times envelope, 115-116.
Shimmin, P. M., 119.
Smith, Adam, 105, 106.
Smith, Harold P. L., 83.
Soundy, 76.
Southampton, 2, 18, 20, 24, 25, 27, 28,
58, 60, 62, 64, 65, 99-103.
Souvenir envelopes, classification of, 45.
Stanard, John D., 88, 93, 98.
Starling, E. A., 113.
Stewart, Robert, 135.
Stoke, 72.
Store, Gordon, 66, 67.
Stornoway, 108.
Stromness, 113.
Stronsay, 106.
Sumburgh, 112, 113.
T.
Tarbert, no.
Teignmouth, 9, 10, n, 13, 15, 59, 61
63, 64, 70.
Thornley, Charles, 95.
Thurso, 49-51, 112, 113, 114, 115.
Torquay, 9, 10, n, 13, 14, 15.
Townesend, E. J. D., 97, 98.
U.
United Airways, Ltd., 84-85.


V.
Vallance, H., 112-113.
W.
Walker, 8., too, 101.
Walker, G. Leigh, 4, 12, 57, 58, 72, 75.
Wells, J. 8., 22.
West Coast Air Services, Ltd., 85-87.
cachets, 85, 86.
fake Coronation covers, 86.
Westbury, F. N., 80.
Western Isles, 109-1 11.
Westray, 107, 108.
Whitelaw, F. J., 4.
Whitta, A. W., 29.
Whoopee Sports, Ltd., 99.
Wick, 2, 40, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 48, 49,
5L 73> "5> 1 35-
Williamson, J. W., 122.
Windsor, 37, 38.
Wood, Sir Kingsley, 39.
Y.
Yeadon, 121, 125, 129.
Young, 8., 121.








