

' 4 ~ 7 % z 1
FHE WORLD’S MENACE.
MEANING OF A GERMAN PEACE.
EXTINCTION OF PEOPLE’S ROLE.
australia’sTeril SET OUT.
Speech by The RIGHT HONORABLE SIR
EDMUND BARTON, P.C., G.C.M.G.
Sk Edmund Barton, P.G., G.C.MXL, a Justice of the High Oourt of
Austra!ia f delivered a notable Speech on 7th May, 1918, on the War
Position, at the Amnia! Meeting of the Granville (lew South Wales)
Brotherhood, in the local Town Halt His Excellency the Governor,
Sir Walter Bavidson, presided* The Speech is herein reprinted for free
circulation. Sk Edmund Barton said :■ — ,
.The aims and purposes of this Society are such that of'
necessity its members must sympathize with the object-s-
-ol the Allies in the- war. One of the many gentlemen who
in the past have addressed you has described you as cs $
big-hearted earnest body of men, striving to do their best
and be' their best.” . To attain these objects is impossible
without freedom —freedom insured by self-government.
That self-government must exist, whether under the name
oi Democracy or under; any other name, whether its head
be elected or hereditary. If the community truly- governs
itself it is.in essence a Democracy, When the American'
delegation visiting the United Kingdom were entertained
the other day at Whitehall Palace, Mr, James Wilson, of
G. 9523.


the American Federation of Labour, used th.es© striking
words
We recognise the fundamental truth that no De-
mocracy can exist if the Imperial German Government
triumphs* The'Allies must win the war if posterity is
to he guaranteed political and industrial freedom* Peace
now would he the fulfilment of the Prussian dream of a
military Autocracy, because they have the very heart of
continental Europe within their grasp, the : resources of
which would insure further conquest of other nations
of. the world,’ 5
II these words are true, and I have no doubt they are,
then the victory of the enemy would'- mean the extinction
of that rule of the people without which , the Granville
Brotherhood would be as short-lived as all the rest of our
free institutions. Not only would all capital be seized,
but our labour would be under foreign dictation, and with-
out a will of its own. Employers and employees would
find their organizations mere by-words. .No man would
be able to say for himself what labour he would pursue,
what wages he would demand, or what hours he would work.
He would have no say in any of these matters. ■ For a peace
which left the German military machine alive in its power
would mean that the world must accept its domination,
whether tamely suffered in peace, or brutally imposed by war.
Such are the consequences which would follow if the
Central Powers were left with “■ the very heart of continental
Europe within their grasp, 55 for they would command
resources which insure further conquest and the subjection
from time to time of such nations as they chose to attack.
, I, have set myself the task of trying to show this to-
night, and the facts speak so loudly lor themselves that


I think the task will be accomplished. At the outset I own
my obligation to Mr. Hilaire Belloc, who ■ in: three ' fine
articles- in Land and Water has stated in convenient form
the facts of population, 'language, and religion to which
I shall advert. There is a fourth article containing Mr.
Belloc’s deductions, but I have not yet seen it.
ENORMOUS ACCESSION OF POWER.
All eyes are so tensely ■ watching the fluctuations of -the
deadly battle now in progress, on -the West front that we are
apt to pay too, little attention to the enormous accession of
power, power-which the enemy have, been gaining in Eastern'
Europe during the last twelve months, very largely as ' the
result of the Russian collapse. Whether that collapse was
mainly caused by folly, by treachery, or by military power
Ido not inquire to-night. It is enough to deal with the
consequences of that in the eastern advances of-the enemy.
The domination of the Central Powers, inspired and led
ly Germany, now extends over an enormous area of Europe*
Its western' boundary, apart from temporary occupation
on that side of the war zone, is practically the- western
boundary of the German Empire and the south-western
boundary of the Austrian Empire, of Serna, and of
Albania. On the -south it, does not include historic
Greece, but it includes the North rEgean Sea, the Dar-
danelles, and the western side of the Black Sea as far as
and further than Sebastopol. On the east the boundary
is vague ,> but it may now be'said to extend much further
than the 30th degree of East Longitude. It includes on
this east side the valley of the Vistula, the marshes of the
Pripet, the basin of the Danube, the Dniester, and the
Memel, and the lower course of the Dwina. The north


boundary includes the . eastern shores of the North Bea
from the boundary of Holland -to/the Kiel Canal,' then
the course of that Canal to the Baltic, and-all the shores
of the Baltic up to the Gulf of Finland* There is within
these limits a territory much vaster than anything else in
Europe, with an enormous population. From west to
east it extends about a thousand miles, from north to south
it runs about 400 miles on the west and about 900 miles
on the east. Perhaps that north and south depth averages
between 600 and 700 miles. With access to the- North Sea,
no doubt at-present impeded, with unimpeded access to
the Baltic, which it already absolutely dominates, with
access 'to the. Adriatic,, the iEgean, the historic narrow
waterway dividing Europe from Asia, and with the naval
mastery of the Black Bea, it has tremendous opportunities
for that naval expansion so,dearly coveted* '
LITTLE RID RIDING-HOOD.
It will be observed that I include Servia and Ron mania
within this area. That I must do, for all their territory
is practically' under enemy domination. Also I include
Bulgaria and European Turkey, because the will of Germany
is paramount in both those countries, just as indeed it is
in Austria-Hungary 1 For all Germany's Allies are in effect
her dependents. I also include the Finns, because the Ger-
man aid to their struggle for independence is mere camouflage.
The wolf dearly loves little Red.Riding-Hood—inside the wolf*
A very large proportion of the'Slavs and the Lithuanians, the
Poles, ail of the Czechs, the Slovaks, the Magyars, Esthonia,
Livonia, Gourland, are within this area; most of them
conquered, the others helpless against Germany, as one fears
the Ukraine with its wheatfields also is.


' It is a medley of nationalities, languages, and religions.
But the British Empire shows that cohesion-can .be main-
tained among-a medley. - The difference-is that , in, the
Central European case the rule is maintained by force, and
by nothing else.
Hypocritically' was echoed the cry of the deluded Bol-
sheviks, “No annexations and no indemnities, ?? until the
time came when an' army in disbandment could or would
offer no further opposition ; * then the red-handed bearers
of the white dove of KMtur annexed in effect -huge slices
®l Russia,
But, not looking for indemnities there in an empty
exchequer, they turned and imposed an indemnity of
£400,000,000 on heroic Soumania. ' The final terms of
peace do not' seem to include an indemnity of any specific
amount. But they' contain- an ■•■ agreement ■to pay t> War
damage/ 5 and they drag , from poor Ron mania territory
probably worth much more than the sum named, and
impose on her economic and probably political enslavement.
But let that be, for the question is not what they have done,
but what they can and will do unless definitely and finally
beaten. For they hold all the area I have described by
force of arms.
In its extent,- ,in ■ its population, in its minerals,.
in its- forests and agricultural resources, when once
that 'area is established;' consolidated, and exploited
by German .energy and,under German ■ oppression, it will
constitute a power able to mock at the rest of Europe on
land, and to give its combined fleets a grim fight at sea,
using for- ship-building the far-reaching coasts in its
possession; and the riches, of the countries behind them,.


I taw said that the Prussian-ridden enemy dominates'the
described .area with, military power . The view of the Allies,,
who champion freedom, is to : allow and protect. the self-
determination of national entities, if now oppressed. While
the enemy talk of the .right of peoples to determine their
future for themselves, they are prepared to allow the vole
to be .taken only while their troops occupy the lands of - the
poor seekers lor freedom. Another case of “Ho compulsion,
only you must.” They must choose between Teutonic
domination and the Teutonic Machine Gun, •
66 UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE 55 SHAM.
Let us look at the German and Austro-Hungarian systems
as they existed before the war. What was and-is sell-
determination in Germany? The so-called “universal
suffrage ”is a sham. Electorates are so manipulated-that
the friends of the Autocracy must always have the majority .
What was, and is, the state of Austria-Hungary ? M Aus-
trian representation ” is so arranged that the majority of
the people are subject to the will of the Teutonic minority.
What of Hungary 1 ■ The Magyars are largely in the
minority, but they govern Hungary and, like the Austrians,
oppress and terrorize the other nations within their bounds,
A worthy band of. missionaries of self-determination !
But, it may be asked, how are the two Central Empire®to
dominate the,great population now under, their influence ? ■
The answer to this question is visible as soon as the dis-
tribution of that population is considered, and will be
seen more clearly when the diversities of non-German
language and religion are . also observed.
First, as to- population.' The greatest weight of numbers
lies to the west. That is the compact German-speaking body


attached to German nationality, the body which Prussia
dominates, and which under Prussia will become, and is al-
ready in a large measure, master of the whole.- But the weight
of population is not only mainly within the purely German
territory, but is contained almost wholly within the political
boundaries with which the two Teutonic Empires began the
war.
LUST FOE EMPIRE.
It is old history to say that where the lust for empire
exists, dense populations tend to master, and do master,
sparse ones ; and this density of population, together
with their knowledge of the art of war, gives, the
German-speaking mass-, unless they are themselves sub-
dued, the potential mastery of the whole of the rest of the
4rea now under their influence.. Of course, the Teuton will
profess to give the other nations within their grasp autonomy.
But autonomy under the military power of Prussia is now,
at any rate, known as something merely nominal.
Por s give Prussia, or a Germany under the Prussian
heel, what it calls, hegemony, and the subjection of the
nation which falls under that hegemony is foredoomed*
She becomes a mere province, and the fate of a province
of Prussia may be gauged by the condition into' which
the smaller component States of the German Empire
have fallen since 1871.
But while the distribution' -of population is a powerful
factor in securing Prussia’s control of the vast regions now
at her feet, there are others of very great force. Mo doubt
the weight of numbers might of itself secure' the eastward
influence of the German mass so as to permeate all the
regions up to- and beyond 30 degrees east of Greenwich,
But it is not all.


"AMAZING CONFUSION OF TONGUES.”
Let us consider the languages of the territories east of
the purely German mass. -They are of bewildering diver-
sity. True, there are the Magyars,- the Roumanians, the
Poles,' the Bohemians, communities each of-which' is in
respect of speech fairly homogeneous, but these ■ unities
cannot wipe out the fact of the amazing confusion of tongues’
when all the vast region is taken together. At-this stage
I am dealing not with nationalities, but with languages.
There is, indeed, a plentiful overlapping of tongues within,
the limits of'the many. nationalities.
1 take the language of a country to be determined not by
maps and tables,, as German statisticians would have it,
but by the common speech of its inhabitants, and a language
does not cease to be the language of a country because
there are within that country various colonies or groups of
alien peoples. Such groups, indeed, are very many within
this eastern area, and they add, of course, to the complexity
of the whole - business.
But we may say that east of the actually German limit there
are five main groups ,'of speech, the Lithuanian, the Slav, the
Magyar, the Roumanian, and the Turkish. There are, of
course, okher groups. The Slavonic is the largest of these*
The Slav languages comprise among themselves different
groups, such as the Polish, the Czech, the Slovak, and the
Serbian.
Mow the Slav block of languages is separated into two by a
•belt of differing speech, and that belt itself consists of two
languages—the Magyar on the west and the Roumanian on
the east. - These two are the speeches of totally different
stocks, So that ■ the two groups speaking this or that Slavonic


tongue are completely kept apart by the Roumanian.-Magyar
belt, and that belt itself is kept apart by . the most complete
possible difference of tongues, the one of Latin origin and
the other of Asiatic, It is unnecessary to, enter into
detail further about these various languages. As languages
they are- numerous ; their dialects are legion. Contrast
this position with the almost exclusive use of the German
tongue in the Teutonic block, and you see what must be
the necessary consequence, as Mr, Belloc tersely puts, it:
“ The German block is united, in its effort, the Slavonic
block divided/’ and not only is the Slavonic divided, but
the divisions’within it accentuate the helplessness of its
members, as of all the others, when the German roller
advances upon them. Indeed it has advanced upon them,
and are they not crashed ?
“ RELIGIOUS DIVERSITY.”
' The third matter to be considered is that of religious
diversity. ■ The first glance shows one that the population
of the German mass is itself divided in religion. That is a
striking fact until one looks a little deeper. Protestants
and Catholics are nearly equal in numbers/ Lutheran
Protestants being rather the more numerous body. No
doubt this cleavage at one time caused. dissension and
threatened to cause disruption. Statesmanship got over
the difficulty, and national pride in the long course, of Prus-
sian , victory did the rest.
■ A man of German Wood is a German first—and a long
way first—and he is a Catholic or a Protest ant ■ afterwards.
Difference- of religious opinion within has not for many
years threatened the security of Teutonic rule, and it’
does not appear likely.to do so, ■On the other hand, the


Protestantism of tlie North Germans sympathetically
affects the Scandinavian nations, and the Catholicism of
the South German apparently, and perhaps not unnaturally,
attracts sympathy from the religious authorities of Rome,
In this respect it may be said of the twain Empires that
their right hand knows mot what their left hand doeth ;
only I suggest that they both know very well.
SOLIDARITY OP GERMAN MASS.
Now contrast the political solidarity of the German
mass, despite religious diversity, with the' condition of
Eastern Europe outside that mass. There we have Pro-
testants, generally Lutherans, mostly in the Baltic districts,
but contained also in many German islands of population
scattered among peoples,'mainly Slav. We have Roman
Catholics, as in much of Cpurland, all Poland, nearly all
Hungary, and parts of the Adriatic coast. We have
Greek' Orthodox, as in most of the purely Slav peoples ;
Greek Uniates (Byzantine in rite but Roman Catholic -in
communion), as in Galicia ; Mohammedans, as of course
in Turkey, in much of Bulgaria, in Northern Albania, &c.
Then we have in various places a mixture of Protestants
and Roman Catholics ; in others, a mixture of Greek
Orthodox and Roman Catholics ; and in others a mixture
of Greek Orthodox and Protestants. Do not ask me to locate
ail these,.for I have not the time if I had the knowledge.
In this eastern country between the Baltic-on the north and
the- Balkans on the south not only are the religions numerous,
as you have-seen, but it is a consequence of the diversities of
race and language that their differences of religion effect them
much more acutely. The odium tlieologicum is there in plenty .
It is not thus- with the German mass.


. I forbear to discuss the religions Question mj further.
Has not enough been said to show that in the countries
now under Teutonic influences but apart from the mass of
German blood, the differences of race, of religion, and of
language are such that by whatever device it is sought to
rule them as one, whether the device be mock autonomy
or something else, nothing will bring them into even the
semblance of one people unless it be a tyranny more
watchful, more stern, more crushing than the worst
despotism of ancient times ; just ■ such. a tyranny as
Prussians well know how to exercise- F
REAL AUTONOMY.”
With real autonomy, which term postulates . free com-
munities, several fine nations might assume .or resume
self-government within these wide spaces. Under the
auspices of democratic nations, there might he a
Poland/ one in language, one in race, one in fervour' for
Poland. It is entitled to its old access .to the Baltic Sea,
although its rightful great port of Dantzig has been much
Germanized, It cannot be free to exist without that port.
There could be a Bohemian State, in which the patriotism
and culture of the Czechs would have free play. Lopped
of the Slavs and Roumanians, over whom at present the
Magyar holds cruel sway, there could be still a Magyar
State ; but the Magyar,, patriotic and fervid for-his nation,
would still insist on keeping its character aristocratic. A
Roumanian State like that which now groans under the
jackboot, but with additions accordant to their race and
to the user. of. the Roumanian language, could and ought, to
be constituted ; while the Southern Slavs assert with just
outcry their title to independence.


All this is what might be. Is it only a dream ! That
depends mainly on the Allied armies on the Western front;
meaning: the single front from the North Sea to the Adri-
atic. /The Germans—-I use the inclusive term to denote
the whole brutal,.mass—- 64 have the very heart of con-
tinental Europe within, their grasp. 55 If I have not shown
you the truth of those words, quoted at the outset from
Mr. James Wilson, then I regret my inability to convey
a very plain thing. But if I have shown that, there is
another statement of Mr. Wilson’s which must follow from
the proof. I' mean the statement that the resources of
this heart of continental Europe “ would insure further
conquest'of other nations of the world,”
GIRMAIIPS TIGHTENING GRIP.
If ■ Germany is given time to organise and develop the
countries now within her-grasp, it will for ever'after be.
too late to shake her hold upon them. ' That hold means
the possession of limitless. resources- - resources in food'
production, in minerals, including oil, in all the things that
make for material wealth and power. She will have a
stronghold not only in these riches but in a huge population.
Armed with the greatest density of population amongst
those 'who will be most strenuous for her aims, first
sowing, these Eastern lands thick with racial dissension
and religions - hate, she will assert the power of this
density t© ■ the utter enslavement of the- countries at
present under her dutch. They cannot unite against
her, though they are fit to prosper separately' as free
nationalities if rescued from her.
It will be sad enough to think- of lair and patriotic
Poland still gored' with the Tangs of; the ■ boar ; of fine
Bohemia still prostrate, of valiant ■ Bervia despoiled of her


all, of unflinching Eoumania, altogether crashed. But if
that is not enough, consider the power over the rest of
humanity which the possession of these vastnesses will
give the robber nation unless rescue comes. With the
riches and the power which will be hers, there is no country
in Europe which will long be able to resist her.
More, for her domination to be complete it will hardly be
necessary to raise the mailed fist. Let her have, exploit, de-
velop that which is now within her grip, and she need scarcely
lift a finger to any other European nation to gain her wishes .
Eor her neighbours, diplomacy, whether secret or open, will be
merely another name for subserviency. She will have no need
of Morocco questions, of Algeciras Conferences, or of Agadir
incidents. If a frown is not enough, a word will be—-or at
most a rattle of the sabre.
“WHAT’S THIS TO US?”
But, it will be said, what is this to us.? What is Aus-
tralia’s trouble in all this ? I will tell you. Mastery of the
British power can only be effected under overwhelming
force. But if overwhelming, that force can be exerted in
two ways, the economic and the military , and in the term
military I include naval. A country behind whose threats
there lies compelling force is mistress of the economic as
well as the political sphere.
■lf the British Isles are subdued, their sea-power goes.
With their sea-power mfost fall all their Dominions,
their Crown Colonies, their dependencies. Overthrow the
power of the United Kingdom, and Canada, Australia,
New Zealand, India, and all the rest fall with it. It the
heart is pierced, bow long will the limbs survive P
Take a case : With the Central Empires in, possession of
a vast navy and transport service, easily attainable if they


arc -allowed to keep, the great seaboards .now at their
disposat-Aand that must be ; the result of■ what is called a
peace by negotiation—the- enemy Empires, having realized
as- a fact what was once but the dream of a Mittel-Europa,
with tentacles in Southern Russia as well as on the rEgean,
aM an open. Black Sea, will 'not have much to. arrest their
-march on India by sea and land. With India gone, what
do- you expect for Australia ?.
But'will it be necessary to approach Australia in that
fashion ■?
, Suppose a negotiated peace followed by a rapid
construction of. the new .German navy. Germany
already has the Russian . fleets within her power. The
resource's of her new possessions would enable her to
make her fleet colossal and all-pervading, and she would
have an unbeaten army. II these things come true, as they
must unless we beat them on the West and now, we shall no
longer he able to speak of British sea-power in pre-war terms..
True, the question of sea supremacy is ever relative. But,
before the war, that supremacy was, determined in our
favour by the weakness of other- Powers. - Under the new
dispensation, if we let it arrive, it must be determined- by
their strength. That means that our supremacy would
disappear. The Empire must then break.
“THE CRITICAL TIME* 5 ’
These are not merely things that may happen. They are
the things, that must happen unless the Allies win before.
Germany can consolidate and develop her new-found
power. Unless we do that the conquest of 'other


nations, besides those now grasped, is not a merely prob-
aHe but a sure consequence. What follows? This:
The critical time is the present campaign-; "and this is
a crisis not only about Belgium, about Alsace-Lorraine,
about the Trentino or- Trieste, and the like* It is a
crisis, about the whole future life of Western civilization.
As Monsieur Loisy has happily put it, The Prussian
is uncivilized and unciviiizable.” 'To lose : or not
decisively to win is not merely to enable the Teutons
to resume their insidious peaceful penetration. It is
to forfeit the Western .civilization to those whose veneer
of kultur conceals the barbarian's heart." For that
kultur to prevail over Europe is to end civilization
m we know it. For the modern German . worship
ol the material—of power merely lor enrichment—is
different from, what we know of the old Germany,
since it is the Prussian's worship of his great god Odin.
Such things as chivalry to man .or to woman, which perhaps
Australians know better as “ playing the game,” are foreign
to Prussian thought, for to the Prussian mind they.are
incomprehensible. And so when the Kaiser visited England
some years ago as a guest, he took with him his master-spy.
WITH A DRAWN ■ GAME WE ARE LOST!
If lor our want of man-power Prussia is able even to hold
her-own, if the war becomes even a drawn game—we are
lost. Even a German and an Austrian Democracy would
not lose the lust of. dominance and gain. You cannot
change hearts and minds with the fairy wand ol a new
constitution. The military machine will not be scrapped.
Whatever treaties may say, any craft or trick will be prac-
tised to maintain it ■ ashore and afloat. The projects


of Germany will only fee suspended .while, as of old, ■ the
Prussians fool their neighbours. For they ■ ■ cannot be
Prussians without continuing to steal privily while pre-
paring to plunder openly.
-The problem therefore is instant, and it can only be
solved by man-power* We have and-shall have the gum
and other munitions* We shall not lave the numbers
unless every part of the Empire is equally alive and
'equally eager. We have learnt to scrap the old cry
€< We are winning.” But can we win unless we scrap
the new' cry “ We have done enough,” and can any of
us of any class weigh any grievance in the scale against
national life ?
It is now-that the enemy are making, because they must
make, their supreme- effort. We have among our chances
against them one that is very considerable. Odin is not
the" Teuton's only god. For the -worship : of the other god,
at ; the beginning of ,1917 there were 1,200 food substitutes
registered in Germany. At the end,,of that year the num-
ber was 7,000. ' The German chemists are. wonderful!
But give the enemy time, and he will .raise food enough
from the Eastern European countries which he is making
Ms prey. The blow to break his teeth must come at once,
and Ms armies are his teeth.
As of old, it is for the British race, of which you are sons,
to £C stick it out.” Even in England we are not yet reduced
to food substitutes. But what we must be more concerned
about is- that we must know no substitutes for humanity,
mercy, and honour-foods of the soul. ' Yes—
,£ To the hero, when Ms sword
Has won the battle for the free,’*
Death’s voice, sounds like a prophet*® word,
And. in its hollow tones are heard
The thanks of millions yet;to be.”
By Authority: Asm sr J. Mullett, Q-oYernment Printer* Melbourne.
