

Reprinted from “The HeraidMelbourne
The Hon. King O’Malley Reviews
His Ancestors
ONE DELAYED BATTLE OP WATERLOO AT LUNCH
TIME.
(TO THE EDITOR.)
SIR. —On January 5, in an article by Mr. Guy Innes,, you
gave to the world some interesting statistics of my ilus-
trious progenitors, the O’Malleys. In the main your infor-
mation is accurate, but there are one or two minor points
that seem to require amplification.
Your article traces the line back to 365 Anno Domini.
As a matter of historical fact the O’Malleys were in the
limelight long years before that comparatively recent date.
All O’Malleys remember Roger, who was King of Ireland
before Julius Caesar (from Italy) made his first cross-
Channel trip to Britain.
Caesar prior to 55 B.C. had landed in Ireland and called
on King R. O’Malley. After being shown round generally,
observing the tokens of a civilisation more ancient than
the Roman itself—Druidical Universities where the sons of
Eastern potentates were educated to return to rule their
Asian realms: striking monuments over their departed dead
—Caesar remarked to his host that he had come to carry
civilisation out, not to destroy it; he invited some of the
O’Malleys to accompany him on his trip to Britannia.
O’Malley was astonished to find crimson painted savages
leaping from mound to mound with considerable agility
—like Devonshire Dervishes. Under the circumstances, Cae-
sar introduced civilisation into England, but left Ireland
as he had found it. So well did Caesar accomplish his work
that nowadays the descendants of the crimson painted
savages are little, if anything, behind the O’Malleys in art
alnd culture.
A later family episode overlooked by your contributor
was the family’s representation at the Battle of Waterloo.
Wellington had to stop the battle for about an hour after
lunch until Charles O’Malley came up with his Irish
Dragoons. When their approach was reported, Wellington
ordered fighting to resume.
The family is taking its proper place in the U.S.A., where
two O’Malleys are Justices of the Supreme Court.
Your reference to me as the late King O’Malley has
caused my executors some premature concern; the refer-
ence is an extravagant statement of uncertified medical
fact, and I still look forward to many years contemplation
of the glories of the O’Malleys through the ages, in antici-
pation of their achievements in the future.
Our present head, as you point out, is Colonel O’Malley
Keyes, of the British Army.
I remain, dear Mr. Editor, for the present at any rate,
not the late, but the living,
KING O’MALLEY.
Melbourne, January 25.
