

THE PRESBYTERY OF TASMANIA:
ITS LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL POSITION.
The following notes of a speech delivered by the Rev. J. Stokie at a meeting of Presbytery held on the 'l4th
January last, it has been thought advisable, with his consent, to reprint for circulation, as setting forth briefly* and
clearly the exact position of the Church, the tenure on which its properties are held, and the illegal character of recent
lj 0 m oticm tabled by Mr. Stoeje was to this effect; —“ That inasmuch as. the resolution of the 15th
T . , (( yctobcr last, declaring the Rules and Forms of the Presbyterian Churcl?Eo be of interim authority, was hastily and
t .incautiously enacted, it be now, and hereby is, rescinded ; and the committee then appointed for drawing up a Code
ot Rules and I or ms for Procedure be and is hereby discharged.”
I submit this motion with a very serious anxiety for the result. The resolution which I hope to see rescinded to-
da}'was adopted without any previous intimation and in my absence; and therefore lam personally in no way responsible
for its effects; but I deem it due to those present, who may possibly have adopted it without much discussion or considera-
tion, to show that it introduces so many vital changes in the Laws of the Church, so affects the tenure of its property, the
rights and liberties of its ministers, and the constitution of this Presbytery, that it is impossible for me to acquiesce in it;
and I think also impossible for any conscientious and intelligent minister of this communion, without at the same time
making up his mind to an honourable secession from this Presbytery, which indisputably holds its pulpits, its emoluments,
and its ecclesiastical rights and properties, in trust for the members and adherents of the Church of Scotland within the
polony, and for them alone. I hold in my hand a copy of these “Pules and Forms of Procedure,’' which you desire to
introduce, and I ask your attention to some few articles in them, in order to indicate some few of the essential changes to
w icn 1 take objection. In the first place, by adopting these “ Pules,” this church asserts for itself a separate and inde-
pendent character and position as a church; that is, it parts and separates from the Church of Scotland, aud this, without
even consulting its 7,000 members and adherents; and this Presbytery assumes “supreme jurisdiction over its subordinate
judicatories, congregations, and people.” Now I hold that this act of separation is new and unconsidered. I hold that
this claim ol supreme jurisdiction is a new and unparalleled usurpation. 1 hold that their effect is to place this Presbytery
and those who adhere to it in a state of secession from the Church of Scotland. In the next place, by adopting these
Pules, this Presbytery rejects the ordination questions imposed by the Church of Scotland, under which I was ordained
at first, and inducted here, and introduces instead ordination questions entirely new, and not used in any other branch of
the Presbyterian Church, except in Victoria. In the third place, by adopting these “.Pules,” the Presbytery introduces
new standards of doctrine in addition to the “Confession of Faith,” which is the one standard recognised in ordination by
the Lfiurcfi ol Scotland; and by this act it binds the conscience of its ministers, not by 39 new articles, but by 196 new
articles, and these contain probably not less than 2,000 distinct _ propositions. In the fourth place, by adopting these
' in eS ’ 1G l res Jy ter y introduces a new formula; a formula which I have never signed, and never will consent to sign
m this colony; and in the face of a specific Act of Assembly, by which “Presbyteries,” in connection with the Church of
Scotland are not allowed to use any other formula but that which is prescribed by Act X., Assembly 1711,” it displaces
and rejects that ordination formula of the Church of Scotland, which I and others have signed, and to which I adhere.
n , j . P* acc > J>7 adopting these “Pules,” this Presbytery has introduced, without necessity, without due consideration,
and, i believe, without possessing the power to do so, no fewer than 25 new laws into this Church ; some of fundamental
importance, and affecting seriously the rights of ministers, the rights of our people, and the constitution of the Presbytery
1 ,f e .' . s a 84y e or dy a single instance of the bearing of these new laws in each direction. Ist. As affecting the rights
o minis eis. is heie enacted on page 33, that when the Presbytery proceeds to try any minister by libel, “the accused
is in tfie meanwhile to be suspended from the exercise of his office till the proceedings terminate.” This law is happily
new aw o us. , I ma U or ma y SR f e aQ d right where there is a court or courts of appeal; but, in circumstances
line ours it opens the door to monstrous oppression; and with my experiences of what the majority in a small Presbytery
uncon ro e 1)1:1 J o, uis a law under which it cannot be expected that I will ever consent to live. 2nd. As affecting the
ri ° ,f °+• G P eo P . 18 enacted on page 16, that the Presbytery is to have final power in appointing all trustees of
mna piopeities, to define their duties in a model trust deed, of which as yet we know nothing; and these
ius ees are ence oi i requned to sign a declaration acknowledging the jurisdiction of this Presbytery over all properties
ves e in en c aige, and in these terms : “I engage that as a trustee, and while continued in such office, I shall, on all
occasions, an in eiety respect, faithfully recognise and maintain the title of the said church as represented in its judica-
ones o e possession anc contiol of the said properties.” This introduces a principle entirely new in the Church of
co anc, easo u e eon 101 of a spiritual court quoad civiha, and, before enacting so incisive a regulation, I hold that the
members of the church throughout the colony are entitled to be at least consulted. 3rd. As affecting the legal constitution
o e res yteiy it is enacted at p. o, that a session composed of assessors “ may appoint any one of their number, being
an elder, not already a representative elder, to represent the congregation in the Presbytery;” a right and privilege new


here; capable of being so wrought and so abused, in a small church like this, as to put a preponderating and dangerous
influence into the hands of a single congregation, and in direct opposition to the Act of Assembly xii. 1839. I need not
proceed farther in this direction. I have clone enough to demonstrate that these “Rules,” where they are new, do antago-
nise directly with our standard, our luavs, and our discipline. I now go on to show that this Presbytery has no power to
put the ministers and congregations of this church under these new laws; and that all its properties are held on such terms,
that no mere vote can alienate them from connection with the Church of Scotland, and from the control ot its laws. Here,
neither I, nor any minister of this church, nor any of its congregations is subject to the control of this Presbytery, except
in so far as the Presbytery acts Avithin the laAVS of the Church of Scotland, and within the terms and conditions on which
it is bound to administer the public trusts with which it is invested. That ought to be clearly understood. As to my oavu
church, manse, and glebe, the facts are decisive. In the year 1833, in reply to a request made by its then managers, a
memorandum was issued by Sir G. Arthur, in these terms: —“Notify to A. Moodie, Esq., and the other gentlemen who,
on behalf of the congregation in this place in connection with the Church of Scotland as by law established , subscribed the
letter of the 29th August, 1832, addressed to the Colonial Secretary, praying the assistance of the Government in the erec-
tion of a new church, that I have considered their application in Council, and acquiesce in the sum of £1,250 being
appropriated according to their request.” In the year 1836, the then eight managers write to the Colonial Secretary thus:
—“ We have the honour of requesting you to inform His Excellency the Lieut.-Governor that we have it in our power to
state that St. Andrew’s Church, built under our superintendence for the performance of Divine service according to the
doctrine and discipline of the Church of Scotland as by law established, from funds supplied partly by GoA’ernment and
partly by the Presbyterian congregation of Hobart Town, will be open for the permanent accommodation of the inhabitants
on Sunday, the 26th instant.” This letter Avas signed by the eight managers. It is plain, then, that as to exact
ecclesiastical position assigned to St. Andrew’s by the Government and by its founders, there is no room for any dispute.
The rest of our churches have been established on the same foundation. In the estimates for 1837, Sir G. Arthur says :
“ The members of the Scotch establishment have at various times been assisted in defraying the expense of building the
churches belonging to their communion at Hobart Town, Launceston, and Bothwell.” In 1836, £SOO is appropriated to
Macquarie River; in 1837, £SOO to Launceston; in 1843, £250 to St. John’s; in the same year a grant for West Tamar,
and £4OO towards the church at Glen Gala; all on the same terms, and for the erecting of churches in connection with the
Church of Scotland as bylaw established. And by the Church Act, dated 1837, it is distinctly enacted that “every place ot wor-
ship and minister’s dAvelling in the building of AA r hich respectively any public moneys shall have been expended, whether by
contributions under this act or otherwise, shall with their respective appurtenances be, and continue to be, for ever dedicated
to the purposes, and holden solely for the uses, and be appropriated to the serA’ice ot the particular denomination for which
respectively such buildings Avere erected originally.” On this point there is no room for doubt and hesitation. My church,
and manse, and glebe, are held for a congregation in connection with the Established Church of Scotland. No deed of
grant will be issued except on that tenure ; and there is no church connected with this Presbytery, in the building ot which
a grant of public money has been recei\ T ed, in which we are not bound by law, and bound as honest men, to see that it is
held solely for the uses, and appropriated to the service, of a congregation adhering to the laws, the doctrine, and the
discipline of the Established Church of Scotland. The members of this Presbytery haA’e no poAver, in any act of secession,
to take these buildings with them. I now proceed to show that those of us who still draAV salaries from the Crown, cannot
continue to do so under these new “ Rules” and this new constitution. The history of these salaries is this:—ln the year
1836 the Legislative Council placed on record their opinion “that the ministers ot the Church of Scotland ought to be
placed on the same footing as to salary as the chaplains of the Church of England establishment. ’ ; In the April ot the
year following, a letter, signed by the then three ministers of the Church of Scotland, is addressed to the Colonial Secretary,
calling attention to this resolution of the Council, “that the ministers of the Presbyterian Church in the colony in
connection Avith the Church of Scotland should be placed on the same footing with the Episcopalian chaplains, with regard
to salary and allowances,” and requesting that this resolution should be carried into effect. In this same year a petition is
presented to the Legislative Council from the ofiiciating minister, elders, and managers of St. Andrews, and signed also by
150 others, in which they say that “they have learned with a deep feeling of gratitude and pleasure . . . . the
sentiments of the Imperial Government as to the public proA T ision to be made for the service of religion according to the
doctrines and discipline of the Established Church of England, and the Established Church of Scotland in the Australian
Coloniesand they crave a legal recognition “of the equality of status of the branches of the Church of England, and of
the Church of Scotland, and of their equal claims to the support of the Government.” This petition was followed by the
Governor’s address to the Legislative Council, in which he says : “The three communions especially adverted to in the
despatch of the 30th November, 1835 (Lord Glenelg’s), as the leading denominations in New South Wales, shall, as regards
their ministers, be admitted as special subjects of endowment from the public revenue in this colony. Such ministers of
the three denominations as may be appointed by His Majesty or by the Lieutenant-Governor, after the Act has come into
force, shall receive respectively a salary of £250. And you will find that I have made provision in the estimates upon this
principle for the existing Presbyterian and Roman Catholic chaplains.” The Church Act followed immediately on this
address; and in this statute it is enacted sec. xv. “that no salary shall in any case be issued under the authority of this
Act to any minister whose appointment shall not have been made in accordance with the laws and principles of the reli-
gious denomination to Avhich such minister belongs.” I draw my salary under the authority of this Act, as a minister
whose appointment was made in accordance with the laAVS and principles of the Church of Scotland, and sanctioned, as so
made, by Her Majesty’s Government. These laws and principles lam bound in law and in all honour to maintain, and I
will not consent by the vote of any majority here to be compelled into succession.
I now come to the debenture fund; and this too, I say, is undeniably held in trust on the same tenure; i.e., for the religious
uses of the members and adherents of the Church of Scotland in the colony, and for none else. Its history is this: In the year


1860, a census was taken with special reference to religious profession. In that census the Presbyterian population was
returned under distinct heads—Church of Scotland, Free Church of Scotland, United Presbyterian; and on the numbers
shewn by that census, the redistribution of the Ecclesiastical Reserve of £15,000 proceeded. The adhering population of
this church, as distinct from all others—6,6oo —entitled it to receive the annual sum of £l,lBO, and this sum was assigned
to it. By the Commutation Act, which passed soon after, in which it is declared to be “ expedient to commute the annual
payment ” of this reserved £16,000 “ for the payment of one principal sum to each of the several churches which now
participate in the said sum of £15,000” —by virtue of this Act, there was paid for behoof of 6,600 members and adherents
of the Church of Scotland, instead of that £l,lBO a year, the one capital sum of nearly £B,OOO in debentures. These
debentures were vested in this Presbytery ; vested not with absolute power and discretion, but in trust for the religious
uses of persons ascertained by the census to be within the colony connected with that church, professing to live within its
laws, and to worship according to its doctrine and discipline, and for none else. In both these Acts this Presbytery is
declared to be the “ Governing Authority ” of the Church of Scotland for the purpose of administering these trusts ; and
the legislature was entitled with some reason to presume on its fidelity. For this Presbytery was founded and constituted at
Launceston in the year 1835, “ agreeable to the customs and institutions of the Church of Scotland,” and in its foundation
deed it is declared to be so founded and constituted under the express direction and authority of the Act of Assembly 1833,
“ whereby it is enacted and declared that it is proper and expedient for ordained ministers of the Church of Scotland,
connected with fixed congregations in any of the colonies, to form themselves, when circumstances permit, into Presbyteries
and Synods, adhering to the standards of this church, and maintaining her form of worship and government.” I submit
then that there can be no dispute as to the position and principles of this Presbytery when dealing with the Government
in the receiving of these debentures ; and none as to the uses to which they are to be put. It received them to hold and
use in trust for the members of one defined denomination, and as a Presbytery holding the same standards, the same laws,
the same discipline, the same government with the Church of Scotland. To these I and others still adhere and intend to
adhere; and it will grieve me to the heart to find that any ministers or elders, who have found their way into this Church
and Presbytery, find it their duty to dissent, and to set up a Presbytery with new standards, new laws, and new discipline.
But, in that case, I know what my own duty is; and, in whatever minority I may find myself here to-day, I will not
shrink from doing it. I move now on the first opportunity I have had, and it seems to me the more incumbent to move
at once, as I find that a standing committee has been absolutely appointed to devise yet further changes; and a committee
composed of gentlemen, not one of whom, however much I may respect them personally, is in my opinion competent, by
any sufficient knowledge of our laws, to be entrusted with a duty so delicate and difficult.


