

Cbc ilcccirt ®o-|lastoratc
OF THE
SCOTS CHURCH;
AND HOW I FARED UNDER IT.
BY THE R'EV. 88. BA IST GK
Having long determined to withdraw from the discharge of the
active duties of the Christian ministry in the Scots Church, at the
close of the fiftieth year of my pastorate, I did so accordingly in
the year 1873; reserving to myself the right of nominating and
recommending to my congregation some fit and proper person as
ray colleague and successor. Having been the Moderator of the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church the same year, I
was so much pleased with the manner in which a peculiarly
painful and annoying case of discipline had been conducted in
the Assembly by the Pev. Dr, Gilchrist, of Newtown, one of our
ministers, that I recommended him to the Elders, Committee of
Management, and congregation, as a fit and proper person to
occupy the office of my colleague and successor, and he was
accordingly elected by a large majority, there being a few though
only a few, dissentients.
It was arranged that Dr. Gilchrist’s salary as Junior Minister
should be three hundred a year, with a hundred additional for a
manse till one should be erected on the church ground. My own
salary, as Senior Minister had, for twenty years before been three
hundred a year, with £llß Bs. additional, as the interest of
£I4BO, which I had advanced from time to time from ray own
resources, on account of an old debt of that amount on the
church. That debt was to be repaid from the sale of certain
ground belonging to the church, which was authorised to be sold
for the purpose by an Act of Parliament passed in the year 187&.
Presuming that the ground would speedily be sold, and the church
debt paid off, I voluntarily agreed to forego the payment of the
interest of the debt as a charge upon the funds of the church,
and thereby to relieve the Committee of Management of a yearly


payment of £llß Bs, But, owing to an unaccountable oversight
on the part of the Legislative Council, in not adding a schedule
to the Act of Parliament, describing particularly the ground to be
sold, I have hitherto been unable to give a valid title to the ground,
which accordingly remains unsold to the present day, thereby
implying a loss of income to myself of £llß Bs. per annum.
Conceiving, from the state of the funds of the church for the
previous twenty years, that aretiringallowance of £250 a year would
be a fair and equitable amount for myself, and such as the church
from past experience would easily be able to pay, I stipulated for
that amount from the first, having something of my own to fall back
upon besides. But the Treasurer of the Church for the time being
having requested, on behalf of the Committee of Management,
that I should accept £l5O as a retiring allowance, and consider the
other hundred, to which I conceived I was entitled, a contingency,
I agreed to accept these terms, although I considered them very
unreasonable, as I was anxious to complete the arrangement
at the time.
My previous colleagues, of whom I had had not fewer than
four, from the year 1854—and never an angry word with any one of
them, any more than I have had with Dr. Gilchrist—had only a
salary of £3OO a year each, and no allowance for a manse.
I left the colony for England by San Francisco in April,
1874, and returned by the P. & O. Company’s steame in
February, 1875. One of the first items of information I received
on my return to Sydney was the astounding fact that, during the
very brief interval that had elapsed since the commencement
of Dr. Gilchrist’s ministry, both the congregation and the
funds of the church had fallen so low that a special collection
had to be made during my absence in England to make up the
deficit, and that, notwithstanding the reduction of the income I
had derived from the funds of the church for twenty years before
by £2lB Bs. in the ways I have stated, the small salary that
remained for me as my retiring allowance had actually fallen
four months behind. How all this was to be reconciled
with the alleged great ability and great popularity of Dr. Gil-
christ as a preacher, Ido not pretend to know. At all events, it
was undeniable at the time that the church had been going down
very rapidly both in membership and in the number of adherents
as well as in funds.
Some time after my return from England, in the year 1875,
I made a clerical tour of about three months in Queensland;
lecturing and preaching with much acceptance in the different
Presbyterian churches, from Warwick in the extreme south, to
Rockhampton within the tropics. Mr. John Fyfe, the Chairman
of our Committee of Management, had preceded me very shortly
on a professional visit he had paid to Brisbane during the same
year. And when a mutual friend of his and mine asked him, as
that friend told me himself shortly thereafter, how they liked their
new minister at Church Hill, Mr. Fyfe merely replied, “Greatly dis-


appointed.” Whatever it may suit Mr. Fyfe’s purposes to say
now, in the interest of the parties to whom he has since attached
himself, this was his candid opinion then.
Towards the close of the year 1875, Dr. Gilchrist received a
unanimous call to Goulburn, which it was generally expected he
would accept. In the interests of the Church, I wrote him the
following letter on the subject, which I marked “ Private and
Confidential,” as I intended it for himself exclusively ; and if he
had simply perused it, and formed his own opinion upon it and
acted accordingly, nobody would ever have been any wiser on the
subject. But Dr, Gilchrist, taking no notice of the falling state of
the Church, interpreted the letter merely as an effort on my part to
thrust him out of the Church, and complained of it on that ground
exclusively to his three friends on the Committee of Management,
who, at a congregational meeting at which I presided as Senior
Minister, held to elect Commissioners to the Presbytery of Sydney
on the subject of the call, made an insolent and ferocious attack
upon me on the ground of this letter, which had been submitted
for their consideration by Dr. Gilchrist. My letter, of which
I am in no way ashamed, was as follows:
[Private and confidential.']
To the Rev. Dr. Gilchrist, LL.D.
Sydney, Ist Nov., 1875.
My Dear Sir,
As it was I who first suggested your being appointed my colleague
and successor in the ministry of the Scots Church, which I have no
hesitation in saying I did principally from the high opinion I had
formed of your spirit and talents, as shown in your management of the
famous Gibson and Mackenzie case in the General Assembly of 1873,
as well as from the hopes I was thereby led to entertain of the pro-
bable results of your services in that capacity to the Church generally,
I deem it incumbent upon me to submit to you the following con-
siderations, which I trust may influence and guide you in the present
very important emergency, in your being called to decide as to whether
you will accept of the unanimous call you had the honour to receive
from Goulburn, or to remain in your present charge. In doing so, j
can assure you I have not indicated to any person whatsoever, even of
my own family, my own opinion as to what course you should pursue
in the case. The period that has elapsed since your settlement in
your present charge, and the general results hitherto, both financial
and otherwise, are surely sufficient to enable you to come to a proper
decision in the matter.
Permit me, then, to state, which I confess I do with unfeigned
regret, that your pastorate in the Scots Church has by no means
realized the very sanguine hopes and confident expectations of all
concerned, either in the increase of the members and adherents of the
church, or in maintaining the funds at their previous amount for a
long series of years.
I confess I am not particularly informed as to the state of the
membership and of the adherents generally at the present time, as
compared with what it was at the commencement of your pastorate ;
but the result in that particular will be indicated sufficiently from the
state of the funds.


usual expenses tor tne support oi puonc woi
Salaries for two Pastors, at £300 each ...
... £600
0
0
Interest on Church Debt
... 118
8
0
£718
8
0
Salary for Senior Pastor till Manse provided for Junior...
£150
0
0
Do. for Junior Pastor, including an additional £100
400
0
0
per annum, in lieu of Manse...
£550
0
0
During the fifteen years or thereby that had elapsed before your
pastorate in the Scots Church commenced, I had had three different
colleagues, the first of whom was the late Rev. John Reid, afterwards
minister of the Mariners’ Church, during whose ministry the stipu-
lated salary of each of the two ministers —which was uniformly paid
without fail—was £4OO per annum, in addition to which the sum of
£llB Bs. was regularly paid to me, as the sole surviving trustee of the
church, as the interest of the church debt.
Mr. Reid’s pastorate terminated in 1862 ; and for some time
thereafter I had no colleague. In the meantime several other churches
in the city and neighbourhood, which had been long in abeyance, or
non-existent, having been supplied with acceptable ministers, the
funds of the Scots Church, which at one time had reached £l3OO per
annum, were considerably reduced ; so that under my second and
third colleagues, the Rev. George Graham and the Rev. A. C. Smith,
the arrangement was that the salaries of the two pastors should be
£3OO a year each ; the additional payment of the interest of the church
debt being continued as before. .
The expenditure incurred, therefore, during that period, besides
the usual expenses for the support of public worship, was as follows:
But the church debt having been disposed of by Act of Parlia-
ment, in authorising the sale of a portion of the church ground for
the purpose, the requisite expenditure since the commencement of
vonr pastorate has been as follows, viz.:
That is £l6B Bs. less than the amount expended during the
collegiate pastorates of Mr. Graham and Mr. Smith. And yet the
revenue of the church has in the meantime fallen so low, since the
commencement of your pastorate, that, to meet this greatly reduced
amount of expenditure, an extra contribution of £IOO or thereby had
to be raised during my absence in England, while the committee are
at present months in arrear in the payment of the small amount of
Retiring allowance payable to myself. . .
Compared with the state of things here, that of the two ministers
of our communion settled in the suburbs about the same time with
yourself, is remarkably different. Mr. Tait, for instance, your own
successor at Newtown, had a salary of only £225, as you had pre-
viously had, at his settlement, along with a comfortable manse. _ But
by the end of his first year, the salary was raised to £3OO, while the
membership of the church was doubled, as well as that of the congre-
gation, and the church itself quite full.
Mr. Mackenzie also commenced his ministry at Paddington in as
hopeless a charge, as it was then regarded by both ministers and
people, as could possibly be supposed. But the congregation he had
gathered, after most willingly leaving to the Senior Pastor, the Rev.
Mr. Milne, the State Aid salary, the manse, and his two chaplaincies of
the Cemetery and the Gaol, had at the first year of his ministry raised
£430 for the salary of the Junior Minister and the repairs of the
church, while both the congregation and the membership had greatly


increased. Now, without instituting invidious comparisons between
either of these ministers and yourself, I would not hesitate to express
my opinion that although you may be superior to both of them as a
scholar, a lecturer, and a preacher, they are both greatly superior
to you as pastors ; and that is the very important point in which you
seem to have failed.
X reoret also to be constrained to add that X do not see the slightest
prospect of improvement in the case. On the contrary, we are rapidly
losing our hold on the northern part of the city ; the church is going
down, and I fear it will only continue to do so, without a change of
some kind or other.
In these circumstances, you have had the honour of receiving a
unanimous call from our church in Goulburn, with a salary of £350 a
year and the finest manse in the colony ; and the question rests
entirely with yourself, as to whether you will accept that call or not.
There are, doubtless, reasons on both sides, and you will probably be
urged by interested parties in each to decide for them. May our
Heavenly Father guide and direct you to do so for the interests of the
Church generally !
You have had a trial of Sydney already ; and from what I have
stated above, it has surely not been a successful one. You do not
seem fitted for excavating a congregation from the humbler and lower
parts of a great city ; and that is the very thing that is required for
our Church in the northern section of our city of Sydney. In Goul-
burn you would have a different, a .pleasanter, and a more hopeful
field. You are here only one of half a dozen doctors either of Ijaws or
of Divinity ; but in Goulburn you would be the only one in all the
southern portion of our territory. You are not likely to be allowed to
take the lead in our Presbytery here ; but you would be facile princeps
in the metropolitan city for our communion in the south in Goulburn,
and your influence in that extensive country would far surpass what-
ever it is likely to prove in Sydney.
I am aware that there are certain of our office-bearers who would
persuade you by all means to remain in your present charge. But I
scarcely think some of these gentlemen are the proper persons to guide
and direct you in a matter so deeply affecting the Church at large.
They value you rather as a popular lecturer than as a Christian mis-
sionary ; and I am persuaded you would have as favourable a field in
the former of these capacities in Goulburn and the south country as
you could have in Sydney.
The want of a manse here can be no valid argument in the case.
All my three former colleagues lived in houses which they rented in
this immediate neighbourhood ; and neither Mr. Graham nor Mr.
Smith had a hundred a year allowed him for house rent, as you have
had all along. That hundred a year has been a dead loss to me, but
to none else. I merely postponed the sale of the chur h ground for
the accomplishment of a great object, which could not otherwise have
been accomplished.
Again, earnestly desiring and humbly trusting that our Heavenly
Father may guide and fit you for His own glory and the benefit of the
Church,
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,
John Dunmore Lang.
Now, after a trial of two years and upwards, I had surely a
right, as the senior minister, to offer an opinion on such a sub-
ject ; and I refer it to any candid person, whether clerical or laic,


whether there was anything unwarranted or offensive in that
opinion ; I was candidly and strongly of opinion that although Dr.
Gilchrist’s ministry had proved unsuccessful in Sydney, as was
perfectly evident it had from the facts I have stated, there was no
reason to suppose that it would be so at Goulburn. It was currently
reported at the time that Dr. Gilchrist’s reason for rejecting the
call to Goulburn was that he anticipated a preferable one from
Melbourne, which lam happy to find he has since got. Not a
few ministers of various communions in the present day virtually
set themselves up to auction in the Church, Without referring to
the present case particularly, if the Goulburn bid does not come
up to the mark the Melbourne one will. How different the con-
duct of Gregory, the minister or bishop of Nazianzum, a small
town in Asia Minor. He never changed his place for a better ;
and whereas there were only seventeen Christians in the place
when he went to it, there were but seventeen Pagans in it when
he died. In short, I thought the change highly desirable for both
parties concerned; and so also did another of the ministers of
Sydney, who had visited Goulburn during the vacancy, and who
was not likely to take his cue from me. What, then, was my
astonishment to find that my letter, which was meant exclusively
for Dr. Gilchrist himself, had been submitted by him to three
prominent members of the Committee of Management, and
represented to them as a mere scheme of mine to thrust him out
of the Church 1 At a congregational meeting of the Church,
therefore, at which I presided as senior pastor, to choose Commis-
sioners to the Presbytery to state the opinion and desire of the
congregation in regard to Dr. Gilchrist’s call to Goulburn, a
ferocious and brutal attack was made upon me personally on
account of that letter, such as I had never experienced all my life
before.
The attack was led on the occasion by Mr, M‘Donnell, the
treasurer, in his usual offensive and over-bearing style. Mr.
Halkett, one of the secretaries, followed in a louder and moi’e
abusive strain. He wondered, forsooth, how I dared to compare
such inferior men as Mr. Tait and Mr. Mackenzie—men who, he
alleged, had been running about the world for a place and could
get nobody to look at them—with much more of the same
insolent kind, equally unwarranted and untrue ; for both of these
very men had succeeded much better in their respective places
than Dr. Gilchrist had ever done in his. And Mr. James Aird,
a mere clerk in Mr. John Frazer’s counting-house,—not to be
outdone by his fellows, although in a somewhat different key—
told the congregation present that I was so little thought of as a
preacher—of course, in comparison with Dr. Gilchrist—that if it
were announced that I was to preach for any time, they might as
well put up a notice on the church door that there would be no
service.
In the meantime both the congregation and the funds of the
Church continued steadily to fall off; and this process went on


regularly till Dr. Gilchrist’s departure for Melbourne. There
was, doubtless, a slight increase of the evening attendance for a
short time before his leaving, in consequence of certain sensational
discourses he had announced on the “ Seals and Trumpets of the
Revelation, and the Battle of Armageddon;” but this change
seemed to have no effect on the general congregation, for at the
time of his departure the funds were so entirely exhausted that
the treasurer had to draw upon his own funds to make up Dr.
Gilchrist’s salary.
I should be sorry, indeed, to insinuate that Dr. Gilchrist was
the sole cause of the lamentable falling off of the Church both in
attendance and in funds. He had two able coadjutors in this
work in Mr. Alexander Halkett, the master of one of tbe dredges
in the harbour, and Mr. George M‘Donnell, the Town-hall con-
stable. It is well known, however, that when persons of such
humble origin get into situations of influence or authority, either
in Church or State, they almost uniformly become the most
insolent, presumptuous, and over-bearing of men. Whether it
was not so in this particular instance will very soon appear.
The psalmody in the Scots Church, which had been entirely
vocal for a long series of yeax-s, had been deemed superior to that
of any other Pi’esbyterian Church in Sydney; but Mr. Halkett,
a private member of the congregation, who had once been
unsuccessful when endeavoux-ing to get a harmonium into the
Church before, and had been for years out of Sydney at Shoal-
haven, having returned to town sometime after I sailed for
England in 1874, had determined to get a harmonium into the
Church by whomsoever opposed. To this measure Mr. Neill,
the manager of the City Bank, and father of the largest family—
about twelve in all—belonging to the Church, was strongly opposed,
and told the office-bearers that if it were carried out and a
harmonium introduced—at all events before Dr. Lang’s return to
the colony—he and all his family would leave the Church, to which
Mr. Halkett merely replied, “That if one left another would
come.” But Mr. Neill and all his family left, and none have
come; for it is not a mei’e instrument, but something interesting
and edifying in the pulpit, that attracts Presbyterians to a place
of worship,
Mr. M'Donnell’s contribution towards this downward pro-
gress of the Church and its funds consisted in his dx-iving away
another of the largest families in the Church b;y offensive and
abusive language, as they maintain themselves that he did.
There had usually been a larger number of marriages in the
Scots Church than in most other Presbyterian Churches in the
colony, and when the Committee of Management of the time
objected, from the fear of the expense, to my getting a colleague
for the year 1858, from my having greatly wished to have one,
being at that time a member of Parliament, I offex-ed them, in
order to gain their consent, to make over the marriage fees—as I
did ever after—which, if I am not greatly mistaken, no other


minister of our Church has done ; but, marriage fees notwith-
standing, the funds of the Church went down to the last.
There was evidently for years past a regular conspiracy in cer-
tain quarters connected with the church to humiliate and degrade
me, as the Senior Minister; and every artifice was used to effect that
object,as well as to prevent me from officiating in the church. I was
scarcely out of the Colony, on my way to England, when George
McDonnell, the treasurer, raised a hue and cry against me in
every direction, because, as he alleged, I was alienating the church
property for my own private purposes. There was not an atom
of truth in the allegation. In the year 1873 an Act of Parlia-
ment was passed, authorising the sale of a parcel of ground
belonging to the church, from the proceeds of which I was to
receive £I4BO, which I had advanced from my own resources, on
account of the church debt, many years since. The ground could
not be sold at that time, but as I required most of the money
for various purposes, on going to England, and as there was a sum
of about £IOOO, in the form of a testimonial, raised for me, and
placed under trustees for my family, in 1870, a mortgage of the
£IOOO was suggested, on the assurance of repayment from the
£1480; the whole transaction being recommended and effected by
W. Barker, Esq., solicitor. Out of this harmless transaction
McDonnell’s unfounded charge against me was raised. Had there
been an atom of truth in his allegation I would have been a sac-
rilegious swindler indeed.
On my return to the colony I would willingly have taken a
part of the service occasionally, when in Sydney, without asking
for any addition to the miserable retiring allowance to which they
had beaten me down ; but McDonnell was now virtually dictator,
and it was not deemed expedient that I should officiate in the
church at all—McDonnell calling out, at a meeting in the church,
“ Dr. Lang will not preach, but when Dr. Gilchrist requires his
services." As I had bound myself not to interfere with their
internal arrangements I could not do so; but how any Presby-
terian Minister like Dr. Gilchrist could submit to any such
dictation I cannot conceive. In short, it was giving such men
their way, and playing into their hands, that led to all that
followed.
But, although I had resumed the solepastorate of the church, on
Dr. Gilchrist’s leaving, as I had certainly a right to do as Senior
Pastor, 1 had no desire or intention to do so permanently ; but I
could not consent to act otherwise at the bidding of men who had
well-nigh ruined it; for, as I have already stated, the revenue of
the church, which for twenty years before Dr. Gilchrist’s incum-
bency, had afforded £3OO a-year to each of the two ministers, and
£llß Bs. additional to myself, on account of the church debt,
which I. had advanced from my own resources, my income from
the church was reduced, from the commencement of Dr. Gilchrist’s
ministry, by not less than £2lB Bs. per annum. I returned to
the colony, from England, in February, 1875, and was three


months in Queensland, during the remaining portion of that
year, preaching and lecturing from Warwick to Rockhampton.
I had received for marriage fees, which I paid over to the
Treasurer, agreeably to engagement, during the portion of the
year I spent in Sydney, £27 10s. This amount was credited
among the receipts of the church, in the yearly report of the
Committee ; but the revenue having been exhausted in paying
Dr. Gilchrist’s salary, my retiring allowance was entered merely
as a debt of the church, although it had been expressly stipu-
lated that.it should be paid simultaneously with the payment to
Dr. Gilchrist. Nay, so completely had the revenue of the church
been exhausted, 1 might almost say annihilated, under Dr. Gil-
christ’s ministry, and the management of the Committee, that
they were not ashamed to propose a collection among the members
of the congregation, who were known to be well affected to me,
as if I had been a pauper. This I could not stand.
The Scots Church had always, till lately, been one of the
first Missionary Churches of our communion in the Colony. I
recollect of two different cases, while it was under my manage-
ment and control, in which it contributed not less than £SO a year
for missionary purposes: the one for the Rev. Mr. Ridley’s mission
to the aborigines of the north-west, and the other for the New
Hebrides Mission. But all this has been discontinued during
Dr. Gilchrist’s incumbency.
Dr. Gilchrist has one talent which I should be sorry to lose
sight of; were he to confine himself to lecturing on such subjects
as he has been accustomed to select for that purpose in these
colonies and New Zealand, I have no doubt that he would, ere
long, make an independent fortune. As to his preaching talents,
my opinion is precisely the same as it was when I wrote him in
my letter of Ist November, 1875, only a great deal stronger.
In these circumstances I think I am not mistaken in supposing
that I should be instrumental in effecting some improvement in
our circumstances by retaining the sole pastorate of the church
in my own hands for a time.
Gibbs, Shallard, and Co., Printers, 108 Pitt Street, Sydney.


